[Cites
53
, Cited by
41
]
Supreme Court of India
Accountant General, M.P vs S.K.Dubey & Anr on 29 February, 2012
Author:
R.M. Lodha
Bench:
H.L. Gokhale
,
R.M. Lodha
1


                                                                  REPORTABLE




                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                     CIVIL  APPEAL NO. 5322 OF 2005



The Accountant General, M.P.                                   .... Appellant


                                      Versus


S.K. Dubey & Anr.                                                   ....Respondents





                                   JUDGMENT
R.M. Lodha, J.
The   Accountant   General,   Madhya   Pradesh   is   in 


appeal, by special leave, aggrieved by the judgment and order dated 


February  8,  2005  passed  by  the  High  Court  of  Madhya   Pradesh  at 


Jabalpur in the writ petition filed by the respondent in that Court.
2.                   The   respondent   is   a   former   Judge   of   the   Madhya 


Pradesh   High   Court.   He   was   appointed   on   March   2,   1998.   He 


rendered   service   of   more   than   10   years   and   retired   on   August   13, 


1998.
2
3.        By   a   notification   issued   on   September   18,   1998,   the 


respondent   was   appointed   as   the   President,   State   Consumer 


Disputes Redressal Commission, Madhya Pradesh (for short, `State 


Commission')   established   under   clause   (b)   of
Section   9
of   the 


Consumer   Protection   Act,   1986   (   for   short,   `1986   Act').     The 


respondent assumed  office on September 21, 1998 and continued to 


hold that office until the end of the working hours on August 12, 2003. 


When he demitted the office of the President, State Commission, he 


had   rendered   service   of   4   years   10   months   and   22   days   as 


President, State Commission.
4.                  The   pension   for   the   period   of   service   rendered   by 


the   respondent   as   Judge   of   the   High   Court   has   been   determined 


under   the
First   Schedule     of   the   High   Court   Judges   (Salaries   and 


Conditions of Service) Act, 1954
(for short, `1954 Act'). That is not the 


controversy   here.   The     respondent's   entitlement   to   pension   for   his 


service   rendered   as   President,   State   Commission   under   the   office 


order dated April 5, 2002 issued by the State Government is in issue.
5.                  By   order   dated   June   3,   1999,   the   Department   of 


Food,   Civil   Supplies   and   Consumer   Protection,   Government   of 


Madhya   Pradesh   addressed   to   the   President,   State   Commission 


prescribed   the   terms   and   conditions   of   the   appointment   of   the
3
respondent   as   President,   State   Commission.   Inter   alia,   it   provided 


that during the currency of his appointment, the respondent shall be 


paid salary as payable to a Judge of the High Court minus pension 


payable.
6.                  On   April   5,   2002,   the   Department   of   Food,   Civil 


Supplies and Consumer Protection, Government of Madhya Pradesh 


issued another order for counting the period of service as President, 


State Commission for the purposes of payability and determination of 


the pension. It provided as follows:
"In   continuation   of   Departmental   Order   of   even 

         No.   F.5-24/96/2   dated   03-06-99   the   State   Government 

         now accords sanction for counting the services of the post 

         of   President   Madhya   Pradesh   State   Consumer   Dispute 

         Redressal Commission, Bhopal for pension provided that 

         the pension on this post and the pension received earlier 

         from   the   State   Government   or   Central   Government   the 

         two   pensions   combined   together   shall   not   exceed   the 

         maximum   of   the   pension   prescribed   for   judges   of 

         honourable High Court.
2.         This   sanction   has   been   endorsed   to   the 

         Accountant   General   M.P.   Gwalior   vide   Finance 

         Department   endorsement   No.   553/853/2002/C   Char 

         dated 5.4.2002.
By   order   and   in   the   name   of   Governor   of 

         Madhya Pradesh."
7.                  It is the   case of the respondent that in accordance 


with   the   above   orders   of   the   State   Government,   the   necessary 


papers for payment  of pension and gratuity to the respondent were
4
prepared   in   the   prescribed   form   and   submitted   to   the   office   of   the 


Accountant   General,   Madhya   Pradesh   (appellant)   on   August   29, 


2003 by the Registrar of the State Commission. The Department of 


Food,   Civil   Supplies   and   Consumer   Protection,   Government   of 


Madhya   Pradesh   also   recommended   and   forwarded   the   pension 


case of the respondent to the appellant.
8.                   The   appellant,   however,   raised   the   objection   that 


pension and gratuity were not payable to the respondent as proposed 


and   recommended.   The   correspondence   ensued   between   the 


appellant and the Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer 


Protection,   Government   of   Madhya   Pradesh.     The   appellant 


reiterated its position that  pension and gratuity were not payable  to 


the   respondent   for   the   period   he   served   as   the   President,   State 


Commission.
9.                   The   above   position   taken   by   the   appellant 


compelled the respondent to file a writ petition before the High Court 


challenging  the letters dated December 10, 2003 and September 23, 


2004     addressed   to   the   Madhya   Pradesh   State   Government   and 


letter   dated   November   4,   2004   addressed   to   the   respondent   that 


pension and gratuity were not payable to the respondent. In that  writ 


petition,   the   appellant   and   the   State   of   Madhya   Pradesh   were
5
impleaded as respondent - 1 and respondent - 2 respectively.  In its 


counter affidavit in opposition to the writ petition,  the appellant set up 


the case  that there was no provision for pension under the 1986 Act 


or the Madhya Pradesh Consumer Protection Rules, 1987 (for short, 


`State   Rules')   for   payment   of   pension   to   the   President,   State 


Commission. Relying  upon the decision of this Court in the case of
Justice   P.   Venugopal  v.  Union   of   India   and   Others1
,  the   appellant 


stated before the High Court  that the respondent was not entitled to 


clubbing   of   the   two   services.       The   appellant   said   that   if   the   State 


Government intended to grant pension to the petitioner (respondent 


herein)   for   the   service   rendered   by   him     as     President,   State 


Commission   then   requisite   statutory   rule   would   have   to   be   framed 


and duly ratified by the State Legislature as required under
Section 


30(2)
of   the   1986   Act.   The   State     Rules   framed   by   the   State 


Government do  not have any provision for payment of pension.
10.                    The   High   Court   of   Madhya   Pradesh,   on 


consideration of the matter, vide its judgment dated February 8, 2005 


allowed   the   writ   petition   filed   by   the   present   respondent.   The   High 


Court   held   that   by     office   order   dated   April   5,   2002,     the   State 


Government   had   passed   an   order   that   the   service   rendered   by  the 


petitioner     (respondent   herein)   as   President,   State   Commission 




         1      (2003) 7 SCC 726
6
would   be     counted   as   pensionable   service.   The   High   Court, 


accordingly, did not accept the view of the appellant   and directed it 


to finalize the pension of the petitioner (respondent herein) and make 


payment of pension and other admissible dues within a period of two 


months.
11.                 It   is   from   this   order   that   the   present   appeal   has 


arisen.
12.                 This Court granted leave in the matter on August 25, 


2005 but   refused to grant any stay.   It was, however, clarified that 


the payment made to the respondent, pursuant to the judgment of the 


High Court, would be subject to the decision in  the appeal.
13.                 We have heard Mr. A. Mariarputham, learned senior 


counsel for the appellant and Mr. Amrendra Sharan, learned senior 


counsel for the respondent.
14.                 Mr.   A.   Mariarputham,   learned   senior   counsel 


referred to
Sections 2(jj)
,
2(h)
,
16(2)
,
30(2)
and
31
of the 1986 Act 


and   submitted   that   there   was   no   statutory   provision   for   grant   of 


pension to the President of the State Commission.  The State Rules, 


learned senior counsel would submit, do not  make any provision for 


pension  to the President of the State Commission and, therefore, no 


order   for   payment   of   pension   to   the   respondent   could   have   been
7
passed.     He   argued     that   when   an   act   is   required   to   be   done   in   a 


particular   manner,   then   it   must   be   done   in   that   manner     and   in   no 


other   manner.
In   this   regard,   he   relied   upon     the   decisions   of   this 


Court   in
State   of   Uttar   Pradesh  v.  Singhara   Singh   and   Others2
,
Chandra   Kishore   Jha  v.    Mahavir   Prasad   and   Others3
,
Shin-Etsu  


Chemical   Co.   Ltd.  v.  Aksh   Optifibre   Ltd.   and   Another4
and
Tamilselvan  v.  State
represented   by   Inspector   of   Police,   Tamil  


Nadu5.
15.                    Mr.   Amrendra   Sharan,   learned   senior   counsel   for 


the respondent  raised the preliminary objection of the maintainability 


of the appeal at the instance of the appellant.  He submitted that the 


appellant was not an `aggrieved person' and, therefore, appeal was 


not   maintainable.   He   relied   upon   the   rulings   of     this   Court   in
Bar  


Council   of   Maharashtra  v.  M.V.   Dabholkar   and   Others6
,
Jasbhai  


Motibhai   Desai  v.  Roshan   Kumar
,   Haji   Bashir   Ahmed   and   Others7 


and Thammanna v. K. Veera Reddy and Others8.
16.                    With   reference   to
Article   162
of   the   Constitution   of 


India,     learned   senior   counsel   for   the   respondent   submitted   that 


executive   power   of   the   State   was   coextensive   with   the   legislative 


               2  AIR 1964 SC 328

              3  (1999) 8 SCC 266

              4   (2005) 7 SCC 234

              5  (2008) 7 SCC 755

              6  (1975) 2 SCC 702

              7   (1976) 1 SCC 671

             8     (1980) 4 SCC 62
8
power   and   when   rules   are   silent,   the   executive   can   always   fill   the 


gaps   by   issuing   executive   order.
In   this   regard,   he   relied   upon 


decisions   of   this   Court   in
Sant   Ram   Sharma  v.  State   of   Rajasthan  


and Others9
and
Lalit Mohan Deb and Others  v.  Union of India and  


Others10
.
17.                     Mr.   Amrendra   Sharan,   learned   senior   counsel   for 


the   respondent   argued   that   the   use   of   words   `shall'   and   `may'   in
Section 16(2)
was indicative of the  legislative intention that  `may'  be 


read   as   directory.   He   submitted   that   firstly,   framing   of   rules   by   the 


State Government under
Section 16(2)
read with
Section 30(2)
was 


not   mandatory    and   secondly,  the   State   Rules  having   been   framed 


for the subjects enumerated in
Section 16(2)
, the power of the State 


Government to exercise its executive power in respect of the subjects 


not provided in the State Rules is not taken away. He relied upon the 


decisions of this Court in M/s.
Atlas Cycle Industries Ltd. and Others  


v.  The   State   of   Haryana11
,
Orissa   State   (Prevention   &   Control   of  


Pollution)   Board  v.  Orient   Paper   Mills   and   Another12
and
Delhi  


Airtech   Services   Private   Limited   and   Another  v.  State   of   Uttar  


Pradesh and Another13
.
9   AIR 1967 SC 1910

             10             (1973) 3 SCC 862

       11            (1979) 2 SCC 196

       12             (2003) 10 SCC 421

       13            (2011) 9 SCC 354
9
18.                  In   rejoinder,   Mr.   A.   Mariarputham,   learned   senior 


counsel   submitted   that   appeal   was   maintainable   at   the   instance   of 


appellant.     According   to   him,   the   appellant,     Accountant   General, 


Madhya Pradesh, is one of the arms of the Comptroller and Auditor 


General -- a constitutional functionary - which monitors and controls 


all activities connected with audit, accounts and entitlement functions 


of   the   Indian   Audit   and   Accounts   Department.   He   submitted     that 


authorizing pension was the function of the appellant. In this regard, 


he referred to material titled   `Supreme Audit Institution of India - A 


Brief Introduction'  to show  that there are 29 offices of the Accounts 


and   Entitlements   (A&E)   headed   by   Accountants   General   (A   &   E) 


engaged   in   maintaining     accounts   of   the   State   Governments   and 


authorizing GPF and pension payments of their employees. Learned 


senior counsel submitted that for maintaining the appeal under
Article 


136
of  the  Constitution  before  this  Court,  it  was  not  necessary that 


the   appellant   must   be   an   `aggrieved   person'.   In   any   case,     the 


appellant was impleaded as respondent 1 in the writ petition   and it 


was   the   appellant's   action   that   was   challenged   in   the   writ   petition 


before the High Court and, therefore, the appeal was maintainable.
19.                  Initially   I   thought   of   considering   the   preliminary 


objection   but since an important   question relating to   the power of 


the   State   Government   in   making   the   service   rendered   by   the
10
respondent as  President of the State Commission pensionable by an 


Executive order although State Rules are in place, has been raised 


and which I intend to decide,   I do not think it necessary to consider 


the preliminary objection.
20.                    I   shall   first   refer   to   the   legal   position   exposited   by 


this   Court   in   the   case   of  Justice   P.   Venugopal.   The   question   for 


consideration   in   that   matter   was   as   to   whether   the   period   during 


which Justice P. Venugopal  served as the Commission of Inquiry or 


as   the   Commissioner   of   Payments   under   the   Madras   Race   Club 


(Acquisition  and  Transfer   of  Undertaking)  Act,   1986  could  be  taken 


into consideration for computing the pensionary benefits. This Court, 


while   dealing   with   the   above   question,     referred   to   constitutional 


provisions,   namely,
Articles     112(3)(d)(iii)
,   217(1)
,     221
and
224A
, 


the provisions contained in the 1954 Act, particularly,
Sections 14
,
15
and
16
thereof   and   the   First   Schedule   appended   thereto   and 


decisions   of   this   Court   in
Union   of   India  and   Others  v.  Pratibha  


Bonnerjea and Another14
and
V.S. Mallimath  v.  Union of India and  


Another15
and   held   that   a   High   Court   Judge   was   entitled   to 


pensionary benefits only in terms of the 1954 Act and not otherwise. 


The Court went on to observe (para 16; pgs. 732-733):
"..........A   High   Court   Judge   is   entitled   to   pensionary 



       14              (1995) 6 SCC 765

       15              (2001) 4 SCC 31
11
benefits   only   in   terms   of   the   said   Act   and   not 

          otherwise.   The   said   Act   is   a   self-contained   code.   It 

          does not contemplate grant of pension to a retired High 

          Court   Judge   for   holding   any   other   office   of   profit. 

          Clubbing of services for the purpose of computation of 

          pension   is   not   contemplated   under   the   said   Act   and, 

          thus,   the   court   cannot   by   process   of   interpretation   of 

          statutory or constitutional provisions hold so."
In para 26 of the Report (Pg. 736), this Court said :
".......for   the   purpose   of   computation   of   pension, 

          different services of the petitioner could not have been 

          clubbed   in   terms   of   Act   28   of   1954.   The   pension 

          payable  to a High Court Judge would  be only for the 

          period rendered in that capacity which would constitute 

          charge to the Consolidated Fund of India and services 

          rendered   subsequent   thereto   in   terms   of   the   order 

          made by a State Government would not be charged to 

          the   Consolidated   Fund.   The   question   as   to   whether 

          such   a   person   would   be   entitled   to   pension   from   the 

          State concerned or not would depend upon the statute 

          or the terms and conditions of appointment."
21.                  In view of the above legal position, there is no doubt 


that   for   the   purposes   of   computation   of   pension   payable   to   the 


respondent his different services, namely, service as a Judge of the 


High Court and service as President, State Commission cannot   be 


clubbed. The respondent is entitled to pension as a High Court Judge 


only for the period rendered by him in that capacity. The subsequent 


service rendered by him as President, State Commission cannot be 


charged   to   the   Consolidated   Fund   of   India.     This   position   was   not 


disputed   by   the   respondent   in   the   High   Court     nor   it   is   disputed 


before   me.   The   question   is,       whether     respondent   is   entitled   to
12
pension from the State of Madhya Pradesh for the service rendered 


by him as President of the State Commission of that State.
22.                  The High Court has recorded in paragraph 15 of the 


impugned order as follows :
"15.         In the instant case, it is not in dispute that State 

          Govt. has made it a part of condition of appointment of 

          petitioner/Justice  S.K. Dubey as per Order (P. 2) dated 

          5th April, 2002 that service rendered by him as President 

          of the State Commission is to be counted as pensionable 

          service modifying Order (P. 1) dated 03.06.1999.  Thus, 

          Order   (P.   2)   forms   part   of   condition   of   appointment   of 

          petitioner   that   it   was   further   ordered   that   pension 

          payable   by   the   State   Govt.   or   from   the   Consolidated 

          Fund   of   Govt.   of   India   shall   not   exceed   the   maximum 

          pension payable to a High Court Judge......."
23.                  The above statement  has not been disputed by Mr. 


A. Mariarputham.   The argument of Mr. A. Mariarputham is that the 


State   Government   of   Madhya   Pradesh   in   exercise   of   the   power 


conferred   by   sub-section   (2)   of
Section   30
of   the   1986   Act   has 


framed the State  Rules for the subjects enumerated therein including
Section   16(2)
.   Rule   6   thereof   provides   for   salary   and   other 


allowances and terms and conditions of the President and Members 


of   the   State   Commission.     The   said   Rule     does   not   provide   that 


service of the President, State Commission is  a pensionable service 


and, therefore, despite the office order dated April 5, 2002 issued by 


the   State   Government   to   the   effect   that   service   rendered   by   the
13
respondent as President of the State Commission was  pensionable 


service, the respondent is not entitled to any pension for the service 


he rendered as President, State Commission.
24.
Section   16
of   the   1986   Act   deals   with   the 


composition of the State Commission. For the present purposes, the 


only relevant provision is sub-section (2) of
Section 16
which reads 


as follows :
"
S. 16
.     Composition of the State Commission.--
(1)       xxx        xxx           xxx         xxx


            (2)       The   salary   or   honorarium   and   other
allowances   payable   to,   and   the   other   terms   and 

            conditions   of   service   of,   the   members   of   the   State 

            Commission shall be such as may be prescribed by the 

            State Government.
Provided  that the appointment  of a member on whole-

            time basis shall be made by the State Government  on 

            the   recommendation   of   the   President   of   the   State 

            Commission   taking   into   consideration   such   factors   as 

            may be prescribed including the work load of the State 

            Commission.
(3)       xxx        xxx           xxx                xxx

            (4)       xxx        xxx           xxx                xxx"
25.
Section 2(jj)
defines `member' as follows :
"
S.2(jj)
"member" includes the President and a member 

            of the National Commission or a State Commission or a 

            District Forum, as the case may be;"
26.                Wherever the  word `prescribed'   occurs  in  the  1986
14
Act, by virtue of
Section 2(n)
, it  means prescribed by rules made by 


the   State   Government,   or   as   the   case   may   be,   by   the   Central 


Government.
27.
Section   30
deals   with   the   power   of   the   Central 


Government   and   the   State   Government   to   make   rules.     As   I   am 


concerned   with   power   of   the   State   Government,   sub-section   (2)   of
Section 30
is reproduced which reads :
"
S. 30
.     Power to make rules.--
(1)         xxx                      xxx         xxx                      xxx


                     (2)          The   State   Government   may,   by
notification,   make   rules   for   carrying   out   the   provisions 

         contained in clause (b) of sub-section (2) and sub-section 

         (4)   of
section   7
,   clause   (b)   of   sub-section   (2)   and   sub-
section (4) of
section 8A
, clause (b) of sub-section (1) and 

         sub-section (3) of
section 10
, clause (c) of sub-section (1) 

         of
section   13
,   clause   (hb)   of   sub-section   (1)   and   sub-

         section (3) of
section 14
,
section 15
and clause (b) of sub-

         section (1) and sub-section (2) of
section 16
of this Act.".
28.
Section   31
makes   a   provision   that   rules   and 


regulations made under the 1986 Act shall be laid before each House 


of Parliament. It reads as under :
"
S. 31
.-   Rules and regulations to be laid before each 

           House   of   Parliament.   -  (1)   Every   rule   and   every 

           regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 

           may   be   after   it   is   made,   before   each   House   of 

           Parliament,   while   it   is   in   session,   for   a   total   period   of 

           thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in 

           two   or   more   successive   sessions,   and   if,   before   the 

           expiry   of   the   session   immediately   following   the   session 

           or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
15
in   making   any   modification   in   the   rule   or   regulation   or 

             both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not 

             be   made,   the   rule   or   regulation   shall   thereafter   have 

             effect   only  in  such  modified  form   or  be  of  no  effect,   as 

             the   case   may   be;   so,   however,   that   any   such 

             modification   or   annulment   shall   be   without   prejudice   to 

             the validity of anything previously done under that rule or 

             regulation.
(2)        Every rule made by a State Government under 

             this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 

             before the State Legislature."
29.                    As noticed above, in the State Rules framed by 


the   Madhya   Pradesh   State   Government,   provision   has   been 


made in Rule 6 with regard to salary and other allowances and 


terms and conditions of the President and Members of the State 


Commission. Rule 6 of the State  Rules reads as under :
"R.6.-   Salary   and   other   allowances   and   terms   and 

        conditions of the President and Members of the State 

        Commission :-
(1)   President   of   the   State   Commission   shall   receive   the 

        salary   of   the   Judge   of   the   High   Court,   if   appointed   on 

        whole-time basis or a consolidated honorarium of Rs. 200/-
per   day   for   the   sitting   if   appointed   on   part-time   basis. 

        Other members, if sitting on whole-time basis, shall receive 

        a   consolidated   honorarium   of  Rs.  3,000   per   month  and  if 

        sitting on part-time basis, a consolidated honorarium of Rs. 

        150 per day for the sitting.
(2)       The   president   and   the   members   of   the   State 

        Commission shall be eligible for such travelling allowance 

        and   daily   allowance   on   official   tour   as   are   admissible   to 

        grade 1 Officer of the State Government.
(3)   The   salary,   honorarium,   other   allowances   shall   be 

        defrayed   out   of   the   Consolidated   Fund   of   the   State 

        Government.
16
(4)   President   and   the   Members   of   the   State   Commission 

   shall hold office for a term of five years or up to the age of 

   67   years   whichever   is   earlier and   shall  not  be   eligible  for 

   re-nomination:
Provided that President and / or  Members may:
(a) by writing under his hand and addressed to the State 

    Government resign his office any time;
(b)   be   removed   from   his   office   in   accordance   with 

    provisions of sub-rule (5).
(5)     The   State   Government   may   remove   from   office, 

 President or any Member of the State Commission who,-
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has been convicted of an offence which in the opinion 

 of the State Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting 

 as such Member; or
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely 

 to affect prejudicially his functions as a Member, or
(e)   has   so   abused   his   position   as   to   render   his 

 continuance in office prejudicial to the public interest:
(f)   is   absent   himself   from   five   consecutive   sittings   of   the 

 Commission, except for a reasonable cause.
Provided   that   the   President   or   a   Member   shall   not   be 

  removed   from   his   office   on   the   ground   specified   in 

  Clauses   (d)   and   (e)   of   sub-rule   (5)   except   on   an   inquiry 

  held   by   State   Government,   in   accordance   with   such 

  procedure   as   it   may   specify   in   this   behalf   and   finds   the 

  Member to be guilty of such ground.
(6) Before appointment, President and a Member of the State 

Commission shall have to take an undertaking  that he does 

not and will not have any such financial or other interest as is 

likely to affect prejudicially his functions as such Member.
17
(7) The terms and conditions of the service of the President 

       and the Members of the State Commission shall not be varied 

       to their disadvantage during their   tenure of office.


       (8) Every vacancy caused by resignation and removal of the 

       President   or   any   other     Member   of   the   State   Commission 

       under   sub-rule   (4)   or   otherwise   shall   be   filled   by   fresh 

       appointment.
(9)   Where   any   such   vacancy   occurs   in   the   office   of   the 

       President of the State Commission, the senior-most (in order 

       of   appointment)   Member,   holding   office   for   the   time   being, 

       shall discharge the functions of the President  until a person 

       appointed   to   fill   such   vacancy   assumes   the   office   of   the 

       President of the State Commission.
(10) When the President of the State Commission is unable 

       to   discharge   the   functions   owing   to   absence,   illness   or   any 

       other   cause,   the   senior-most   (in   order   of   the   appointment) 

       Member   of   the   State   Commission   shall   discharge   the 

       functions of the President until the day on which the President 

       resumes the charge of his functions.
(11) The President or any Member ceasing to hold office as 

       such shall not hold any appointment in or be connected with 

       the   management   or   administration   of   an   organization   which 

       have been subject of any proceeding under the Act during his 

       tenure   for  a  period  of  five  years  from   the  date   on  which   he 

       ceases to hold such office."
30.                   It is clear from the above Rule  that it does not make 


any  provision in making the service of the President and Members of 


the State Commission  a pensionable service. State Rules are totally 


silent in this regard. The moot question that falls for determination in 


this   appeal   is,     whether    in   the   absence   of   any  express   rule   in   the 


State   Rules,   was   it   open   to   the     State   Government   of   Madhya 


Pradesh to   have provided by way of an Executive order dated April 


5, 2002 that  the service rendered by the respondent as President of
18
the   State   Commission   would   be   counted   as   pensionable   service. 


The   incidental   question   is   whether     such   order   is   inconsistent   with
Section 16(2)
or the State Rules.
31.                   Subject   to   the   provisions   of   the   Constitution,   the 


executive power of a State   extends   to the matters with respect to 


which the Legislature of the State has power to make laws.   This is 


what is provided in
Article 162
of the Constitution.  In other words, the 


executive power of the State Executive is coextensive with that of the 


State Legislature.
32.                   In   the   case   of  Sant   Ram   Sharma9    this   Court 


negated the arguments advanced on behalf of the appellant therein 


that   in   the   absence   of   any   statutory   rules   governing   promotions   to 


selection   grade   posts   the   Government   cannot   issue   administrative 


instructions  and such administrative instructions  cannot impose any 


restrictions not found in the rules already framed.   The Court  stated:
"....It   is   true   that   Government   cannot   amend   or   supersede 

       statutory rules by administrative instructions, but if the rules 

       are silent on any particular point Government can fill up the 

       gaps   and   supplement   the   rules   and   issue   instructions   not 

       inconsistent with the rules already framed."
33.                   The   above   legal   position   has   been   followed   and 


reiterated by  this  Court  time and again.     The Constitution  Bench of 


this Court in Lalit Mohan Deb10  (para 9; pg. 867) said :
"9.   It  is  true  that  there   are   no  statutory   rules   regulating  the 

       selection   of   Assistants   to   the   selection   grade.   But   the
19
absence of such rules is no bar to the Administration giving 

       instructions regarding promotion to the higher grade as long 

       as such instructions are not inconsistent with any rule on the 

       subject..........".
34.
In
Union   of   India   and   another  v.  Central   Electrical  


and   Mechanical   Engineering   Service   (CE&MES)   Group   `A'   (Direct  


Recruits)   Association,  CPWD
and  others16,   this   Court   held   that  the 


executive instructions could fill in gaps not covered by rules but such 


instructions cannot be in derogation of the statutory rules.
35.                  The statutory provision contained in
Section 16(2)
is 


quite   clear.   It   provides   that   the   salary   or   honorarium   and   other 


allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service 


of, the members of the State Commission shall be   such as may be 


prescribed by the State Government. The term `member' includes the 


President   of   the   State   Commission.   That   pension   can   be   made   a 


condition of service is beyond any question. What is the meaning of 


the   expression,   `as   may   be   prescribed   by   the   State   Government' 


occurring in
Section 16(2)
.
36.                  In   my   opinion,     the   expression   `as   may   be 


prescribed by the State Government'  in
Section 16(2)
has to be read 


as prescribed by the rules framed by the State Government, if any. 


This is the plain meaning of the above expression.   If the Parliament 



       16           (2008) 1 SCC 354
20
intended   that   salary  or   honorarium  and   other   allowances  and   other 


terms and conditions of  service of the President and the Members of 


the State Commission have to be  provided in the rules by the State 


Government in exercise of its powers under
Section 30(2)
and in no 


other manner, the provision in
Section 16(2)
would have read, `the 


salary or honorarium and other allowances payable to, and the other 


terms   and   conditions   of   service   of   the   members   of   the   State 


Commission  shall only be in accordance with the rules framed by the 


State   Government'.   The   words   `shall   be   such'   followed   by   the 


expression   `as   may   be   prescribed'   clearly   indicate   the   legislative 


intent   of   `may'   being   directory   and   the   expression   `as   may   be 


prescribed' to mean, 'if any'.   The construction that I have put to the 


expression, 'as may be prescribed'   gets support from the decisions 


of this Court in
Surinder Singh v. Central Government
and others17 


and Orissa State (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Board12 .
37.                  In  Orissa   State   (Prevention   &   Control   of   Pollution)  


Board12, this Court was seized with  the question, whether as long as 


the   manner   is   not   prescribed   under   the   Rules   for   declaration   of   an 


area   as   the   air   pollution   control   area,   the   valid   notification   under
Section 19
of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 


could   be   published   in   the   official   gazette   or   not.
Section   19
under 




        17        (1986) 4 SCC 667
21
consideration   read,   `the   State   Government   may,   after   consultation 


with the State Board, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare in 


such   manner   as   may   be   prescribed,   any   area   or   areas   within   the 


State   as   air   pollution   control   area   or  areas   for   the   purposes   of  this 


Act'.
Section   2(n)
of   that   Act   defines   the   word   `prescribed'   which 


means prescribed by  rules made  by the Central Government or, as 


the   case   may   be,   the   State   Government.   Section   54   of   that   Act 


provides for power of the State Government to make rules.
In light of 


these provisions and few decisions of this Court viz;
T. Cajee v. U.  


Jormanik   Siem
&   another18    and  Surinder   Singh17,   the   Court 


considered the expression `as may be prescribed' and held that this 


expression   means `if any'.
This is what this Court said (para12; pg.
429):
" . . . . .In one of the cases decided by this Court, to be referred 

         later in this judgment "as may be prescribed" has been held to 

         mean "if any".   It is  thus  clear  that such  expression  leaves  the 

         scope   for   some   play  for   the   workability   of  the  provision   under 

         the law.  The meaning of the word  "as" takes colour in context 

         with which it is used and the manner of its use as prefix or suffix 

         etc. There is no rigidity about it and it may have the meaning of 

         a   situation   of   being   in   existence   during   a   particular   time   or 

         contingent, and so on and so forth. That is to say, something to 

         happen in a manner, if such a manner is in being or exists, if it 

         does   not,   it   may   not   happen   in   that   manner.   Therefore,   the 

         reading of the provision under consideration makes it clear that 

         manner of declaration is to be followed "as may be prescribed"
i.e. "if any" prescribed."
38.                     I   am   of   the   considered   view   that   there   is   no 


         18           AIR 1961 SC 276
22
difference in the legal position in a case where power conferred on 


the State Government for framing rules has been exercised but such 


rules remain silent on certain aspects although it had power to make 


rules with regard to those aspects and in the situation where no rules 


have been framed in exercise of the     power conferred on it, insofar 


as executive power of the State is concerned.  The power that vests 


in the State Government in
Section 30(2)
to carry out the provisions 


contained in
Section 16(2)
does not take away its executive power to 


make provision for the subjects covered in
Section 16(2)
for which no 


rules   have   been   framed   by   it.     The   exercise   of   such   power   by   the 


State   Government,   obviously,   must   not   be   inconsistent   with   the 


constitutional provisions or statutory provision in
Section 16(2)
or the 


State Rules framed by it.   In the present case, the exercise of power 


by the State Government by issuance of the order dated April 5, 2002 


does not suffer from any such vice.
39.                  Two   more   aspects   need   to   be   considered   by   me, 


firstly, the effect of
Section 31(2)
of the 1986 Act   which provides 


that every   rule   made under the 1986 Act shall   be laid before the 


State Legislature and secondly, whether in view of
Section 31(2)
,  the 


executive power of the State is to be exercised  in generality and not 


for a situation specific.
23
40.                  Craies on Statute Law, Seventh Edition,   has dealt 


with the subject, `Laying before Parliament' in Chapter 13 under the 


title   `Delegated   Legislation'.   The   author   has   observed   that   the 


requirement for `laying' first appeared in the 1830s. According to the 


author,   there   are   three   kinds   of   laying,   (i)   laying   without   further 


procedure:   (ii)   laying   subject   to   negative   resolution:   and   (iii)   laying 


subject   to   affirmative   resolution.   The   above   three   kinds   of   `laying' 


have   been   then   explained.     This   Court   approved   the   observations 


made   by   Craies   on   Statute   Law   in   respect   of   the   subject   `laying 


before   Parliament'     in  Hukam   Chand   Etc.  v.  Union   of   India   and  


others19.
41.                  As   to   whether   the   laying     of   rules   and   regulations 


before the Parliament is mandatory or directory or whether laying is a 


condition   precedent   to   their   operation   or   be   neglected   without 


prejudice   to  the  effect  of  the  rules,  it  is  now well  settled    that   each 


case   must   depend   on   its   own   circumstances   or   the   wording   of   the 


statute under which the rules are made. This Court had an occasion 


to deal with the policy and object underlying the provisions relating to 


laying the delegated legislation made by the subordinate law making 


authorities   or   orders   passed   by   subordinate   executive 


instrumentalities before both Houses of Parliament with reference to 




       19          (1972) 2 SCC 601
24
Section 3(6)
of the Essential Commodities Act,   1955, in the case of 


M/s.  Atlas  Cycle  Industries  Ltd.11  .
Section  3(6)
under  consideration 


read,   `every   order   made   under   this   Section   by   the   Central 


Government or by any officer or authority of the Central Government 


shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament as soon as may be, 


after it is made'.
In M/s. Atlas Cycle Industries Ltd.11, a three-Judge 


Bench of this Court referred to the observations made in the Craies 


on   Statute   Law   and   also   the   decisions   of   this   Court   in
Jan  


Mohammad   Noor   Mohammad   Begban  v.  State   of   Gujarat   &   and  


Another20
and
Narendra   Kumar  and   Others  v.  The   Union   of   India  


and Others21
and  held as under :
"32. From the foregoing discussion, it inevitably follows that the 

       Legislature   never   intended   that   non-compliance   with   the 

       requirement   of   laying   as   envisaged   by   sub-section   (6)   of
Section   3
of   the   Act   should   render   the   order   void. 

       Consequently non-laying of the aforesaid notification fixing the 

       maximum selling prices of various categories of iron and steel 

       including   the   commodity   in   question   before   both   Houses   of 

       Parliament cannot result in nullification of the notification......."
42.                   In light of the above legal position, if
Section 31(2)
of 


the   1986   Act   is   seen,   it   leaves   no   manner   of   doubt     that   the   said 


provision is directory.
43.                   I   am   unable   to   accept   the   submission   of   Mr.   A. 


Mariarputham   that   having   regard   to   the   provision   contained   in 


       20           (1966) 1 SCR 505

       21              (1960) 2 SCR 375
25
Section 31(2)
,   the executive power of the State Government to fill in 


the gaps in the rules can only be  exercised in generality.
44.                  It follows from the   above discussion that the State 


Government   has     power   to   issue   executive   order   or   administrative 


instructions with regard to subject/s provided in
Section 16(2)
of the 


1986   Act   where   the   State   Rules   are   silent   on   any   of   such   subject. 


There is nothing in
Section 30(2)
or
Section 31
of the 1986 Act that 


abridges the power of the State Government to issue executive order 


or   administrative   instructions   with   regard   to   pensionable   service   of 


the President and Members of the State Commission, although State 


Rules have been framed but such Rules are silent on the aspect of 


the   pensionable   service.   In   other   words,   in   the   absence   of   any 


provision in the State Rules relating to the pensionable service of the 


President and Members of the State Commission, there is no bar for 


the   State   Government   in   issuing   executive   order   or   administrative 


instructions     regarding   pensionable   service   of   the   President,   State 


Commission.
45.                  Insofar   as   the   order   dated   April   5,   2002   issued   by 


the Government of Madhya Pradesh according  sanction for counting 


the   service   of   the   respondent   on   the     post   of   President,   State
26
Commission   for   pension   is   concerned,   the   same   being   not 


       inconsistent   with   the   statutory   provision   contained   in
Section   16(2)
and the State Rules, the view of the High Court that the respondent 


       was entitled to pension from the State Government as per the terms 


       and   conditions   of   appointment   cannot   be   faulted.   The   High   Court 


       rightly observed that the respondent was entitled to pension from the 


       State   Government   insofar   as   service   rendered   by   him   as   the 


       President, State Commission was   concerned to the extent provided 


       in the order dated April 5, 2002.  Obviously such service shall not be 


       clubbed   with   the   service   of   the   respondent   as   a   High   Court   Judge 


       and shall not be charged to  Consolidated Fund of India.
46.                  Civil   appeal,   accordingly,   has   no   merit   and   is 


       dismissed with no order as to costs.
.........................J.

                                                   (R.M. Lodha)




        NEW DELHI.
FEBRUARY 29, 2012.
27
REPORTABLE


              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                    Civil Appeal No. 5322 OF 2005

                                        


The Accountant General                                   ...        

Appellant


                            Versus


S.K. Dubey and Anr.                             ...         Respondents





                            J U D G E M E N T




H.L. Gokhale J.


                     I   have   had   the   advantage   to   go   through   the
erudite judgment prepared by my Brother Lodha J., though for 


the reasons respectfully indicated below, I am not in a position 


to agree therewith.
2.                 The   short   question   in   this   appeal   is   as   to 


whether the first respondent who functioned as the President of 


the   Consumer   Disputes   Redressal   Commission,   in   Madhya 


Pradesh ("State Commission" for short) for a period of about 4 


years and 11 months, after his retirement as a High Court Judge, 


was entitled to receive pension for this subsequent period in the
28
absence   of   any   specific   provision   therefor   in   the   rules   framed 


under the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986
("
The Act
" for short). 


The ancillary question is as to whether the second respondent 


i.e. State of Madhya Pradesh could grant pension for this period 


by issuing an executive order.
3.                  The   broad   facts   and   the   statutory   provisions 


relevant   to   this   case   have   been   referred   to   in   my   Brother's 


judgment and therefore I am not repeating  them, though I may 


refer to some of the essential facts and relevant provisions.
Short facts leading to the present appeal
4.                  The   first   respondent   herein,   retired   as   a   Judge 


from the Madhya Pradesh High Court on 13.8.1998 after putting 


in   a   service   of   more   than   ten   years.   He   was   appointed   as   the 


President   of   the   State   Commission   after   a   short   gap   on 


21.9.1998   vide   Government   notification   dated   18.9.1998. 


Thereafter, he worked for a period of four years, ten months and 


twenty   two   days   as   the   President,   and   demitted   that   office   on 


12.8.2003.
29
5.                   The salary or honorarium and other allowances 


payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of the 


members of the State Commission (which include the President) 


are governed under the above Act.  The terms and conditions of 


appointment of the first respondent were determined under the 


Government's   letter/order   dated   26.5/3.6.1999,   which   included 


the following terms:-
(i)        The period of appointment shall be in accordance 

       with
Section 16(3)
of Consumer Protection Act, 1986.
(ii)       During the period of appointment he shall get pay 

       equal   to   the   pay   payable   to   Judge   of   High   Court   after 

       deducting the pension.   The relief on pension shall not be 

       payable   to   him   in   terms   of   Finance   Department   Office 

       Memorandum No. E-4-Char-79-Ni-5-84 dated 20.10.1984.
(iii)      The   allowances   and   other   perquisites   at   par   with 

       Judge of the High Court shall be made available to him.
Thus, it was clear that during this period he was 


to   receive   a   pay   equal   to   his   pay   as   a   High   Court   Judge   after 


deducting the amount of pension for the services rendered as a 


High court Judge. The relief on pension was also not payable to 


him.     The   allowances   and   other   perquisites   were   to   be   made 


available   to   him   at   par   with  a   Judge   of   a   High   Court.     Thus,   it 


was an appointment for a tenure with specific terms which did
30
not include pension.
6.                   Later,   on   5.4.2002,   the   Government   of   Madhya 


Pradesh   issued   an   order   according   sanction   for   counting   the 


period of his service as the President of the State Commission 


for the purpose of payability and determination of pension.  The 


order included a proviso as follows:
"provided   that   the   two   pensions   combined   together 

       shall   not   exceed   the   maximum   of   the   pension 

       prescribed for Judges of the Hon'ble High Court."
7.                   After the tenure of the first respondent was over, 

he submitted his pension papers to the office of the appellant on 

29.8.2003 in Form 6 (Form for assessing pension and gratuity). 

Clauses 18 and 19 thereof read as follows:-
18 Proposed pension  :  Rs. 13,000/-p.m. + DA or                      

                                    Rs. 1,56,000/- p.a. + DA


19 Proposed death-:  Rs. 1,38,333=00 (as per calculation  

    cum-retirement     sheet)

    gratuity

   

The calculation sheet enclosed therewith was as follows:-
CALCULATION SHEET


Calculation   sheet   of   amount   of   Pension   and   Death-cum-

retirement Gratuity Payable to Hon'ble Justice Shri S.K. Dubey, 

President   M.P.   State   Consumer   Disputes   Redressal 

Commission, Bhopal as per present Scale.
Date of Birth                                                   14.8.1936
31
Date of appointment and joining

as Judge of High Court                                        2.3.1988


Date of appointment as permanent

Judge                                                         4.8.1989


Date of retirement as High Court                              14.8.1998 F.N.

Judge


Date of appointment as President, 

M.P. State Consumer Disputes 

Redressal Commission, Bhopal                   21.9.1998 F.N.




Total Service


As High Court Judge        2.3.1988 to 14.8.1998 F.N.

                                    Year           Month                 Day
10               5                  12
Service as President of             21.9.1988 to 13.8.2003
M.P. State Consumer       4              10             22
Disputes Redressal

Commission
Total              15                        4          04
Amount   of   Pension   under   Part-I   of   the   High   Court   Judge 

(Conditions of Service) Act 1954 and as per Government of India 

Ministry of Law and Justice Department of Justice Dt. 18.12.1987 

and 11.4.1988


Rs. 11,150 X 15 = 167250  = Rs. 13937.50p
12
Maximum is Rs. 13,000/- P.M. OR Rs. 1,56,000/- P.A.


Amount of Death-cum-Retirement Gratuity including 55% D.A. as 

per instructions.
Pay Rs. 26,000+
32
55% of D.A 14,300            40,300 X 20 X 15              = 4,03,000

Total Rs. 30,3000/-              30 X 1


Maximum limit of DCRG                            Rs. 3,50,000=00

Less already paid                      Rs. 2,11,667=00


Balance to be paid                     Rs. 1,38,333=00
family pension:- w.e.f. 14.8.2003 of Rs. 78,000 per month (or per 

annum?) to Smt. Manju Dubey, wife of Hon'ble Justice Shri S.I. 

Dubey till her death or remarriage whichever is earlier.
8.                   The   appellant   raised   certain   queries   with 


respect  thereto  by  his  letter dated  10.12.2003.    It was stated  in 


this   letter   that   according   to   the   pension   calculation   sheet 


submitted on behalf of the first respondent, the pension of first 


respondent   had   been   revised   by   adding   his   service   as   the 


President to the service rendered by him as a High Court Judge, 


and   the   same   was  not   in   accordance   with  law.     It   was  pointed 


out that there was no provision in the
Consumer Protection Act, 


1986
about the admissibility of pension. Besides, a clarification 


was sought on the following three points:-
(i)      The   rate   at   which   the   pension   is   to   be   calculated   for 


each year of service.
(ii)     Relief on pension is admissible or not, if admissible then 


as   per   rules   applicable   to   the   State   Government,   Central 


Government/Judges of High Court.
33
(iii)     In   the   order   for   counting   the   said   services,   there   is   no 


mention   about   admissibility   of   gratuity   and   commutation   of 


pension.
It was also pointed out that it was not proper to 


revise the pension of the first respondent as sanctioned by the 


President of India without amendment in the
High Court Judges 


(Conditions   of   Service)   Act,   1954
.     The   pension   papers   were 


therefore returned.
9.                  This led to further correspondence between the 


appellant   and   the   first   respondent.     Appellant   recorded   in   his 


letter dated 23.9.2004, that the case of the first respondent was 


referred   to   the   Central   Ministry   of   Law   and   Justice   which   had 


replied   by   their   letter   dated   9.9.2002,   alongwith   a   copy   of   the 


judgment   of   this   Court   in   SLP   No.   15450/2003   i.e.
Justice   P. 


Venugopal   Vs.   Union   of   India
[reported   in   2003(7)   SCC   726] 


which   held   that   for   the   purpose   of   pensionary   benefits,   the 


period undergone as a High Court Judge cannot be clubbed with 


an additional period to refix the pension.   The same position is 


reiterated   by   the   appellant   in   his   subsequent   letter   dated 


4.11.2004   addressed   to   respondent   No.   1.     These   three 


letters/orders  were challenged by the first respondent in  a writ
34
petition to the Madhya Pradesh High Court (W.P. No.13302/2004) 


which has allowed that petition by the impugned judgment and 


order   dated   8.2.2005.   The   High   Court   has   noted   that   this 


additional liability is being undertaken by the State Government, 


and it is not be drawn from the Consolidated Fund of India, and 


that it is not to exceed the maximum pension payable to a High 


Court Judge and therefore would be valid.
The submissions by the rival parties
10.                 The learned counsel for the first respondent Mr. 


Amrendra   Sharan   raised   an   objection   to   the   maintainability   of 


the   appeal   at   the   instance   of   the   appellant.     It   was   contended 


that   since   his   decision   was   challenged,   the   appellant   is   not 


expected to agitate it further.   In this connection, we must note 


that the appellant was joined as the first respondent in the Writ 


Petition in the High Court.  He is in charge of the accounts in the 


State   and   represents   the   Comptroller   and   Auditor   General   of 


India,   who   is   a   Constitutional   Functionary.   The   payment   of 


pension and its supervision is a part of his responsibility.
His 


letters/orders were challenged in the writ petition, and if it was 


his view that the decision of the High Court was erroneous, we
35
do not see any reason as to why he should not be held eligible 


to challenge the decision. He is an administrative authority and 


his decision was approved by the Ministry of Law and Justice. 


Such   petitions   have   been   filed   by   the   Accountant   Generals   in 


the past also. [For reference in the case of
Accountant General 


of   Orissa   Vs.   R.   Ramamurthy
reported   in   2006   (12)   SCC   557.] 


Hence we do not find any substance in this objection.
11.                The   principal   submission   on   behalf   of   the 


appellant   is  based   on
Section  16(2)
of  the   Act,   which reads  as 


follows:-
"16. Composition of the State Commission.....
(1) ......................
(2)   The   salary   or   honorarium   and   other   allowances 

       payable to, and other terms and conditions of service 

       of,   the   members   of   the   State   Commission   shall   be 

       such as may be prescribed by the State Government."
The   definition   of   a   `member'   under
Section   2(jj)
of   the 


act   includes   the   President   of   the   State   Commission,   and   the 


term `prescribed' has been defined in
Section 2 (n)
as follows:-
"2(n).    "prescribed"   means   prescribed   by   rules 

       made   by   the   State   Government,   or   as   the   case   may 

       be, by the Central Government under this Act."
36
Section   30
which   lays   down   the   power   of   the   Central 


Government or that of the State Government to make the rules, 


specifically provides under Sub-section (2) that amongst others, 


the   State   Government   may   by   a   notification   make   rules   for 


carrying   out   the   provisions   of   Sub-section   (2)   of
Section   16
of 


the   Act.   This   being   so,   whatever   is   prescribed   in   the   rules   are 


the various terms and conditions of service, for the members of 


the   State   Commission.     This   does   not   mean   that   the   State 


Government   cannot   frame   additional   rules   either   granting 


pension or other benefits.  However, wherever it is done without 


framing rules, it will be difficult to say that it is authorized by the 


statute.
12.                  As far as the rules in this behalf viz. The Madhya 


Pradesh Consumer Protection Rules, 1987 are concerned, there 


is   no   difficultly   in   noting   that   the   rules   do   not   provide   for 


pension either to the President or to the members.  Rules 6 (1) to 


(3)   thereof   are   the   relevant   rules   in   this   behalf.     They   read   as 


follows:-
"6.       Salary   and   other   allowances   and   terms   and 

       conditions of the President and Members of the State
37
Commission.
"1.      The   President  of  the  State  Commission  shall 

       receive salary of the High Court if appointed on whole 

       time   basis   or   a   consolidated   honorarium   of   Rs.200 

       per day for the sitting if appointed on part time basis. 

       Other   members,   if   sitting   on   whole   time   basis,   shall 

       receive a consolidated honorarium of Rs.150 per day 

       for the sitting.
2.       The   President   and   the   Members   of   the   State 

       Commission   shall   be   eligible   for   such   travelling 

       allowance and daily allowance on official tour as are 

       admissible to grade I Officer of the State Government.
3.       The salary, honorarium and other allowances 

       shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of the 

       State Government.
......................................."
13.                 The   submission   of   Mr.   Mariarputham,   learned 


Senior Counsel for the appellant has been that the appellant is 


required   to   read   and   implement   these   provisions   as   they   are. 


The   section   clearly   provides   that   the   terms   and   conditions   of 


service of the member (including President of the Commission) 


will   be   as   prescribed   by   the   State   Government.     `Prescribed' 


means as
laid down in
the rules.
Section 31
of the Act requires 


that these rules are to be laid before the legislature.   Since the 


rules   do   not   provide   for   pension,   one   cannot   incorporate   any 


such  concept  in  the  service  conditions   of the first respondent.
Mr. Mariarputham, relied upon the judgment of this Court in the 


case   of
State   of   Uttar   Pradesh   Vs.   Singhara   Singh
reported   in 


AIR   1964   SC   358,   and   particularly   first   part   of   paragraph   8
38
thereof which reads as follows:-
"8.       The rule adopted in Taylor V. Taylor (1876) 1 

       Ch.   D   426   is   well   recognised   and   is   founded   on 

       sound   principle.     Its   result   is   that   if   a   statute   has 

       conferred a power to do an act and has laid down the 

       method   in   which   that   power  has   to   be   exercised,   it 

       necessarily   prohibits   the   doing   of   the   act   in   any 

       other   manner   than   that  which   has   been   prescribed. 

       The principle behind the rule is that if this were not 

       so,   the   statutory   provision   might   as   well   not   have 

       been enacted........."
14.                  As   against   the   submission   on   behalf   of   the 


appellant,   it   has   been   submitted   by   Mr.   Amrendra   Sharan, 


learned Senior Counsel appearing for the first respondent, that 


in  the present  case the  rules  are silent  about the  provision for 


pension.     It   cannot   however   mean   that   the   State   Government 


cannot on its own grant pension by issuing an executive order 


under
Article 162
of the Constitution of India.  He relied upon the 


judgment   of   this   Court   in
Sant   Ram   Sharma   Vs.   State   of 


Rajasthan
reported in AIR 1967 SC 1910 in this behalf.
A strong 


reliance   was   also   placed   on   the   judgment   of   this   Court   in   the 


case of
Orissa State (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Board 


Vs. Orient Paper Mills
reported in 2003 (10) SCC 421, particularly 


paragraph   12   thereof,   to   explain   the   phrase   `as   may   be 


prescribed'.     It   was   therefore   submitted   that   where   the   rule   is 


silent,   it   cannot   mean   a   restriction   on   the   exercise   of   the
39
executive   powers   of   the   State,   which   it   has   exercised   in   the 


present case.
Consideration of the rival submissions
15.
Article   162
of   the   Constitution,   lays   down   the 


extent of the executive power of the State in following terms:-
"162.      Extent of executive power of State


       Subject   to   the   provisions   of   this   Constitution,   the 

       executive power of a State shall extend to the matters 

       with respect to which the Legislature of the State has 

       power to make laws:
Provided   that   in   any   matter   with 

       respect   to   which   the   Legislature   of   a   State   and 

       Parliament   have   power   to   make   laws,   the   executive 

       power of the State shall be subject to, and limited by, 

       the   executive   power   expressly   conferred   by   this 

       Constitution or by any law made by Parliament upon 

       the Union or authorities thereof."
This  Article  does lay down in  its  principal  part that the 


executive   power   of   the   State   shall   extend   to   the   matters   with 


respect   to   which   the   Legislature   of   a   State   has   the   power   to 


make laws.   It is however important to note that the proviso to 


this Article lays down that in such matters the executive power 


of   the   State   shall   be   subject   to   and   limited   by   the   executive 


power   expressly   conferred   by   the   Constitution   or   by   any   law 


made   by   Parliament   upon   the   Union   or   authorities   thereof.     In
40
the   instant   case,   the   State   Govt.   has   been   expressly  given   the 


power   under
Section   30   (2)
to   make   rules   for   carrying   out   the 


provisions of
Section 16 (2)
of the act.   The State has therefore 


to exercise its executive power subject to and as limited by this 


law meaning thereby in conformity therewith.
16.                 When   the   statute   provides   that   the   `terms   and 


conditions shall be such as may be prescribed, and `prescribed' 


means prescribed by the rules, it is implied that these rules shall 


be of general application.  If pension is to be covered under the 


concept of terms and condition of service under
Section 16 (2)
, 


there   has   to   be   a   general   rule   concerning   the   same.     Pension 


denotes   a   periodical   payment   to   be   made   available   to   the 


employee after his retirement, after long years of service which 


are governed by the relevant rules [Ref.
Pepsu Road Transport 


Corporation, Patiala Vs. Mangal Singh
reported in 2011 (11) SCC 


702].  In the instant case, there are general rules laying down the 


terms   and   conditions   framed   under   the   concerned   statute   but 


they do not make any provision for pension.  As far as the grant 


of pension is concerned, in his first letter dated 10.12.2003, the 


appellant raised the issue with respect to the rate at which the
41
pension is to be calculated.  Mr. Mariarputham, submitted that if 


the   service  in   the   consumer   commission   is   not   to   be   clubbed, 


and even if the State Government is to bear the responsibility, it 


will also have to be provided as to how many years of service in 


the commission will qualify for pension. It is not enough merely 


to   provide   that   the   two   pensions   combined   together   shall   not 


exceed   the   maximum   of   the   pension   prescribed   for   Judges   of 


the Hon'ble High Court. These issues can be dealt with if rules 


are made and not otherwise.
17.                Nothing   prevents   the   State   Government   from 


making   rules   in   this   behalf   specifically   for   this   purpose.     A 


provision for pension has thus been made when the legislature 


so   wanted   it,   as   can   be   seen   in   the   case   of   Central 


Administrative   Tribunal.   Thus,   Rule   8   of   the   Central 


Administrative   Tribunal   (Salaries   and   Allowances   and 


Conditions   of   Service   of   Chairman,   Vice   Chairman   and 


Members) Rules, 1985 reads as follows:-
"8.   Pension-   (1)   Every   person 

       appointed   to   the   Tribunal   as   the   Chairman,   a   Vice 

       Chairman   or   a   Member   shall   be   entitled   to   pension 

       provided that no such pension shall be payable-
(i) if he has put in less than two years 

       of service; or
42
(ii)   if   he   has   been   removed   from   an 

      office in the Tribunal under sub-section (2) of
Section 

      9
of the Act.
(2)   Pension   under   sub-rule   (1)   shall   be 

      calculated   at   the   rate   of   rupees   seven   hundred   per 

      annum   for   each   completed   year   of   service   1[**]   and 

      irrespective  of  the  number  of  years  of  service in   the 

      Tribunal,   the   maximum   amount   of   pension   shall   not 

      exceed   rupees   three   thousand   five   hundred   per 

      annum:
Provided   that   the   aggregate   amount 

      of   pension   payable   under   this   rule   together   with  the 

      amount   of   any   pension   including   commuted   portion 

      of   pension,   (if   any)   drawn   or   entitled   to   be   drawn 

      while   holding   office   in   the   Tribunal   shall   not   exceed 

      the   maximum   amount   of   pension   prescribed   for   a 

      Judge of the High Court."
1.  Omitted by GSR 417 (E), dt. 31.3.1989
18. (i)            In
Justice P. Venugopal
(supra), a bench of three 


Judges of this Court has laid down that a High Court Judge is 


entitled   to  pensionary  benefits  only  in  terms  of  the
High  Court 


Judges (Conditions of Service) Act,  1954
and not otherwise.   A 


clubbing   of   additional   services,   if   any,   for   the   purpose   of 


computation of pension is not contemplated.   As  seen from the 


calculations tendered by the first respondent it is very clear that 


he was clubbing his service as a High Court Judge and as the 


President of the State Commission, to claim the pension, though 


not   exceeding   the   maximum   of   the   pension   prescribed   for 


Judges of the High Court.  It is also relevant to note that it is not 


stated   in   the   Calculation   Sheet   as   to   which   portion   of   the
43
proposed pension was to be paid by the State Government and 


which would be payable for the services as a High Court Judge. 


Thus,   on   these   facts   the   pension   claimed   was   clearly 


inadmissible.
(ii)      It   is   true   that   in   para   26   of   its   judgment   in
Justice   P. 


Venugopal
(supra) this Court has laid down that the question as 


to   whether  a   Judge   rendering   services   subsequently   would  be 


entitled to pension from the State will depend upon the statute 


or the terms and conditions of appointment.  As noted above, in 


our understanding the provisions of the statute and the rules in 


the present case are clear, and therefore the appellant could not 


be faulted for raising the queries with respect to the claim of the 


first   respondent   for   the   pension   as   the   President   of   the   State 


Commission, in the absence of specific provision in the rules.
19.                  The   reliance   by   the   respondent   No.   1   on   the 


judgment of this Court in
Orissa State (Prevention and Control 


of Pollution) Board
(supra) is also erroneous.   That was a case, 


where there was a power under
Section 19
of the Air (Prevention 


and   Control   of   Pollution)   Act,   1981,   to   declare   any   area   as   air 


pollution   control   area.     This   was   to   be   done   after   consultation
44
with   the   said   Board   by   issuing   a   notification   in   the   official 


gazette.     This   in   fact,   was   done.     What   was   lacking   were   the 


rules   to   be   made   under
Section   54
of   the   Act   to   carry   out   the 


purposes of the Act, and amongst others it was provided under 


sub-section (2) thereof that the rules may provide for the manner 


in   which   an   area   or   areas   may   be   declared   as   air   pollution 


control area.  It was canvassed on behalf of the respondent that 


in   the   absence   of   rules   `prescribing   this   manner',   the 


notifications issued under
Section 19
would be bad.   This court 


negated   this   argument.     The   observations   of   this   court 


concerning  the term `prescribed'  will have  to be  looked  in that 


context.  It is in this context that what is observed in paragraph 


13 of the judgment is more important.  It reads as follows:-
"13.       Thus, in case manner is not prescribed under 

       the   rules,   there   is   no   obligation   or   requirement   to 

       follow   any,   except   whatever   the   provision   itself 

       provides viz.
Section 19
in the instant  case which is 

       also complete in itself even without any manner being 

       prescribed   as   indicated   shortly   before   to   read   the 

       provision omitting this part "in such manner as may 

       be prescribed".  Merely by absence of rules, the State 

       would   not   be   divested   of   its   powers   to   notify   in   the 

       Official   Gazette   any   area   declaring   it   to   be   an   air 

       pollution   control   area.     In   case,   however,   the   rules 

       have   been   framed   prescribing   the   manner, 

       undoubtedly,   the   declaration   must   be   in   accordance 

       with such rules."
Thus,   in   the
Orissa
case   the   substantive
45
declaration concerning the pollution control area had been done 


by following the procedure of issuing a notification in exercise 


of   the   power   under
Section   19
of   the   Act,   and   therefore   the 


decision was complete and valid in itself.  The rules prescribing 


the manner were not framed at all, and therefore non-adherence 


thereto would not vitiate the notification.  In the instant case, the 


rules   have   been   framed.     They   lay   down   the   substantive 


provisions concerning the terms and conditions of the service, 


and they do not include pension.  The scenario in the two cases 


is quite distinct.
20.
Sant   Ram   Sharma
(supra)   was   a   case 


concerning   promotions   to   selection   grade   posts   in   the   Indian 


Police Service on the basis of merit. The statutory rules for that 


purpose   were   not   framed,   and   it   was   contended   that   the 


executive   government   cannot   be   held   to   have   power   to   make 


appointments   and   lay   down   conditions   of   service   without 


making   rules   in   that   behalf.     There   was   however,   long 


administrative   practice   bordering   on   to   a   rule   of   effecting 


promotions based on merit, and not merely on seniority, and the 


appellant had also been considered for selection.   It was in this 


context   that   this   Court   held   that   it   would  not   be   proper   to   say 


that till statutory rules governing promotions to selection grade
46
posts are framed, Govt. cannot issue administrative instructions 


regarding the principles to be followed.   The court repelled the 


contention by observing at the end of paragraph 9 as follows:-
"As   a   matter   of   long   administrative   practice 

       promotion   to   selection   grade   posts   in   the   Indian 

       Police Service has been based on merit and seniority 

       has been taken into consideration only when merit of 

       the candidates is otherwise equal and we are unable 

       to   accept   the   argument   of   Mr.   N.C.   Chatterjee   that 

       this   procedure   violates,   in   any   way,   the   guarantee 

       under Arts. 14 and 16 of the Constitution."
Hence,   this   judgment   cannot   be   read   as   a 


judgment   permitting   an   additional  grant   when  the   rules   do   not 


provide for the same.
21.                  The   decisions   of   this   court   in
Lalit   Mohan   Deb 


Vs.   Union   of   India
reported   in   1973   (3)   SCC   862   and   those   in
Union of India and another Vs. Central Electrical and Mechanical 


Engineering   Service   (CE&MES)   Group   `A'   (Direct   Recruits) 


Association, CPWD and others
reported in 2008 (1) SCC 354 are 


also   to   the   same   effect,   namely  that   the   executive   instructions 


have   to   be   in   conformity   with   the   rules   and   not   inconsistent 


therewith.  In the present case rules have been framed.  It is not 


a   case   of   absence   of   rules.     It   is   a   case   where   there   is   no 


concept of pension at all in the concerned rules.   The question
47
is   whether   such   a   provision   can   be   brought   in   through   an 


executive   order   for   the   benefit   of   an   individual.     In   the   instant 


case there are rules framed for the purpose of
Section 16 (2)
of 


the   Act   read   with
Section   30   (2)
of   the   Act.     The   rules   do   not 


provide   for   any   pension,   and   if   they   do   not   so   provide,   the 


concept   and   the   obligation   thereunder   cannot   be   brought   in 


through an executive order.   It is also very relevant to note that 


the   Oxford   Dictionary   defines   the   verb   `prescribe'   amongst 


others, as follows:-
"   to   state   authoritatively   that   something   should   be 

       done in a particular way".
When
Section   16   (2)
lays   down   that   the   terms 


and  conditions   of service shall be  such  as may be  prescribed, 


there   is   an   element   of   authoritativeness,   and   a   requirement   to 


act in a particular way.
22.                  The   provision   of
Section   31
of   the   Act   is   to   be 


looked at from this point of view.   It provides for the rules and 


regulations to be laid before each House of Parliament and State 


Legislature.     The   first   respondent   relied   upon   the   judgment   of 


this Court in the case of M/s
Atlas Cycle Industries Ltd. Vs. State 


of   Haryana
reported   in   1979   (2)   SCC   196   to   submit   that   laying
48
down was not mandatory but was a directory provision.   In the 


present   case,   it   is   difficult   to   say   that   this   provision   is   merely 


directory.  But in any case, what
Section 31
indicates is that the 


Union Parliament or the State Legislature is to be kept informed 


about the rules. This is because it concerns the public finance 


and   the   functioning   of   the   authorities   under   the   Act.     It   is   a 


welfare   enactment   and   it   cannot   be   said   that   these   provisions 


are such which can be ignored.   This is only to emphasize that 


one   has   to   function   within   the   four   corners   of   law,   and   the 


executive power cannot be used to act outside thereof.
23.                    We cannot ignore that the provisions of statute 


and   the   rules   are   to   be   read   as   they   are.   As   stated   by   Justice 


G.P. Singh in Principles of Statutory Interpretation (13th Edition, 


Chapter 2 Page 64), 





       "the   intention   of   the   Legislature   is   primarily   to   be 

       gathered   from   the   language   used,   which   means   that 

       attention should be paid to what has been said as also 

       to what has not been said."
[See   also   Crawford   Vs.   Spooner   4   Moo   Ind.   App.
179   and
Nalinakhya Vs. Shyam Sunder
AIR  1953 SC 148 Para 9 quoting 


with approval Crawford Vs. Spooner.]
We may as well refer to 


the observations of this court in para 10 of
State of Kerala Vs. K.
49
Prasad
reported in 2007 (7) SCC 140 to the following effect:-
"........ It needs little emphasis that the Rules are meant 

       to   be   and   have   to   be   complied   with   and   enforced 

       scrupulously.     Waiver   or   even   relaxation   of   any   rule, 

       unless such power exists under the rules, is bound to 

       provide   scope   for   discrimination,   arbitrariness   and 

       favouritism, which is totally opposed to the rule of law 

       and  our  constitutional   values.   It  goes  without  saying 

       that   even   an   executive   order   is   required   to   be   made 

       strictly in consonance with the rules.  Therefore, when 

       an   executive   order   is   called   in   question,   while 

       exercising   the   power   of   judicial   review   the   Court   is 

       required to see whether the Government has departed 

       from   such   rules   and   if   so,   the   action,   of   the 

       Government is liable to be struck down."
(emphasis supplied)
24.                  The first respondent was undoubtedly entitled to 


receive pension for his tenure of service as a High Court Judge. 


The   question   is   with   respect   to   payability   of   pension   for   the 


service as the President of the State Commission. It is a matter 


concerning public finance, and such a grant cannot be made at 


the   instance   of   the   State   Government   when   the   rules   do   not 


prescribe   the   same.     In   the   instant   case   the   order   according 


sanction to pension does not prescribe any period for eligibility 


nor   any   rate   at   which   the   pension   is   to   be   paid.   This   is   apart 


from the fact that as seen from the Calculation Sheet tendered 


by the first respondent, the subsequent period of his service as 


the   President   of   the   State   Commission   was   sought   to   be
50
clubbed   with   the   period   of   his   service   as   a   High   Court   Judge, 


which   is   impermissible.   Such   an   order   for   the   benefit   of   an 


individual   cannot   be   considered   to   be   a   valid   one.     Any   such 


exception being made by exercising executive power would be 


violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India.
25.                  In the circumstances the appeal deserves to be 


allowed   and   the   impugned   judgment   and   order   passed   by   the 


High   Court   is   required   to   be   set-aside.     Accordingly,   this   Civil 


Appeal   is   allowed,   the   judgment   and   order   of   the   High   Court 


dated   8.2.2005   in   Writ   Petition   No.13302/2004   is   hereby   set-


aside,   the   said   writ   petition   filed   by   the   first   respondent   is 


dismissed though without any order as to costs.
26.                  Mr.   Amrendra   Sharan,   learned   counsel   for   the 


first   respondent   submitted   that   in   the   event   this   Court   is   not 


inclined to hold  in  favour of  the respondent No.1,  the payment 


made   so   far   should   not   be   recovered.     He   relied   upon   the 


judgment   of   this   Court   in   the   case   of
Yogeshwar   Prasad   Vs. 


National Institute of Education Planning and Admn
. reported in 


2010   (14)   SCC   323   wherein   this   court   held   in   the   facts   of   that 


case   the   grant   of   higher   pay   scales   should   not   be   recovered
51
unless   it   was   a   case   of   misrepresentation   or   fraud.
This 


judgment   in   turn   referred   to   an   earlier   judgment   in
Sahib   Ram 


Vs. State of Haryana
reported in 1995 Supp. (1) SCC 18.   In that 


matter the appellant was held to be not entitled to a salary in the 


revised scale.  However, since the higher pay scale was given to 


him   due   to   wrong   construction   of   the   relevant   order   by   the 


authority   concerned   and   not   on   account   of   any 


misrepresentation by the employee, the amount paid till the date 


of   order   was   directed   not   to   be   recovered.     When   this   appeal 


was admitted, stay as prayed by the appellant was declined, but 


it   was   made   clear   that   the   payment   made   by   the   appellant 


pursuant to the judgment of the High Court will be subject to the 


decision   of   appeal.     Mr.   Mariarputham,   learned   counsel   for   the 


appellant   submitted   that   the   appeal   is   canvassed   basically   in 


view   of   the   principle   involved.       In   view   thereof,   although   the 


appeal   is   allowed,   the   additional   pension   paid   to   the   first 


respondent as the President of the State Commission till the end 


of   February   2012,   will   not   be   recovered   from   him.     However, 


from March, 2012 onwards the first respondent shall be entitled 


to   receive   pension   only   for   the   service   rendered   by   him   as   a 


High Court Judge.
.........................................J.
52
( H.L. Gokhale  )




New Delhi

Dated: February 29, 2012
53
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                     CIVIL  APPEAL NO. 5322 OF 2005



The Accountant General, M.P.                                   .... Appellant


                                       Versus


S.K. Dubey & Anr.                                                 ....Respondents





                               COMMON ORDER




          In   view   of   divergence   of   opinion   in   terms   of   separate 


judgments    pronounced  by  us in this  appeal today,    the Registry  is 


directed   to   place   the   papers   before   Hon'ble   the     Chief   Justice   for 


appeal being assigned to an appropriate Bench.
.........................J.

                                                      (R.M. Lodha)

 


                                                     .........................J.

                                                     (H.L. Gokhale)

NEW DELHI.
FEBRUARY 29, 2012.