[Cites
8
, Cited by
17
]
Supreme Court of India
Esha Ekta Appartments Chs Ltd.& Ors vs Mun.Corp.Of Mumbai & Anr on 29 February, 2012
Equivalent citations: AIR 2012 SUPREME COURT 1718, 2012 (4) SCC 689, 2012 AIR SCW 2147, 2012 (3) AIR BOM R 722, (2012) 3 RECCIVR 933, (2012) 3 KCCR 103(1), (2012) 92 ALL LR 897, (2012) 3 ALL RENTCAS 105, AIR 2012 SC (CIV) 1222, (2012) 4 CIVILCOURTC 190, (2012) 116 REVDEC 608(2), (2012) 2 ALLMR 954 (SC), (2012) 2 ICC 733, (2012) 3 SCALE 210, (2012) 114 ALLINDCAS 65 (SC), (2012) 1 CLR 667 (SC), (2012) 5 BOM CR 609
Bench:
Sudhansu Jyoti Mukhopadhaya
,
G.S. Singhvi
1





                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


         SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 33471 OF 2011




Esha Ekta Appartments CHS Ltd. and others                           ... Petitioners


                                           Versus


The Municipal Corporation of Mumbai and another                     ... Respondents


                                            With


                               SLP(C) No.33601 of 2011


                               SLP(C) No.33940 of 2011


                               SLP(C) No.35324 of 2011


                               SLP(C) No.35402 of 2011





                                       O  R  D  E  R




1.     Having failed to convince the trial Court and the High Court to entertain 


their   prayer   for   restraining   respondent   no.   1   -   Municipal   Corporation   of 


Mumbai   (for   short,   `the   Corporation')   from   demolishing   the   buildings 


constructed   on   Plot   No.   9,   Scheme   58,   Worli,   Mumbai,   the   petitioners   have 


filed these petitions under
Article 136
of the Constitution.        


                                                  2



2.      The petitioners are the Cooperative House Building Societies (for short, 


`the societies') and their members, who are said to have purchased flats in the 


buildings constructed by the developers on the plot in question.  Their grievance 


is that even though the flats were purchased under a bona fide belief that the 


buildings have been constructed in accordance with law, the trial Court and the 


High Court did not injunct the Corporation from demolishing the same on the 


ground   that   the   latter   had   taken   action   in   furtherance   of   the   orders   passed   in 


Writ   Petition   Nos.   2040/1999,   2402/1999,   2403/1999,   2904/1999,   2949/1999 


and 1808/2000. 




3.      The Corporation leased out the plot in question, of which the total area is 


17907.60   sq.   meters   to   M/s.   Pure   Drinks   Pvt.   Ltd.   on   17.1.1962   for   general 


industrial   use.   After   18   years   and   about   11   months,   the   State   Government 


issued order dated 1.12.1980 under
Section 37(2)
of the Maharashtra Regional 


and Town Planning Act, 1966 and sanctioned the change of use in respect of 


13049.45   sq.   meters   land   from   industrial   to   residential.     Between   1980   and 


1982,   M/s.   Pure   Drinks   transferred   that   portion   of   land   to   the   developers   for 


construction   of   residential   buildings.   The   building   plans   submitted   by   the 


developers for construction of 6 buildings comprising of basement, ground and 


5   upper   floors   were   sanctioned   by   the   competent   authority   on   8.6.1981.   The 


amended   building   plans   submitted   by   the   developers   for   construction   of   9 


                                                 3



buildings with ground and 5 upper floors were also sanctioned by the competent 


authority.  




4.      In   1984,   the   developers   submitted   new   building   plans   proposing 


construction of two buildings on stilts with 24 and 16 upper floors respectively, 


additional 6th and 7th floors in building no. 2 and additional 6th floor on a portion 


of building no. 3. The new plans were rejected by the competent authority on 


6.9.1984. Notwithstanding  this, the developers continued the construction and 


did not stop their activity despite the stop work notice dated 12.11.1984 issued 


by the Corporation.




5.      After   the   purchasers   of   flats   formed   societies,   they   along   with   the 


societies   filed   writ   petitions   for   issue   of   a   direction   to   the   Corporation   to 


provide water connections. During the pendency of those petitions, the Division 


Bench of the High Court took cognizance of the fact that the buildings had been 


constructed   in   violation   of   the   sanctioned   plans   and   passed   order   dated 


11.10.2005   and   directed   the   Additional   Commissioner   of   the   Corporation   to 


appear in person to explain the reason for not taking action against the illegal 


construction. That order reads as under:




        "In all these writ petitions, arguments were heard on behalf of 

        the parties. None appeared for respondent no.4 in Writ Petition 

        No.2904-99, for respondent No.4 in Writ Petition No.2403-99, 

        for   respondent   Nos.4   and   5   in   Writ   Petition   No.2402-99,   for 

        respondent   nos.4   and   5   in   Writ   Petition   No.1808-2000.   Shri 


                                         4



N.V.   Patil,   Sub-Engineer   Building   and   Proposal   (City)   was 

present in Court to assist the Advocate for the Corporation.


2.   In   the   course   of   the   argument,   it   was   revealed   by   the 

Advocate   for   the   Corporation   on   taking   instructions   that 

original licence for construction was granted in favour of four 

persons   viz.   Shri   Manjit   Singh   Madanjit   Singh,   Power   of 

Attorney Holder of S. Karanjit Singh, Chief Executive Officer 

of   Pure   Drink   Pvt.   Ltd.,   Shri   Ishwarsingh   Chawla   of   PSD 

Construction   Pvt.   Ltd.,   Shri   D.K.Gupta   of   D.Y.   Builders   Pvt. 

Ltd.   and   Abdula   Yusuf   Patel.   Pursuant   to   the   illegality   in 

construction   having   been   found,   notices   were   issued   under 

Section 53-1 of the M.R.T.P. Act on 20th  February, 2002 to all 

the   four   persons   mentioned   above.   Thereafter,   sanction   was 

granted for prosecution of all the four persons and decision in 

that   regard   was   taken   on   19th   May,   2003   by   the   Executive 

Engineer   (Building   Proposal),   CT/1   of   the   Corporation. 

Meanwhile,   the   panchanama   of   the   illegal   construction   was 

carried out on 13th November, 2002. Besides, the prosecution 

was launched against  builder,  developer  and all the occupants 

of the building and they were convicted on admission of guilt 

and   sentenced   by   way   of   imposition   of   fine   from   Rs.600/-   to 

Rs.2000/-   imposed   by   the   Magistrate.   Apart   from   the   above 

actions,   no   other   action   has   been   taken   by   the   Corporation   in 

relation  to  the illegal   construction.   The  affidavit-in-reply  filed 

on   behalf   of   the   Corporation   before   issuance   of   rule   in   the 

petition   by   Shri   Kurmi   Deonath   Sitaram,  Executive   Engineer, 

DP(City)(I)   discloses   that   initial   approval   was   granted   for   six 

wings   consisting   of   ground   plus   five   upper   floors   and   it   was 

issued  on 9th  June,  1981 and  Commencement  Certificate   was 

granted   on   10th   June,   1981.   The   amendment   plans   were 

approved   for   nine   wings   of   ground   plus   five   upper   floors   on 

2nd   February,   1983.   Thereafter,   amendment   plans   proposing 

stilt   plus   twenty-four   floors   and   stilt   plus   sixteen   floors   with 

additional sixth and seventh floor to building nos.2 and 4 and 

additional   sixth   floor   for   the   part   of   building   no.3   were 

submitted but they were refused on 6th September, 1984. In spite 

of   that,   the   constructive   activities   continued   and   the   work 

beyond the approved  plans was carried out, and therefore Stop 

Work notice was issued under
Section 353-A
of the MMC Act 

on 12th  November, 1984. However, the work continued. Again 


                                         5



new architect  submitted further plan with a fresh notice under 

Section 337. The same was rejected by the Corporation.


3. The affidavit also discloses the various illegalities committed 

in   the   course   of   construction   of   the   buildings   which   include 

construction   of   additional   floors   without   approval,   increase   in 

the height of the building and carrying of construction beyond 

the permissible limits of FSI, apart from other illegalities. The 

affidavit, however, does not disclose as to what action, if any, 

for   prohibiting   the   developer   and   the   owner   from   proceeding 

with   the   construction,   was   taken   as   wall   as   what   action   was 

taken   after   illegal   construction   having   been   carried   out,   apart 

from launching prosecution and issuance of notices. Even in the 

course   of   the   argument,   learned   Advocate   appearing   for   the 

Corporation   could   not   satisfy   us   about   any   concrete   action 

having   been   taken   by   the   Corporation   for   stoppage   of   illegal 

construction   or   demolition   of   illegal   construction.   In   fact,   the 

arguments  in the  matter  were  heard partly  on  27th September 

and again yesterday and as well as today. On the very first day 

of the argument, it was orally informed by the learned Advocate 

for   the   Corporation   that   he   would   ensure   the   presence   of   the 

officer of the Corporation to assist him in order to enable him to 

give correct detail information in the matter. In spite the officer 

being   present,   we   are   not   able   to   get   the   detail   information 

regarding the action taken by the Corporation as also the detail 

description of the illegalities committed by the builder and any 

other persons on his behalf in the matter. It is to be noted that 

undisputedly the records disclose some illegalities in the matter 

of construction carried out since the year 1984 onwards. In spite 

of affidavit having been filed in the year 2000, the Corporation 

has   not   explained   the   reason   for   failure   on   its   part   to   take 

appropriate   action   against   the   illegal   construction   and   even 

today.   Apart   from   being   assisted   by   the   officer   of   the 

Corporation,   the   Advocate   appearing   for   the   Corporation   is 

unable to disclose the reason for the same. We find it necessary 

to   issue   notice   to   the   Additional   Commissioner   to   appear   in 

person before us on Friday i.e. 14th October, 2005 at 11.00 a.m. 

to explain the same along with all records in the matter, as it is 

informed   by   the   Advocate   for   the   Corporation   that 

Commissioner is out of India.


                                                 6



        4.   The   Registrar   General   is   required   to   fax   the   copy   of   this 

        order to the Corporation apart from the fact that of the same is 

        being noted by the Advocate for the Corporation. At the request 

        of the learned Advocate for the Corporation, Registrar need not 

        send   copy   of   this   order   by   fax   as   learned   Advocate   for   the 

        Corporation undertakes to the Court that he through the officer 

        present   in   Court   will   assure   intimation   of   this   order   to   the 

        Additional   Commissioner   and   consequently,   his   presence 

        before the Court on 14th October, 2005 at 11.00 a.m."





6.      The Commissioner of the Corporation appeared before the High Court on 


14.10.2005   and   gave   an   assurance   that   necessary   steps   would   be   taken   in 


accordance   with   law   within   a   period   of   two   months   in   relation   to   the   illegal 


constructions.   Thereafter,   the   Corporation   issued   notices   dated   19.11.2005   to 


respondent   no.   2,   the   societies   and   their   members   under
Section   351
of   the 


Mumbai Municipal Corporation Act, 1888 (for short, `the 1888 Act') requiring 


them to show cause as to why the unauthorized constructions may not be pulled 


down   and   the   buildings   be   brought   in   tune   with   the   sanctioned   plans.   In   the 


notices it was also stipulated that if the noticees fail to show sufficient cause, 


then the Corporation will pull down the illegal construction and also take action 


under
Section 475A
of the 1888 Act. The societies and their members sent reply 


dated 28.11.2005 through their advocate and pleaded that they were in no way 


responsible   for   the   unauthorized   constructions.   Deputy   Chief   Engineer, 


Building Proposals (City) did not accept the reply sent by the advocate of the 


societies and their members and passed orders dated 3.12.2005 and 8.12.2005 


                                                 7



and directed the petitioners to remove the illegal constructions.  Thereupon, the 


petitioners filed Long Cause Suits for declaring notices dated 19.11.2005 and 


orders   dated   3/8.12.2005   to   be   illegal.     They   further   prayed   for   grant   of 


permanent   injunction   restraining   the   Corporation,   its   servants,   agents   and 


representatives   from   taking   any   action   demolishing   the   buildings.   The 


petitioners   also   filed   notices   of  motion   for  grant   of  temporary  injunction.   On 


17.12.2005, the trial Court passed ad-interim orders and directed the parties to 


maintain status quo in respect of the suit structures.




7.      In   the   detailed   written   statement   filed   on   behalf   of   the   Corporation, 


several objections were taken to the maintainability of the suits. On merits, it 


was pleaded that the buildings were constructed in violation of the sanctioned 


plans and the developers did not stop the construction activity despite stop work 


notice. It was further pleaded that action taken under
Section 351
of the 1888 


Act was legal and justified because the buildings had been constructed in gross 


violation of the sanctioned plans. It was then averred that those who purchased 


the flats knowing fully well that the buildings were being/had been constructed 


in   violation   of   the   sanctioned   plans   are   not   entitled   to   complain   against   the 


action   taken   by   the   Corporation   for   removal   of   the   illegal/unauthorized 


constructions.


                                                8



8.    After   hearing   the   counsel   for   the   parties,   the   trial   Court   passed   orders 


dated  23.3.2010  and rejected   the petitioners'   prayer  for temporary injunction. 


For the sake of reference paragraphs 36 to 39 of the order passed in the case of 


the petitioners, who have filed SLP(C) No. 33471 of 2011 are extracted below: 




      "36. In so far as claim of the plaintiffs that they are bona fide 

      purchasers   of   their   respective   flats   and   they   were   not   aware 

      about   illegal   construction   raised   by   the   building/Developer   is 

      concerned, it is submitted by both the counsels of the defendant 

      no. 2 that the fact of illegal construction itself mentioned in the 

      agreement   in   between   the   plaintiffs   and   developers.   In   this 

      respect while perusing the agreement produced by the plaintiffs 

      on   record   revising   plans   for   putting   up   multi-storied   building 

      submitted to the Corporation and for sanction. It means on that 

      day  it was  made known  to the  purchaser   the  revised  plan  has 

      been   submitted.   In   short   on   that   date   the   upper   floor 

      construction was not sanctioned by the Corporation. 


      37. Not only this it is appeared from the letter of Jayant Chitnis, 

      Architect   who   specifically   mentioned   in   his   letter   that   he 

      already   addressed   a   letter   dated   5.1.1990   and   informed   to   the 

      concerned developer about the show cause notice issued by the 

      Corporation about the construction of upper floors which were 

      not sanctioned. This letter also addressed to the said society by 

      the   said   Architect.   It   means   the   Architect   made   aware   to   the 

      societies as well as the Developer when show cause notice has 

      been   issued  by   the  Corporation  when   Corporation  noticed  the 

      construction of illegal upper floors. From this fact it is clear that 

      even   on   the   date   of   purchase   the   respective   flat   owners   were 

      aware that the construction of upper floors which is mentioned 

      in   the   351   notice   were   illegal   and   unauthorized.   Till   then   by 

      adopting the risk of demolition they have purchased the same.


      38. From the documentary evidence as well as direction given 

      by the Hon'ble High Court in the abovesaid writ petitions it is 

      clear   that   on   the   buildings   of   the   plaintiffs   there   are   certain 

      illegal constructions of upper floors as mentioned in the notice 


                                                   9



        under
Section 351
. Therefore, at this prima-facie stage plaintiffs 

        have not made out any case to protect their illegal construction.


        39. Not only this as per the direction of the Hon'ble High Court 

        the MMC has issued notices and after receiving the reply from 

        the respective societies, the AMC passed order of demolition of 

        such   illegal   upper   floors.   Prima   facie   in   the   order   I   found   no 

        illegalities   carried   out   by   the   AMC   in   passing   the   same. 

        Considering all the documents and submissions I found no any 

        three   cardinal   principles   available   with   the   plaintiffs   for 

        granting   ad-interim   injunction.   Therefore,   I   answer   above 

        points in the negative. Hence, I proceed to pass the following 

        order.


                                            ORDER
1)        Notices of Motion No. 4807/2005 is hereby dismissed.
2)        Cost in cause.
3)        Notices   of   Motion   No.   4807/2005   is   disposed   of 

        accordingly."
9.      The appeals filed by the petitioners were dismissed by the learned Single 


Judge   of   the   High   Court   who,   after   examining   the   documents   filed   by   the 


parties, agreed with the trial Court that the constructions made in violation of 


the sanctioned building plans were illegal and the Corporation did not commit 


any error by ordering demolition of the unauthorized portions of the buildings.
The reasons assigned by the High Court for negating the petitioners challenge 


to   the   order   of   the   trial   Court   are   contained   in   paragraphs   12   to   15   of   the 


impugned  which are extracted below:
10
"12.   It   may   be   mentioned   that   for   immovable   properties 

authorized   construction   can   be   shown   only   by   documentary 

evidence.  No party  can contend orally  that the construction  is 

authorized   without   showing   documentary   evidence.   In   a   case 

such as this, where flats have been constructed in the building 

and   have   been   sold   under   agreements   to   flat   purchasers   in   a 

proposed co-operative society under the provisions of MOFA, 

the  documentary  evidence  must  be  present   to the  mind of the 

flat   purchasers   upon   taking   inspection   of   the   plans   and 

specifications   statutorily   required   to   be   shown   and   inspected. 

Consequently   in   such   a   case   the   only   documentary   evidence 

would be expected to be with the flat purchasers who, under the 

specific   statutory   mandate,   would   require   to   inspect   the   title 

contained in the sanctioned plan and the specifications. If that is 

shown   in   reply   to   the   notice,   of   course,   the   notice   would   not 

proceed. That  essential  document which  would be only  to the 

knowledge   of   the   party   receiving   the   notice   and   the   party 

purchasing the flat would have to be shown by that party alone 

and not by the MMC just because the party orders or directs the 

MMC to produce the plans which never were.
13. The fact that the flat purchasers purchased flats which are 

shown   not   to   have   been   specifically   under   sanctioned   plans 

shows that they are not bonafide purchasers. The fact that the 

regularization   application   has   been  made  itself  shows  that  the 

admitted position that the structure was illegal which required 

regularization.   No   party   can   apply   for   regularization   of   a 

regular  structure.   Consequently  it is  self-contradictory  to state 

that the structure is authorized and yet apply for regularization.
14.   In   fact   a   preposterous   argument   is   that   the   lease   of   the 

lessees is not terminated by the MMC who is the lessor and the 

lessees have malafide sought to complain and get the impugned 

notice enforced.
15. It is gratifying to note that the learned Judge has passed a 

legal order upon seeing a blatant defiance of law and the legal 

procedure   throwing   to   the   winds   all   legal   requirements   and 

mandates of construction under the supervision of the planning 

authority   obviously   upon   the   conviction   and   expectation   that 

such   extensive   construction,   however   illegal,   would   not   be 

demolished."
11
10.     Before   proceeding   further,   we   deem   it   appropriate   to   mention   that   in 


January 2002, Corporation had decided to demolish the buildings constructed in 


violation of the sanctioned plans.   On coming to know of this, the flat buyers 


made applications through their architect for regularization of the buildings and 


gave   out   that   they   were   prepared   to   pay   concessional   penalty.     Their 


applications   were   rejected   by   the   Corporation.     The   appeals   filed   against   the 


orders   of   the   Corporation   were   dismissed   by   the   State   Government   and   the 


petitioners have challenged both the orders by filing separate writ petitions.
11.     Dr.   Abhishek   Manu   Singhvi,   Shri   Mukul   Rohatgi,   Shri   Shyam   Divan, 


Senior Advocates and Shri Santosh Paul and Shri Abhimanyu Bhandari, learned 


counsel   for   the   petitioners   argued   that   the   impugned   order   is   liable   to   be   set 


aside   because   if   the   disputed   constructions   are   demolished,   the   suits   will 


become   infructuous   and   the   members   of   the   societies   and   their   families   will 


suffer   irreparable   loss   inasmuch   as   they   will   become   roofless.   Dr.   Singhvi, 


placed   before   the   Court   satellite   map   of   the   site   and   argued   that   if   the   total 


constructed area is measured with reference to the area of the plot which was 


leased  out by the Corporation to M/s. Pure Drinks Pvt. Ltd., the construction 


made by the developers cannot be said to be excessive and the trial Court and 


the   High   Court   committed   serious   error   in   recording   a   finding   that   the 


construction of buildings with 24 and 16 floors is illegal. Learned counsel then
12
referred   to   the   agreements   entered   into   between   the   flat   buyers   and   the 


developers to show that the former had purchased the flats under a bona fide 


belief that the developers will be able to persuade the Corporation to sanction 


the revised building plans and they should not be made to suffer on account of 


the wrong, if any, committed by the developers. Learned counsel also pointed 


out that the writ petitions filed by the petitioners for issue of a mandamus to the 


Corporation   to   regularize   the   illegal/unauthorized   construction   are   pending 


before the High Court and submitted that till the disposal of those petitions the 


Corporation   should   not   be   allowed   to   demolish   the   buildings   or   the 


constructions which are said to have been made in violation of the sanctioned 


plans.   In   support   of   this   submission,   Shri   Mukul   Rohatgi   placed   before   this 


Court   xerox   copies   of   the   order   sheets   of   Writ   Petition   No.   6550   of   2010.
Learned counsel for the petitioners lastly submitted that the Court may consider 


the   desirability   of   transferring   the   writ   petitions   filed   by   the   petitioners   for 


regularization of the construction to this Court so that the issue of regularization 


may be finally decided and 200 families which are residing in the flats allegedly 


constructed in violation of the sanctioned plan may not be rendered homeless.
12.     Shri   Pallav   Shishodia,   learned   senior   counsel   appearing   for   the 


Corporation argued that the action taken under
Section 351
of the 1888 Act is 


perfectly   legal   because   the   buildings   in   question   were   constructed   despite
13
rejection   of   the   revised   building   plans   and   the   issue   of   stop   work   notice.
Learned   senior   counsel   emphasized   that   the   Corporation   had   taken   belated 


action   for   removing   the   illegal   construction   in   the   light   of   the   observations 


made  by the Division Bench of the High Court on 11.10.2005 and, therefore, 


notices dated 19.11.2005 and orders dated 3/8.12.2005 cannot be faulted.
13.    Shri Harish N. Salve, learned senior counsel appearing for respondent no.
2 argued that total area of Plot No. 9 cannot be taken into consideration for the 


purpose of deciding whether the buildings have been constructed in violation of 


the sanctioned plan because the State Government had allowed change on land 


use only in respect of 13049.45 sq. meters. Learned senior counsel submitted 


that the members  of the societies who purchased the flats knowing fully well 


that   the   buildings   had   been   constructed   in   violation   of   the   sanctioned   plans 


cannot claim any equity or complain against the action taken by the Corporation 


for demolition of the illegal/unauthorized structures.
14.    We have considered the respective submissions and carefully scrutinized 


the record. The scope of the appellate Court's power to interfere with an interim 


order passed by the Court of first instance has been considered by this Court in 


several cases.
In
Wander Ltd. v. Antox India (P) Ltd
1990 Supp SCC 727, the 


Court   was   called   upon   to   consider   the   correctness   of   an   order   of   injunction 


passed by the Division Bench of the High Court which had reversed the order
14
of the learned Single Judge declining the respondent's prayer for interim relief.
This Court set aside the order of the Division Bench and made  the following 


observations:
"In such appeals, the appellate court will not interfere with the 

       exercise of discretion of the court of first instance and substitute 

       its own discretion except where the discretion has been shown 

       to have been exercised arbitrarily, or capriciously or perversely 

       or   where   the   court   had   ignored   the   settled   principles   of   law 

       regulating   grant   or   refusal   of   interlocutory   injunctions.   An 

       appeal against exercise of discretion is said to be an appeal on 

       principle.   Appellate   court   will   not   reassess   the   material   and 

       seek to reach a conclusion different from the one reached by the 

       court   below   if   the   one   reached   by   that   court   was   reasonably 

       possible   on   the   material.   The   appellate   court   would   normally 

       not   be   justified   in   interfering   with   the   exercise   of   discretion 

       under appeal solely on the ground that if it had considered the 

       matter   at   the   trial   stage   it   would   have   come   to   a   contrary 

       conclusion.   If   the   discretion   has   been   exercised   by   the   trial 

       court   reasonably   and   in   a   judicial   manner   the   fact   that   the 

       appellate   court   would   have   taken   a   different   view   may   not 

       justify interference with the trial court's exercise of discretion."
15.
In
Skyline Education Institute (India) Pvt. Ltd. v. S.L. Vaswani
(2010) 2 


SCC   142,   the   3-Judge   Bench   considered   a   somewhat   similar   question   in   the 


context of the refusal of the trial Court and the High Court to pass an order of 


temporary injunction, referred to the judgments in
Wander Ltd. v. Antox India 


(P)   Ltd
(
supra),   N.R.   Dongre   v.   Whirlpool   Corpn.
(1996)   5   SCC   714   and 


observed:
"The ratio of the abovenoted judgments is that once the court of 

       first instance exercises its discretion to grant or refuse to grant
15
relief of temporary injunction and the said exercise of discretion 

       is   based   upon   objective   consideration   of   the   material   placed 

       before   the   court   and   is   supported   by   cogent   reasons,   the 

       appellate court will be loath to interfere simply because on a de 

       novo consideration of the matter it is possible for the appellate 

       court   to  form  a  different  opinion  on  the  issues   of prima   facie 

       case, balance of convenience, irreparable injury and equity."
16.    In these cases, the trial Court and the High Court have, after threadbare 


analysis   of   the   pleadings   of   the   parties   and   the   documents   filed   by   them 


concurrently held that the buildings in question were constructed in violation of 


the sanctioned plans and that the flat buyers do not have the locus to complain 


against   the   action   taken   by   the   Corporation   under
Section   351
of   1888   Act.
Both,   the   trial   Court   and   the   High   Court   have   assigned   detailed   reasons   for 


declining  the  petitioners'  prayer   for  temporary  injunction   and  we  do  not  find 


any valid ground or justification to take a different view in the matter.
17.    The submission of Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi that the constructed area 


should   be   measured   with   reference   to   the   total   area   of   the   plot   cannot   be 


accepted   for   the   simple   reason   that   the   State   Government   had   sanctioned 


change of land use only in respect of 13049.45 sq. meters.
18.    In view of the above, we may have dismissed the special leave petitions 


and   allowed   the   Corporation   to   take   action   in   furtherance   of   notices   dated 


19.11.2005 and orders dated 3/8.12.2005, but keeping in view the fact that the 


flat buyers and their families are residing in the buildings in question for the last
16
more than one decade, we feel that it will be in the interest of justice that the 


issue relating to the petitioners' plea for regularization should be considered by 


this Court at the earliest so that they may finally know their fate.
19.    We, therefore, direct the petitioners to furnish the particulars of the writ 


petitions filed for regularization of the construction which are pending before 


the High Court. The needful be done within a period of two weeks from today.
Within this period of two weeks, the petitioners shall also furnish the particulars 


and   details   of   the   developers   from   whom   the   members   of   the   societies   had 


purchased the flats.  List the cases on 16th March, 2012 (Friday).
20.    If the petitioners fail to comply the aforesaid directions, the special leave 


petitions shall stand automatically dismissed.
.......................................................J.

                                        (G.S. SINGHVI)





                                        .......................................................J.

New Delhi;                                   (SUDHANSU JYOTI MUKHOPADHAYA)

February 29, 2012.