[Cites
7
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
Commnr. Of Customs, New Delhi vs M/S. Caryaire Equipment India Pvt. Ltd on 9 February, 2012
Bench:
Anil R. Dave
,
H.L. Dattu
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


              CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6404 OF 2003





The Commissioner of Customs, New Delhi                           ... Appellant


                Versus 


M/s. Caryaire Equipment India Pvt. Ltd.                      .... Respondent 





                              O R D E R
1.         The   core   issue   that   falls   for   our   consideration   and 


             decision  in this appeal is: whether "aluminium  grills"
can be termed as "Extruded aluminium products"?   If 


             the   answer   is   in   positive,   the   assessee   would   be 


             covered by Item Serial No.7 of the Product Code 61 of 


             the Duty Entitlement Passbook Scheme (for short "the 


             DEPB   Scheme").   The   assessee   has   succeeded   before 


             the   Customs,   Excise   and   Gold   (Control)   Appellate 


             Tribunal (for short 'the Tribunal').  The Revenue in this 


             appeal calls in question the correctness or otherwise of 


             the   judgment   and   order   of   the   Tribunal.   By   the
1
impugned   judgment   and   order,   the   Tribunal   has   set 


      aside the order of confiscation of goods and the penalty 


      imposed by the Commissioner of Customs.
2.    The   facts   in   nutshell   are:   the   assessee   is   the 


      manufacturer of aluminium grills made out of extruded 


      aluminium sections. In its regular business activity, the 


      assessee   had   filed   a   shipping   bill   dated   18.06.2002, 


      inter   alia,  claiming   the   benefit   of   the   DEPB   Scheme 


      for   export   of   the   said   products   as   falling   under   Item 


      Serial   No.   7   of   Product   Group:   Engineering-Product 


      Code: 61 at 7%  ad valorem. The Customs Officer, on 


      verification   of   the   shipping   bill,   has   found   that   the 


      goods   in   question   are   fabricated   aluminium   products 


      and   therefore,   denied   the   export   of   goods   as   being 


      prima   facie  liable  for  confiscation  under the
Customs 


      Act, 1962
(for short "the Act")
3.    Thereafter, the assessee, by his letter dated 24.6.2002 


      had   made   a   request   to   the   Commissioner   of  Customs 


      for a personal hearing in lieu of the show cause notice.
2
At   the   time   of   the   personal   hearing,   the   assessee   had 


      contended   that   the   aluminium   grills   were   fabricated 


      items, but the end-product is made out of the extruded 


      aluminium.   The   Commissioner,   while   rejecting   the 


      contention   of   the   assessee,   has   passed   an   order   dated 


      28.6.2002 for confiscation of goods and imposition of 


      penalty   in   exercise   of   his   powers   under
Section   113
and
114
of the Act read with Rules  11 and 14 of the 


      Foreign Trade (Regulation) Rules, 1993.  However, he 


      had   permitted   the   assessee   to   redeem   the   goods   on 


      payment of certain amount of fine.
4.    Aggrieved by the aforesaid order of the Commissioner 


      of   Customs,   the   assessee   had   carried   the   matter   in 


      appeal   before   the   Tribunal.     The   Tribunal,   after 


      appreciating   the   contention   of   the   assessee,   had   set 


      aside   the   order   of   the   Commissioner   vide   its   order 


      dated 16.10.2002. In its order, the Tribunal holds that 


      aluminium   grills   are   nothing   but   the   extruded 


      aluminium  products.  Therefore, the Tribunal is of the 


      opinion   that   the   Commissioner   of   Customs   was   not
3
justified in passing the order in exercise of his powers 


      under
Section 113
and
114
of the Act.
5.    The   Revenue,   being   aggrieved   by   the   judgment   and 


      order   passed   by   the   Tribunal,   has   filed   this   appeal 


      under
Section 130-E
of the Act.
6.    Shri Harish Chandra, learned senior counsel appearing 


      for   the   Revenue,   contends   that   aluminium   grill   is 


      altogether  a   separate   product   and   the   same   cannot   be 


      equated   with   extruded   aluminium   product   which   is 


      mentioned   under   Entry   7   of   the   Product   Group 


      Engineering (Code 61).  He submits that the benefit of 


      the DEPB Scheme encompasses within its ambit only 


      to the extruded aluminium products which are obtained 


      from   the   process   of   aluminium   extrusion.     Shri 


      Abhinav   Mukerji,   learned   counsel   for   the   Revenue, 


      who is assisting Shri Harish Chandra, would elaborate 


      the process of aluminium extrusion and contends that it 


      is a product, which is strictly obtained from the process
4
of extrusion, without any alterations or modifications, 


      is   eligible   for   the   benefit   provided   under   the   DEPB 


      Scheme.   He,   therefore,   submits   that   the   product 


      obtained by fabricating the extruded aluminium is not 


      eligible   for  the   benefit   of   the   Scheme.     In  support   of 


      their  contention,  they  have   produced  a  xerox  copy  of 


      the book titled as "The Complete Technology Book on 


      Aluminium and Aluminium Products".   A reference is 


      also made to certain observations made by this Court 


      while   explaining   the   meaning   of   the   expression   "the 


      product".
7.    Per  contra,   Shri   Aditya   Kumar,   learned   counsel 


      appearing for the assessee submits that the expression 


      "extruded   aluminium   products"   used   in   Entry   7   of 


      Code 61 is sufficiently wide to include products which 


      are made out of the extruded aluminium by fabricating 


      it.     He   contends   that   even   the   finished   end-product 


      which   is   in   the   fabricated   form   of   the   extruded 


      aluminium,   the   same   would   fall   under   Entry   7,   as 


      extruded aluminium product.
5
8.             In order to resolve the controversy posed in this appeal 


                  by   the   parties   to   the  lis,  a   reference   to   Duty 


                  Exemption/Remission   Scheme   requires   to   be   noticed.
Chapter 4 of Exim Policy and Handbook of Procedures 


                  provides   for   Duty   Exemption/Remission   Scheme.
Paragraph   4.37   of   the   said   chapter   provides   for   the 


                  DEPB Scheme. The said paragraph reads as under:
"The Policy relating to Duty Entitlement Passbook Scheme (DEPB) 

Scheme is given in Chapter 4 of the Policy.  The duty credit under the 

scheme shall be calculated by taking into account the deemed import 

content of the said export product as per SION and the basic custom 

duty payable on such deemed imports.   The value addition achieved 

by   export   of   such   product   shall   also   be   taken   into   account   while 

determining the rate of duty credit under the scheme."
Entry 7 of the Product Code 61 in the DEPB schedule reads as under:
"Extruded Aluminium products including pipes and tubes".
9.                The   facts   are   not   in   dispute.     The   assessee   is   a 


                  manufacturer   of   aluminium   grills   made   out   of   the 


                  extruded   aluminium.   Admittedly,   the   export   of   the 


                  aforesaid   item   was   made   and   shipping   bill   dated 


                  18.6.2002   was   presented   before   the   Customs   Officer, 


                  inter   alia,   claiming   the   benefit   under   the   aforesaid
6
entry.        While   denying   the   said   benefit,   the 


       Commissioner   of   Customs   has   passed   an   order   of 


       confiscation of the goods and has also levied a penalty, 


       in exercise of his powers under
Section 113
and
114
of 


       the Act read with Rules 11 and 14 of the Foreign Trade 


       (Regulation) Rules, 1993.   However, he had permitted 


       the assessee to exercise its right of redemption, if it so 


       desires.   We   do   not   know   whether   the   assessee   had 


       exercised   that   right.     We   are   not   concerned   much   on 


       that.
10.    Admittedly,   the   assessee   had   carried   the   matter   in 


       appeal before the Tribunal.       The Tribunal has given 


       relief   to   the   assessee   by   holding   that   the   aluminium 


       grills   are   nothing   but   extruded   aluminium   products 


       and, therefore, the assessee is entitled to take benefit of 


       Item Serial No. 7 of the Product Group: Engineering-
Product Code: 61.
11.    As   we   have   already   noticed,   the   only   issue   which 


       requires   to   be   considered   and   decided   in   this   Civil
7
Appeal is, whether the aluminium grills can be termed 


                  as   Extruded   aluminium   products,   and   if   it   is   so, 


                  whether the assessee can take the benefit of the Item 7 


                  of  Code 61?
12.            To appreciate what is extruded aluminium, a reference 


                  can   be   made   to   the   literature   that   is   produced   by 


                  learned counsel appearing for the parties.
13.            The   process   of   "extrusion",   as   explained   in   the 


                  Textbook   McGraw-Hill   Encyclopedia   of   Science   & 


                  Technology, reads as under :
"Extrusion:   The   forcing   of   solid   metal   through   a   suitably   shaped 

orifice under compressive forces.   Extrusion is somewhat analogous 

to squeezing toothpaste through a tube, although some cold extrusion 

processes  more nearly  resemble  forging,  which  also deforms  metals 

by application of compressive forces.   Most metals can be extruded, 

although   the   process   may   not   be   economically   feasible   for   high-

strength alloys."
The process of the cold extrusion of aluminium can also be noticed 


from the aforesaid book. The same is as under:
"Cold extrusion: The extrusion of cold metal is variously termed cold 

pressing, cold forging, cold extrusion forging, extrusion pressing, and 

impact extrusion.  The term cold extrusion has become popular in the 

steel fabrication industry, while impact extrusion is more widely used 

in the nonferrous field.
The   original   process   (identified   as   impact   extrusion)   consists   of   a 

punch (generally moving at high velocity) striking a blank (or slug) of
8
the metal to be extruded, which has been placed in the     cavity of a 

die.   Clearance is left between the punch and die walls; as the punch 

comes in contact with the blank, the metal has nowhere to go except 

through   the   annular   opening   between   punch   and   die.     The   punch 

moves a distance that is controlled by a press setting.   This distance 

determines   the   base   thickness   of   the   finished   part.     The   process   is 

particularly adaptable to the production of thin-walled, tubular-shaped 

parts having thick bottoms, such as toothpaste tubes.

A   process   requiring   less   pressure   than   backward   extrusion   is   the 

forward-extrusion   process,   originally   called   the   Hooker   process.     A 

formed blank (usually a thick-walled cup) is placed in a die cavity and 

struck   by   a   punch   having   a   shoulder   or   enlarged   section   a   short 

distance from the end.   Upon contact with the blank, the nose or end 

of   the   punch   starts   to   push   the   center   of   the   blank   through   the   die 

cavity, in a manner similar to the action occurring in deep drawing of 

sheet   metal.     After   the   punch   has   advanced   a   short   distance,   the 

shoulder comes in contact with the top of the thick wall of the blank. 

The punch shoulder then extrudes the metal through the annular space 

between the die and the end of the punch.  Thus, in forward extrusion, 

the   metal   moves   in   the   same   direction   as   the   punch,   whereas   in 

backward extrusion the metal moves in the opposite direction."
14.             In the book "The Complete Technology on Aluminium 


                   and Aluminium Products", a reference is made to the 


                   manufactured   forms   of   the   aluminium.     A   useful 


                   reference  can  be  made  to  the  literature  on aluminium 


                   and its manufactured form, from the aforesaid book.  It 


                   shows aluminium and its alloys may be cast or formed 


                   by virtually all known processes.  Manufactured forms 


                   of   aluminium   and   aluminium   alloys   can   be   broken 


                   down   into   two   groups.   Standardized   products   and 


                   Engineered   Products.   The   Standardized   products
9
include sheet, plate, foil, rod, bar, wire, tube, pipe, and 


       structural   forms.   In   the   same   book,   it   is   said   that 


       Engineered   products   are   those   designed   for   specific 


       applications   and   include   extruded   shapes,   forgings, 


       impacts,  castings, stampings, power metallurgy (P/M) 


       parts,   machined   parts,   and   metal-matrix   composites 


       (MMCs).   The   standardized   products   are   again 


       described   to   include   only   the   extruded   aluminium 


       product   simplicitor.   If   anything   that   is   done   to   those 


       extruded   aluminium   products,   that   would   become   the 


       engineered products.
15.    In the instant case, it is the assessee's stand before the 


       Commissioner   of   Customs   and   also   before   the 


       Tribunal,   that   it   fabricates   extruded   aluminium   into 


       aluminium   grills.     It   is   not   the   case   of   the   assessee 


       either before the Commissioner of Customs or before 


       the   Tribunal,   that   aluminium   grills   are   the   same   as 


       extruded   aluminium   products.   It   is   an   admitted 


       position   that   assessee   carries   out   the   fabrication   to 


       derive a product known as aluminium grills made out
10
of extruded aluminium products.   If that fact situation 


is accepted, then the Tribunal was wholly incorrect in 


holding   that   the   aluminium   grills   are   nothing   but 


extruded   aluminium   products   and   therefore,   they 


would fall under Entry 7 of Code 61.  The issue before 


us   can   be   looked   into   from   another   angle   also.   The 


Legislature,   while   enumerating   the   goods   that   would 


fall under Item 7 of the Product Code 61 of the DEPB 


Schedule,   immediately   after   the   expression   "extruded 


aluminium   products"   has   specifically   used   the 


expression "included" to include pipes and tubes.  The 


legislature   recognizes   pipes   and   tubes   which   are 


engineered out of the extruded aluminium products, as 


included  under  the  Item  7.  The  expression  "including 


pipes   and   tubes"   following   the   words   "extruded 


aluminium products" in Item 7 is restrictive in nature 


and   will   give   `extruded   aluminium   products'   a 


restrictive meaning in order to include the standardized 


products such as pipes and tubes within the meaning of 


the term extruded aluminium products.
11
16.
In
South Gujarat Roofing Tiles Manufacturers Assn. & 


                   Anr.   v.   State   of   Gujarat   &   Anr.
,   (1976)   4   SCC   601, 


                   this Court has held thus:
"Though   "include"   is   generally   used   in   interpretation   clauses   as   a 

word   of   enlargement,   in   some   cases   the   context   might   suggest   a 

different   intention.   Pottery   is   an   expression   of   very   wide   import, 

embracing   all   objects   made   of   clay   and   hardened   by   heat.   If   it   had 

been  the  legislature's  intention  to bring within the  entry all  possible 

articles of pottery, it was quite unnecessary to add an explanation. We 

have   found   that   the   explanation   could   not   possibly   have   been 

introduced to extend the meaning of potteries industry or the articles 

listed therein added ex abundanti cautela. It seems to us therefore that 

the   legislature   did   not   intend   everything   that   the   potteries   industry 

turns out to be covered by the entry. What then could be the purpose 

of the explanation. The explanation says that, for the purpose of Entry 

22,   potteries   industry   "includes"   manufacture   of  the   nine   articles   of 

pottery   named   therein.  It   seems   to   us   that   the   word   "includes"   has 

been used here in the sense of `means'; this is the only construction 

that the word can bear in the context. In that sense it is not a word of 

extension, but limitation; it is exhaustive of the meaning which must 

be given to potteries industry for the purpose of Entry 22. The use of 

the   word   "includes"   in   the   restrictive   sense   is   not   unknown.  The 

observation of Lord Watson in  Dilworth  v.  Commissioner of Stamps 

which   is   usually   referred   to   on   the   use   of   "include"   as   a   word   of 

extension, is followed by these lines:
"But the word `include' is susceptible of another construction, which 

may become imperative, if the context of the Act is sufficient to show 

that   it   was   not   merely   employed   for   the   purpose   of   adding   to   the 

natural   significance   of   the   words   or   expressions   defined.   It   may   be 

equivalent   to   `mean   and   include',   and   in  that   case   it   may   afford   an 

exhaustive explanation of the meaning which, for the purposes of the 

Act, must invariably be attached to these words or expressions."
It must therefore be held that the manufacture of Mangalore pattern 

roofing tiles is outside the purview of Entry 22."
17.
In
Reserve   Bank   of  India   &  Ors.  v.   Peerless   General
12
Finance & Investment Co. Ltd. & Ors.
, (1987) 1 SCC 


                  424,   this   Court   while   analysing   the   different 


                  connotations of the `inclusive definitions' has held:
"32. We do not think it necessary to launch into a discussion of either 

Dilworth case2  or any of the other cases cited. All that is necessary 

for us to say is this: Legislatures resort to inclusive definitions (1) to 

enlarge the meaning of words or phrases so as to take in the ordinary, 

popular and natural sense of the words and also the sense which the 

statute wishes to attribute to it, (2) to include meanings about which 

there might be some dispute, or, (3) to bring under one nomenclature 

all   transactions   possessing   certain   similar   features   but   going   under 

different   names.   Depending   on   the   context,   in   the   process   of 

enlarging, the definition may even become exhaustive."
18.
In
Godfrey Phillips India Ltd. & Anr. v. State of U.P. 


                  & Ors.
,       (2005) 2 SCC 515, this Court has observed 


                  thus:
"73. Having rejected the second premise contended for by Mr Salve, 

the next question is whether the language of Entry 62 List II would 

resolve the issue. The juxtaposition of the different taxes within Entry 

62 itself is in our view of particular significance. The entry speaks of 

"taxes   on   luxuries  including  taxes   on   entertainments,   amusements, 

betting   and   gambling".  The   word   "including"   must   be   given   some 

meaning. In ordinary parlance it indicates that what follows the word 

"including" comprises or is contained in or is a part of the whole of 

the word preceding. The nature of the included items would not only 

partake   of   the   character   of   the   whole,   but   may   be   construed   as 

clarificatory of the whole.
74.  It   has   also   been   held   that   the   word   "includes"   may   in   certain 

contexts   be   a   word   of   limitation  (
South   Gujarat   Roofing   Tiles  

Manufacturers Assn. v. State of Gujarat28
). ..."
19.            In Karnataka Power Transmission Corporation & Anr.
13
v.   Ashok   Iron   Works   Private   Limited,   (2009)   3   SCC 


                   240,   this   Court   while   considering   the   meaning   and 


                   connotations of the word `inclusive' has held thus:
"14.  The   learned   counsel   also   submitted   that   the   word   "includes"
must be read as "means". In this regard, the learned counsel placed 

reliance upon two decisions of this Court, namely; (1) South Gujarat  

Roofing Tiles Manufacturers Assn. v. State of Gujarat1 and (2) RBI v.
Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Ltd.2
15. Lord Watson in Dilworth v. Stamps Commr.3 made the following 

classic statement: (AC pp. 105-06)

"...   The   word   `include'   is   very   generally   used   in   interpretation 

clauses in order to enlarge the meaning of words or phrases occurring 

in   the   body   of   the   statute;   and   when   it   is   so   used   these   words   or 

phrases must be construed as comprehending, not only such things as 

they   signify   according   to   their   natural   import,   but   also   those   things 

which   the   interpretation   clause   declares   that   they   shall   include.   But 

the word `include' is susceptible of another construction, which may 

become imperative, if the context of the Act is sufficient to show that 

it was not merely employed for the purpose of adding to the natural 

significance of the words or expressions defined. It may be equivalent 

to `mean  and include', and in that  case it may afford an exhaustive 

explanation of the meaning which, for the purposes of the Act, must 

invariably be attached to these words or expressions."
16.  Dilworth3  and few other decisions  came up for consideration in 

Peerless   General   Finance   and   Investment   Co.   Ltd.2  and   this   Court 

summarised the legal position that (Peerless case2, SCC pp. 449-50, 

para 32) inclusive definition by the legislature is used:
"32. ... (1) to enlarge the meaning of words or phrases so as to take in 

the   ordinary,   popular   and   natural   sense   of   the   words   and   also   the 

sense   which   the   statute   wishes   to   attribute   to   it;   (2)   to   include 

meanings   about  which  there   might  be  some  dispute;   or (3) to  bring 

under   one   nomenclature   all   transactions   possessing   certain   similar 

features but going under different names."
14
17. It goes without saying that interpretation of a word or expression 

must   depend   on   the   text   and   the   context.   The   resort   to   the   word 

"includes"   by   the   legislature   often   shows   the   intention   of   the 

legislature that it wanted to give extensive and enlarged meaning to 

such  expression. Sometimes,  however, the  context  may  suggest that 

word   "includes"   may   have   been   designed   to   mean   "means".   The 

setting,   context   and   object   of   an   enactment   may   provide   sufficient 

guidance for interpretation of the word "includes" for the purposes of 

such enactment."
20.            Principles   of   Statutory   Interpretation   (12th  Edition, 


                  2010) by Justice G.P. Singh, at pg. 181, has discussed 


                  in   detail   the   different   connotations   of   the   word 


                  `include' while laying stress on the restrictive as well 


                  as exhaustive explanation of the word `inclusive' thus:
"The word `include' is very generally used in interpretation clauses  

in order to enlarge the meaning of words or phrases occurring in the  

body  of   the  statute;   and when  it  is  so used   those   words  or  phrases  

must  be  construed  as  comprehending,  not  only  such  things,  as  they  

signify according to their natural import, but also those things which  

the   interpretation   clause   declares   that   they   shall   include.   But   the  

word   `include'   is   susceptible   of   another   construction,   which   may  

become imperative,  if the context of the Act is sufficient to show that  

it was not merely employed for the purpose of adding to the natural  

significance of the words or expressions used. It may be equivalent to  

`mean   and   include'   and   in   the   case   it   may   afford   an   exhaustive  

explanation   of   the   meaning   which   for   the   purposes   of   the   Act   must  

invariably   attached   to   those   words   or   expressions.   Thus   the   word  

include may in certain contexts be a word of limitation."
21.            In   view   of   the   aforesaid   reasons,   in   our   opinion,   the 


                  goods in question namely, the aluminium grills cannot
15
fit   into   Item   7   of   the   Product   Code   61   of   the   DEPB 


            Schedule   in   order   to   claim   benefit   of   the   DEPB 


            Scheme   and   therefore,   we   cannot   sustain   the   order 


            passed by the Tribunal.
22.       In   the   result,   while   allowing   the   appeal   filed   by   the 


            Revenue,   we   set   aside   the   impugned   judgment   and 


            order   passed   by   the   Tribunal   and   restore   the   order 


            passed by the Commissioner of Customs. No costs.
Ordered accordingly.
.....................................J.

                                                                 (H.L. DATTU)





                                                   .....................................J.

                                                            (ANIL R. DAVE)


NEW DELHI,

FEBRUARY 14, 2012
16