[Cites
25
, Cited by
191
]
Supreme Court of India
K.K. Patel And Anr vs State Of Gujarat And Anr on 12 May, 2000
Equivalent citations: AIR 2000 SUPREME COURT 3346, 2000 AIR SCW 3564, 2000 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 521, 2000 (7) SRJ 143, 2001 SCC(CRI) 200, 2000 (4) SCALE 572, 2000 ALL MR(CRI) 1232, 2000 CRIAPPR(SC) 411, 2000 (6) SCC 195, 2000 CRILR(SC&MP) 521, (2000) 7 JT 246 (SC), 2000 (3) LRI 163, (2000) 157 TAXATION 636, (2000) 113 TAXMAN 324, (2000) 162 CURTAXREP 42, 1999 ALLMR(CRI) 2 2030, 2000 CHANDLR(CIV&CRI) 234, (2000) 3 CURCRIR 1, (2000) 244 ITR 55, (2000) 2 EASTCRIC 748, (2000) 4 GUJ LR 3599, (2000) 3 GUJ LH 30, (2000) 2 RECCRIR 863, (2000) 4 SUPREME 160, (2000) 28 ALLCRIR 1658, (2000) 4 SCALE 572, (2000) 41 ALLCRIC 351, (2000) 2 CHANDCRIC 197, (2000) 3 ALLCRILR 99, (2000) 2 CRIMES 314, (2000) 5 BOM CR 505
Bench:
K.T. Thomas
,
D.P. Mohapatra
CASE NO.:
Special Leave Petition (crl.) 3774  of  1999



PETITIONER:
K.K. PATEL AND ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF GUJARAT AND ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	12/05/2000

BENCH:
K.T. THOMAS &  D.P. MOHAPATRA




JUDGMENT:
Thomas J.
Leave granted.
L...I...T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T..J
    This  case is policeman versus policeman.  For six years
now the case is still drifting in the first phase itself, as
its  very  right of entry into the criminal court  is  under
challenge.   The  Sessions Court in  revisional	 proceedings
upheld the objections raised by the accused that prosecution
is  not maintainable but the High Court in a second revision
held  that sessions court had transgressed the	jurisdiction
as  no	revisional powers could have been exercised  by	 the
Sessions  Judge	 at that stage.	 It is the said decision  of
the  Division  Bench of the High Court of Gujarat  which  is
being challenged in this appeal.
A  Deputy  Superintendent of Police (for convenience  he
can  be	 referred to hereinafter as  "the  respondent-police
officer)   filed  a  complaint	 before	  the	Metropolitan
Magistrate, Ahmedabad, against two other police officers one
of  whom was a Superintendent of Police and the other was  a
Deputy	Superintendent of Police.  (They will hereinafter be
referred  to  as  "the appellants".)  The  offences  alleged
against	 the  appellants  in the complaint are	those  under
Sections  166
,
167
,
176
,
201
,
219
,
220
,
342
,
417
of	 the
Indian	Penal Code (
IPC
for short) read with
Sections  120B
,
34
and
109
of the same Code.	 The offence  under
Section
147(G)
of  the	 Bombay Police Act is also included  in	 the
complaint.
A  brief account of the events which preceded the filing
of  the	 said  complaint is necessary.	 On  24.8.1992,	 one
Jaffer	Khan lodged a complaint with the magistrate alleging
that  his  brother  (Jahangir Khan) was	 kidnapped  by	some
persons	 named	in the complaint.  The magistrate  forwarded
the  said  complaint to the police for action under
Section
156(3)
of  the	 Code  of  Criminal  Procedure	(hereinafter
referred  to  as "the Code") and then FIR was registered  on
its  basis.   The respondent-police officer was arrested  by
the  appellants	 on  28.8.1992, but  the  alleged  kidnapped
person (Jahangir Khan) appeared before all people concerned.
Respondent-police officer was later released on bail.  After
investigation  the  police  submitted	"final	report"	  on
3.3.1994  holding  that	 the  accused  are  untraceable	 and
requested  the court to grant "A" Summary (which means	that
the  complaint	could  not be substantiated due to  want  of
proof).	  But the court after hearing the  respondent-police
officer	 also  in the matter, passed an order  granting	 "B"
Summary,  (which means that the complaint was found  false).
It  was	 in the above background that the  respondent-police
officer filed the present complaint on 25.7.1994.
The present complaint runs into more than 70 typed pages
and  has  been prepared in a flummoxed fashion.	 It is	very
clumsily  prepared.   It was difficult even for the  learned
counsel	 appearing  for	 the  respondent-police	 officer  to
decipher  the  lengthy	sentences as well  as  circumlocuted
paragraphs.   Nonetheless he found out the core	 allegations
in the complaint which is extracted below:
"The  conspiracy has been made by making false complaint
and I have illegally been arrested in which accused No.1 and
2  have	 helped since they were in crime branch	 since	long
period	   and	   having	relation     with     Muslim
politicians/leaders/anti  social  elements and	having	good
relations  with them and to get their help in continuing  in
the  crime branch and in view of their other weaknesses	 and
under political pressure to please the Muslim leaders and in
doing so, getting benefit inter se, have played main role in
arresting us and in making ex parte inquiry against me which
would  become clear from perusal of all the aforesaid  facts
and  the  grounds.  Investigating Officer cannot  make	such
illegal	 ex parte inquiry under political or other  pressure
or  for any other cause for illegally arresting by  misusing
the  power under the pretext of law and though the complaint
was  going  to be proved wrong, ultimately, instead  of	 "B"
Summary,  "A" Summary has been prayed for and for preventing
repetition  of such things in future, the accused should  be
severely  dealt	 with  to  set example in  the	interest  of
justice	 and I am filing this complaint only for the sake of
justice	 and  therefore,  it is prayed that the	 accused  be
strictly  and severally dealt with.  Otherwise, when a Class
I Police Officer has been dealt with in this fashion and has
been  arrested	in this manner, there would be nothing	like
safety of any common subject or citizen."
The	 Metropolitan  Magistrate  after  taking  the  sworn
statement  of the respondent-police officer took  cognizance
of  the	 aforesaid  offences  and   issued  process  to	 the
appellants.    On   appearance	 before	  the	Metropolitan
Magistrate  appellants filed a petition for discharging them
on  the	 premise that no sanction was obtained to  prosecute
them.	The  Metropolitan  Magistrate	dismissed  the	said
petition  on  17.5.1997	 with  a  rider	 that	"appropriate
decision  regarding prior sanction shall be taken on  merits
after  considering the evidence that may be produced by	 the
parties".   (The  Metropolitan Magistrate of  Ahmedabad	 has
written one of the lengthiest and tautologous orders running
into  114  closely typed pages just for reaching  the  above
conclusion.   We  are unable to appreciate how	the  heavily
boarded courts like the Metropolitan Magistrate's court or a
city  court  could afford writing such fritteringly  lengthy
orders	just for concluding that the questions raised can be
considered at a later stage).
Appellants	filed  a revision before the Sessions  Court
and  in	 the  revision	the   appellants  raised  one	more
additional  point  based  on
Section 161(1)
of	 the  Bombay
Police	Act  which  was	 made applicable  to  the  State  of
Gujarat.   As  per that section no complaint could be  filed
after  one  year  of the date of the act  complained  of  in
respect	 of offences falling within the purview of that sub-
section.   By  a  well considered order	 learned  Additional
Sessions  Judge	 of  Ahmedabad	(V.N.	Yagnik)	 upheld	 the
objections  on both counts, one based on Section 197 of	 the
Code  and  the other on
Section 161(1)
of the Bombay  Police
Act.  Consequently the process issued by the trial court was
quashed and the complaint itself stood dismissed.
Learned  Single Judge of the High Curt of Gujarat in the
revision  moved	 by the respondent-police officer set  aside
the  judgment of the Additional Sessions Judge mainly on the
ground	that Sessions Court should not have entertained	 the
revision  at all as the order challenged before it was	only
interlocutory.	 What the learned Single Judge has stated on
that point is the following:
"The  order	 dated	17th May 1997, made by	the  learned
Magistrate did not conclude the issue raised before him and,
therefore,  was necessarily an interlocutory order.  In view
of  the	 provisions  contained	in  Section  397(2)  CRPC  a
revision  against the said order would not be  maintainable.
In  my	view, therefore, the Revision Application  No.198/97
preferred  before the learned Additional Sessions Judge	 was
not maintainable.  The learned Additional Sessions Judge has
thus  transgressed  her	 jurisdiction  in  entertaining	 and
allowing the said Revision Application."
However,   learned	 Single	 Judge	 opined	  that	 the
Metropolitan  Magistrate  was right in holding that  further
evidence  is  required	to decide the question	relating  to
Section 197 of the Code, regarding the objections pertaining
to
Section  161(1)
of the Bombay Police Act.	The  learned
Single Judge made following observations:
"The  question  of limitation under
Section 161
of	 the
Bombay	Police	Act  was  never raised	before	the  learned
Magistrate.   It was, therefore, not open to the accused  to
raise  the  said  contention before the	 learned  Additional
Sessions  Judge and the learned Additional Sessions Judge in
entertaining  and  deciding  the   said	 issue	has  clearly
transgressed her jurisdiction."
Merely  because  the appellants did not raise the  legal
points	based on
Section 161
of the Bombay Police Act before
the  Metropolitan  Magistrate  they are	 not  estopped	from
canvassing  on	that  additional  grounds  also	 before	 the
Sessions  Court in revision as they were challenging therein
the very issuance of process against them.  The position may
be  different if the Sessions Judge had avoided dealing with
the  contention	 based on
Section 161(1)
of the said Act  on
the  premise that it could be raised before the trial court.
But  when  the	Sessions  Judge had opted to  go  into	that
question  and  rendered	 a decision on it on  merits  it  is
difficult  to  concur with the reasoning of the	 High  Court
that  the  said	 aspect would not be gone into by  the	High
Court as the same was not raised before the trial court.
That  apart, the view of the learned Single Judge of the
High  Court that no revision was maintainable on account  of
the  bar contained in Section 397(2) of the Code, is clearly
erroneous.   It	 is now well neigh settled that in  deciding
whether	 an order challenged is interlocutory or not as	 for
Section	 397(2)	 of the Code, the sole test is	not  whether
such  order was passed during the interim stage.  {vide
Amar
Nath  vs.  State of Haryana
(1977 4 SCC 137);
Madhu  Limaye
vs.   State  of Maharashtra
(1977 4 SCC 551);
V.C.   Shukla
vs.  State
through CBI (1980 2 SCR 380);  and
Rajendra Kumar
Sitaram	 Pande	vs.  Uttam
(1999 3 SCC 134)}.   The  feasible
test  is  whether  by upholding the objections raised  by  a
party, would it result in culminating the proceedings, if so
any  order  passed  on such objections would not  be  merely
interlocutory  in  nature as envisaged in Section 397(2)  of
the  Code.  In the present case, if the objection raised  by
the  appellants	 were  upheld  by   the	 court	the   entire
prosecution  proceedings would have been terminated.  Hence,
as per the said standard, the order was revisable.
Therefore, the High Court went wrong in holding that the
order  impugned before the Sessions Court was not  revisable
in view of the bar contained in Section 397(2) of the Code.
Though learned counsel for the appellants endeavoured to
contend	 that  want of sanction of the Government is  a	 bar
under  Section 197 of the Code for taking cognizance of	 the
offences, we do not consider it necessary to delve into that
part  of the contention in view of our conclusion  regarding
Section	 161(1)
of  the  Bombay   Police  Act.	  The	said
sub-section is extracted below:
"161.   Suits  or prosecutions in respect of  acts	done
under  colour of duty as aforesaid - not to be	entertained,
or  to be dismissed if not instituted within the  prescribed
period.-  (1)  In  any	case  of  alleged  offence  by	 the
Commissioner,  the Revenue Commissioner, the Commissioner, a
Magistrate,  Police  officer or other person, or of a  wrong
alleged to have been done by such Commissioner, such Revenue
Commissioner,  Commissioner,  Magistrate, Police officer  or
other  person  by any act done under colour or in excess  of
any such duty or authority as aforesaid or wherein, it shall
appeal	to the Court that the offence or wrong if  committed
or  done was of the character aforesaid, the prosecution  or
suit  shall  not be entertained, or shall be  dismissed,  if
instituted,  more  than one year after the date of  the	 act
complained of.
Provided  that,  any such prosecution against  a  Police
Officer	 may be entertained by the Court, if instituted with
the  previous  sanction of the State Government	 within	 two
years from the date of the offence."
The	 sub-section  imposed  a  ban	on  the	 court	from
entertaining a prosecution for an offence falling within the
purview	 of  the sub-section and was committed by  a  police
officer,  if  the prosecution was instituted more  than	 one
year  after  the  date of the act complained of.   The	only
exception  to  the  said  ban is, if  the  complainant	gets
sanction  from the State Government to prosecute the  police
officer	 the aforesaid period of one year would get enlarged
to  two	 years.	 Offences falling within the purview of	 the
sub-section  relate to those acts done "under the colour  or
in  excess of any duty or authority as aforesaid".  The sub-
section	 then  widens the net a little further	by  bringing
within	its sweep those offences committed through any	acts
done which are "of the character aforesaid".  The expression
"aforesaid"  in the sub-section is evidently with  reference
to  what  is mentioned in
Sections 159
and
160
of  the	same
enactment.   Those provisions afford an absolute immunity to
a  public  servant  from  any penalty or  liability  to	 pay
damages	 in  respect  of  any "act done in  good  faith"  in
pursuance  of or intended pursuance of "any duty imposed  or
any  authority conferred on him by any provision of this Act
or  any	 other law for the time being in force or any  rule,
order or direction made or given thereunder".  Such absolute
immunity  is not afforded in respect of any offence or wrong
alleged	 to have been done by such public servant, if it was
done  "under  colour  or  in  excess of	 any  such  duty  or
authority  as aforesaid".  Nonetheless the said statute	 has
fixed a time limit for initiation of prosecution proceedings
in  such  cases against the public servant.  If	 prosecution

proceedings  were not initiated within such time limit, they
cannot be commenced thereafter.
A  three  Judge  Bench  of	this  Court  in
Virupaxappa
Veerappa Kadampur vs.  State of Mysore
(AIR 1963 SC 849) has
considered the amplitude of the expression "under the colour
of  any duty or authority" as envisaged in the sub- section.
After  making  reference  to some of the  earlier  decisions
rendered  by  the Bombay High Court and after  noticing	 the
meaning	 of  the expression "colour of office" given in	 Law
lexicons, learned Judges observed thus:
"Whether  or  not when the act bears the true colour  of
the  office or duty or right, the act may be said to be done
under colour of that right, office or duty, it is clear that
when  the  colour  is  assumed as a cover  or  a  cloak	 for
something  which  cannot properly be done in performance  of
the  duty or in exercise of the right or office, the act  is
said to be done under colour of the office or duty or right.
It  is	reasonable  to think that the legislature  used	 the
words  `under  colour'	in
S.161(1)
to include	this  sense.
.......	  It  appears to us that the words `under colour  of
duty'  have been used in
S.161(1)
to include acts done under
the  cloak  of duty, even though not by virtue of the  duty.
When he (the police officer) prepares a false Panchnama or a
false  report he is clearly using the existence of his legal
duty  as a cloak for his corrupt action or to use the  words
in  Stroud's  Dictionary `as a veil to his  falsehood.'	 The
acts  thus  done in dereliction of his duty must be held  to
have been done under colour of the duty."
In	this case, there is no scope for contending that the
offences  alleged would not fall within the purview of "acts
done  under the colour or in excess of duty or authority" of
such  police  officer.	 Even  the   very  reading  of	 the
ingredients  for  the offences alleged would show that	such
offences  could not be committed without being in the  cloak
of  a public servant nor could they be committed unless	 the
public	servant was at least under the colour of his office.
Section	 166
of the Indian Penal Code which is one  of	 the
offences alleged against the complainant is extracted below:
"166.Public servant disobeying law, with intent to cause
injury	to  any	 person.- Whoever, being a  public  servant,
knowingly disobeys any direction of the law as to the way in
which  he  is  to conduct himself as  such  public  servant,
intending to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will,
by  such disobedience, cause injury to any person, shall  be
punished  with	simple	imprisonment for a  term  which	 may
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both."
The indispensable ingredient of the said offence is that
the  offender  should  have  done the act  "being  a  public
servant".   The	 next ingredient close to its heels is	that
such  public servant has acted in disobedience of any  legal
direction  concerning  the  way	 in  which  he	should	have
conducted  as  such public servant.  For the offences  under
Sections  167
and
219
of IPC the pivotal ingredient is	 the
same  as  for  the offence under
Section 166
of  IPC.	 The
remaining offences alleged in the complaint, in the light of
the  averments	made therein, are ancillary offences to	 the
above	and  all  the  offences	  are  parts  of  the	same
transaction.   They  could not have been  committed  without
there  being at least the colour of the office or  authority
which appellants held.
Shri  S.K.	 Dholakia,  learned senior counsel  for	 the
State  of Gujarat invited our attention to the decisions  of
this Court in State of Maharashtra vs.	Narhar Rao (AIR 1966
SC  1783)  and State of Maharashtra vs.	 Ram and Ors.	(AIR
1966  SC 1786).	 Both the decisions dealt with the scope  of
Section	 161
of  the Bombay Police Act.  In the  former,  a
Police	Head  Constable	 was  tried for	 the  offence  under
Section	 5(2)
of the Prevention of Corruption Act 1947,	 for
accepting  bribe  in the course of investigating a  criminal
case.	Though the trial court convicted him of the  offence
the  High  Court acquitted him in appeal on the ground	that
prosecution  was barred under
Section 161(1)
of the Act.   A
three  Judge  Bench of this Court has held that the  act  of
accepting  bribe  is  not an act done in the colour  of	 his
office.	  The  following observations in that  decision	 are
apposite in the context.
"In this connection, it is important to remember that an
act is not done under colour of an office merely because the
point  of time at which it is done coincides with the  point
of  time the accused is invested with the powers or duty  of
the  office.   To be able to say that an act was done  under
the  colour  of	 an office one must  discover  a  reasonable
connection between the act alleged and the duty or authority
imposed	 on  the accused by the
Bombay Police Act
or  other
statutory   enactment.	 Unless	 there	 is   a	  reasonable
connection  between the act complained of and the powers and
duties	of  the office, it is difficult to say that the	 act
was  done  by  the accused officer under the colour  of	 his
office."
In	the  latter  decision the same	three  Judges  Bench
considered  the case of two Police Head Constables who	were
prosecuted  for	 certain  offences and they  were  convicted
under
Section	330
of the IPC.	 There also the	 High  Court
took the view, in the appeal filed by them, that prosecution
was barred under
Section 161(1)
of the Act.  On the facts of
that  case  learned  Judges held that the  offence  was	 not
relating  to an act done in the colour of office.  The	said
decision  confined to the fact situation which arose in that
case.
We	may observe that neither of the above decisions	 has
changed	 the  legal position laid down by the  three  Judges
Bench in
Virupaxappa Veerappa Kadampur
(supra).
In	the  present case, it is the admitted fact that	 the
complaint  was filed only long after the period indicated in
Section	 161
of  the Act was over, either with	 or  without
sanction   from	 the  State   Government.   Therefore,	 the
complaint is irretrievably barred under the said provision.
In view of this conclusion of ours it is unnecessary for
us  to	consider  the next question whether  sanction  under
Section	 397 of the Code is necessary to take cognizance  of
the offences alleged.
We,	 therefore,  allow  this appeal and  set  aside	 the
judgment under challenge and restore the order passed by the
Sessions Judge dismissing the complaint.