[Cites
5
, Cited by
33
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs M/S. Popular Builders, Calcutta on 17 October, 2000
Equivalent citations: AIR 2000 SUPREME COURT 3185, 2000 AIR SCW 3690, 2000 (3) ARBI LR 522, 2000 (1) JT (SUPP) 497, 2000 (7) SCALE 168, 2000 (4) LRI 491, 2000 (8) SCC 1, 2000 (10) SRJ 25, (2000) 3 ARBILR 522, (2000) 4 SCJ 527, (2000) 7 SUPREME 72, (2001) 1 RECCIVR 363, (2000) 7 SCALE 168, (2001) 44 ALL LR 315, (2000) 4 CURCC 142
Bench:
S.N.Phukan
,
M.B.Shah
PETITIONER:
UNION OF INDIA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
M/S.  POPULAR BUILDERS, CALCUTTA

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	17/10/2000

BENCH:
S.N.Phukan, M.B.Shah, G.B.Pattanaik




JUDGMENT:
PATTANAIK,J.
L.....I.........T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T..J

      Leave Granted.
This  appeal by the Union of India is directed against
the  judgment  dated 28th of January, 1999 of  the  Division
Bench  of Calcutta High Court, dismissing the appeal of	 the
Union  of  India, arising out of an arbitration	 proceeding.
The  undisputed	 facts are that the respondent	had  entered
into  an  agreement with the appellant for  construction  of
Annex  Building	 to  Telephone	 Bhawan	 at  Calcutta.	 The
agreement  between  the	 parties  contained  an	 arbitration
clause	therein.   After the completion of work,  the  final
bill  was drawn and was sent to the respondent and he agreed
to  accept the final bill and in fact did receive the  money
under the final bill without any objection.  But thereafter,
he  wrote  a  letter  to   the	concerned  Chief   Engineer,
indicating several items of claim and additional works which
the  respondent	 had executed pursuant to the directions  of
the  appropriate  authority and the said work had  not	been
included  in  the final bill.  He, therefore, requested	 the
Chief  Engineer,  the  authority  under	 Clause	 25  of	 the
agreement  to appoint an arbitrator and pursuant to the said
request, the Chief Engineer by his letter dated 25.11.93 did
appoint	  an   arbitrator.    Subsequently,  the   appointed
arbitrator  was	 changed.  Pursuant to an order of the	High
Court  and  before the arbitrator, the respondent filed	 his
claim  on  different  heads.  The Union	 of  India-appellant
herein, filed his objection as well as filed a counter claim
before	the  arbitrator.  The learned Arbitrator  ultimately
passed	an  award and that award was filed before  the	High
Court,	for  being made a rule of Court under
Section 14
of
the  Arbitration  Act,	1940.  The Union of India  filed  an
objection  under
Sections 30
and
33
for setting  aside	 the
award.	 The learned Single Judge considered the  objections
filed by the Union of India and rejecting the same, made the
award  a rule of Court.	 Against the aforesaid order of	 the
learned	 Single Judge, an appeal was carried to the Division
Bench under
Section 39
of the Arbitration Act.	The Division
Bench  having  dismissed the Unions appeal by the  impugned
order, the present appeal has been preferred by the Union of
India.	 From  the  judgment of the  learned  Single  Judge,
rejecting  the	objections of the Union of India as well  as
the impugned judgment of the Division Bench, it appears that
the  Union  of India had urged the sole point of  limitation
and  the same had been negatived by the courts below and  in
our view rightly.
Mr.   A.	Subba Rao, the learned counsel for the Union
of  India  however raised the question that the	 final	bill
having	been accepted by the respondent-contractor,  without
any  objection, there did not subsist any arbitrable dispute
to  be	referred to arbitration, invoking Clause 25  of	 the
agreement  and, therefore, the impugned award has to be	 set
aside.
In  support of this contention, reliance  has	been
placed	on two decisions of this Court M/s.
P.K.   Ramaiah
and  Company  vs.   Chairman & Managing	 Director,  National
Thermal Power Corpn.
, 1994 Supp.
(3) S.C.C.  126 as well as
a three Judge Bench decision of this Court in Nathani Steels
Ltd.   vs.   Associated Constructions, 1995 Supp.(3)  S.C.C.
324.

      Mr.   L.	Nageswara Rao, appearing for the respondent-
claimant on the other hand contended that this objection had
not specifically been taken in the objection, that was filed
under
Sections	 30
and
33
of	 the  Arbitration  Act,	 and
therefore,  the Union Government should not be permitted  to
take  up this plea in this forum.  He further contended that
pursuant  to  the request made by the Contractor, the  Chief
Engineer  himself  having  appointed an	 arbitrator  on	 the
ground	that  dispute  subsists for arbitration and  in	 the
arbitration  proceeding,  the Union Government having  fully
participated  and  further,  subsequent	 to  the  award,   a
rectification  application  having been filed by  the  Union
Government  and	 in  that application also,  only  challenge
being  made on the quantum and not on the ground of  absence
of arbitrable disputes, it would not be appropriate for this
Court  to  allow the Union Government to take this  plea  at
this  belated  stage.	He  also   contended  that  the	 two
decisions  referred to by the Union Government are prior the
appointment  of	 arbitrator and none of these decisions	 are
applicable  to	the  case in hand, where an award  has	been
passed	by the appointed arbitrator after due  participation
of Union Government in the arbitration proceedings.
Having considered the rival submissions at the Bar and
on  careful  scrutiny of the objections filed by  the  Union
Government  under
Sections 30
and
33
of the Arbitration Act,
though	we  find sufficient force in the contention  of	 Mr.
Nageswara  Rao,	 but  the existence of a dispute  being	 the
condition  precedent for appointment of an arbitrator  under
Clause 25 and in view of the two decisions of this Court and
that  the  respondent-claimant	did receive the	 final	bill
without any protest, we are not persuaded to outright reject
the  contention	 of Mr.	 Subba Rao, appearing for the  Union
Government.   It transpires from the award itself that	only
as against claim item No.  2, the Union of India had pleaded
that  the  said claim cannot be entertained in view  of	 the
receipt	 of  the  final bill by the contractor	without	 any
protest, though the arbitrator had rejected the said plea of
the Union of India.  It is no doubt true as contended by Mr.
Nageswara  Rao	that  neither the judgment  of	the  learned
Single	Judge nor the judgment of the Division Bench,  which
is  under  challenge  in this appeal before this  Court	 did
indicate  the  fact that the Union of India had raised	this
contention  before  the	 aforesaid   two  forums  below	 but
notwithstanding the same when the existence of an arbitrable
dispute is the condition precedent for exercise of power for
appointment  of an arbitrator under Clause 25 and since	 the
final  bill  that was prepared by the appropriate  authority
was  accepted  by the respondent without any protest  as  is
apparent  from the letter of the claimant-contractor and the
question had been raised before the arbitrator in respect of
the  claim  item No.  2 by the Union of India, we  think  it
appropriate  to	 hold  that so far as claim item No.   2  is
concerned,  the	 same  could  not  have	 been  a  matter  of
reference of an arbitrable dispute and as such, the award of
the  arbitrator to that extent must be set aside.  So far as
the  other claim items are concerned, the Union of India not
having	taken  any  objection to the same on  the  aforesaid
score  and  that even the objection filed under
Sections  30
and
33
of the Arbitration Act not being specific  on	that
issue,	we  do not think it appropriate to allow  the  Union
Government  to	raise  that objection, so far as  the  other
items  of  claim are concerned.	 Accordingly,  the  impugned
award  in respect of claim item No.  2 is set aside and	 the
rest  of  the award amount, stand affirmed.  The  appeal  is
allowed in part.