[Cites
0
, Cited by
81
]
Supreme Court of India
Jagdamba Prasad Shukla vs State Of U.P. & Ors on 22 August, 2000
Equivalent citations: AIR 2000 SUPREME COURT 2806, 2000 (7) SCC 90, 2000 AIR SCW 3047, 2000 LAB. I. C. 3111, 2000 ALL. L. J. 2444, (2000) 9 JT 457 (SC), 2000 (8) SRJ 144, 2001 (1) UJ (SC) 247, 2000 (9) JT 457, (2000) 2 LABLJ 1513, (2000) 4 PAT LJR 37, (2000) 5 SERVLR 164, (2000) 4 ESC 2431, (2000) 6 SCALE 78, (2000) 5 SUPREME 650, (2000) 87 FACLR 1, (2000) 97 FJR 304, (2000) 3 CURLR 309, (2000) 4 ALL WC 2982, (2001) 1 LAB LN 51, (2001) 1 BLJ 238, (2000) 4 SCT 390, (2000) 3 UPLBEC 2268
Author:
S.P. Bharucha
Bench:
S.P. Bharucha
PETITIONER:
JAGDAMBA PRASAD SHUKLA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF U.P.  & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	22/08/2000

BENCH:
S.P. Bharucha, J. & Y K Sabharwal, J.




JUDGMENT:
Y.K.SABHARWAL,J.
Delay condoned.	 Leave granted.
L....I..........T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T..J
     The appellant while holding the post of a Sub Inspector
was placed under suspension by an order dated 1st June, 1977
and  was  transferred  to Gorakhpur by an  order  dated	 4th
August, 1977 in order to face disciplinary proceedings.	 The
appellant   did	  not  participate   in	  the	disciplinary
proceedings  allegedly	on  account  of	 illness  and  being
confined for medical treatment at Kanpur and also on account
of   financial	crunch	for   non-payment   of	 subsistence
allowance.   The  appellant  was served with  a	 show  cause
notice	dated  29th December, 1978 proposing  punishment  of
removal	 from  service.	 In reply thereto, appellant  raised
several	 objections indicating irregularities in conduct  of
departmental  proceedings.  The Deputy Inspector General  of
Police	by  an	order  dated 11th  February,  1979  directed
removal	  of  the  appellant   from  service.	After  being
unsuccessful  in  departmental	appeal and even in  a  claim
petition  filed	 before	 U.P.Public  Service  Tribunal,	 the
appellant challenged his order of removal in a writ petition
filed in the High Court.
The  only contention pressed on behalf of the appellant
before	the High Court was that on account of non-payment of
subsistence  allowance,	 right from the date  of  suspension
till   his  removal,  he  could	  not  participate  in	 the
departmental  enquiry and, therefore, the proceedings of the
said  enquiry  stood  vitiated	for   denial  of  grant	  of
reasonable  opportunity	 to  him to appear  in	departmental
enquiry.   It  was  rejected  by the High  Court.   The	 two
reasons given by the High Court for rejecting the contention
are:-(i) to receive subsistence allowance, the appellant was
required  to  furnish a certificate stating that he  is	 not
engaged	 in  any other employment, business,  profession  or
vocation,  which was not furnished;  and (ii) the  appellant
had  not  taken a ground either in the claim petition or  in
the  writ  petition  that he could not	participate  in	 the
enquiry because of financial crunch.
In	 this  appeal  also, the only  contention  urged  on
behalf	of  the	 appellant  is	 the  denial  of  reasonable
opportunity  in	 the departmental enquiry.  It is  contended
that  on account of financial crunch created by	 respondents
by  non-payment	 of subsistence allowance from date  of	 the
suspension  till removal, the appellant could not travel  to
Gorakhpur and participate in the proceedings of departmental
enquiry.
Learned counsel for the respondents did not dispute the
factual	 position that the subsistence allowance as urged on
behalf	 of  the  appellant  was   not	paid  to  him.	 The
justification  offered by the respondents for not paying the
subsistence   allowance	 is  that   the	 applicant  had	 not
furnished  the	address where the amount was to be sent	 and
had also not given the requisite certificate indicating that
he was not employed else during the period of suspension.
It	 is  evident from the record that the High Court  is
not  right  in observing that ground sought to be urged	 was
not taken in the claim petition or in the writ petition.  In
fact,  the  High  Court in the latter part of  the  judgment
observes  that `for the first time, the petitioner has taken
the  ground  in this writ petition that he could not  attend
the  departmental proceedings due to financial crunch as  he
was  not  paid his subsistence allowance.' A perusal of	 the
record shows that the contention urged before the High Court
and  again before us, was also raised before the  U.P.Public
Service	 Tribunal  and even earlier before the	authorities.
The  U.P.  Public Service Tribunal considered it and on	 the
facts  of the case, the Tribunal held that `Therefore, those
rulings	 where	person was unable to attend the enquiry	 for
non-payment  of subsistence allowance, resulting in  enquiry
being  vitiated	 will not be applicable.' Apart from it,  in
reply  dated  22nd January, 1979 sent to show cause  notice,
the  appellant specifically stated that he has not been paid
his  pay  and suspension allowance which cannot be  withheld
and  as such how could he be expected to reach Gorakhpur  or
elsewhere  due to shortage of funds.  He further stated that
`the  applicant has requested a number of times for  drawing
his  pay and suspension allowance, but the same could not be
drawn  and sent to applicant which was a serious handicap to
appear	anywhere even if he so preferred during illness	 and
even  against the recommendations of his medical attendant.'
The  request  of  the appellant for payment  of	 subsistence
allowance  is also contained in his letter dated 31st March,
1978  sent to Superintendent of Police, Railways,  Gorakhpur
Section,  Gorakhpur.   The  said letter	 also  contains	 the
address	 of the appellant.  The address of the appellant  is
in  fact contained on various communications sent by him  to
the  respondents.  It is curious that the respondents  could
serve  all  other  communications including the	 show  cause
notice	to  the	 appellant  but	 in so	far  as	 payment  of
subsistence  allowance is concerned, the plea taken is	that
the  appellant did not intimate his address and,  therefore,
the  amount  could  not be sent.  Thus, it is  evident	that
despite repeated requests, the subsistence allowance was not
paid  to  the  appellant from the date	of  suspension	till
removal.   It  is  also	 evident   that	 the  appellant	 had
expressed  difficulty  to  reach  place of  enquiry  due  to
shortage of funds.
Reverting	now to the other reason which prevailed with
the High Court, namely, the appellant having not furnished a
certificate  stating  that  he is not engaged in  any  other
employment, business, profession or vocation and having thus
not  complied with Rule 53(2) of the Financial Hand Book, it
may be noticed that at no stage, the appellant was told that
he  had to furnish such a certificate, and that he could not
be  paid  subsistence allowance without it.  It was not	 the
case  of the respondents that in response to the appellant's
request	 for payment of subsistence allowance, he was  asked
to  furnish such a certificate and since he did not  furnish
it, the amount of subsistence allowance was not paid to him.
Therefore,  the second reason for rejecting the	 appellant's
contention  for	 non- payment of subsistence allowance	also
does not deserve to be sustained.
The  payment  of subsistence allowance,  in  accordance
with  the  Rules, to an employee under suspension is  not  a
bounty.	  It is a right.  An employee is entitled to be paid
the  subsistence allowance.  No justifiable ground has	been
made  out  for non-payment of the subsistence allowance	 all
through	 the period of suspension i.e.	from suspension till
removal.  One of the reasons for not appearing in enquiry as
intimated  to  the authorities was the financial  crunch  on
account	 of  non-payment  of subsistence allowance  and	 the
other  was  the illness of the appellant.  The appellant  in
reply  to  show cause notice stated that even if he  was  to
appear	in enquiry against medical advice, he was unable  to
appear	for  want  of  funds on account	 of  non-payment  of
subsistence  allowance.	  It  is a clear case of  breach  of
principles  of	natural justice on account of the denial  of
reasonable opportunity to the appellant to defend himself in
the  departmental  enquiry.  Thus, the departmental  enquiry
and  the  consequent  order  of	 removal  from	service	 are
quashed.
In	 view of the aforesaid, the impugned judgment of the
High  Court  is	 set aside and the appeal  is  allowed	with@@
      JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
costs.@@
JJJJJJ
.UP 10 2; Fixed-pitch, printer 1; -n -ml4 -PA4 -dFX-NORMAL -Fx -e -j; dumbp
L.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T....R