[Cites
11
, Cited by
111
]
Supreme Court of India
Singhai Rakesh Kumar vs Union Of India & Ors on 28 November, 2000
Equivalent citations: AIR 2001 SUPREME COURT 390, 2001 (1) SCC 364, 2000 AIR SCW 4285, 2001 TAX. L. R. 187, 2001 (4) LRI 688, 2000 (3) JT (SUPP) 248, (2001) 115 TAXMAN 101, 2000 (10) SRJ 396, (2000) 164 CURTAXREP 483, (2001) 247 ITR 150, (2001) 160 TAXATION 363, (2000) 4 SCJ 491, (2001) 1 CURLJ(CCR) 384, (2000) 7 SCALE 666, (2000) 7 SUPREME 697
Bench:
S.P.Bharucha
,
Doraswaimy Raju
,
Ruma Pal
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil) 15619-15620 1996


PETITIONER:
SINGHAI RAKESH KUMAR

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	28/11/2000

BENCH:
S.P.Bharucha, Doraswaimy Raju,, Ruma Pal




JUDGMENT:
Bharucha, J.
L.....I.........T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T..J

      Under  challenge are the orders of a Division Bench of
the  High Court of Madhya Pradesh dismissing a writ petition
filed  by the appellant-assessee and answering against him a
reference  made by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal of	 the
following  question  :	 Whether on the facts  and  in	the
circumstances of the case, the Tribunal was right in holding
that  the profit arising from the sale of agricultural lands
did not amount to capital gains within the meaning of
Income
Tax Act, 1961
?
The  reference related to the Assessment Years 1981-82
and 1983-84.
In the previous years relevant to the Assessment Years
1981-82	 and  1983-84 the assessee sold	 agricultural  lands
which were situated within the municipal limits of Bina.  He
made  capital gains thereon and the Income Tax Officer	made
him  liable  to	 capital  gains tax.   The  first  appellate
authority  agreed  with	 the  Income  Tax  Officer  and	 the
assessee  approached  the Tribunal.  The Tribunal held	that
the profit on the sale of agricultural lands was not capital
gains  within the meaning of the provisions of the ncome
Tax
Act,  1961
.   From  the order of the Tribunal  the  question
aforestated  was  referred to the High Court.	Pending	 the
reference,  the	 assessee filed in the High Court  the	writ
petition  the  order  upon  which  is  impugned.   The	writ
petition asked the H gh Court to declare as unconstitutional
the  Explanation  to  sub-section (1A) and clause  (iii)  of
sub-section  (14)  of
Section 2
of the Income Tax Act,	1961
and  to declare that capital gains arising from the sale  of
agricultural lands within a municipal are were not liable to
capital	 gains tax under the
Income Tax Act, 1961
.  The High
Court dismissed the writ petition and answered the reference
against the assessee.
Article  366
defines,  in clause	 (1),  agricultural
income	to  mean  agricultural income as defined  for  the
purposes  of the enactments relating to Indian	Income-tax.
Entry  46  of  List  II	 of  the  Seventh  Schedule  of	 the
Constitution  speaks of Taxes on agr cultural income;	in
other  words,  it  is  for the States to  legislate  on	 the
subject of taxes on agricultural income.  Entry 82 of List I
of  the	 Seventh Schedule reads Taxes on income other  than
agricultural income;  in other words, it is for the Union t
legislate  on  the  subject of taxes on	 income	 other	than
agricultural income.
In  the Income Tax Act, 1922
agricultural income was
defined	 in clause (1) of
Section 2
.  Sub-clause (a) thereof
alone	is   relevant	for    our   purpose.	 Thereunder,
agricultural  income  meant any rent or	 revenue  derived
from land which is used for agricult ral purposes ...
Section	 2 (4A)
defined capital asset to mean property of
any  kind held by an assessee but not any land from  which
the income derived is agricultural income.
It  was submitted by learned counsel for the  assessee
that agricultural income in clause (1) of
Article 366
must
be read only as it was defined in 1950 when the Constitution
came into force;  that is to say, in the manner indicated in
Section 2(1)(A)
and
2(4)(A)(iii)
of the 1922 Act.  To decide
the  correctness of the submission, it is necessary to	give
true  meaning  to clause (1) of
Article 366.
Agricultural
income thereunder means agricultural income as defined for
the   purposes	of  the	 enactments   rel  ting	 to   Indian
Income-tax.  The definition does not say that agricultural
income	means  agricultural income as defined in the  1922
Act.   It  does	 not even say that it  means  agricultural
income as defined for the purposes of the enactment relating
to  I dian Income-tax.	It says that it means agricultural
income	as  defined  for  the  purposes	 of  the  enactments
relating  to  Indian  Income-tax.  The use  of	the  plural
enactments  is very relevant.  It means that  agricultural
income	 for   the  purposes  of   the	 onstitution   means
agricultural income as it is defined at the relevant time in
the enactment that then relates to Income-tax.
In the judgment of this Court in
Bajaya vs.  Gopikabai
& Anr.
[1978(2) SCC 542] the position in law, as applicable
here,  is  stated thus:	 Broadly speaking,  legislation	 by
referential  incorporation falls in two categories:   First,
where  a  statute  by specific	reference  incorporates	 the
provisions  of	another statute as of the time of  adoption.
Second, where a statute incorporates by general eference the
law  concerning	 a particular subject, as a genus.   In	 the
case  of  the former, the subsequent amendments made in	 the
referred  statute  cannot  automatically be  read  into	 the
adopting statute.  In the case of latter category, it may be
presumed  t at the legislative intent was to include all the
subsequent  amendments	also made from time to time  in	 the
generic	 law  on the subject adopted by	 general  reference.
This  principle	 of construction of a reference statute	 has
been neatly summed up by Sutherl nd, thus:
A	 statute  which	 refers	 to the	 law  of  a  subject
generally  adopts the law on the subject as of the time	 the
law  is	 invoked.  This will include all the amendments	 and
modifications  of  the	law  subsequent	  to  the  time	 the
reference statute was enacte .
Corpus  Juris  Secundum  also   enunciates  the	same
principle in these terms :
.Where  the  reference in an adopting statute is	to
the  law generally which governs the particular subject, and
not  to	 any  specific	statute or part	 thereof,  ..	the
reference  will	 be held to include the law as it stands  at
the  time  it is sought to be app ied, with all the  changes
made  from time to time, at least as far as the changes	 are
consistent with the purpose of the adopting statute.
Under  the  terms of the Constitution,  Parliament  is
empowered  to  legislate to say what  agricultural  income
means.	 What Parliament says in this regard in the  statute
then  current  relating to income tax is the  definition  of
In  regard  to	such  agricultural  income  the	 States	 may
legislate.   In	 regard	 to  all  other	 income	 it  is	 for
Parliament  to legislate.  (See
The Karimtharuvi Tea Estates
Ltd., Kottayam & Anr.  Vs.  State of Kerala & Ors.
, [1963(1)
agricultural income for the p urposes of the Constitution.
upp.  SCR 823].)

      It  is in this background that the impugned amendments
in  the	 1961  Act may be seen.	 Clause (1A)  of
Section  2
defined agricultural income to mean, inter alia, any rent
or  revenue derived from land which is situated in India and
is  used for agricultural purposes.  Clause (14) of Section
2 defined capital asset to mean property of any kind held
by  an	assessee  in  India  ..	  but  does  not  include
agricultural  land  in India..	The words  agricultural
land  in  India were substituted by the Finance Ac  ,  1970
with  effect  from  1st April, 1970 to read thus  :   (iii)
agricultural land in India, not being land situate -
(a)  in  any  area  which	  is  comprised	 within	 the
jurisdiction   of  a  municipality   (whether  known  as   a
municipality,	municipal    corporation,    notified	area
committee,  town  area committee, town committee, or by	 any
other  name) or a cantonment board and which has  population
of  not	 less  than  ten  thousand  according  to  the	last
preceding  census  of which the relevant figures  have	been
published before the first day of the previous year;  or
(b)in  any  area within such distance, not being	more
than  eight  kilometers,  from	the   local  limits  of	 any
municipality or cantonment board referred to in item (a), as
the  Central Government may, having regard to the extent of,
and  scope for, urbanization o that area and other  relevant
considerations,	 specify  in this behalf by notification  in
the Official Gazette;
It  appears  that	 by reason of the  decision  of	 the
Bombay	High  Court in
Manubhai A.  Sheth & Ors.  Vs.	N.D.
Nirgudkar
,  2nd Income-Tax Officer, A-II Ward, Bombay & Anr.
[128  I.T.R.   87], an Explanation was added by the
Finance
Act,  1989
, with effect from 1st A ril, 1970, to clause (1A)
of
Section  2
which read thus :  Explanation	-  For	the
removal	 of  doubts,  it  is hereby  declared  that  revenue
derived	 from  land  shall not include and shall  be  deemed
never  to have included any income arising from the transfer
of  any	 land  referred	 to  in item  (a)  or  item  (b)  of
sub-clause (iii) of clause (14) of this Section;
The position, as a result, is that income arising from
the  transfer  of  agricultural land that falls	 within	 the
terms  of  items (a) and (b) of sub-clause (iii)  of  clause
(14) of
Section 2
falls outside the ambit of revenue derived
from  land and therefore, utside the ambit of  agricultural
income.	 Such income, therefore, is liable to capital gains
tax chargeable under
Section 45
of the 1961 Act.
Parliament  has,	as aforestated, the power to  define
what  agricultural income is in the 1961 Act;  the amendment
of  sub-sections  (2) and (14) of
Section 2
thereof  in	 the
manner	aforestated are, therefore, good in law.  The effect
is  that the assessee is li able to pay capital gains tax on
the sales of his lands within the municipal limits of Bina.
We are of the view, therefore, that the High Court was
right  in the conclusions that it came to.  The appeals	 are
dismissed with costs.