[Cites
7
, Cited by
45
]
Supreme Court of India
Shish Ram & Ors vs The State Of Haryana & Ors on 5 May, 2000
Equivalent citations: AIR 2000 SUPREME COURT 2148, 2000 AIR SCW 2228, (2000) 6 JT 298 (SC), 2000 (6) SRJ 288, 2000 (4) SCALE 458, 2000 (6) SCC 84, 2000 HRR 694, 2000 (3) LRI 223, (2000) 3 PUN LR 367, 2000 (126) PUN LR 367, (2000) 2 CURLJ(CCR) 126, (2000) 4 SCALE 458, (2000) 2 LANDLR 233, (2000) 4 SUPREME 31, (2000) 3 RECCIVR 279, (2000) 3 ICC 424
Bench:
S. Saghir Ahmad
,
R.P. Sethi
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil) 1941  of  1997



PETITIONER:
SHISH RAM & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE STATE OF HARYANA & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	05/05/2000

BENCH:
S. Saghir Ahmad & R.P. Sethi.




JUDGMENT:
SETHI,J.
L...I...T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T..J

    Holding that the land described as "charand" is included
within	the  definition of "Shamilat-deh" as  defined  under
Section	  2(g)
of   the   Punjab  Village   Common   Lands
(Regulations)  Act,  1961 (hereinafter referred to  as	"the
Act")  and relying upon its earlier Division Bench  judgment
in the case of Khushi Puri v.  State of Haryana [1978 Punjab
Law  Journal 78], the High Court dismissed the writ petition
filed  by the appellants praying for issuance of  directions
prohibiting  the Gram Panchayat from leasing out the charand
land  and  to  keep land measuring 541 kanal  and  2  marlas
reserved  as charand for grazing up cattles.  The High Court
also  did not consider it proper to grant the prayer of	 the
appellants  seeking  declaration that the land reserved	 for
charand	 during	 consolidation	could not be  used  for	 the
income	of the Gram Panchayat as it stood allegedly deducted
from  the lands of the proprietors.
Not satisfied with	 the
judgment  of  the  Division  Bench of the  High	 Court,	 the
appellants have filed the present appeal with the submission
that  the reservation of charand land for the income of Gram
Panchayat  violated
Article 31A
of the Constitution of India
as  was the ratio of the this Court in
Bhagat Ram & Ors.  v.
State  of Punjab & Ors.
[1967 (2) SCR 165].  It is  further
submitted that without paying any compensation at the market
value  to the proprietors of the village, the land could not
vest in the Gram Panchayat.  The reservation of Charand land
for  the  income  of Gram Panchayat allegedly in  breach  of
Section	 5
of the Act is stated to be illegal.	The  leasing
out  has been alleged to be in contravention of the  grazing
rights	of  the	 proprietors   and  non-proprietors  of	 the
village.   There  is  no doubt that the appellants  are	 the
inhabitants  of	 village Khajuri, Tehsil Jagadari,  District
Yamuna	Nagar,	Haryana.  It is also not disputed  that	 the
land,	the   subject  matter  of   the	  litigation   being
shamilat-deh  is vested in the Gram Panchayat.	It has	also
to be noticed that after the vesting of the land in the Gram
Panchayat, none of the inhabitants of the village raised any
objections  regarding  its vesting for a period of about  34
years.	 It is also on record that some land out of shamilat
deh  land  was	being leased out to the proprietors  of	 the
village	 since	the  year 1976 and none of  the	 inhabitants
raised	any objection.	From the counter affidavit filed  on
behalf of the respondents it appears that many of the family
members	 of the appellants, particularly, the brother of the
appellant  No.1	 had  themselves  been taking  the  land  in
dispute	 on  lease without raising any	objection.
Learned
counsel	 appearing  for the appellants relying upon  a	Full
Bench  judgment	 of  the  Punjab &  Haryana  High  Court  in
Bishamber  Dayal  v.  State of Haryana & Ors.
[1986  Punjab
Law  Journal 208] submitted that the Gram Panchayat was	 not
entitled  to lease the land or use it in the manner it	like
without	  following  the  procedure   and  subject  to	 the
restrictions  placed on its use by the Punjab Village Common
Lands  (Regulations) Rules, 1964 (hereinafter referred to as
"the  Rules").	Referring to Rule 3(2), the learned  counsel
submitted  that	 the  Gram Panchayat could use the  land  in
shamilat-deh  vested  in it under the Act either  itself  or
through another for anyone or more of the purposes specified
therein.   One of the purposes referred to in clause (vi) is
'grazing  of  animals'.	 Learned counsel appearing  for	 the
respondents  drew our attention to clause (xxv) of  Sub-rule
(2) of Rule 3 which authorised the Gram Panchayat to use the
land  for  the purposes of leasing out for cultivation.
He
also  drew  our attention to the Division Bench judgment  of
the  High Court in Khushi Puri's case(supra) wherein it	 was
held:	"It  is provided by rule 3(2) of the Punjab  Village
Common	Lands  (Regulation) Rules, 1964, that the  panchayat
could  make  use  of the land in shamilat deh vested  in  it
either itself or through another for the purposes related to
forestry.   It	cannot,	 therefore,  be	 gainsaid  that	 the
plantation  of	trees was such a purpose for which the	land
could not be utilised by the panchayat.	 Whatever rights the
panchayat  had for the management of the land devolved	upon
the Administrator and there is, therefore, no basis for this
contention  made by the learned counsel for the	 petitioners
that the Administrator acted beyond his powers."
In	Salig  Ram  & Ors.v.  Maksudan Singh &	Ors.   [1965
Current	 Law Journal 711], the High Court had earlier  held:
"...that  the panchayat has a right to use the shamilat	 deh
vested	in  it under the 1954 Act either itself	 or  through
another	 person in any of the manners set out in that  rule.
Similar	 rules are stated to have been framed under the Act.
This  shows that except to the extent to which the statutory
rules  indicate,  there	 is no fetter on the  power  of	 the
panchayat  to  use the shamilat deh which vests in it  under
the Act for any of the specified purposes it likes and it is
not necessary that what was grazing land out of the shamilat
deh previous to such vesting, must continue to be such."
In
Bishamber Dayal
's case (supra) the Full Bench of the
Court  had  considered	and approved the view taken  by	 the
Division  Bench	 in Khusi Puri's case.	In that	 regard	 the
Court had held:
"
The  Act
and the Rules empower the Gram  Panchayat  to
convert	 a portion of the street for any one or more of	 the
purposes given in Rule 3(2).  A Division Bench of this Court
had  an	 occasion  to construe the  provisions	of
Sections
2(g)(4)
,
4
and
5
of the Act and Rule 3(2) of the Rules made
thereunder  in Khushi Puri's case (supra).  It was held that
the  Gram Panchayat could make use of the shamilat deh	land
vested	in  it	either	itself or through  another  for	 the
purposes  mentioned  in Rule 3(2).  In that case a  part  of
Charand	 land  which  was used for grazing cattle  had	been
entrusted  to  the Forest Department to plant  trees,  which
were  to be the property of the Gram Panchayat.	 This action
of  the Gram Panchayat had been upheld by theDivision Bench.
Shri  Bansal, learned counsel for the petitioner has  raised
no  contention before us that Khushi Puri's case(supra) does
not lay down the correct law or that the ratio thereof needs
reconsideration	 by  a larger Bench.  We are  in  respectful
agreement with the ratio of Khushi Ram's case (supra)."
We	do  not	 agree with the submission  of	the  learned
counsel of the appellants that in
Bishamber Dayal
's case the@@
	       JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
Full Bench of the High Court had taken a different view than@@
JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
the  one  which was taken in Khushi Puri's case.   The	High
Court  appears	to  have  consistently held  that  the	land
vesting	 in  the Gram Panchayat can be used for any  one  or
more  of  the purposes specified in Sub-Rule (2) of Rule  3,
leasing	 out for cultivation being one of the purposes.	  We
find  no reason to disagree with the High Court and in	fact
approve	 the  position of law settled by it in Khusi  Puri's
case which was upheld by the Full Bench in Bishamber Dayal's
case.  Learned counsel for the appellants then tried to make
a distinction between the charand land and the shamilat deh.
In support of his contentions he referred to Annexures I and
II  wherein the land, the subject matter of the dispute	 has
been defined to be charand land.  The definition of shamilat
deh  proivdes that it shall include "lands described in	 the
revenue	 record	 as  shamilat deh  or  (charand-in  Haryana)
excluding  abadi deh".	Relying upon the Khushi Puri's	case
the  High  Court  in the impugned judgment  was,  therefore,
right  in  holding that there did not exist any	 distinction
between	 the charand and shamilat deh and the contention  of
the appellants that the charand could not vest with the Gram
Panchayat  under  the Act was based upon wrong	assumptions.
Reliance  placed  by the learned counsel for the  appellants
upon  the judgment in
Bhagat Ram
's case is misplaced besides@@
	  JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
being  without	any  basis.   Despite  our  insistence,	 the@@
JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
learned	 counsel  for the appellants could not refer to	 any
averments  in  the  writ petition filed in  the	 High  Court
regarding  the	alleged	 violation  of
Article	31A
of	 the
Constitution.	We are also of the opinion that the  present
petition  though filed in a representative capacity, yet was
not  a bonafide action inasmuch as the appellants and  their
relations having accepted the position of law and earlier at
times taking the benefit of lease-hold rights could not have
recourse to the legal proceedings after having failed to get
the  lease in their favour or in favour of their  relations.
The   delay   in  approaching	the  court   also   remained
unexplained.   There  is  no merit in this appeal  which  is
accordingly dismissed but without any order as to costs.@@
		      JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ