[Cites
18
, Cited by
76
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India & Others vs M/S Ganesh Das Bhojraj on 22 February, 2000
Equivalent citations: AIR 2000 SUPREME COURT 1102, 2000 (9) SCC 461, 2000 AIR SCW 764, 2000 CLC 815 (SC), 2000 (2) SCALE 17, 2000 (3) LRI 803, (2000) 2 JT 314 (SC), 2000 (3) SRJ 197, 2000 (2) UJ (SC) 970, (2000) 3 MAD LW 95, (2000) 2 SCALE 17, (2000) 159 CURTAXREP 178, (2000) 116 ELT 431, (2000) 89 ECR 228, (2000) 244 ITR 691, (2000) 2 MAD LJ 193, (2000) 119 STC 293, (2000) 2 SUPREME 525, (2000) 3 BOM CR 294
Bench:
B.N. Kirpal
,
M.B. Shah
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil) 6071  of  1999



PETITIONER:
UNION OF INDIA & OTHERS

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
M/S GANESH DAS BHOJRAJ

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	22/02/2000

BENCH:
B.N. Kirpal & M.B. Shah.




JUDGMENT:
Shah, J.
L...I...T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T..J

    Two	 Judges	 Bench	of this Court by  order	 dated	15th
October,  1999 has referred this matter to a larger Bench by@@
		   JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
observing thus:-@@
JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ

    It appears that there is a conflict in the ratio of the
decisions  of  this  Court in M/s
Pankaj Jain  Agencies	 vs.
Union  of India and others
{1994 (
5) SCC 198}, Collector  of
Central	 Excise	 vs.  New Tobacco Co.  and others
{1998	 (
8)
SCC  250}  and	I.T.C.	Limited vs.   Collector	 of  Central
Excise,	 Bombay
{1996 (5) SCC 538} is also relevant.  In our
view  it is appropriate that this appeal is to be heard by a
larger Bench.
Before referring to the said decisions, we would narrate
few facts involved in the matter.@@
	  JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ

    Respondent	admittedly  imported a consignment of  Green
Beans (Pulses) weighing 505-505 M.T.  vide Invoice No.14/099
dated  31.12.1986.   They have filed bill of entry  for	 the
same  on  05.2.1987.  The importer claimed clearance of	 the
said   goods  free  of	duty  on  the  basis  of   Exemption
Notification No.129/76-Cus dated 02.8.1976.  However, it was
pointed	 out  that  on 04.2.1987 the said  notification	 was
amended vide Notification No.40/87-Cus, whereby basic duty @
25%  was  levied.   As the duty was levied @  25%,  importer
filed  Writ  Petition No.  535 of 1987 in the High Court  of
Bombay	contending inter alia that the said notification was
not duly published and that it was not in force on the date.
A  Division Bench of the High Court of Bombay accepting	 the
said  contention on the basis of Full Bench decision of	 the
said Court in the case of
Apar (P) Ltd.	 Vs.  Union of India
and  others
, {1985 (22) ELT 644} allowed the writ  petition.
Hence the present appeal by the State.
At	the outset, we may state that in appeal filed before
this  Court the judgment of the Full Bench of the High Court
of Bombay in Apar (P) Ltd.s case (supra) was set aside {Re:
Union of India v.  Apar (P) Ltd.
, (1999) 6 SCC 117}.
A  copy of Original Extraordinary Gazette of India dated
February  04,  1987 [Part-IISection 3Sub-section  (i)]	is
produced  for  our perusal.  The said notification reads  as
under:	-
MINISTRY OF FINANCE

    (Department of Revenue)
New Delhi, the 4th February, 1987
NOTIFICATION


    No.40/87-CUSTOMS  G.S.R.   81(E).In	  exercise  of	the
powers	conferred  by sub-section (1) of
section 25
of	 the
Customs	 Act,  1962  (52 of 1962), the	Central	 Government,
being  satisfied that it is necessary in the public interest
so  to	do,  hereby  makes the following  amendment  in	 the
notification of the Government of India in the Department of
Revenue	 and  Banking  No.129/76-  Customs,  dated  the	 2nd
August, 1976, namely:-
In	the said notification, for the words from the whole
of  the duty of customs leviable thereon which is  specified
in  the	 said First Schedule the words from payment of	so
much  of  that	portion	 of the duty of	 customs,  which  is
specified  in  the  said First Schedule as is in  excess  of
twenty five per cent ad valorem shall be substituted.
The	 contention is	the aforesaid Notification was	not
made  available	 to public at large and, therefore,  on	 the
basis  of  the	said  Notification customs  duty  cannot  be
levied.	  The learned counsel for the appellant relied	upon
the  decision in M/s
Pankaj Jain Agencies v.  Union of India
and    others1	 and   the     learned	 counsel   for	 the
respondentimporter   has  relied  upon	 the  decision	 in
Collector of Central Excise v.	New Tobacco Co.
and others2
in support of their respective contentions.
In
Pankaj Jain Agencies
(Supra), this Court  considered
similar contention with regard to the Exemption Notification
issued	under
Section 25
of the Customs Act, 1962 and	held
that  there  was  no  substance	  in  the  contention	that
notwithstanding	 the publication of the notification in	 the
Official  Gazette there was yet a failure to make law  known
and  that,  therefore, the notification did not acquire	 the
elements  of  operativeness  and enforceability.   For	this
purpose, Court referred to
Section 25(1)
of the Customs Act,
which reads as under:  -
25.	  Power	 to grant exemption from duty.(1)  If  the
Central	 Government is satisfied that it is necessary in the
public	interest  so to do, it may, by notification  in	 the
Official  Gazette,  exempt  generally either  absolutely  or
subject	 to such conditions (to be fulfilled before or after
clearance)  as may be specified in the notification goods of
any specified description from the whole or any part of duty
of customs leviable thereon.
On	the  basis  of	the  aforesaid	Section,  the  Court
negatived  the	contention that until the  notification	 was
available  in  Bombay  and shown to be so available    the
statutory  rules  or instrument would not become  operative.
The  Court relied on Three Judge Bench decision in
State  of
Maharashtra  v.	 Mayer Hans George3
and also referred to the
decision  in
B.K.   Srinivasan	 and  others  v.   State  of
Karnataka
and others4 and held thus:  - In the present case
indisputably  the mode of publication prescribed by
Section
25(1)
was complied with.  The notification was published in
the  Official Gazette on the 13.2.1986.
As to the effect of
the  publication  in the Official Gazette, this	 Court	held
[
Srinivasan
case AIR at p.  1067:  SCC pp.672-73, para 15]:
Where the parent statute is silent, but the subordinate
legislation  itself  prescribes the manner  of	publication,
such a mode of publication may be sufficient, if reasonable.
If  the subordinate legislation does not prescribe the	mode
of  publication or if the subordinate legislation prescribes
a  plainly  unreasonable mode of publication, it  will	take
effect	only  when it is published through  the	 customarily
recognised official channel, namely, the Official Gazette or
some  other  reasonable	 mode	of  publication.
(emphasis supplied)

    As	against	 this,	learned counsel for  the  respondent
referred  to the decision in
Collector of Central Excise  v.
New  Tobacco  Co.
and others5 and emphasized that  in	 the
aforesaid  case,  the  Court has specifically held  that  if
publication is through a Gazette then mere printing of it in
the  Gazette  would  not  be   enough  unless  the   Gazette
containing the notification is made available to the public.
The  Court  after  considering the contentions has  held  as
under:	-
Our	 attention was also drawn to the decisions of  this
Court in
Pankaj Jain Agencies v.  Union of India6
and
I.T.C.
Ltd.   v.   CCE7
but they are not helpful in  deciding	 the
question that arises in these cases.
We	hold that a Central Excise notification can be	said
to  have  been	published,  except   when  it  is   provided
otherwise,  when it is so issued as to make it known to	 the
public.	 It would be a proper publication if it is published
in  such  a  manner  that  persons   can,  if  they  are  so
interested,  acquaint  themselves  with	 its  contents.	  If
publication is through a Gazette then mere printing of it in
the  Gazette  would  not  be  enough.	Unless	the  Gazette
containing the notification is made available to the public,
the   notification  cannot  be	said   to  have	 been	duly
published.
In
Garware	 Nylons	 Ltd.  v.  Collector  of  Customs  &
Central	 Excise,  Pune8
similar question was  considered  by
this  Court.   In that case by Notification dated  30.9.1985
the customs basic duty was enhanced from 100% to 150% w.e.f.
30.9.1985.   The question was whether enhanced rate of	duty
was  applicable in respect of goods which were cleared	from
the  warehouse during the period 30.9.1985 till	 31.10.1985.
The  case of the Company was that the notification came into
effect	only  from 1.11.1985 since it was made available  to
the public for sale on that date.  Relying upon the decision
in  New	 Tobacco Co., the Court allowed the said  appeal  by
holding	 that the notification can be said to have been duly
published when it is made known to the public.
It	has  been submitted by the learned counsel  for	 the
appellant  that the afore-quoted observations in the case of
New  Tobacco Co.  are directly in conflict with the law
laid
down  by
this Court in Pankaj Jain Agencies and  in
I.T.C.
Ltd.
(supra).	We agree with the said submission.
In	our  view, as noted above, in
Pankaj Jain  Agencies
case, the Court directly dealt with a similar contention and
after  relying	upon the decision in the case of
Mayer	Hans
George
(Supra) rejected the same.
That decision is followed
in
I.T.C.   Ltd.
(Supra) and other matters.
Hence, it  is
difficult  to  agree  that  the	  decision  in
Pankaj	Jain
Agencies
case	was  not helpful in deciding  the  question
dealt  with  by	 the Court.
Section 25
of the	Customs	 Act
empowers  the Central Government to exempt either absolutely
or subject to such conditions, from the whole or any part of
the  duty  of customs leviable thereon by a notification  in
Official  Gazette.  The said notification can be modified or
cancelled.   The  method  and  mode provided  for  grant  of
exemption   or	withdrawal  of	 exemption  is	issuance  of
notification   in  the	Official   Gazette.   For   bringing
Notification  into  operation, the only requirement  of	 the
section	 is  its publication in the Official Gazette and  no
further publication is contemplated.  Additional requirement
is  that under
Section 159
such notification is required  to
be  laid  before  each House of Parliament for a  period  of
thirty days as prescribed therein.
Hence, in our view
Mayer
Hans  George
(supra) which is followed in the
Pankaj	Jain
Agencies
case represents the correct exposition of law and
the  Notification under
Section 25
of the Customs Act  would
come  into  operation  as  soon as it is  published  in	 the
Gazette	 of  India  i.e.   the date of	publication  of	 the
Gazette.   Apart  from prescribed requirement under
Section
25
,  usual mode of bringing into operation such notification
followed  since years in this country is its publication  in
the  Official Gazette and there is no reason to depart	from
the same by laying down additional requirement.
In	the case of Mayer Hans George, it was contended that
the  Notification  under
Section 8
of the  Foreign  Exchange
Regulation  Act, 1947 of the Reserve Bank of India could not
be  deemed  to have been in force and operation merely	from
the  date of issue or publication in Gazette.  It would have
effect	only from the date on which the person against	whom
it  is sought to be enforced had knowledge of its making.  A
contention  was raised as regards the precise point of	time
when  a	 piece	of   delegated	legislation  like  exemption
notification  by the Reserve Bank would in law take  effect.
In  support  of that contention reliance was placed  on	 the
decision  of  Privy Council in Lim Chin Aik v.	The  Queen9.
The  Court negatived the said contention by holding that  in
the  first  place  the order of Minister dealt with  by	 the
Privy  Council was never published since admittedly it was
transmitted  to	 the Immigration official who kept  it	with
himself.   The Court observed:	- But in the case on hand,
the  notification  by the Reserve Bank varying the scope  of
the  exemption,	 was admittedly published in the  Official
Gazettethe  usual mode of publication in India, and it	was
so  published  long before the respondent landed in  Bombay.
The  question, therefore, is not whether it was published or
not,  for  in  truth  it was published, but  whether  it  is
necessary that the publication should be proved to have been
brought	 to the knowledge of the accused Lastly, the  order
made  by  the Minister in the Singapore case, was  one	with
respect to a single individual, not a general order, whereas
what we have before us is a general rule applicable to every
person	who  passes  through India.  In the first  case,  it
would  be  reasonable  to expect that the proper  method  of
acquainting  a person with an order which he is directed  to
obey  is to serve it on him, or so publish it that he  would
certainly  know	 of  it, but there would be no	question  of
individual service of a general notification on every member
of  the public, and all that the subordinate law-making body
can or need do, would be to publish it in such a manner that
persons	 can,  if they are interested,	acquaint  themselves
with its contents.
The	 Court further referred to the judgment of Bailhache
J.   in Johnson V.  Sargant & Sons10 and did not approve the
observation  made  therein to the effect that the order	 was
not  known  until  the morning of May 17 but  it  came	into
operation  before it was made known.  On the contrary, Court
held  that there was great force in learned authors  (Prof.
C.K.   Allen)  following comment on reasoning  in  Sargants
case:
This  was a bold example of judge-made law.	 There	was
no  precedent  for  it,	 and indeed  a	decision,  Jones  v.
Robson11, which, though not on all fours, militated strongly
against	 the judges conclusion, was not cited;	nor did the
judge  attempt to define how and when delegated	 legislation
became known.  Both arguments and judgment are very brief.
The  decision has always been regarded as very doubtful, but
it never came under review by a higher court.
The Court also held that:
It is obvious that for an Indian law to operate and be
effective  in  the  territory where it	operates  viz.,	 the
territory of India it is not necessary that it should either
be published or be made known outside the country.  Even if,
therefore, the view enunciated by Bailhache, J.	 is taken to
be  correct, it would be apparent that the test to find	 out
effective  publication	would be publication in	 India,	 not
outside	 India	so as to bring it to the notice of  everyone
who  intends to pass through India.  It was published  and
made  known  in India by publication in the Gazette  on	 the
24th  November and the ignorance of it by the respondent who
is a foreigner is, in our opinion, wholly irrelevant.
The Court further observed:	 -
but  where  there	 is no	statutory  requirement	we
conceive  the rule to be that it is necessary that it should
be  published in the usual form i.e., by publication  within
the  country in such media as generally adopted to notify to
all  the persons concerned in the making of rules.  In	most
of  the	 Indian	 statutes,  including	the  Act  now  under
consideration,	there is provision for the rules made  being
published  in the Official Gazette.  It therefore stands  to
reason	that  publication in the Official Gazette viz.,	 the
Gazette	 of India is the ordinary method of bringing a	rule
or  subordinate	 legislation  to the notice of	the  persons
concerned.
From  the aforesaid judgment it can be stated that it is
established  practice  that the publication in the  official
gazette,  that	is, Gazette of India is ordinary  method  of
bringing  a rule or subordinate legislation to the notice of
the  persons  concerned.   Individual service of  a  general
notification  on every member of the public is not  required
and  the  interested  person can acquaint himself  with	 the
contents  of the notification published in the gazette.	  It
is the usual mode followed since years and there is no other
mode  prescribed  under	 the present statute except  by	 the
amendment in the year1998 by Bill No.  21 of 1998.
Further,  in
New Tobacco Co.s
case (Supra)	 the  Court
referred  to the decision in
Harla v.  State of Rajasthan12
.
In
Harlas
case the Court referred to Section 3 of  Jaipur
Laws  Act, 1923 which inter alia provided that the Court  of
Jaipur	State  shall administer the law passed from time  to
time by the State and published in the official gazette.  In
that  case, it was admitted that Jaipur Opium Act was  never
published in the Gazette and, therefore, the Court held that
in  the	 absence  of  some specific law	 or  custom  to	 the
contrary, a mere resolution of a Council of Ministers in the
Jaipur	State  without further publication  or	promulgation
would  not be sufficient to make a law operative.  The Court
also observed:	-
We	take  it  that	if  these  Proclamations  are  not
published strictly in accordance with the rules so drawn up,
they  will  not be valid law..The mode of  publication	can
vary;	what  is  a  good  method in  one  country  may	 not
necessarily   be  the  best  in	 another.   But	  reasonable
publication of some sort there must be.
Further,  in  the case of
New Tobacco Co.
(Supra),	 the
Court  relied  on the decision in
B.K.	Srinivasan
(Supra).
In  that  case	(in  para   15)	 after	considering  various
contentions,  the  Court  specifically held that  where	 the
parent	statute	 prescribes  the   mode	 of  publication  or
promulgation  that mode must be followed.  Where the  parent
statute	 is  silent, but the subordinate legislation  itself
prescribes  the	 manner	 of  publication,  such	 a  mode  of
publication may be sufficient, if reasonable.
From  the aforesaid observations, it is plain and  clear
that   the  decision  in
B.K.	  Srinivasan
(Supra)	also
reiterates  that the notification will take effect only when
it  is published through the customarily recognised official
channel,  namely, the official gazette.
We also agree	with
the  reasons recorded in
Mayer Hans George
(supra) and	hold
that  notification under
Section 25
of the Customs Act would
come  into  operation  as  soon as it is  published  in	 the
Official  Gazette  and no further publication  is  required.
Hence, the decision rendered in
Pankaj Jain Agencies
(supra)
represents  the	 correct exposition of law on  the  subject.
The  decision  rendered	 in  New Tobacco  Co.	followed  in
Garware	 Nylons Ltd.
(supra) does not lay down the  correct
law.
The	 learned  counsel  for	 the  respondent,   however,
submitted  that there is nothing on record to establish that
notification  dated 4.2.1987 withdrawing full exemption from
the levy of customs duty was published on the same day.	 For
this  purpose,	original  copy	of  the	 Notification  dated
4.2.1987 published in the Extra-ordinary Gazette on the said
date had been produced before us.  The Gazette is admissible
being  official	 record	 evidencing public affairs  and	 the
Court  is required to presume its contents as genuine  under
Sections 35
and
38
read with
Section 81
of the Evidence Act,
unless	contrary is proved.  Hence, there is no substance in
the  contention	 that  notification dated 4.2.1987  was	 not
published in the Gazette on the same day.  In our view, said
notification came into force on the same date.
Lastly,  at this stage, we would mention that Parliament
has  added  sub- sections (4) and (5) to
Section 25
of	 the
Customs	 Act  by  Act No.21 of 1998 w.e.f.   1.6.1998  which
prescribe  the	method	and  mode   of	publication  of	 the
Notification  and  the	date on which it comes	into  force.
Newly  inserted sub- sections (4) and (5) to
Section 25
are
as under:  -
(4)	 Every	notification issued under  sub-section	(1)
shall,--
(a)	 unless	 otherwise provided, come into force on	 the
date  of its issue by the Central Government for publication
in the Official Gazette;
(b)	 also be published and offered for sale on the	date
of  its	 issue	by the Directorate of Publicity	 and  Public
Relations of the Board, New Delhi.
(5)	 Notwithstanding  anything contained in	 sub-section
(4),  where a notification comes into force on a date  later
than  the date of its issue, the same shall be published and
offered	 for  sale by the said Directorate of Publicity	 and
Public	Relations  on a date on or before the date on  which
the said notification comes into force.
In	the  result,  the appeal is allowed.   The  impugned
judgment and order passed by the High Court is set-aside and
quashed.   The respondent is held liable to pay customs duty
@  25%	under  Notification No.40/87-Cus.   dated  4.2.1987.
There shall be no order as to costs.