[Cites
2
, Cited by
42
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Pawan Biscuits Co. Pvt. Ltd vs Collector Of Central Excise Patna on 20 July, 2000
Equivalent citations: AIR 2000 SUPREME COURT 2565, 2000 AIR SCW 2690, 2000 (3) BLJR 2095, 2001 (1) FAC 69, 2000 BLJR 3 2095, 2000 (5) SCALE 263, 2000 (3) LRI 470, 2000 (10) SRJ 346, (2000) 8 JT 113 (SC), 2000 (6) SCC 489, (2000) 120 ELT 24, (2001) 1 FAC 69, (2000) 5 SUPREME 239, (2000) 5 SCALE 263
Bench:
B.N.Kirpal
,
D.P.Mohapatra
PETITIONER:
M/S PAWAN BISCUITS CO. PVT. LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
COLLECTOR OF CENTRAL EXCISE PATNA

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	20/07/2000

BENCH:
B.N.Kirpal, D.P.Mohapatra




JUDGMENT:
Judgement
Kripal.J.

The appellant who is manufacturing biscuits is seeding to impugn the
assessabe value of the biscuits manufactured by it for M/S. Britannia
Industries Ltd. (hereinafter feferred to as 'Britannia') pursuant to
an agreement which had been entered into between the two Companies.
It is not in dispute that the appellant was incorporated on 30.12.1982
and after making arrangements for obtaining finance it started a Unit
from 3.1.1985 wherein it commerced commercial production of its own
brand of biscuits.
On 15.12.1986, an agreement was entered into between the appellant and
Britannia which required the appellant to manufacture discuits for
Britannia. The terms of the agreement, broadly speaking envisaged that
the ingredients for the manufacture of biscuits as well as the recipe
or emthod by which the biscuits were to be manufactured were to be
supplied by Britannia. The ingredients so supplied were also tobe
regarded as belonging to Britannia for the manufacture of the
biscuits. The appellant was required to make jpackages as directed by
Britannia and then supply the same under Britannia's instruction. For
the work done, the appellant was entitled to receive certain amount
which was to be fixed from time to time. The agreement also
contemplated that if the biscuits were not manufactured upto the
required standard, then the same were to be destroyed and in respect
of those biscuits on payment was to be made to the appellant and on
the contrary, the appellant would become liable to pay for the cost of
the ingredients which had nto spoiled.
What is material in this agreement is that there was a clause which
specifically provided that "relationship between the parties shall
always be that of principal and principal and not principal and
agent". The agreement also gave liberty to the appellant to continue
to manufacture biscuits under other brands and to sell the same.
It is nobody's case that the Unit in question was established by or at
the behest of Britannia. The Unit had come into existence before the
agreement dated 15.12.1986 entered into between the parties.
The trouble for appellant arese when it received a show cause notice
dated 16.11.1987 from the Assistant Collector requiring the appellant
to show cause as to why the assessable value should not be approved on
the basis of Britannia's wholesale cash price. A reference in the said
show cause notice was made to the agreement dated 15.12.1986.
The appellant showed cause but the Assistant Collector by his order
dated 29.6.1988 came to the conclusion that the biscuits manufactured
by the appellant vere to be cleared and excise to be paid on the value
of the said biscuits calculated after taking into consideration
Britannia's wholesale price.
The appellant filed an appeal before the Collector (Appeals) and the
Collector (Appeals) passed an order rejecting the said appeal and
affirmed the order of the Assistant Collector dated 29.6.1988. In fact
the Tribunal held that the appellant was an agent of Britannia and
therefore it is the Britannia's wholesale price which is to be taken
into consideration for arriving at the normal value for the purposes
of computing the excise duty of the biscuits manufactured by the
appellant.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the
opinion that the point in issue is no longer res integra. This Court
has time and again held that for the purpose of ascertaining assessabe
value post-manufacturing expenses have not to be taken into
consideration. This Court in M/s
Ujagar Prints and Others (II) V.
Union of India and Others
(1989) 3 SCC 488, was concerned with a
number of issues raised by the appellant. The appellant was a
processing house which inter alia processed the grey fabrics. Amongst
other issues which were raised, one of the contentions urged on behalf
of the appellant therein was that the grey fabric which was given for
prosessing continued to belong to the customer and the processing
house was only entitled to charge the processing charges. It was the
case of the appellant therein that the price of the grey cloth, of
which the processing house had never become the owner, could never be
taken into consideration in arriving at the assessable value.
Repelling this contentions, this Court noticed that according to
Sec.
4
of the Central Excise Act, the value of the article for the purposes
of duty shall be deemed to be the wholesale cash price for which an
article of the like kind and quality was sold or was capable of being
sold at the time of removal of the article from the factory or
premises of manufacture. It was then observed that in the case of
processing houses they became liable to pay excise duty not because
the manufacture of the goods.
It was held that it could not be contended, keeping in view the
provisions of Sec 4 and the Central Excise (Valuation) Rules, 1975
that the assessable value of the processed fabric should comprise only
of the processing charges disregarding the value of the grey cloth.
Justice Mukherji, in a separate but concurring judgment observed that
the assessable value of the goods manufactured would include the value
of the grey cloth in the hands of the processor plus the value of the
job work done plus manufacturing profits and manufacturing expenses.
The correct assessable value was to be the value of the fabric at the
factory gate at the time when the manufactured goods leave the factory
and enter the mainstream.
After the aforesaid judgment in
Ujagar Prints
case was delivered on
4.11.1988 a civil miscellaneous application for clarification was
filed.
The Constitution Bench in a two paragraph order dated 27.1.1989
reported in (1989) 3 SEC 531, M/s
Ujagar Prints and Other (II) V.
Union of India and Others
, clarified that the assessable value of the
processed fabric would be the value of the grey cloth in the hands of
the processor plus the value of the job work done plus manufacturing
profit and manufacturing expenses whatever they pay. The factory gate
was to mean the deemed" factory gate as if the processed fabric was
sold by the processor. To make the position clear this Court gave the
following example:-
It was further observed that the brand at which the processing house
sells the goods "must be the value of the grey cloth or fabric plus
the value of the job work done plus the manufacturing profit and the
manufacturing expenses but not any other subsequent profit or
expenses. It is necessary to include the processor's  expenses, costs
and charges plus profit, but it is not necessary to include the
trader's profits who gets the fabrics processed, because those would
be post manufacturing profits".
The present case is similar to
Ujagar Prints
case.
In
Ujagar Prints'
case, it was the grey cloth which was given to the processor whereas
in the present case it was the raw material for the manufacture of
biscuits given to the appellant. After the biscuits are made, they are
given back to or are delivered under the instructions of Britannia.
The appellant was entitled to receive processing charges which would
include its expenses plus profits for the purpose of determining the
excise value. However, the cost of the raw material supplied by
Britannia will have to be included in addition to the appellant's
manufacturing costs and profit.
What cannot be included on the ration
of
Ujagar Prints
case is any profit of Britannia or expenses which are
incurred after the manufacture of the biscuits by the appellant.
Despite repeated attempts made by the learned counsel for the
respondent, we are lunable to distinguish this case from the ration
laid down by
this Court in the aforesaid two decisions of
Ujagar
Prints
' case.
This appeal is accordingly allowed. The excise authorities will be at
liberty to determine the amount of excise duty afresh in accordance
with law. There will be no order as to costs.
.UP 10 2; Draft, printer 1; -n -PA4 -dFX-NORMAL -y -e; dumbp
L.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T....R