[Cites
2
, Cited by
171
]
Supreme Court of India
Govt. Of Andhra Pradesh And Amr vs B. Satyanarayana Rao (Dead) By Lrs. And ... on 5 April, 2000
Equivalent citations: AIR 2000 SUPREME COURT 1729, 2000 (4) SCC 262, 2000 AIR SCW 1561, 2000 LAB. I. C. 1843, 2000 (3) SCALE 277, 2001 (1) SERVLJ 107 SC, 2001 (3) LRI 739, (2000) 4 JT 536 (SC), 2000 (5) SRJ 213, (2000) 2 CURLR 264, (2000) 2 SCT 680, 2000 SCC (L&S) 486, (2000) 85 FACLR 744, (2000) 2 LABLJ 545, (2000) 3 LAB LN 2, (2000) 2 SERVLR 440, (2000) 3 SUPREME 715, (2000) 3 SCALE 277, (2000) 2 ESC 1144
Author:
V.N. Khare
Bench:
V.N. Khare
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  883 of 1993

PETITIONER:
GOVT. OF ANDHRA PRADESH AND AMR.

RESPONDENT:
B. SATYANARAYANA RAO (DEAD) BY LRS. AND ORS. ETC. ETC.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 05/04/2000

BENCH:
V.N. KHARE & Y.K. SABHARWAL

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

2000 (1) SCR 1009

The following Order of the Court was delivered :
Permission to file S.L.P. granted. Impleadment application allowed.
Delay condoned.
Leave granted.
The short question that arises in these appeals is whether the post of
Regional Transport Officer in the Department of Transport can be filled in
by transfer of Section Officers of the Secretariat and Superintendents of
the Office of the State Transport Authority. The recruitment to the posts
of Regional Transport Officers are governed by the rules known as Andhra
Pradesh Transport Services Rules framed under
Article 309
of the
Constitution (hereinafter referred to as 'the rules'). Rules 3(a) provides
the method of recruitment to the post of Regional Transport Officer. Rule
3(a) reads as under :
Category IV : Regional Transport Officer -
1.       By direct recruitment
2.       By promotion from among Motor Vehicles Inspectors
3.       By recruitment by transfer from among :
(i)    Superintendents of the Office of the State Transport Au-thority.
(ii)   Superintendents of the Sub-ordinate Offices; and
(iii)  Section Officers of the Secretariat except Law, 'Finance and
Legislature Departments.
Rule 3(a) further provides that the first vacancy in the post of Regional
Transport is to go to the Motor Vehicle Inspector. The second vacancy is
meant for Superintendents of the Office of the State Transport Authority.
The third vacancy is to go to Motor Vehicles Inspectors. The fourth vacancy
is earmarked for Section Officers of the Secretariat. Fifth vacancy is for
Superintendents of sub-ordinate offices of the Multizone. Sixth vacancy is
for Motor Vehicles Inspectors. Seventh vacancy is meant for Superintendents
of sub-ordinate offices of the Multizone. It is against second and fourth
vacan-cies, the employees working as Superintendents in the Office of the
State Transport Authority and as Section Officers in the Secretariat were
appointed as Regional Transport Officers by transfer. The said appointments
were challenged by the employees working in the office of the Regional
Transport Offices.
The Andhra Pradesh Administrative Tribunal found that the appoint-ments of
Superintendent in the office of State Transport Authority and Section
Officers working in the Secretariat to the posts of Regional Transport
Officers are contrary to the Presidential Order of 1975. Consequentially,
their appoint-ments were set aside. It is against the said order and
judgment the appointees whose appointments were set aside and State of
Andhra Pradesh are in appeal before us.
Learned counsel for the appellant urged that this matter stands concluded
by a decision of this Court in the case of
State of A.P. v. V. Sadanandam
,
[1989] Supp. 1 SCC p.576 wherein it was held that overriding power has been
given to the State Government under paragraph 5(2) of the Presidential
Order in express terms in recognition of the principle that public interest
and administrative exigencies has precedence over the promotional interest
of the members of the local cadres and zones and therefore, the State
Government by order of transfer can fill the vacancies on the posts in
different zones, as contemplated under the Rules.
Learned counsel for the respondent attempted to convince us that the
decision in the case of
State of A.P. v. V. Sadanandam
(supra) has to be
ignored on the principle of per incurium as certain relevant provisions of
the Rules were not considered in the said case, and in any case this case
requires to be referred to a large bench of three Judges. Rule of per
incurium can be applied where a Court omits to consider a binding precedent
of the same court or the superior court rendered on the same issue or where
a court omits to consider any statute while deciding that issue. This is
not the case here.
In
State of A.P. v. V. Sadanandam
(supra) the
controversy was exactly the same as it is here and this court after
considering paragraph 5 of the Presidential Order of 1975 held that the
Government has power to fill a vacancy in a zone by transfer. We,
therefore, find that rule of per incurium cannot be invoked in the present
case. Moreover, a case cannot be referred to a larger Bench on mere asking
of a party. A decision by two Judges has a binding effect on another
coordinate Bench of two Judges, unless it is demonstrated that
the said
decision
by any subsequent change in law or decision ceases to laying down
a correct law. We, therefore, reject the arguments of learned counsel for
the respondents.
Learned counsel for the respondents then urged that in any case para 5(2)
of the Presidential Order does not permit the recruitment by transfer and
the only power of the State Govt. under para 5(2) of the Presidential Order
is to pass simplicitor order of transfer on an equivalent post. This very
argument was also advanced in the case of
State of A.P. v. Sadanandam
(supra). The relevant para 15 is extracted below :
"In the first place, we must point out that the Tribunal has failed to
construe para 5(2) of the Presidential Order in its proper perspective and
give full effect to the powers conferred thereunder on the State Government
to make provisions contrary to the scheme of local cadres prescribed under
para 5(1). The words of sub-para (2) of para 5 viz. 'nothing in this order
shall prevent the State Government from making provision for' sets out the
overriding powers given to the State Government under sub-para. Such
overriding powers have been given to the State Government in express terms
in recog-nition of the principle that public interest and administrative
exigencies have precedence over the promotional interests of the members
belonging to local cadres and zones. Since para 5(2) also forms apart of
the Presidential Order, it forms part of the scheme envisaged for creating
local cadres and zones. The Tribunal was, therefore, in error in taking the
view that if the State Govt. was to exercise its powers under para 5(2) and
make provision for promotion of U.D. Assistants in the Directorate and
Assistant Section Officers in the Secretariat to be transferred to posts in
zones I to IV, it will be the very negation of the creation of cadres and
zones under para 5(1) and it will be destructive of the scheme underlying
the Presidential Order.
In fact the Tribunal has realised the operative
force of para 5(2) to some extent but it has failed to give full effect to
its realisation of the scope of Section 5(2). In para 12 of its judgment in
R.P. No. 1595/1983 the Tribunal has stated that since the amended rule
refers to para 5(2) of the Presidential Order 'it will no longer be open to
the petitioners to attack the amendment as was done in respect of the
earlier amendment in the previous R.P.'. The Tribunal has thus noticed that
the amended rule has been brought about by the government in exercise of
its powers under para 5(2) but it has failed to draw the logical inference
following therefrom.''

Following the decision in the case of
State of A. P. v. Sadanandam
(supra),
we reject the arguments of counsel for the respondents.
For the aforesaid reasons these appeals deserve to be allowed. We
accordingly set aside the judgments and orders under appeal. The appeals
are allowed. There shall be no order as to costs.