[Cites
3
, Cited by
50
]
Supreme Court of India
M.C. Mehta vs Union Of Indi A & Ors on 1 March, 2001
Equivalent citations: AIR 2001 SUPREME COURT 1544, 2001 AIR SCW 974, 2001 (2) COM LJ 236 SC, 2001 (2) SCALE 309, 2001 (2) LRI 704, 2001 (4) SCC 577, 2001 (4) SRJ 134, (2001) 2 COMLJ 236, (2001) 3 JT 207 (SC), (2001) 2 SCJ 286, (2001) 2 SUPREME 228, (2001) 2 RECCIVR 372, (2001) 2 SCALE 309
Bench:
Umesh C. Banerjee
,
B.N. Agrawal
CASE NO.:
Writ Petition (civil) 4677  of  1985



PETITIONER:
M.C. MEHTA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDI A & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	01/03/2001

BENCH:
G.B. Pattannaik, Umesh C. Banerjee & B.N. Agrawal




JUDGMENT:
With
I.A.No. 1254 in I.A. No.22

I.A.NOS.153, 455, 1181, 451 & 441 in W.P.(C ) No.4677/1985

And

IA No.1328 in IA No.1254 in IA No.129 in WP© No.4677/85

Re: M/s. Swatnatra Bharat Mills & DCM Silk Mills

IA No.1329 in IA No.1254 in IA No.129 in WP© No.4677/85
Re: Birla Textiles


JUDGMENT

BANERJEE, J.
L...I...T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T..J

    On	10th May, 1996, this Court on a petition filed as  a
public	interest litigation directed surrender of plots upon
relocation  of	H categories industries	 More  than  four
years  have  passed  since  the	 date of  the  order	but
regrettably  the  purpose of the order, to wit,	 to  provide
some  open  space  and green verge for the  benefit  of	 the
people	of  the	 capital city, stands unfulfilled  and	thus
resultantly  deprivation of lung space in the city.   Laws
delay  in  this	 sub-  continent  is  not  unknown  in	 the
adversarial  litigation,  but the situation should  not	 and
ought not to be similar in a public interest litigation more
so  when  the  same concerns environmental  degradation:   A
rather	sad  state of affairs.	It is on  this	perspective,
however,  that	the present Interlocutory Application  taken
out  by	 the  DDA  for direction on  six  key  questions  as
mentioned in the petition shall have to be considered.
Incidentally,  some	 entrepreneurs	also  moved  certain
other  Interlocutory Applications, we do deem it fit however
to  record that the entrepreneurs application or any  other
matter	or  petition  pending shall await the  judgment	 and
order  in  DDA's application.  Before,	however,  proceeding
with  the  matter further, a brief backgrounder seems to  be
rather	indispensable  having  regard  to  the	concept	  of
sustainable  development for the capital city.	Needless  to
say  while  the Brundtland Report called out for  adaptation
globally  of a strategy of sustainable development  defining
it as development that meets the need of the present without
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their
own  needs, the initial linkage between the natural and	 man
made   environment  and	 the   critical	 relevance  of	both
environment  and development is generally attributed to	 the
Stockholm  declaration	of  1972 which stands  restated	 and
reaffirmed  by	the  UN General Assembly in  December,	1986
specifying  therein  sustained	and  rapid  development	 for
developing nations.
Prof.  Nico Schrijver of the Institute of Social Studies
at  Hague,  in	his  paper on Legal  Aspect  of	 Sustainable
Development  and Protection of Environment has	high-lighted
this  right  to development or sustainable  development	 and
indicated that the same includes a healthy environment.
The	 controversy  as regards Development or	 Environment
vis-  à-vis  the society however persists and it is in	this
context	 a judgment of the Calcutta High Court, of which one
of  us	(Banerjee, J.) was a party, in regard to  Calcuttas
Wetlands  in the Eastern fringe of the city of Calcutta (see
AIR  1993 Cal 215) may be noted:  Relevant extracts  whereof
are  noted  hereinbelow:-  While  it  is  true	that  in  a
developing  country there shall have to be developments, but
that  development  shall  have	to be  in  closest  possible
harmony	 with  the environment, as otherwise there would  be
development  but no environment, which would result in total
devastation, though however, may not be felt in presenti but
at some future point of time, but then, it would be too late
in the day, however, to control and improve the environment.
Nature	will  not tolerate us after a certain degree of	 its
destruction  and it will, in any event, have its toll on the
lives  of the people.  Can the present-day society afford to
have  such a state and allow the nature to have its toll  in
future	 the answer shall have to be in the negative.	The
present-day   society  has  a  responsibility  towards	 the
posterity  for their proper growth and development so as  to
allow  the  posterity  to  breathe normally and	 live  in  a
cleaner	  environment	and  have    a	 consequent   fuller
development.   Time  has  now come therefore  to  check	 and
control the degradation of the environment and since the Law
Courts	also have a duty towards the society for its  proper
growth	and  further development, it is a plain exercise  of
the  judicial power to see that there is no such degradation
of  the society and there ought not to be any hesitation  in
regard thereto..
The	 Calcutta  Wetland  Judgment was pronounced  on	 the
apprehended  danger of a severe bio-diversity crisis but the
situation  in the capital city of Delhi is rather  pathetic:
Non-  availability of even the lung space has resulted in  a
very  high  degree of pollution	 as a matter of fact,  this
Court (vide:  1996 (4) SCC 351) while dealing with the issue
at   the   instance   of  Mr.	 Mehta,	  the	lawyer	 and
social-activist had the following to state:
7.	 Delhi	is one of the most polluted cities  in	the
world.	The quality of ambient air is so hazardous that lung
and  respiratory diseases are on the increase.	The city has
become a vast and unmanageable conglomeration of commercial,
industrial, unauthorised colonies, resettlement colonies and
unplanned  housing .  There is total lack of open spaces and
green  areas.	Once a beautiful city Delhi now	 presents  a
chaotic	 picture.   The	 most vital community need  as	at
present	 is the conservation of the environment and reversal
of  the	 environmental degradation.  There are virtually  no
lung  spaces  in the city.  The Master Plan indicates  the
approximately  34 per cent of recreational areas have  been
lost  to  other uses.  We are aware that the  housing,	the
sports	activity and the recreational areas are also part of
the  community need but the most important community  need
which  is wholly deficient and needed urgently is to provide
for  the lung spaces in the city of Delhi in the shape	of
green  belts and open spaces.  We are therefore, of the view
that totality of the land which is surrendered and dedicated
to   the   community   by   the	 owners/occupiers   of	 the
relocated/shifted   industries	should	be   used  for	 the
development of green belts and open spaces.
The Court in discharge of its social duty and obligation
as the guardian angel of the society further directed in the@@
       JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
same decision as below:@@
JJJJJJJJJJJJJ
9.	We, therefore, order and direct that the land which
would  become available on account of shifting/relocation of
hazardous/noxious/heavy	 and large industries from the	city
of Delhi shall be used in the following manner:-
be	Sl.  Extent Percentage to be Percentage to by the  N@@
		    IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
surrendered and developed Dedicated to the owner for his own@@
IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
benefit	 in accordance DDA for Development of with the	user@@
		       IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
perm  itted  Master  Plan Green belts and  under  the  other@@
IIII			  IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
spaces@@
IIIIII
1	       2			  3					      4
1.    Up to 2000 sq. mts.			   -
100% to be developed
      (including the first	    by the
      owner in			    2000 sq.mts. of the@@
		    JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
      accordance with the
      larger plot)			    zoning
      regulations of

the Master Plan @@
IIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
2.	0.2 ha to 5 ha		      57		43
3.	5 ha to 10 ha		      65		35
4.	over 10 ha		      68	      32



    The	 earlier  paragraphs  have been introduced  in	this
judgment  as a backgrounder and to emphasize the sensitivity
of  the issue since environmental degradation will have	 its
toll  and  there  cannot be any doubt  or  dispute  therein,
though may not be felt in presenti.
The directions as above in terms of the order dated 10th
May,  1996 has however, led to some confusion at the time of@@
      JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
execution  of this Courts order before the District  Judge,@@
JJJJJJJJJ
Delhi  since none of the industrial units which were  closed
down  by  the order of this Court, took any step  whatsoever
for  surrendering  the land on the pretended pretext of	 the
order of this Court dated 4.12.1996.
Significantly,  however,  the order dated 4th  December,
1996  of  this Court came to be passed in  an  Interlocutory
Application  for directions filed by the Central  Government
wherein	 this Court was pleased to observe in paragraph 3 of
the order as below (vide 1997 (11) SCC 327):
3.	 We see considerable force in the contention of the
learned	 Additional  Solicitor General on the  second  point
also.  The existing hazardous industries having been closed,
what  remains  is the plot, superstructure and the  workmen.
The  occupants of the plots and the owners of the industries
which  have  been closed down shall have to undertake  fresh
procedure for setting up of a new industry.  Needless to say
that  no industry can be set up which is not permitted under
the Master Plan.  The procedure required for setting up of a
new  industry  shall have to be followed in every case.	  We
make  it  clear that Government permission and	the  consent
from  the  Pollution  Control Board/Committee,	if  required
under  law, shall have to be obtained .	 Even fresh electric
connection and water connection shall have to be applied for
and obtained in the changed circumstances.  We have no doubt
when	     approached		       for	   necessary
permission/licence/water/electric      connections	 the
authorities   shall   expedite	 in    dealing	 with	 the
applications.
The	 order	of 4th December, 1996 though mainly  pertain
however	 to the compensation aspect to the workers of  those
industries  which  are not re-locating and which  have	been
closed	down but some variations were ordered having  regard
to  the	 setting up of industries in accordance with  Master
Plan  of  Delhi.   The	order however was  clear  enough  to
indicate  the  intent of the order.  In	 this  Interlocutory
Application,  however,	Delhi Development Authority said  to
have  been  confronted	with various queries raised  by	 the
industries  and	 upon  consideration   thereof	prayed	 for
issuance  of appropriate directions in regard to the  issues
me ntioned hereinbelow:
i) Land surrendered by the Industries as per order dated
10.5.1996 has to be on the total plot area in possession.@@
	  JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
ii)	 Land  offered	for  surrender	should	be  directly
approachable  from  the	 road,	vacant	and  free  from	 all
encumbrances.
iii)  From the land surrender cases in respect of  plots
leased	by Delhi Development Authority, it is seen that	 out
of  14	Industrial Units requiring to surrender the land,  7
have  a	 plot  area  ranging between 8	sq.m  to  100  sq.m.
Honble	Supreme	 Court is requested to give directions	for
minimum plot area to be surrendered by an Industrial Unit.
iv)	 Certain  units	 have	restarted  their  industries
removing/modifying   the  objectionable	  use  process	 and
obtained  clearances  from  various departments.   Are	such
industries   also   liable  to	 surrender  land  to   Delhi
Development  Authority	as  per	  orders  dated	  10.5.1996,
8.7.1996 and 4.12.1996?
v)	There are certain industries which were closed prior
to  the orders of Honble Supreme Court dated 10.5.1996	but
their  names appear in the list of H category industries to
be  closed  as	mentioned in the various orders	 of  Honble
Supreme	 Court.	  Are  such industries liable  to  surrender
land?	There  are  other   industrial	units  which  closed
pursuant  to  the  Honble   Supreme  Courts  orders  dated
10.5.1996  and restarted the activities as per orders  dated
4.12.1996 of Honble Supreme Court.  Suitable directions may
be  given whether land surrender from such industries has to
be effected.
vi) There are certain units which were running in rented
premises  from within plot located in an approved industrial
area/non  conforming area and whose name is got included  in
the  list  of  1328 industries released by  Honble  Supreme
Court  from  time  to  time.  After the	 orders	 of  Honble
Supreme	 Court	dated 10.5.1996, the tenant has closed	down
the  industry and has handed over the rented premises to the
original  owner.   In  such  cases  is	the  original  owner
required  to  surrender land if the total plot area is	more
than 2000 sq.m.?
Adverting  to the records at this juncture, be it  noted
that  after the judgment of this Court on 10th May, 1996  as
above, three Interlocutory Applications, having more or less
similar prayers were dismissed:	 Delhi Development Authority
also  filed  the IA No.139 for clarification of order  dated
10.5.1996,  8.7.1996  and 4.12.1996 with a prayer  that	 the
units  required	 to  surrender land are now closed  down  as
being  a  hazardous large scale industry and do not wish  to
relocate  but  to  start units which are  permitted  in	 the
Master	Plan  and in compliance with the  pollution  control
norms.	 This  Court  however  dismissed  the  Interlocutory
Application on 1st October, 1997.
Significantly,  the interlocutory application No.139 was
filed  on  behalf  of Delhi Development	 Authority  and	 the
prayer	therein not only bears a similarity with the  prayer
in  this  application  but more or less the  same  has	been
couched	 in the exactly similar language and for convenience
sake the same is set out hereinbelow:-
(a)	 Whether  the order dated 10.5.1996 passed  by	the
Honble Court in so far as it require the units to surrender
land would apply to such units which after having closed the
hazardous large scale industries do not wish to relocate but
to start units which are permitted under the Master Plan and
which also comply with Pollution Control Rules.
It	is  on	this prayer this Court passed  an  order  of
dismissal though however without recording any reason.
Mr.	  Ranjit Kumar, the learned amicus curiae  appearing
in  the matter contended that by reason of rejection of such
a  prayer,  resulting in the dismissal of  the	application,
question  of  further  consideration  of  the  issue  as  is
proposed  in  question No.IV hereinbefore would	 not  arise.
Undoubtedly,  there  is some substance in such a  contention
but  the factum of non-availability of reasons in the  order
has  rendered the situation slightly more flexible so as  to
afford	a further opportunity to this court having regard to
the  concept of justice to consider in some detail the order
dated  4th  December,  1996  in I.A.   No.36  accepting	 the
contention of the learned Additional Solicitor General.	 The
clarificatory  order of 4th December, 1996 did in fact grant
a  liberty  which  would  be  dealt  with  in  detail  while
answering the issues raised in the application.
Another redeeming feature which ought also to be noticed
pertains to the desire of the Delhi Development Authority to
move  the  Court once again after having failed in  such  an
attempt earlier.  We are at a loss to find a further attempt
on the part of the Delhi Development Authority.	 The reasons
obviously  there would be some:	 but apparently nothing	 was
forthcoming.
Subsequently,  Swatantra Bharat Mill and DCM Silk  Mills
also moved I.A.No.425 with a prayer to direct DDA to acquire
the land required to be surrendered under the
DDA Act
or the
Land  Acquisition  Act
and to restrain DDA  for  trying  to
expropriate  the land of the petitioner :  This prayer	also
was  turned down by this Court and hence the application was
dismissed as withdrawn.	 Be it noted that the learned amicus
curie  with  his  usual	  eloquence  contended	that  review
applications  against  the  order passed on 10th  May,	1996
numbered  36 in the year 1996, 55 in the year 1997, 3 in the
year  1999 and 2 petitions in the year 2000, as the  records
depict,	 were all dismissed and on the wake of the same, Mr.
Ranjit	Kumar  addressed  us  in  detail  that	the  present
petition  said	to  be	for   clarification  cannot  but  be
attributed  to	be a further attempt to review of the  order
dated 10.5.1996 which, in fact, does not call for any review
nor  does  it  call for any further order  substituting	 the
earlier order dated 10th May, 1996.
Mr.	  Rawal,  the learned Additional  Solicitor  General
however,  contended  that  while submission of	Mr.   Ranjit
Kumar  may have some substance pertaining to some of  issues
as  raised  herein but that cannot said to be applicable  in
regard to all the issues.  Mr.	Additional Solicitor General
made  it quite categorical that the application as filed  by
DDA  is not for circumvention of compliance of the order  of
this  Court but only to act in terms therewith.	 The instant
petition,  Mr.	 Rawal	contended has been  initiated  as  a
necessity  and	DDA  had  to move  this	 Court	for  certain
clarification since there have been large scale unscrupulous
withholding  of delivery of possession.	 The necessity	also
said  to  be by reason of proposed transfer  to	 land-locked
areas which cannot possibly be utilised even as a lung-space
by  reason of non- availability of an entry thereto.  It has
been contended further that since a large number of proposed
surrender,  if	not in its entirety, are with  encumbrances,
question  of obtaining possession thereof upon clearance  of
the encumbrances by the DDA would not arise since that would
foist an additional financial burden or liability beyond the
capacity of the DDA to meet.
Mr.	  Rawal	 contended  that  transfer  also  should  be
effected   without  any	 superstructure	 on  the   land	  as
otherwise,  it would be a near impossibility for DDA to take
possession  thereof.  Be it noted that the order dated	10th
May, 1996 specifically directed that H category industries
are  required to surrender the land to the DDA.	 We may note
here  that  this order of surrender was passed by reason  of
the fact that the pollution level has reached its optimum in
the  city  of  Delhi  affecting the  entire  society	H
category  industries  were  directed to close  down  and  to
surrender  the land so as to make available some green	belt
and  open space popularly ascribed to be lung space for	 the
city.  Industries might have closed in terms of the order of
this  Court  and  the compliance to the order  was  to	this
limited	 extent only.  Structures are still lying there	 and
no  surrender has yet taken place.  Majesty of law  demanded
compliance  in observance rather than in its breach  it	 is
for  the society only that this Court thought it fit to pass
order to the extent as indicated above	the capital city of
the country ought not to be termed as the most polluted city
in  the	 world:	  It  is with this spirit  that	 the  public
interest litigation was filed and this Court also maintained
the  same  by  directing  the	shifting  of  H	  category
industries   Five years have passed by and not one industry
has  surrendered  though  of course,  by  reason  therefore,
show-cause  notice  to these industries were issued  by	 the
order  dated 21st September, 1999 and the public notice	 was
directed  to be issued by an order dated 12th October, 1999.
The  matters are pending in Court but there has not been any
change	of situation.  Significantly by reason of a specific
situation  this	 Court in the case of Hindustan	 Vegetables
passed an order on7th December, 1999 directing the Hindustan
Vegetables  Oil Corporation to hand over 2 acres of the land
only  on  which the factory premises stood and not the	land
measuring  about  1.20	acres belonging to the	factory	 and
situated  just	abutting the other side of the road:   As  a
matter	of fact the land stands bifurcated by the road - one
for  the  factory  use	and the other  for  the	 residential
purposes  and  it  is  by reason  of  the  peculiar  factual
elements, that this Court passed an order directing only the
factory area to be surrendered	Thus the order as passed on
7th  December, 1999 in Hindustan Vegetables case cannot	 be
termed	to  be of general application for surrender  of	 all
factory lands  Any interpretation which runs counter of the
above  would also be opposed to the true spirit of the order
and  there would be a total failure of the avowed objects of
social	welfare	 and social benefit which has prompted	this
Court to pass the order dated 10th May, 1996.
Mr.	  Venugopal and Mr.  Shanti Bhushan, learned  Senior
Counsels appearing for the entrepreneurs however, complained
of  violation  of fundamental rights under
Article 14.
Mr.
Shanti	Bhushan contended that factum of surrender would not
arise  since the industries which he represents are prepared
to  restart and relocate the industries within the ambits of
the  Master Plan and Zonal Development Plans and this  Court
ought in the fitness of things grant necessary clarification
in  regard thereto.  In the similar vein Mr.  Venugopal also
submitted  that	 light and service industries and  household
industrial  units  stands permitted in terms of	 the  Master
Plan  for  Delhi  and the Zonal Development  Plan  does	 not
contain	 any bar for their continuance in the event the same
falls  within the ambit of the Master Plan.  Mr.   Venugopal
contended that though hazardous and noxious industrial units
are  not  permitted  in Delhi and existing heavy  and  large
scale  industrial units both in terms of this Courts  order
and in terms of the Master Plan are required to be relocated
and  shifted  but the land which would become  available  on
account	 of such shifting ought to be used for making up the
deficiency  as per the needs of the community based on norms
given  in the Master Plan.  Mr.	 Venugopal contended that as
a  matter of fact in the event any land or part of the	land
so vacated is not needed for the deficiency of the community
service	 the  Master Plan for Delhi itself records that	 the
same  would  be	 used as per prescribed	 land  use.   Strong
emphasis has been laid on Master Plan for Delhi Perspective,
2001  in  particular the chapter on Work  Centres  industry.
Relevant  extracts  of	which are set out herein  below	 for
ready reference:-
Heavy and Large Industries
    Refer Annexure III H(b)

    a.
b..
(c)	 The land which would become available on account of
shifting  as  administered in (b) above, would be  used	 for
making up the deficiency, as per the needs of the community;
based  on  norms given in the Master Plan;  if any  land  or
part  of land so vacated is not needed for the deficiency of
the  community	services, it will be used as per  prescribed
land  use;   however  the land shall be used for  light	 and
service	 industries,  even if the land use according to	 the
Master	Plan/Zonal  Development Plan is	 extensive  industry
(emphasis supplied).
(d)	 Modernisation	of heavy and large scale  industrial
units	shall	be  permitted	subject	 to  the   following
conditions:
(i) it will reduce pollution and traffic congestion.
(ii)  Whenever  the unit is asked to shift according  to
the  policies of the plan, no compensation shall be paid for
assets attained because of modernisation.
Much  emphasis  has been laid on the word however  (as
emphasised  above) and relying thereon it has been contended
that  user of land, in the event the same is not needed	 for
deficiency  of community services, can thus be had for light
and  service  industries  even if the Master Plan  or  Zonal
Development  Plan  depicts its user as	extensive  industry.
Further	 reliance  was also placed on paragraph (d)  of	 the
Master Plan that even modernisation of heavy and large scale
industrial   units  is	permitted   though  subject  to	 the
conditions  specified in (i) and (ii) above.  It is in	this
context	 also  our  attention has been drawn  to  the  Zonal
Development Plan in particular the existing land use and the
proposed land use in sub-zone G.  In reference to the same
Mr.   Venugopal	 contended  that existing  land	 use  totals
5456.32	 hectare whereas the proposed land use is  identical
in  area  No doubt the submission at the first blush  seems
to  be	rather attractive but when read in the light of	 the
decision  of  this Court as recorded in the  judgment  dated
10th  May,  1996 we are afraid that the same pales into	 its
insignificance	since the submission cannot be	countenanced
at  this juncture and after the expiry of five years.  There
were altogether in the records of this Court 96 Applications
for  Review  which had the fate of dismissal by	 this  Court
from time to time as detailed herein before in this judgment
-  it is thus probably a bit too late in the day to  contend
and  take recourse to the rules to avoid surrender of  land.
This  Courts  order  has been categorical and  it  is  only
expected that the entrepreneurs would act in terms therewith
and  not  de hors the same.  Needless to dilate that in	 the
case  of  Swatantra  Bharat Mills and DCM  Silk	 Mills,	 the
learned	 District and Sessions Judge, Delhi recorded in	 the
order  dated  25th July, 2000 about the factum of filing  of
objections  to	the  execution petitions pertaining  to	 the
surrender  of land.  The order of the learned Judge  records
that the land in question has not been offered as yet and as
such directed the industry to remove all the superstructures
from  the land and also file an undertaking that it is	free
from   all  encumbrances.   The	  land	should	further	  be
accessible  from  the public road;  Be it recorded that	 the
two industries named above in which the learned District and
Sessions  Judge	 passed	 the  directions   as  above  in  no
uncertain  terms  submitted  that the land  to	be  offered,
stands	free from all encumbrances and there is existing  no
cloud on the title of the industry over the land which is to
be surrendered.
Mr.	 Gopal Subramaniam, learned senior counsel appearing
for  the entrepreneurs also contended in the same vein	that
as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  Master  Plan  and  the  Zonal
Development  Plans having statutory recognition in terms  of
the
Delhi  Development Act, 1957
, paragraphs © and  (d)  as
noticed above under the title Work centres industry ought to
be  given  its full play and the order of this	Court,	thus
should	be modified to incorporate the same.   Incidentally,
it  has been contended rather strongly that the Master	Plan
being  the golden thread in the orders passed by this  Court
from  time  to time, and since there is available under	 the
Master	Plan some relief the same ought to be made available
to  the entrepreneurs.	In this context paragraph 11 of	 the
judgment  dated	 10th May, 1996 (supra) may be	noticed	 and
which reads as below:-
The DDA has suggested that it may be necessary to amend
the Master Plan for regularising the land use as directed by
us.   We do not agree with the suggestion.  The totality  of
the   land   made   available	as    a	  result   of	 the
relocation/shifting  of the industries is to be used for the
community  needs.  The land surrendered by the owner has  to
be  used for the development of green belt and open  spaces.
The  land  left	 with  the  owner  is  to  be  developed  in
accordance  with  the user permitted under the Master  Plan.
In either way the development is to meet the community needs
which  is  in conformity with the provisions of	 the  Master
Plan.
We would also deem it fit to quote paragraph 12 as below
for  consideration  of this aspect of the matter:  We  are,
therefore, of the view that it is not necessary to amend the
Master Plan.
While  it  is true that this Court has directed user  of
land  left with the owner to be developed in accordance with
the  user permitted under the Master Plan but the whole aim,
object	and  spirit of the order was to meet  the  community
need  and  it  is  in  this context  also  that	 Mr.   Gopal
Subramaniam  drew our attention to the Appendix to the Zonal
Development  Plan  pertaining to area G.  We  are  however
unable	to  accede to such a submission since time  has	 not
come  as  yet  in any event to assess the situation  in	 its
entirety.   The Zonal Development Plans produced before	 the
Court has not been finalised as yet since it is presently in
the  draft  stage and as such no reliance can be  placed  by
this  Court on the data and the materials available thereon.
A  proposal cannot be said to be a final declaration of	 the
community   need.   We	are  thus   unable  to	record	 our
concurrence  therewith	for the reasons noticed above.	 The
order  of this Court dated 4th December, 1996 in the  matter
in issue ( 1997 (11) SCC 327) was passed in an interlocutory
application  for  directions  filed by the  Union  of  India
wherein in paragraphs 2 and 3 this Court observed as below:
2.	 So  far  as  the first	 contention  is	 concerned,
learned	 Additional  Solicitor General has taken us  through
the  order  of this Court in M.C.  Mehta v.  Union of  India
(1996  (4) SCC 351) regarding land-use along with the  order
dated  8.7.1996 (M.C.  Mehta v.	 Union of India (1996) 4 SCC
750)  regarding relocation of 168 industries.  The intention
of  this Court is clear that the order regarding land re-use
was  both  for relocating industries as well as those  which
decide	to  close  down	 and  not  to  relocate.   (Emphasis
supplied)  The	learned counsel for the industries have	 not
disputed  this	interpretation.	 We, therefore,	 accept	 the
contention of learned Additional Solicitor General.  Nothing
more need be said on this point.
3.	 We see considerable force in the contention of	 the
learned	 Additional  Solicitor General on the  second  point
also.  The existing hazardous industries having been closed,
what  remains  is the plot, superstructure and the  workmen.
The  occupants of the plots and the owners of the industries
which  have  been closed down shall have to undertake  fresh
procedure for setting up of a new industry.  Needless to say
that  no industry can be set up which is not permitted under
the Master Plan.  The procedure required for setting up of a
new  industry  shall have to be followed in every case.	  We
make  it  clear that Government permission and	the  consent
from  the  Pollution  Control Board/Committee,	if  required
under  law, shall have to be obtained.	Even fresh  electric
connection and water connection shall have to be applied for
and obtained in the changed circumstances.  We have no doubt
when	approached    for    necessary	 permission/licence/
water/electric connections the authorities shall expedite in
dealing with the applications.
The	 order	as  above   thus  unmistakably	depicts	 the
intention of this Court to rely on its order dated 10th May,
1996 though with certain variations as noticed herein before
in  this  judgment.  Setting up of industries was  expressly
authorised,    upon   compliance     with   all	  regulatory
requirements,	unfortunately	 however    though   certain
advantages  has	 been  made available, but not	one  of	 the
learned Advocates could respond in the affirmative even on a
specific enquiry from the Court.
The issues are long pending- the issues are urgent since
the  entire society is impaired	 no exception can be  taken
to the legal battles involved in an adversarial litigation
this is not one such instance:	It is a true public interest
litigation  for the protection of the society and to avoid a
deliberate  peril arising out of entrepreneurial failure and
total  apathy  and non-concern for social good and  benefit.
The  Delhi Development Act of 1957 envisaged preparation  of
Master Plan for Delhi with a definite statutory direction to
define various zones into which Delhi may be divided for the
purposes  of development and the manner in which the land in
each  zone  is proposed to be used and the stages  by  which
such  development shall be carried out.	 As a matter of fact
the Master Plan came into existence in 1962 and H category
industries  ought to have shifted out of the area  specified
therein	 by 1962 itself.  Then came the Master Plan of	1990
to  combat the existing situation with a specified period of
shifting within three years i.e.  there was an obligation to
the  H category industries to shift and relocate in  terms
of  the Master Plan by the year 1993 and the social activist
by  reason  of the failure of the entrepreneurs, moved	this
Court	in  1995  whereupon   after  allowing  all  possible
opportunities  to  all entrepreneurs and upon assessment  of
the  situation	through the appointments of Commissions	 and
obtaining various reports on these aspects, passed the order
on 10th May, 1996 which has till date not been complied with
 an indeed a sorry state of affairs and a total neglect and
apathy	towards	 the society, new and novel submissions	 are
advanced  as in any adversarial litigation but unfortunately
as  noticed  above  it	is too late in the  day	 to  contend
otherwise apart from what the order contains as of 10th May,
1996.	Needless  to record that as late as April last	year
(28th  April,  2000)  this Court issued a direction  to	 the
affect	that  within one month all the industries which	 are
required  to  surrender land in terms of this Courts  order
dated  10th May, 1996 should voluntarily surrender the	same
to  the Delhi Development Authority and if the same has	 not
been  done the DDA will be duty bound to file an application
for  execution	of  this Courts order before  the  District
Judge,	Delhi and the District Judge shall thereupon execute
this  Courts order and report compliance within four  weeks
of  the	 filing of the execution application.  Be  it  noted
that by the order last referred, this Court further directed
that  the execution application to be filed by DDA not later
than  8 weeks from the date of the order  the entrepreneurs
should	have some regard and sanctity for the orders of this
Court rather than pleading anew before the Court for further
clarification  [if  assuming  we  ascribe  the	same  to  be
clarification rather than review]  can this be termed to be
in  consonance with the law or is it a deliberate attempt to
ridicule the Courts order?  We will not be very wrong if we
answer	the same that probably the second alternative is the
answer.	  The  DDA also has raised certain inquiries  before
this  Court again after the specific direction of this Court
in  28th  April, 2000s order.  We are at a loss as  to	why
after  the  specific  order of the  learned  District  Judge
instead	 of relying thereon, a further application has	been
filed  before this Court in July, 2000.	 DDA is expected  to
act in terms of the order expeditiously rather than with the
delayed	 whip  in  its hands.  In any event  we	 answer	 the
inquiries raised in the manner following:-
Re (i)..  So far as the first issue is concerned, we
make it clear that the order dated 7.12.1999, in the case of
vegetable  oil was in the peculiar facts of that case and is
not  of universal application, nor does it in any way dilute
the  mandate  of  the order of this  Court  dated  10.5.1996
directing  surrender of entire land subject to the extent of
availability  to  the  owner as per  order  dated  10.5.1996
reported in 1996 (4) Supreme Court Cases  351.
Re	(ii).  So far as the second issue is  concerned,
if  the	 owner has the land which is approachable  from	 the
road,  then he must surrender with the approach, so that the
surrendered  land  can be utilised for the  community.	 If,
however,  he is himself not the owner of the approach  road,
then  question	of his providing an approach road  does	 not
arise  and  as	such surrender shall take effect on  as	 is
where  is  basis.   On the question as to the  land  to	 be
surrendered  should be free from encumbrance, we are of	 the
view, if the land is already encumbered, then a direction to
release	 it  from encumbrance and surrender will be a  great
burden.	  At  the same time, such land will be of no use  to
the  society  unless  released	from  encumbrance.   In	 the
circumstances  we  direct that the owner cannot utilise	 the
land available to him by virtue of order of this Court dated
10.5.96,  until	 he  releases	the  surrendered  land	from
encumbrance.	Further	 if  it	 is   not  made	 free	from
encumbrance  within  five  years, then he will not  get	 the
benefit of the order dated 10.5.96 and after five years even
the  land  which the owner was otherwise entitled to  retain
would  stand vested with DDA for the use and the need of the
society.
Re(iii)  So	 far  as the third issue  is  concerned,
those  who  are	 required to surrender upto 100	 sq.   meter
after  that  extent of land becomes available to them  under
the  order  of	this  Court  dated  10.5.96  they  need	 not
surrender,  since such a tiny bit of land cannot be utilised
for any need of the society.
Re(iv)  So far as the fourth issue is concerned,  it
is  to	be  noted that on the application of  the  Union  of
India, this Court by order dated 4.12.96 in IA No.36 in Writ
Petition  No.4677  of 1985, accepting the 2nd contention  of
the  learned  Additional  Solicitor General, held  that	 the
occupants  of  the  plots and the owners of  the  industries
which  have  been closed down shall have to undertake  fresh
procedure for setting up of a new industry and such industry
can  be	 established if permissible under the  Master  Plan.
The  Court also observed that when approached for  necessary
permission/license/water/    electric	  connections,	 the
authorities  shall  expedite  in dealing  the  applications.
(See  1997  (11)  SCC	327).  In  view	 of  the  aforesaid
clarificatory  order of the Court on the application of	 the
Union  Government, it would not be necessary for those units
who  have started new industries after obtaining  clearances
from  various  departments,  provided that the	Master	Plan
permits	 establishment of such industries, to surrender	 the
land.	But those who have not started such industries	with
appropriate  clearance	from the competent  authority,	they
cannot	be  permitted to take the stand that they intend  to
start  such  industry nor such a plea will entitle  them  to
retain	the  land.   They  must	 be  bound  by	the  earlier
direction  of  the Court requiring them to surrender.	This
will  apply to those industries which have not relocated the
hazardous industries elsewhere.	 But if they have relocated,
they  cannot get the benefit, as has been held by the  Court
in  the	 order dated 28.4.2000, reported in 2000  (4)  SCALE
267,

    Re(v).   So far as the fifth issue is concerned,  if
the  names  of	the  industries appear in the  list  of	 H
categories in various orders of the Court, and they have not
appeared  or  put  any	objection,  then  it  would  not  be
permissible for them to put up the plea that industries were
closed	down  prior  to	 order dated 10.5.96  and  claim  an
equitable right of not surrendering.
Re(vi) So far as the sixth issue is concerned, it is
apparent that the order of the closure was on the industries
which were found injurious, irrespective of the fact whether
it  was	 being	carried on by the owner of the land  or	 the
tenant.	  This being the position, the subsequent  direction
of  surrender also is in relation to the land on which	such
industries  were  being	 carried on and were ordered  to  be
closed	down.	Consequently, it is irrelevant where  tenant
after  closing down the industries, handed over the premises
to  the owner.	The owner in such case would be bound by the
order for surrender, and will have to surrender.
Interlocutory  application filed by the DDA thus  stands
disposed of as above.
The other IAs.  Shall be dealt with separately.