[Cites
10
, Cited by
57
]
Supreme Court of India
Chilakuri Gangulappa vs Revenue Divisional Officer, ... on 14 March, 2001
Equivalent citations: AIR 2001 SUPREME COURT 1321, 2001 AIR SCW 1174, 2001 (4) SRJ 238, 2001 (2) UJ (SC) 1237, 2001 (2) LRI 70, 2001 (4) SCC 197, (2001) 3 JT 430 (SC), 2001 UJ(SC) 2 1237, 2001 (2) SCALE 466, 2001 (3) JT 430, 2001 (2) ALL CJ 1100, 2001 ALL CJ 2 1100, (2001) 3 PAT LJR 25, (2001) 2 LANDLR 420, (2001) 2 MAD LJ 33, (2001) 3 MAD LW 113, (2001) REVDEC 585, (2001) 2 SCJ 381, (2001) 2 ANDHLD 114, (2001) 2 SUPREME 365, (2001) 3 ICC 513, (2001) 2 SCALE 466, (2001) WLC(SC)CVL 475, (2001) 1 UC 589
Bench:
K.T. Thomas
,
R.P. Sethi
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil) 1800  of  2001



PETITIONER:
CHILAKURI GANGULAPPA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
REVENUE DIVISIONAL OFFICER, MADANPALLE AND ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	14/03/2001

BENCH:
K.T. Thomas & R.P. Sethi




JUDGMENT:
THOMAS, J.
Leave granted.
L...I...T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T..J

    When  a document was found to be insufficiently  stamped
the  further proceedings were, unwittingly, diverted through
a  wrong track.	 After it covered a long distance  everybody
concerned  realised  that the lis was proceeding  through  a
wrong  course.	 It  has now to be reversed and put  in	 the
proper track.
Appellant  filed  a civil suit before the Munsif  Court,
Madanapalle  (Andhra  Pradesh) as early as 1988.   The	main
relief	claimed	 in the suit is enforcement of an  agreement
executed  on  26.6.1986 for sale of an	immovable  property.
When  the agreement was produced in court it was found to be
insufficiently	stamped and the learned Munsif impounded  it
and  forwarded	the  instrument to  the	 Revenue  Divisional
Officer	 (RDO)	for the purpose of taking further action  on
it(the	Collector  must	 have delegated his  powers  to	 the
R.D.O.	 in  that  behalf).  He called for a report  from  a
subordinate  revenue officer regarding the real market value
of the property which is mentioned in the document.
On	the  strength of the said report the  R.D.O.   found
that  the  market value of the property was Rs.64,880/-	 and
hence the agreement of sale should have been stamped with an
additional  duty  of  Rs.3,895/-.   As	the  instrument	 was
stamped	 only  with a stamp of Rs.5/- the R.D.O.  imposed  a
penalty	 equivalent  to	 ten times of the  deficiency  which
amounted  to  Rs.38,950/-.   The order of  the	R.D.O.	 was
passed on 4.7.1998.
Appellant  challenged the said order by filing an appeal
before	the  Senior  Civil Judge purportedly  under
Section
47A(4)
of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899.	(The said section is
included  in the
Stamp Act
as per a State amendment  carried
out  by the State of Andhra Pradesh).  Learned Senior  Civil
Judge  found  that the appeal was not maintainable  for	 two
reasons.   First is that the order challenged before him was
not  passed  by the registering authority nor the  procedure
laid  down in
Section 47A
of the Stamp Act was followed.  He
also  found  that appellant did not pay the amount of  Stamp
duty  before  preferring  an  appeal which  is	a  condition
precedent  for	filing	such appeal.  On both  premises	 the
appeal	was dismissed as not maintainable.  The Senior Civil
Judge pronounced the judgment on 12.3.1999.
Appellant  filed  a	 revision petition before  the	High
Court challenging the judgment of the Civil Judge.  A Single
Judge  of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh pointed out	that
as  per	 the  proviso to
Section 47A
of the Act	 no  appeal
shall  be preferred unless and until the difference, if any,
in  the	 amount of duty is paid by the person liable to	 pay
the  same,  after deducting the amount already deposited  by
him.  Even though the appellant made a plea before the High
Court  for  giving him some time to pay the  amount  learned
Single	Judge found that no such time can be granted at that
stage  since  he has already preferred the appeal.   Learned
Single	Judge  did  not	 consider whether  an  appeal  would
otherwise  have	 been maintainable before the  Civil  Judge.
Hence the revision petition was dismissed with the following
observations:
Deposit  of amount is a condition precedent for  filing
the  appeal.  The Court has no power to grant any relaxation
to  any party in the matter of deposit of amount as required
under  the  proviso.   In  fact,  a  duty  is  cast  on	 the
petitioner  to	deposit	 the amount in accordance  with	 the
proviso	 at the time of filing of the appeal.  If any appeal
is  filed  without deposit of the amount in accordance	with
the  proviso, that appeal is clearly not maintainable.	 For
these  reasons, I do not find any merit in the petition.  In
the facts and circumstances of the case, I do not want to go
into the question whether the learned Senior Civil Judge had
the jurisdiction to hear the appeal or not.
It	is  the	 aforesaid  order which	 the  appellant	 has
challenged  in	this Court by special leave.  When  petition
for  special  leave  was  moved	  learned  counsel  for	 the
appellant  submitted  on 22.11.1999 that the  appellant	 was
ready  and  willing  to deposit the differential  amount  in
court.	 In fact notice was issued to the respondent on	 the
strength of the above submission.
The	 R.D.O.	  noted that the document was executed on  a
stamp  paper worth Rs.5/- whereas the consideration involved
was Rs.20,000/-.  He also noted that the market value of the
property was Rs.64,880/-.  On its basis the R.D.O.  directed
the  appellant	to  remit  the stamp  duty  and	 penalty  of
Rs.42,845/-.
Unfortunately  the	entire proceedings  got	 misdirected
from  the stage of the trial court dispatching the  document
to  the R.D.O.
Section 47A
of the Stamp Act (as amended  by
the  State of Andhra Pradesh) consists of a procedure when a
document  was  found  insufficiently stamped and  when	that
document  is presented for registration.  Sub-section (1) of
that  section says that where the registering officer  while
registering  any  instrument has reason to believe that	 the
market	value  of the property which is a subject matter  of
such  instrument  has  not  been  truly	 set  forth  in	 the
instrument,  or that the value arrived at by him as per	 the
guidelines  prepared  by  the Government, he may  keep	such
instrument pending and refer the matter to the Collector for
determination of the market value of the property.
Sub-section	 (2) of
Section 47A
of the Act says that the
Collector shall have the power to determine the market value
of  the	 property  which  is  the  subject  matter  of	such
instrument  and	 the duty payable thereon.  Sub-section	 (3)
empowers  the Collector to take action, suo motu, within two
years  from  the date of the registration.  Sub-section	 (4)
has  to	 be read in this context.  Any person aggrieved	 by
the   order  of	 a  Collector	under  sub-section  (2)	  or
sub-section  (3)  may  appeal  to  the	appellate  authority
specified  in  sub- section (5).  All such appeals shall  be
preferred  within such time and shall be heard and  disposed
in  such  manner, as may be prescribed by rules	 made  under
this  Act.  There  is a proviso to  sub-section	 (2)  which
contains  a  bridle on the appellate provision envisaged  in
sub-section (4).  Hence that proviso has to be read:
Provided  that no appeal shall be preferred unless	and
until  the difference, if any, in the amount of duty is paid
by  the	 person	 liable to pay the same,  after	 taking	 the
amount already deposited by him.
We	extracted  the relevant sub-sections of Section	 47A
for  the  purpose of showing that the whole  route  followed
hitherto  was  wrong  as  Section 47A would  not  come	into
picture	 at all since nobody has a case that the  instrument
concerned  was	ever  presented for  registration.   In	 the
context	 of this instrument being presented before the Civil
Court  the relevant provision to be noticed is
Section 40
of
the  Stamp  Act.  Sub-section (1) of that Section says	that
when  the Collector impounds an instrument under
Section 33
,
or  receives any instrument sent to him under
Section  38(2)
he  shall adopt the procedure laid down in the	sub-section.
In  this  context
Section 38
is to be looked into.   It  is
extracted below:
38.	  Instruments  impounded how dealt with.- (1)  Where
the  person impounding an instrument under
section 33
has by
law  or consent of parties authority to receive evidence and
admits,	 such  instrument  in  evidence upon  payment  of  a
penalty	 as provided by
section 35
or of duty as provided by
section	 37
, he shall send to the Collector an authenticated
copy  of  such	instrument, together with a  certificate  in
writing,  stating  the amount of duty and penalty levied  in
respect	 thereof,  and	shall  send   such  amount  to	 the
Collector,  or	to  such person as he may  appoint  in	this
behalf.	  (2)  When such instrument has been impounded	only
because	 it has been written in contravention of
section  13
or
section 14
, the Collector may refund the whole penalty so
paid.
It	is clear from the first sub-section extracted  above
that the court has a power to admit the document in evidence
if  the	 party producing the same would pay the	 stamp	duty
together  with	a  penalty  amounting	to  ten	 times	 the
deficiency  of	the stamp duty.	 When the court	 chooses  to
admit the document on compliance of such condition the court
need  forward only a copy of the document to the  Collector,
together with the amount collected from the party for taking
adjudicatory  steps.   But if the party refuses to  pay	 the
amount aforesaid the Collector has no other option except to
impound	 the document and forward the same to the Collector.
On  receipt  of	 the  document through either  of  the	said
avenues	 the Collector has to adjudicate on the question  of
the  deficiency	 of the stamp duty.  If the Collector is  of
the opinion that such instrument is chargeable with duty and
is  not	 duly stamped he shall require the payment  of	the
proper	duty  or  the amount required to make  up  the	same
together with a penalty of an amount not exceeding ten times
the  amount  of the proper duty or of the deficient  portion
thereof.
In	the  present  case, an argument is raised  that	 the
instrument is not actually an agreement of sale as envisaged
in  the
Schedule to the Stamp Act
(subject to amendment	made
by  the	 State of Andhra Pradesh) but it is only a  deed  of
compromise  entered  into  by  two  disputing  persons.	  We
refrain	 from expressing any opinion on the said plea as  it
is  open to the parties to raise their contentions regarding
the  nature of the document before the trial court.  In	 the
present	 case  the  trial  court   should  have	 asked	 the
appellant, if it finds that the instrument is insufficiently
stamped,  as to whether he would remit the deficient portion
of  the stamp duty together with a penalty amounting to	 ten
times  the deficiency.	If the appellant agrees to remit the
said  amount  the court has to proceed with the trial  after
admitting  the document in evidence.  In the meanwhile,	 the
court has to forward a copy of the document to the Collector
for  the  purpose  of  adjudicating   on  the  question	  of
deficiency of the stamp duty as provided in
Section 40(1)(b)
of the Act.  Only if the appellant is unwilling to remit the
amount	the court is to forward the original of the document
itself	to the Collector for the purpose of adjudicating  on
the  question of deficiency of the stamp duty.	The  penalty
of  ten	 times indicated therein is the upper limit and	 the
Collector  shall take into account all factors concerned  in
deciding  as to what should be the proper amount of  penalty
to be imposed.
Inasmuch  as  none	of the above  proceedings  had	been
adopted	 by  any of the authorities including High Court  we
set  aside  the	 impugned orders.  We direct the  Munsif  to
consider  first	 whether  the	document  is  insufficiently
stamped	 and if he finds that question in the affirmative he
has to adopt the next step indicated above.
This appeal is accordingly allowed.