[Cites
17
, Cited by
95
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Vikrant Tyres Ltd vs The First Income Tax Officer, Mysore on 9 February, 2001
Equivalent citations: AIR 2001 SUPREME COURT 800, 2001 (3) SCC 76, 2001 AIR SCW 624, 2002 AIR - KANT. H. C. R. 645, 2001 TAX. L. R. 323, (2001) 115 TAXMAN 202, 2001 (1) SCALE 720, (2001) 2 JT 455 (SC), 2001 (3) SRJ 229, 2001 (2) JT 455, (2001) ILR (KANT) (1) 2017, (2001) 163 TAXATION 387, (2001) 247 ITR 821, (2002) 127 STC 5, (2001) 2 KANTLJ(TRIB) 442, (2001) 1 SUPREME 633, (2001) 1 SCALE 720, (2001) 166 CURTAXREP 1
Bench:
S.P. Bharucha
,
N. Santosh Hegde
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil) 10202-04  of  1995



PETITIONER:
M/S. VIKRANT TYRES LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE FIRST INCOME TAX OFFICER, MYSORE

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	09/02/2001

BENCH:
S.P. Bharucha, N. Santosh Hegde & Y.K. Sabharwal.




JUDGMENT:
L...I...T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T..J
SANTOSH HEGDE, J.
Being  aggrieved by an order made by the Division  Bench
of the High Court of Karnataka in Writ Petition Nos.17068-70
of 1988, the appellant is before us in these appeals.
In	respect	 of  assessment years 1977-78,	1978-79	 and
1980-81,  assessment  orders  were served on  the  assessee-
appellant  and	demand notices were issued.   The  appellant
complied  with	the  demands  by paying the  tax  due.	 The
appellate authority on an appeal preferred by the appellant,
allowed	 the  same and the taxes paid were refunded  to	 the
appellant.   The  appellate  tribunal dismissed	 the  appeal
filed  by  the Revenue and on a Reference made to  the	High
Court, the same came to be allowed thereby upholding all the
assessment  orders.   Thereafter,  the	Revenue	 made  fresh
demands	 and the assessee re-paid the taxes as assessed	 and
demanded.   However,  the Revenue invoked
Section 220(2)
of
the  Income Tax Act, 1961 (the Act) and demanded interest in
respect	 of the tax assessed for the period commencing	with
refund	of the tax consequent upon the first appellate order
till  the  taxes  were	finally	  paid	after  disposal	  of
References.
The	 appellant challenged the said demand of interest in
the  above-mentioned  writ petitions before the High  Court,
inter  alia,  contending that it was not at all	 in  default
because	 it  had  paid	the taxes  in  compliance  with	 the
demands, hence, the original demands did not survive so this
was not a case where it had failed to comply with the demand
made  under
Section 156
of the Act.  The Revenue  contended
that  the order of assessment, the appellate orders and	 the
order made on reference resulting in consequential order are
only different steps in the same proceeding and the ultimate
order  relates	back to the original order itself  and	that
also in view of
Section 3
of the Taxation Laws (Continuation
and Validation of Recovery Proceedings) Act, 1964 (for short
the  Validation	 Act)  the  original  demand  notices  got
revived	 by operation of law and due effect had to be  given
to  such  revival.   The  High	Court,	however,  held	that
sub-section  (2)  of  Section 3 of the Validation  Act	kept
alive  the earlier demand notice even though payment in full
was made pursuant to that demand and treated the same as due
notice	having been kept alive all along till the assessment
order  was  upheld  by	the  higher  forum.   On  the  above
foundation, the writ petitions came to be dismissed.
In	these  appeals,	 it is contended on  behalf  of	 the
appellant that
Section 220(2)
does not apply to the facts of
the case in view of the admitted fact that when the original
notice	of  demand  was issued, the same was  complied	with
without delay and, subsequently, when the appellant lost its
case before the High Court, a fresh demand notice was issued
which was also satisfied by the appellant.  According to the
appellant,  once the payment as demanded, has been made, the
notice	ceases	to  have any statutory force  and  does	 not
survive	 thereafter.  It is also contended that Section 3(2)
of  the	 Validation Act does not revive or bring  back	into
existence  a  notice of demand which has ceased to have	 any
statutory  force by virtue of payment of tax demanded within
the  time stipulated in the notice.  It is also argued	that
Section	 3(2) of the Validation Act only stipulates that  no
fresh  demand notice is required to be issued as a result of
there  being  a	 variation in the orders  of  the  different
appellate  forums  with a view to see that the	recovery  of
revenue due to the State is not hampered.
On	behalf	of the Revenue, it is contended	 that  under
Section	 220(2)
of  the  Act, the Revenue  is	entitled  to
collect	 interest on that part of tax which is due to it and
retained  by the assessee, and the High Court was  justified
in  coming to the conclusion that since on the facts and the
circumstances  of this case, the Revenue was a creditor	 and
the  tax-payer	a debtor, the debtor should  compensate	 the
creditor by paying interest on the amount due.
Based on the above pleadings, the point emerging for our
consideration  is:   does  the	 Act  under
Section  220(2)
contemplate  payment  of  interest on any sum of  money	 due
under  a  demand  notice  even	after  the  said  demand  is
satisfied ?
For	 the sake of convenience, it is necessary for us  to
extract	 the relevant part of that Section which is in terms
following :
220 (2) If the amount specified in any notice of demand
under
section	156
is not paid within the  period  limited
under  sub- section (1), the assessee shall be liable to pay
simple interest at one and one-half per cent for every month
or  part of a month comprised in the period commencing	from
the  day  immediately  following  the	end  of	 the  period
mentioned  in  sub-section  (1) and ending with the  day  on
which the amount is paid :
Provided  that,  where  as a result of  an	order  under
Section 154
, or
section 155
, or
section 250
, or
section 254
,
or
section 260
, or
section 262
, or
section 264
or an  order
of  the	 Settlement  Commission under sub-  section  (4)  of
Section 245D
, the amount on which interest was payable under
this section had been reduced, the interest shall be reduced
accordingly  and the excess interest paid, if any, shall  be
refunded.
A bare reading of this Section clearly indicates that if
the assessee does not pay the amount demanded under a notice
issued	under
Section	156
of	 the  Act  within  the	time
stipulated  under  sub-section	(1), the  said	assessee  is
liable	to pay simple interest at one and one-half per	cent
for  every month or part of a month comprised in the  period
commencing from the day immediately following the end of the
period mentioned in sub- section (1) and ending with the day
on  which  the amount is paid, and therefore  the  condition
precedent  under  this	Section is that there  should  be  a
demand	notice	and  there should be a default	to  pay	 the
amount	so  demanded within the time stipulated in the	said
notice.	  Applying this Section to the facts of the case, it
is  seen that immediately after the assessment was made	 for
the relevant years, demand notices were issued under
Section
156(1)
of the Act and admittedly the appellant satisfied the
said demands and nothing was due pursuant to the said demand
notices.   However,  after  the judgment  of  the  appellate
authority  which went in favour of the assessee, the Revenue
refunded  the  amount  due  as per the	said  order  of	 the
authority.   Thereafter,  when	the   matter  was  taken  up
ultimately  in Reference to the High Court and the  assessee
lost  the  case, fresh demand notices were issued and it  is
also  an  admitted  fact that in satisfaction  of  the	said
demand notices the appellant had paid the amount as demanded
within	 the  time  stipulated	 therein.    The   question,
therefore,  is:	  whether the Revenue is entitled to  demand
interest  in regard to the amount which was refunded to	 the
assessee  by  virtue  of  the	judgment  of  the  appellate
authority  and	which  was  re-paid  to	 the  Revenue  after
decision  in the Reference by the High Court on fresh demand
notices	 being	issued to the assessee ?  Admittedly,  on  a
literal	 meaning of the provisions of
Section 220(2)
of	 the
Act,  such  a demand for interest cannot be made.  The	High
Court  by  a liberal interpretation of the said Section	 and
relying	 upon Section 3 of the Validation Act has held	that
the  Revenue is entitled to invoke
Section 220(2)
of the Act
for  the purpose of demanding interest on such retention  of
money.
We	are  not  in agreement with the High  Court  on	 the
interpretation	placed by it on
Section 220(2)
of the Act in
regard	to the right of the Revenue to demand interest in  a
situation  where  the  assessee has promptly  satisfied	 the
demand	made by the Revenue in regard to the tax  originally
assessed.
It	is a settled principle in law that the courts  while
construing  Revenue Acts have to give a fair and  reasonable
construction to the language of a Statute without leaning to
one  side or the other, meaning thereby that no tax or	levy
can  be imposed on a subject by an Act of Parliament without
the words of the Statute clearly showing an intention to lay
the burden on the subject.  In this process, the courts must
adhere	to  the	 words	of the	Statute	 and  the  so-called
equitable  construction of those words of the Statute is not
permissible.   The  task  of the court is  to  construe	 the
provisions  of	the  taxing   enactments  according  to	 the
ordinary  and natural meaning of the language used and	then
to  apply that meaning to the facts of the case and in	that
process	 if  the tax-payer is brought within the net  he  is
caught,	 otherwise he has to go free.  This principle in law
is  settled  by this Court in
India Carbon Ltd.	 & Ors.	  v.
State  of  Assam
[1997 (6) SCC 479] wherein this Court	held
Interest  can  be levied and charged on delayed payment	 of
tax  only  if  the statute that levies and charges  the	 tax
makes	a   substantive	 provision  in	 this	behalf.	  A
Constitution  Bench of this Court speaking through one of us
(Hon.	Bharucha,  J.)
in  the case of
V.V.S.	  Sugars  v.
Government  of	A.P.  & Ors.
[1999 (4) SCC 192]  reiterated
the  proposition
laid down in
the
India Carbon Ltd.s
case
(supra)	 in the following words :
The Act
in question is a
taxing	statute	 and, therefore, must be interpreted  as  it
reads, with no additions and no substractions, on the ground
of  legislative	 intendment or otherwise. If we apply  this
principle  in  interpreting
Section 220
of the Act, we	find
that  the condition precedent for invoking the said  Section
is  only if there is a default in payment of amount demanded
under  a  notice by the Revenue within the  time  stipulated
therein	 and if such a demand is not satisfied then
Section
220(2)
can be invoked.
The	 High Court also fell in error in relying on Section
3  of  the Validation Act to construe
Section 220(2)
in	 the
manner	in  which  it  has done in  the	 impugned  judgment.
Section	 3 of the Validation Act, in our opinion, cannot  be
relied	upon  to  construe the authority of the	 Revenue  to
demand	interest  under
Section 220
of the Act.   The	said
Section	  was	enacted	 to  cope   up	with   a   different
fact-situation.	  That	Section only revives the old  demand
notice	which  had never been satisfied by the assessee	 and
which  notice got quashed during some stage of the challenge
and  finally  the  said quashed notice gets restored  by  an
order  of  a higher forum.  In such situation, Section 3  of
the Validation Act restores the original demand notice which
was  never  satisfied by the assessee and the  said  Section
does  away  with the need to issue a fresh  notice.   Beyond
that,  that  Section  cannot be resorted to for	 reviving  a
demand notice which is already fully satisfied.
In	a  similar fact-situation, a Division Bench  of	 the
Kerala	High  Court  in
I.T.O.	v.  A.V.  Thomas  &  Company
(1986) 160 ITR 818 had held that the condition precedent for
invoking
Section  220(2)
is that even after the  notice  of
demand	under
section 156
and after a further period of  35
days  as provided under
section 220(1)
, the assessee  should
continue  as  a	 defaulter in the matter of payment  of	 tax
demanded.   It	further held that only in case the  assessee
defaults  in  payment  of tax assessed, 35  days  after	 the
notice	of  demand under
section 156
, the liability  to	 pay
interest  accrues.   In	 that  case  also,  admittedly,	 the
assessee had paid the tax when he received the demand notice
under
section	156
,  hence, the High Court  held  that	 the
requirements  under
section  220(2)
for  attracting	 the
liability to pay interest did not exist.
We	are  in agreement with the said view of	 the  Kerala
High  Court.  Though this judgment was brought to the notice
of  the	 Karnataka High Court in the impugned judgment,	 the
said  High Court thought it fit not to place reliance on the
same which, in our opinion, is erroneous.
In	the  light of the above, we are of the opinion	that
Section	 220(2)
of the Act cannot be invoked to demand	 any
interest  from	the  appellant for the assessment  years  in
question.   These  appeals,  therefore, stand  allowed,	 the
impugned  judgment is set aside and the demands made by	 the
Revenue	 under
Section	 220(2)
of the Act  for	 payment  of
interest  on  the  tax	due for	 assessment  years  1977-78,
1978-79 and 1980-81 stand quashed.