[Cites
14
, Cited by
89
]
Supreme Court of India
Indian Banks Association vs Workmen Of Syndicate Bank And Ors on 13 February, 2001
Equivalent citations: AIR 2001 SUPREME COURT 946, 2001 (3) SCC 36, 2001 AIR SCW 749, 2001 LAB. I. C. 897, 2001 (2) UJ (SC) 810, 2001 (2) UPLBEC 1511, 2001 (3) SRJ 322, (2001) 2 JT 542 (SC), 2001 (1) LRI 613, 2001 (2) SCALE 25, 2001 (2) JT 542, 2001 UJ(SC) 2 810, 2001 SCC (L&S) 504, (2001) 98 FJR 543, (2001) 88 FACLR 1097, (2001) 1 LABLJ 1045, (2001) 2 LAB LN 25, (2001) 2 MAHLR 407, (2001) 2 SCT 223, (2001) 2 SCJ 244, (2001) 2 UPLBEC 1511, (2001) 2 SUPREME 119, (2001) 2 SCALE 25, (2001) BANKJ 433, (2001) 1 CURLR 986, (2001) 1 BANKCLR 528
Author:
S.N. Variava
Bench:
S. Rajendra Babu
,
S.N. Variava
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  3355 of 1998

PETITIONER:
INDIAN BANKS ASSOCIATION

RESPONDENT:
WORKMEN OF SYNDICATE BANK AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 13/02/2001

BENCH:
S. RAJENDRA BABU & S.N. VARIAVA

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

2001 (1) SCR 1011

The Judgment of the Court was delivered by

S.N. VARIAVA, J. Leave granted in SLP (C) No. 9000/1998.
All these Appeals are against a common judgment dated 30th March, 1997, A
common question arises in all these Appeals.
The Government of India, Ministry of Labour by an Order dated 3rd October,
1980 referred the following dispute under
Sections 7A
and
10(l)(d)
of the
Industrial Disputes Act between the Management of 11 Banks and the Deposit
Collectors to the Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad for adjudication:
"Whether the demands of the Commission Agents of as the case may be Deposit
Collectors Employed in the banks listed in the Annexure that they are
entitled to pay scales, allowances and other service conditions available
to regular clerical employees of those banks is justified? If not, to what
relief are the workmen concerned entitled and from which date?"
Before the Tribunal parties lead evidence both oral and documentary. After
hearing the parties the Tribunal by its Award dated 22nd December, 1988
held that the Deposit Collectors were workmen of the concerned Bank. The
Tribunal then directed as follows:
"All those Deposit Collectors and Agents who are below the age of 45 years
on 3.10.1980 (the date of the first reference of this industrial dispute)
shall be considered for regular absorption for the post of Clerks and
cashiers if they are matriculates and above including qualified Graduates
and Post Graduates. They may be taken to banks service as regular employees
if they pass the qualifying examination conducted by the banks, Those who
are absorbed shall be treated on par with regular clerical employees of the
Bank. Those who are qualified with 8th Class and below Matriculations shall
be considered for absorption as Sub-Staff by conducting qualifications
examination.
As regards the Deposit Collectors and Agents who are above 45 years of age
on the date 3-10-1980 and also those who are un-willing to be absorbed in
Regular Banks service they shall be paid the fall back wages of Rs. 750.00
per month linked with minimum deposit of Rs. 7,500,00 per month and they
should be paid incentive remuneration at 2 per cent for collection of over
and above 7,500.00 per month and they should also pay uniform conveyance of
Rs. 50 per month for deposit of less than Rs. 10,000.00 and Rs. 100.00 per
month for deposits of more than Rs. 10,00.00 upto or above Rs. 30,000,00
per month they should be paid Gratuity of 15 days commission for each year
of service rendered.'"
Various Writ petitions were filed by various Banks and the Indian Banks
Association. All were disposed off by the impugned judgment dated 20th
March, 1997.
Before the High Court it has been conceded that relief of being absorbed as
regular staff of the banks in clerical cadre was not available to be
granted; on this concession the High Court set aside the directions of the
Tribunal to absorb the Deposit Collectors as regular staff. The high Court
however upheld the other directions of the Tribunal regarding payment of
fall back wages, conveyance allowance, gratuity etc.

Except for C.A. No. 3356 of 1998, all these Appeals have been filed by the
Various banks and/or the Indian banks Association. C.A. No. 3356 of 1998
has been filed by the National Confederation of Bank Employees. This Appeal
is against that portion Of the impugned judgment, whereunder the relief of
absorption as a regular employee has been set aside.
On behalf of the Appellants it has been submitted that the Deposit
Collectors could not be treated as workmen since their engagement were
purely a matter of contract between the parties. It was submitted that the
Agreements were, in all cases, for a specific period. It was submitted that
the Deposit Collectors did their work without any control or supervision of
the Banks. It was submitted that the Deposit Collectors could also do other
works and take on other employment. It was submitted that the Deposit
Collectors had no fixed time or period to devote to their work as Deposit
Collectors or for their attendance in the Bank. It was submitted that these
Deposit Collectors could come to the Bank at any time and make the
deposits. It was further submitted that there was no qualification or age
limit for a person to be engaged as a Deposit Collector and that, infact,
many of the Deposit Collectors were well advanced in age. It was submitted
that no disciplinary action could be taken against the Deposit Collectors.
It was submitted that all the above mentioned facts showed that there was
no relationship of master and servant and that, therefore, these Deposit
Collectors were not workmen.
Reliance has also been placed on
Section 10
of the Banking Regulation Act.
The relevant portion of
Section 10
reads as follows :
"10. Prohibition of employment of managing agents and restrictions on
certain forms of employment:- (1) No banking company
(a)    Shall employ or be managed by managing agent; or
(b)    Shall employ or continue the employment of any person:
(i) Who is, or at any time has been adjudicated insolvent, or has suspended
payment of has compounded with his creditors, or who is, or had been,
convicted by a Criminal Court of an offence involving moral turpitude; or
(ii) Whose remuneration or part of whose remuneration take the form of
commission or of a share in the profits of the company.
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-clause shall apply to the
payment by a banking company of-
(a)    any bonus, in pursuance of a settlement or award arrived at or made
under any law relating to industrial disputes or in accordance with any
scheme framed by such banking company or in accordance with the usual
practice prevailing in banking business
(b)    any commission to any broker (including guarantee broker) cashier
contractor, clearing and forwarding agent, auctioneer or any other person,
employed by the banking company under a contract otherwise than as a
regular member of the staff of the company; or

xxx                                xxx                                xxx

It was submitted that
Section 10(b)
clearly lays down that a banking
company cannot employ any person whose remuneration or part of whose
remuneration takes the form of commission or of a share in the profits of
the company. It was submitted that it was an admitted position that
commission was paid to the deposit Collectors. It was submitted that it can
never be presumed that the Bank were employing persons contrary to the
provisions of the
Banking Regulation Act
. It was submitted that this showed
that these Deposit Collectors were not employed by the Banks. It was
submitted that the proviso (b), which permitted payment of commission under
a contract to a person who was not a regular member of the staff, was
merely an extension and did not detract from the main provision which
prevented employment on commission basis.
It was also submitted that the Deposit Collection Schemes were un-
remunerative and were not viable. Certain charts and Figures were shows to
the Court and it was submitted that the Banks were suffering a loss in
running these Schemes. It was submitted that neither the Tribunal nor the
High Court had gone into viability of the Schemes.
Mr. P.P. Rao further submitted that the
Banking Regulation Act
is an Act of
1949. He took the Court through the definition of the term "workman"
On the
Industrial Disputes Act
as well as various other Acts like
Beedi and Cigar
Workers (Conditions of Employment) Act
, Coal Mines Provident Found

and Misc.
Provisions Act Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act
etc. He submitted that under each Act the definition was framed as per the
purpose of the Act. He pointed out that depending on the purpose of the
Act, either a wide or narrow definition had been given to the term
"worker". He pointed out that the proviso to
Section 10
of the Banking
Regulation Act has been operative since 1949. He submitted that in the
Industrial Disputes Act
the definition of the term "worker" in
Section 2(s)
was amended in 1984. He submitted that even in 1984 the Legislature did not
think it fit to include in this definition a person who was receiving
commission. He submitted that this clearly indicated that persons receiving
commission were not meant to be and were not workmen within the meaning of
the term as laid down in the
Industrial Disputes Act
.
Mr. P.P. Rao further submitted that if the Deposit Collectors are not
workmen, then their entitlement has to be as per their contract or as per
the provisions of a statute. He submitted that the Tribunal had no power to
change the contract between the parties and/or to impose conditions of
service. He submitted that the Tribunal could only have done so, provided
it was statutorily permitted or it was so provided in the Contract. He
submitted that the gratuity which has been awarded by the tribunal is
neither as per the contract between the parties nor as per the provisions
of the
Payment of Gratuity Act
. He submitted that the Deposit Collectors
have concealed what they were receiving from the other employment. He
submitted that this information should have been called for. He submitted
that the entire liability has been foisted on the Banks, when in fact the
other employer should be sharing the burden imposed on the Banks.
It was submitted on behalf of the Appellants that for all the above
reasons, the impugned Order and the directions given by the Tribunal should
be set aside.
On the other hand Mr. Sharma, on behalf of the Respondents, submitted that
the Deposit Collectors had to regularly visit the small depositors, i.e.,
small traders, house wives, students etc. He submitted that they would have
to go to these depositors at times which were convenient to those person or
at times when they would be in a position to give the deposit. He submitted
that the Deposit Collectors may also ha veto make more than one visit to
small depositors. He submitted that the Deposit Collectors would have to
collect deposits from all these persons and then taken the collections to
the banks and make the deposits after making the relevant entries and
filing up the relevant forms. He submitted that the work of Deposit
Collectors was manual inasmuch as they had to make the collections by going
from place to place and from depositor to depositor and that it was also
clerical inasmuch as they had to fill up various forms, accounts, registers
and pass books every day. He submitted that over and above this work many
of the Deposit Collectors were also made to do other sundry works of a
clerical nature in the banks. He submitted that amount received by the
Deposit Collectors by way of commission was wage linked to productivity. He
submitted that it was incorrect to state that the banks had no control over
the Deposit Collectors. He submitted that the banks exercised control over
the Deposit Collectors and laid down various stipulations which were to be
followed by these Deposit Collectors. He submitted that merely because the
nature of the control was different did not mean that there was no control.
Mr. Sharma relied upon the definition of the term "Wages" in
Section 2 (rr)
of the Industrial Disputes Act, which reads as follows:
"2 (rr) "wages" means all remuneration capable of being expressed in terms
of money, which would, it the terms of employment express or implied, were
fulfilled, be payable to a workman in respect of his employment or of work
done in such employment, and includes-
(i) such allowances (including dearness allowance) as the workman is for
the time being entitled to;
(ii) the value of any house accommodation, or of supply of light, water,
medical attendance or other amenity or of any service or of any
concessional supply of foodgrains or other articles;
.(iii)  any travelling concession;
(iv) any commission payable on the promotion of sales or business or both;
but does not include-
(a)    any bonus;

(b)    any contribution paid or payable by the employer to any pension fund
or provident fund or for the benefit of the workman under any law for the
time being in force;
(c)    any gratuity payable on the termination of his service;" points out
that, under sub-clause (iv) of the above definition, "wage" includes
commission payable on promotion of sales or business or both. He submitted
that the commission which was received by Deposit Collectors was promotion
of the business of the banks, viz., receiving deposits from on investors.
Mr. Sharma submitted (hat the proviso to
Section 10
clearly laid down that
commission could be paid to a person who was not in the regular employment
of a bank. He submitted that, therefore,
Section 10
of the Banking
Regulations Act did not prevent Deposit Collectors from being workmen as
defined in the
Industrial Disputes Act
.
In support of this submission he
relied upon an authority of the Madras High Court in the ease of
The
Management of Indian Bank v. The Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal
(c)
& Anr., reported in (1990) 1  LLJ 50. In this case it has been held that
Deposit Collectors satisfy the definition of "workmen" under the
Industrial
Disputes Act
and that they are "workmen" as defined in the
Industrial
Disputes Act
. It has been held that the banks have control over such
Deposit Collectors and that
Section 30
of the Banking regulations act did
not help the banks in contending that Deposit Collectors were not workmen.
Mr. Sharma relied upon the case of Silver Jubilee Tailoring House & ors. v.
Chief Inspector of Shops and Establishments & Anr., reported in(1974) 1 LLJ
747, In this case the question was whether certain tailors working with the
Appellant Company were employees of the Appellant and were covered by the
Andhra Pradesh Shops and Establishments Act and Payment of Wages Act. The
question which arose for consideration Were whether the Appellants had
control over these tailors and whether the fact that these tailors could
work for more than one employee meant that there was no relationship of
master and servant. This Court held that during the last two decades the
emphasis in deciding the question of relationship of employer and employee
had changed. It held that while control was an important factor it was
wrong to say that in every case it would be a decisive factor. It held that
the degree of control and supervision would be different in different types
of business and that what was essential was an element of authority over
the workers in the performance of the work, so that the employee was
subject to the directions of the employer; It also held that working with
more than one employer did not militate against being the employee of the
proprietor of the shop where he attended the work. It held that a servant
need not be in the exclusive control of one master, ft held that the fact
that the workers were not on obliged to work whole day was also not very
material. It held that all that was necessary was that the workman was
principally employee by that employer.
Mr. Sharma also relied upon the case of
Dharangadhara Chemical Works Ltd v.
State of Saurashtra
, reported in [1957] SCR, 152. in this case the
Appellants were lessees holding a licence for the manufacture of salt on
certain landed. The salt was manufactured by labourers known as Agarias
from rain water that got mixed saline matter in the soil. The work was
seasonal in nature and commenced In October after the rains and continued
till June. Thereafter the Agarias left for their own villages and did their
own cultivation work. During the season the lands were devided into plots
and plots were allotted to the Agarias. Generally the same plot was
allotted to the same Agaria every year. After manufacturing of salt the
Agarias were paid at the rate of 5 as. 6 pies per maund, At the end of each
season the accounts were settled and the Agarias were paid the balance due
to them. During the season the Agarias worked with the members of their
families and were free to engages extra labour on their own, if they so
desired. No hours of work were prescribed, no master roll maintained, nor
were working hours controlled by the Appellants. There were no rules as
regards leave or holidays and the Agarias were free to go out of the
factory after making arrangements for manufacturing Of salt. The question
for consideration before this Court was whether the Agarias were workmen
within the meaning of the
Industrial Disputes Act
. This Court held that the
prima facie test of master of servant between employer and employee was the
existence of the right in the employee not merely to direct what work was
to be done but also to control the manner in which it was to be done, the
nature or extent of such control varying in different industries and being
by its nature incapable of being precisely defined. This Court held that
the correct approach, therefore, was to consider whether, having regard to
the nature of the work, there was due control and supervision of the
employer. This
Court further held
that the question whether the
relationship between the parties was one as between ah employer and
employee was a question of fact and where the Industrial Tribunal Came to a
finding, such finding of fact was not open to question in a proceeding
under
Article 226
of the Constitutions, unless it could be shown to wholly
unwarranted by the evidence, Mr. Sharma submitted that in this case the
Tribunal had, on consideration of evidence and material before it, arrived
at a positive finding that there was control by the banks and that there
was a relationship of master and servant. He submitted that such finding of
fact was based upon the evidence on record and nothing had been shown that
such finding was Unwarranted or unsustainable on the basis of evidence on
record. He submitted that the High Court was thus right in not interfering
with such findings of fact.
On the question of the Scheme being un-remunerative, Mr. Sharma showed
certain pamphlets and circulars recently issued by one of the banks, which
is before this Court. He pointed out, from these pamphlets and circulars,
that far from the Scheme being un-remunerative the banks were receiving
large amounts as deposits through such Schemes. He pointed out that the
banks were wanting to continue with such Schemes.
Mr. Sharma submitted that gratuity need not be only under the
Payment of
Gratuity Act
. He submitted that the Tribunal had not said that it was
awarding gratuity under the
Gratuity Act
. He submitted that the Tribunal
has powers, dehors the
Gratuity Act
, to direct payment of Gratuity. He
submitted that the Tribunal always has power and jurisdiction to modify
conditions of service and, in this case, it has been found by the Tribunal
that there was no fixed pay scales, no bonus, no gratuity, ho dearness
allowance and, therefore, the Tribunal had given the direction, as set out
hereinabove, as and by way of a package. He submitted that earlier
commission was being paid at a rate of 3.5 per cent by most of the banks.
He pointed out that now, over and above the sum of Rs. 7,500 the commission
had been reduced to 2 per cent. He submitted that to that extent Deposit
Collectors were loosing, but as this was part of the package as given by
the Tribunal it was being accepted by the Deposit Collectors. He submitted
that the directions given by the Tribunal were fair and just and absolutely
right. He submitted that the Order of the High Court was correct and this
Court should not interfere.
Mr. Nageshwar Rao, who appeared for the Appellants in C. A. No. 3356 Of
1998, supported Mr. Sharma in all his submissions. He, however, submitted
that the High Court was wrong in setting aside the directions regarding
regularisation of service. He submitted that the concessions which had been
made before the High Court had not been made on behalf of his clients and
his clients could not be held to be bound by such concession. He submitted
that in any case the Deposit Collectors should get the pay scales,
allowance and other service conditions of the other employees of the banks.
He submitted that even though the Deposit Collectors may not have been
absorbed as regular employees of the banks yet they should have been
granted the pay scales, allowance and their service conditions of the
employees of the banks, He submitted that most of these Deposit Collectors
had been working for 20 to 25 years and that there was nothing wrong if
they were either absorbed in the banks of given the pay scales allowances
and other service conditions of the other employees of the banks.
We have considered the rival submissions. In our view, Mr. Sharma was right
when he submitted that on the basis of evidence before it the Tribunal has
given findings of fact that the Deposit Collectors were workmen within the
meaning of
Section 2 (develop)
of the Industrial Disputes Act. On the
evidence on record it could not be said that this finding was
unsustainable. Having been shown the relevant evidence we are also of the
opinion that the Tribunal correctly arrived at a conclusion that these
Deposit Collectors were workmen.
Further, as seen from
Section 2 (rr)
of the industrial
Disputes Act
, the
commission received by Deposit Collectors is nothing else but wage, which
is dependent on the productivity. This commission is paid for promoting the
business of the various banks.
We also cannot accept the submission that the banks have no control over
the Deposit Collectors. Undoubtedly, the Deposit Collectors are free to
regulate their own hours of work, but that is because of the nature of the
work itself. It would be impossible to fix working hours for such Deposit
Collectors because they have to go to various depositors. This would have
to be done at the convenience of the depositors and at such times as
required by the depositors. If this is so, then no time can be fixed for
such work. However, there is control inasmuch as the Deposit Collectors
have to being the collections and deposit the: same in the banks by the
very next day. They have to then fill in various forms, accounts, registers
and pass books. They also have to do such other clerical work as the bank
may direct. They are, therefore, accountable to the bank and under the
control of the bank.
We also see no force in the contention that
Section 10
of the Banking
Regulations Act prevents employment of persons on commission basis. The
proviso to
Section 10
makes it clear that commission can be paid to persons
who are not in regular employment Undoubtedly the Deposit Collectors are
not regular employees of the Bank, But they nevertheless are workers within
the meaning of the term as defined in the industrial
Disputes Act
. There is
clearly a relationship of master and servant between the Deposit Collectors
and the concerned Bank.
Mr. Nageshwar Rao is right in his submission that the concession was not
binding on his clients. However, what has been conceded has been correctly
conceded. No question arose of directing absorption of the Deposit
Collectors as regular workmen, No such demand had been made and, therefore,
there could have been no such direction. Such direction were beyond the
reference. Even otherwise, the question of absorption would be fully
covered by an authority of this Court in the case of Union of India & ors.
v. K.V. Baby & Anr., reported in (1999) 1 LLJ 1290. In this case it has
been held that persons who are engaged on the basis of individual contracts
to work on commission basis cannot be equated with regular employees doing
similar work. It has been held that the mode of selection and
qualifications are not comparable with those of the employees, even though
the employees may be doing similar works. In the present case, not only
care the modes of selection and qualifications not comparable, but even the
work is not comparable. The work which the Deposit Collectors do is
completely different from the work which the regular employees do. There
was thus no question of absorption and there was also no question of the
Deposit Collectors being paid the same pay scales, allowances and tower
service conditions of the regular employees of "the banks.
We also see no substance in the contention that these Schemes are un-
remunerative. The Banks have introduced these Schemes because they want to
encourage the common man to make small and regular deposits. As a result of
such Schemes, the number of depositors have become much larger. We have no
doubt that such Schemes are continued because the Banks find them
remunerative. The Banks have large collections through such Schemes.
For the reasons set out hereinabove, we see no substance in any of these
Appeals. All the Appeals accordingly stand dismissed. There will however,
be no Order and to costs.