[Cites
8
, Cited by
54
]
Supreme Court of India
Sucha Singh vs State Of Punjab on 22 March, 2001
Equivalent citations: AIR 2001 SUPREME COURT 1436, 2001 AIR SCW 1292, 2001 (1) UJ (SC) 779, 2001 (4) SRJ 342, 2001 (4) JT 107, 2001 (2) LRI 889, 2001 (4) SCC 375, 2001 (2) SCALE 543, 2001 SCC(CRI) 717, 2001 (2) BLJR 1526, 2001 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 361, (2002) SC CR R 238, (2001) 2 EASTCRIC 63, (2001) 2 RAJ LW 345, (2001) 2 RECCRIR 298, (2001) 2 SCJ 633, (2001) 2 CURCRIR 55, (2001) 2 SUPREME 451, (2001) 2 ALLCRIR 1182, (2001) 2 SCALE 543, (2001) 1 UC 572, (2001) 42 ALLCRIC 908, (2001) 2 CHANDCRIC 60, (2001) 2 ALLCRILR 91, (2001) 2 CRIMES 69, 2001 (1) ANDHLT(CRI) 375 SC
Bench:
K.T. Thomas
,
R.P. Sethi
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.) 24  of  2001



PETITIONER:
SUCHA SINGH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF PUNJAB

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	22/03/2001

BENCH:
K.T. Thomas & R.P. Sethi




JUDGMENT:
THOMAS, J.@@
JJJJJJJJJJ
L...I...T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T..J

    During the months when insurgency in the State of Punjab
was  at its peak two striplings were knocked off from  their
house  on a dark night by armed assailants in the very sight
of  their old parents, despite the importunes made by  their
mother.	  Those abducted youngsters were finished off within
a shortwhile by firing them with AK-47 rifles, a little away
from  their  house.   The abductors were  indicted  for	 the
murder of those two young Sikhs.  Appellant Sucha Singh, the
sole  survivor	of the criminal conspiracy hatched,  is	 now
challenging the conviction and sentence of life imprisonment
passed	on him by a designated court, for the offence  under
Section 302 read with
Section 34
of the Indian Penal Code.
Shri  U.R.	 Lalit, learned senior counsel	pleaded	 for
reconsideration	 of  the  ratio laid down by this  Court  in
State  of  West Bengal vs.  Mir Mohammad Omar
& ors.   {2000
(8)  SCC  382}	wherein it is held that the court  would  be
justified  in appropriate cases to draw the presumption that
the  abductors	themselves  could  be  the  killers  of	 the
abducted  victim, unless they explained otherwise as to what
they did with the prey.
Learned  senior counsel submitted that the said ratio is
discordant   with  the	criminal   jurisprudence  thus	 far
enunciated that the burden is entirely on the prosecution to
prove  the case.  He further submitted that the ratio in
the
said decision
cannot at any rate be applied for fastening an
accused	 with  the aid of
Section 34
IPC.  As we heard	Shri
U.R.   Lalit  in  extenso on the above	submission,  besides
other  points convassed by him on the merits of the case, we
are bound to deal with them now.
The synopsis of the case is this.  The incident happened
on  the	 night of 22.2.1991.  PW-3 Diwan Singh and his	wife
PW-4  Dalbir  Kaur  had	 five sons.  The  elder	 three	were
working	 in  the  grain	 market	  at  Amritsar.	  Among	 the
remaining  sons	 Narinder Singh was in the army and he	came
home  for a furlough and stayed with his parents.  The other
son  Surinder Singh was also staying in the same house.	 The
militancy  in  Punjab had armed terrorists on its cadre	 who
were  prowling for preys during those days.  Diwan Singh and
his  family were targeted by the militants as they suspected
him  to be conduit for the police who were out to crush	 the
insurgency.
On	the  night of occurrence Diwan Singh, his  wife	 and
their  two sons (Narinder Singh and Surinder Singh) were  in
their  house at Rupawali, which is situate on the  outskirts
of Amritsar City.  The inmates of the house retired to their
rooms  in  the night, presumably after their  supper.	Four
assailants  including the appellant went to that house armed
with AK-47 rifles at about 10 P.M., and knocked at the door.
Diwan  Singh  switched on the light in the courtyard and  he
immediately  understood	 the danger ahead of him.   He	then
scampered  to the roof of the house and hid himself, but  he
could  see  what  was  happening   on  the  courtyard.	 The
assailants  caught the two deceased sons and took them	away
despite	 the  entreaties persistently made by their  mother.
Though she made a bid to follow them she could reach only up
to  the	 end  of their courtyard as she	 was  tweaked  aside
forcefully with the butt end of a rifle.  The two sons taken
away  by  the assailants were never seen thereafter  by	 the
parents.
After a shortwhile the parents of the deceased heard the
sound  of  gunshots  from a distance.  The  terror  stricken
parents	 somehow whiled away their time in the night without
even  gazing outside.  On the next morning Diwan Singh	went
to  his brother Gurna Singh, who was living nearby, and with
him  a	search was made for their abducted sons.  They	came
across the dead bodies of the deceased lying on the roadside
studded with gunshot injuries.
Police  after  investigation   charge-sheeted  only	 two
persons	 as  accused, one the appellant Sucha Singh and	 the
other  Sarbjit Singh.  According to the police the remaining
two  assailants	 could	not be apprehended despite  all	 the
steps  adopted	by  the police.	 The case was sent up  to  a
designated  court  as some of the offences included  in	 the
charge	fell  within  the  purview   of	 the
Terrorist	 and
Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act
(TADA).	The judge of
the  designated	 court	convicted  both	 the  accused  under
Section	 302  read  with
Section 34
IPC  though  they	were
acquitted  of the offences under TADA.	We are told that the
other  convicted  person  died	subsequently.	This  appeal
pertains only to the appellant Sucha Singh.
There  is no dispute that the deceased were shot dead on
the  said  night by somebody with AK-47 rifles.	  Hence	 the
only  point  is	 whether  the	appellant  was	one  of	 the
murderers.   The  evidence  against  the  appellant  is	 the
testimony  of PW-3 Diwan Singh and PW-4 Dalbir Kaur.  As for
them,  they only testified that the two deceased were  taken
away  by  armed assailants from the house on that  ill-fated
night and such assailants included the two convicted persons
and  that  the	corpses of the deceased	 were  spotted	next
morning	 lying	on  the roadside a little  away	 from  their
house.
Shri  U.R.	Lalit, learned senior counsel first focussed
on  a contention that PW-3 Diwan Singh and PW-4 Dalbir	Kaur
were  living with their elder sons at Amritsar City and that
they  learnt  about  the  death of the	deceased  only	when
somebody  informed  them about it on the following  morning.
In other words, according to the learned senior counsel, the
truth of the testimony of PW-3 and PW-4 will depend upon the
question  whether  they were actually staying in  the  house
where the deceased stayed on the night.
Three witnesses were examined on the defence side to say
that  the  old parents were actually living at Amritsar	 for
about six months prior to the occurrence.  They are:  DW-1 a
member	of the Panchayat, DW-3 and DW-4.  True, those  three
witnesses said like that.  But their evidence would not help
the  defence  to  show	that the  old  parents	were  living
differently from the house where the deceased stayed on that
night.	 All that the witnesses could say was that PW-3	 and
PW-4  were staying at Amritsar.	 That expression  Amritsar
could  encompass  even areas lying on the periphery  of	 the
city  limit  also.   This is clearly  discernible  from	 the
manner	in which DW-1 Senga Singhs address was described in
his  deposition.   He is described as resident	of  Rupawali
Village in Amritsar.
Learned  counsel made a futile endeavour to create	some
doubt  that  PW-3 and PW-4 would have been staying with	 the
elder  sons at Amritsar City.  One such attempt was based on
a  fact	 that  PW-3 himself was convicted in a	murder	case
earlier,  and hence he would have known the value of  prompt
reporting to the police.  According to the counsel, PW-3 did
not  choose  to go to the police station even by next  early
morning.   What	 PW-3 said on that score is that  after	 the
sons  were  taken away he remained in the house	 during	 the
entire	night  as he was fear-stricken and when the  morning
broke  he  collected  his brother Gurnam Singh and  went  in
search	of  his	 sons and came across the  body	 at  Village
Phirni	(which	is close to their residence).  He then	left
the  spot after leaving his brother to remain near the	dead
bodies, and went to Amritsar city on a bicycle for informing
his  elder sons about the occurrence.  On his way back	from
the  city  he came across the police.  He furnished to	them
the  details  of  the occurrence as he knew.  In  the  above
narration  there is nothing to show that PW-3 and PW-4	were
residing away from their house at Rupawali.
Another  attempt made by learned counsel is based on the
fact  that  the	 abductors  did	  not  catch  PW-3  who	 was
considered  to	be a police tout.  According to the  learned
counsel the assailants would not have left the house without
him  and  the  fact that they took away his two	 sons  would
further show that PW-3 was not available in the house.	This
argument  proceeded on an assumption that the sons were	 not
the  target  of	 the assailants at all.	 We dont  have	any
material  to  assume that the assailants did not  count	 the
sons  also  as touts of the police along with their  father.
It  must be remembered that the assailants took away all the
male members of the family whom they could see in the house.
As  PW-3 went to the roof hiding himself from the assailants
they would have decided to be satisfied for the present with
what they got, i.e.  the two sons.  Whatever it be, the fact
that  the  accused succeeded in taking away the two sons  of
the  two deceased alone is not enough, in the  circumstances
of  this  case, to doubt the presence of PW-3 and  his	wife
PW-4 in the house on the crucial night.
That  apart,  the two younger sons,	 including  Narinder
Singh  who  came  from army for a furlough to  be  with	 his
parents, were actually staying in their house at Rupawali on
the fateful night.  There would be no logic in assuming that
their  parents	would  have kept away from their  own  house
leaving those two sons alone on that night.  Why should they
do so.
Thus we too are inclined to believe the version of PW- 3
and  PW-4.  On their testimony the circumstances against the
appellant are the following:
(1)	 The  incident happened during a period when  Punjab
was boiling with terrorist activities.	(2) The house of the
deceased was treated by the terrorists as the home of police
touts  against	terrorists.  (3) Appellant and three  others
reached	 the house during the dead of night armed with AK-47
rifles	(which	is described as assault rifle) and  caught
the  two  sons.	 Even in spite of entreaties made  by  their
mother	PW-4, the abductors forcibly took away the two	sons
into  the  darkness outside.  (4) Within a  shortwhile	they
heard  the sound of gunshots.  (5) The two abducted sons did
not  return to the house during that night.  (6) On the next
morning	 their dead bodies were spotted on the roadside at a
place  situated	 only a short distance away from the  house.
(7)  They  were killed with AK- 47 rifles as the empties  of
the bullets of such firearm were lying near the dead bodies.
(8)  Appellant did not tell the court as to what happened to
the two sons after they abducted them.
The	 abductors  alone  could tell the court as  to	what
happened to the deceased after they were abducted.  When the
abductors  withheld that information from the court there is
every  justification for drawing the inference, in the light
of  all the preceding and succeeding circumstances  adverted
to  above,  that  the  abductors are the  murderers  of	 the
deceased.
Shri  U.R.	 Lalit,	 learned senior counsel	 raised	 his
contention  on	the above score that even assuming that	 the
appellant  was	one  among  the persons who  took  away	 the
deceased  that circumstance alone is not sufficient to	hold
him  to be one of the killers of the deceased.	According to
the  senior  counsel  a finding beyond abduction  cannot  be
fastened on the appellant.
Recently this Court has held in
State of West Bengal vs.
Mir  Mohammad  Omar
(supra) that the principle	embodied  in
Section	 106
of  the  Evidence Act can	 be  utilised  in  a
situation   like  this.	  Shri	 U.R.	Lalit  pleaded	 for
reconsideration	 of  the said legal position.  According  to
him,  the
ratio
laid down in
that decision is not  in	tune
with  the  well accepted principle of criminal law that	 the
accused	 is entitled to keep his tongue inside his mouth  as
the  burden is always on the prosecution to prove the  guilt
of  the	 accused.   To	meet   the  said  contention  it  is
appropriate  to extract the following observations from that
decision:
The	 pristine  rule that the burden of proof is on	the
prosecution  to prove the guilt of the accused should not be
taken  as  a  fossilised  doctrine as though  it  admits  no
process	  of  intelligent  reasoning.	 The   doctrine	  of
presumption  is	 not alien to the above rule, nor  would  it
impair	the  temper of the rule.  On the other hand, if	 the
traditional  rule  relating  to	 burden	  of  proof  of	 the
prosecution  is allowed to be wrapped in pedantic  coverage,
the  offenders	in  serious  offences  would  be  the  major
beneficiaries and the society would be the casualty.
Learned senior counsel contended that
Section 106
of the
Evidence  Act is not intended for the purpose of filling  up
the   vacuum  in  prosecution	evidence.   He	invited	 our
attention  to the observations made by the Privy Council  in
Attygalle and anr.  vs.	 The King (AIR 1936 PC 169) and also
in
Stephen Seneviratne vs.  The King
(AIR 1936 PC 289).
In
fact  the observations contained therein were considered  by
this  Court in an early decision authored by Vivian Bose, J,
in
Shambhu Nath Mehra vs.  State of Ajmer
(AIR 1956 SC 404).
The  statement	of  law	 made by the learned  Judge  in	 the
aforesaid decision has been extracted by us in
State of West
Bengal	vs.   Mir  Mohammad Omar
(supra).  It is  useful  to
extract	 a further portion of the observation made by us  in
the aforesaid decision:
Presumption of fact is an inference as to the existence
of  one fact from the existence of some other facts,  unless
the  truth  of such inference is disproved.  Presumption  of
fact  is  a  rule in law of evidence that a  fact  otherwise
doubtful  may  be inferred from certain other proved  facts.
When  inferring	 the existence of a fact from other  set  of
proved facts, the court exercises a process of reasoning and
reaches	 a logical conclusion as the most probable position.
The  above  principle has gained legislative recognition  in
India  when
Section 114
is incorporated in the
Evidence Act
.
It  empowers the court to presume the existence of any	fact
which  it  thinks likely to have happened.  In that  process
the  court shall have regard to the common course of natural
events,	 human conduct etc.  in relation to the facts of the
case.
We	pointed out that
Section 106
of the Evidence Act  is
not  intended  to relieve the prosecution of its  burden  to
prove  the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt, but
the  section  would  apply to cases  where  prosecution	 has
succeeded  in proving facts for which a reasonable inference
can be drawn regarding the existence of certain other facts,
unless	the accused by virtue of special knowledge regarding
such facts failed to offer any explanation which might drive
the court to draw a different inference.
We	have  seriously	 bestowed our consideration  to	 the
arguments  addressed by the learned senior counsel.  We only
reiterate  the	legal principle adumbrated in
State of	West
Bengal vs.  Mir Mohammad Omar
(supra) that when more persons
than  one have abducted the victim, who was later  murdered,
it  is within the legal province of the court to justifiably
draw  a presumption depending on the factual situation, that
all  the abductors are responsible for the murder.
Section
34
of	the  IPC could be invoked for the aid to  that	end,
unless	any particular abductor satisfies the court with his
explanation  as	 to  what  else	 he  did  with	the   victim
subsequently,  i.e.  whether he left his associates en-route
or  whether  he dissuaded others from doing the extreme	 act
etc.  etc.


    We	are  mindful of what is frequently happening  during
these  days.   Persons are kidnapped in the sight of  others
and  are  forcibly taken out of the sight of all others	 and
later  the kidnapped are killed.  If a legal principle to be
laid  down  is that for the murder of such  kidnapped  there
should	necessarily  be independent evidence apart from	 the
circumstances enumerated above, we would be providing a safe
jurisprudence  for  protecting	 such  criminal	 activities.
India cannot now afford to lay down any such legal principle
insulating  the	 marauders  of their activities	 of  killing
kidnapped innocents outside the ken of others.
Lastly,  learned counsel invited our attention to a note
which  was recovered by the police from the scene of murder.
That  note  contained the scribbling purported to have	been
authored  by  a group styled as Babbar Khalsa, owning  the
two  murders  of the deceased.	We do not know how the	said
note  would  help the appellant unless he shows that he	 has
nothing	 to  do with that self styled Babbar Khalsa,  even
assuming that the note was left by the murderers without any
intention to mislead the investigation.	 At any rate, we are
not  persuaded	to change our conclusion on the strength  of
the said note.
In	the  result, we confirm the conviction and  sentence
and dismiss this appeal.