[Cites
27
, Cited by
143
]
Supreme Court of India
Jayalakshmi Coelho vs Oswald Joseph Coelho on 28 February, 2001
Equivalent citations: AIR 2001 SUPREME COURT 1084, 2001 AIR SCW 1013, 2001 (2) LRI 109, 2001 (2) SCALE 277, 2001 (4) SCC 181, (2001) 2 ALLMR 229 (SC), (2001) 1 MARRILJ 456, (2001) 2 CGLJ 129, 2001 (4) SRJ 81, (2001) 3 JT 356 (SC), 2001 (2) UJ (SC) 952, 2001 (2) ALL CJ 1094, 2001 (1) MARR LJ 456, (2001) 1 CIVILCOURTC 404, (2001) 1 ANDH LT 115, (2001) 3 MAD LJ 33, (2001) 3 MAD LW 69, (2001) 3 MAH LJ 498, (2001) 2 MAHLR 524, (2001) MATLR 284, (2001) 2 MPLJ 556, (2001) 2 RAJ LW 194, (2001) 2 SCJ 174, (2001) 2 SUPREME 209, (2001) 2 RECCIVR 515, (2001) 2 SCALE 277, (2001) WLC(SC)CVL 313, (2001) 43 ALL LR 168, (2001) 2 ALLCRILR 785, (2001) 2 CIVLJ 278, (2001) 1 DMC 440, (2001) 1 UC 620, (2001) 2 CURCC 6, (2001) 1 HINDULR 682, (2001) 3 BOM CR 132
Author:
Brijesh Kumar
Bench:
Brijesh Kumar
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil) 3609  of  1998



PETITIONER:
JAYALAKSHMI COELHO

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
OSWALD JOSEPH COELHO

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	28/02/2001

BENCH:
Brijesh Kumar, D.P.Mohapatro




JUDGMENT:
L.....I.........T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T..J

      BRIJESH KUMAR, J.
This  appeal  is	preferred against the  Judgment	 and
Order  dated February 17, 1998 passed by a Division Bench of
the  Bombay  High Court in Letters Patent Appeal  No.204  of
1997.	The  Court  of the Principal  Judge,  Family  Court,
Bombay,	  modified  its	 earlier   decree  which  order	 was
challenged  by means of a Writ Petition.  The Writ  Petition
was  dismissed	upholding the order passed by the  Principal
Judge,	Family	Court.	 The impugned order  passed  by	 the
Division  Bench	 confirmed the order of the  learned  Single
Judge  giving  cause of grievance to the appellant.   Hence,
the  present  appeal.	We have heard  Ms.   Indra  Jaising,
learned	 Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant and Shri
A.S.   Bhasme, learned counsel appearing for the respondent.
The  appellant Jayalakshmi Coelho and the respondent  Oswald
Joseph	Coelho got married on January 6, 1977 in  accordance
with  the
Special  Marriage  Act, 1954
.  Out  of  the	said
wedlock,  a  female  child Neisha Anne Coelho  was  born  on
August	1,  1978.  Later, however, differences seem to	have
arisen	between	 the appellant and her husband,	 ultimately,
culminating  into,  the parties agreeing for dissolution  of
their  marriage	 and they entered into an agreement to	that
effect	on  26th July, 1991.  It is stated in the  agreement
that it had become impossible for them to live any longer as
husband	 and  wife  so	they had  decided  to  dissolve	 the
marriage  by  mutual consent.  They had also  settled  other
issues	amicably relating to their properties and custody of
the  child  etc.   in terms as indicated in  the  agreement.
According  to  the agreement, the flat in which the  parties
had  been  living as husband and wife, on certain terms	 and
conditions, was to be transferred by the wife in the name of
the  husband.	The  other   matters  relating	to  jewelry,
ornaments, utensils, personal belongings etc.  had also been
mentioned in the agreement as well as about the fixtures and
furniture in the house.	 It also mentioned about the custody
of the daughter.  The petition for divorce by mutual consent
was filed in the Family Court at Bandra, Bombay on 21.8.1991
under
Section 28
of the Special Marriage Act, 1954.   Apart
from  other  averments,	 made  in the  petition	 for  mutual
divorce, in paragraph 8, it was mentioned that Flat No.11 in
Mon-Bijou  Cooperative Housing Society was purchased by both
the parties out of their own funds in the year 1976.  Though
it  was	 in  the  name	of the	appellant  yet	she  was  to
relinquish her right, title and interest in the said flat in
the  favour  of the respondent, namely, the husband, as	 per
their  agreement  arrived at earlier on 26th of July,  1991.
It  was,  thereafter,  mentioned   that	 the  Memorandum  of
Agreement  may be treated as part and parcel of the  divorce
petition  and  order  be passed	 accordingly.	However,  in
paragraph  14  of the petition, only the  following  reliefs
were   prayed  :-  (a)	that   the  marriage  between	the
Petitioners  solemnized on the 6th day of January, 1977,  at
Bombay be dissolved by a decree of divorce;
(b)  such other reliefs as this Honble Court may deem
fit think and proper.
The  Family  Court  granted the  decree  as  follows:-
DECREE	IN THE FAMILY COURT AT BOMBAY PETITION NO.  AA-1221
OF 1991

      Jayalakshmi  Coelho  Residing  at No.2  Laxmi  Bhawan,
Matunga, Bombay .Petitioner No.1

      And

      Oswald  Joseph  Coelho  Residing at  No.11,  Mon-Bijou
Chimbai Road, Bandra Bombay ..Petititoner No.2
1.   Jayalakshmi Coelho and Oswald Joseph Coelho	have
filed  this  joint  petition  under
Section  23
of  Special
Marriage  Act,	1954  to get a decree of divorce  by  mutual
consent.
2.   Marriage between the petitioners Jayalakshmi	 and
Oswald	took  place  under  the provisions  of	the
Special
Marriage   Act,	 1954
at  Bombay   on	6th  January   1977.
Thereafter  they started dwelling together at Bandra.  Their
marital	 life was also fruitful by birth of daughter  Neisha
Anne  Coelho, who was born on 1st August 1978.	But it seems
that  thereafter  differences arose between the two  and  in
July  1986, Jayalakshmi left the matrimonial house and	went
to  her	 parental house.  Both the parties decided  to	take
divorce by mutual consent.
3.   This	 petition is coming on 7.3.1992 before	Shri
S.D.   Pandit, Judge, Family Court, Bandra.  In presence  of
Petitioner No.1 and 2, suit is decreed.
O R D E R

      Marriage	between	 the   petitioners  Jayalakshmi	 and
Oswald	is  hereby dissolved by decree of divorce by  mutual
consent.
No order as to costs.
The  respondent, namely, the husband, after passing of
the consent decree, as indicated above, moved an application
dated  June  30, 1992 stating therein that decree by  mutual
consent	 was  granted to the parties on 7th March, 1992	 but
the  order  remained  silent  on other	reliefs	 which	were
mentioned  in  the  agreement  and in  paragraph  8  of	 the
petition  relating to transfer of Flat No.11, Mon-Bijou	 Co-
operative  Housing  Society,  60-D,  Chimbai  Road,  Bombay.
According to the agreement dated 26.7.91, the flat was to be
transferred  in	 the  name  of the  husband  on	 payment  of
Rs.1,70,000/- to the wife.  But the said prayer was not made
for  the  reason  as indicated below in paragraph 3  of	 the
petition for modification of decree:-
I	 say that though all these averments and facts were
put  on record, in the petition, both the Petitioners  being
lay persons, and appearing in this Honble Court without the
assistance  of any lawyer, failed to ask for relief, as	 per
the  said  agreement in their prayer clauses.	Consequently
the  Order  passed by this Honble Court remained silent	 on
those reliefs.
It  has  not  been said that the court  wanted  to  or
intended to pass order about transfer of flat but it was not
so  ordered  due to any clerical error or  accidental  slip.
Thereafter,  in the application for modification,  averments
have  been  made to the effect that the respondent,  namely,
the  husband  had been approaching the appellant for  making
the payment of the balance amount of Rs.1,60,000/-, 10,000/-
having been paid earlier, but she had not been accepting the
same  on one pretext or the other and that she was trying to
sell  away the flat to some other person.  Therefore, it had
become	necessary  to move the application praying  for	 the
following  relief in para 10 of the application :- (a) That
this Honble Court be pleased to modify its order and decree
dt.   7th  March, 1992 in M.J.	Petition No.AA	1221/91	 by
including and granting the following prayers :-
(1)  That	 the Opponent (Original Petitioner No.1)  be
directed  by  an order of mandatory injunction	to  transfer
Flat  No.11,  Mon-Bijou	 Co-op.Hsg.  Society  Chimbai  Road,
Bandra,	 Bombay	 400 050, to the name of Petitioner No.2  on
payment	 of Rs.	 1,60,000/-, (Rupees One Lakh sixty thousand
only)  as  per the Memorandum of Agreement dated 26th  July,
1991.
(2)  That	 the  Opponent Original Petitioner  No.1  be
directed  by  an  order of mandatory  injunction  to  remove
herself	 and  her belongings from the said flat No.11,	Mon-
Bijou  Co-op.  Hsg.  Society, Chimbai Road, Bandra 400	050,
forthwith;
(3)  That	 it  be declared that the custody  of  minor
child  Neisha  anne  Coelho  is	 granted  to  the  Applicant
husband.
(b)  Pending  the hearing and final disposal  of	this
application  the  Opponent  Original   Petitioner  No.1	  be
restrained  by	an order of injunction from  disturbing	 the
Petitioner  No.2  is  peaceful	possession  of	flat  No.11,
Mon-Bijou Co-op.  Hsg.	Society Chimbai Road, Bandra, Bombay
400 050.
©	 That the pending the hearing and final of  disposal
of this Application opponent the original Petitioner No.1 be
restrained  by	an order of injunction from selling  parting
with  possession of or creating any third part rights in the
said  flat  No.11, Mon-Bijou Co-op.  Hsg.  Society,  Chimbai
Road, Bandra, Bombay  400 050.
(d)  Interim  and ad interi orders in terms of  prayer
(b) and (c).
(e) For cost of this Application.
(f)  Any other orders that this Honble Court deem fit
in the nature and circumstances of the case.
The  application was opposed and an affidavit in reply
was  filed  by	the appellant-wife.  According	to  her,  no
payment	 was made by the respondent-husband as per the terms
of  the	 agreement  and the allegation that  any  draft	 for
payment was prepared and sent to the appellant was false and
incorrect.   It	 is  not  necessary  to	 mention  all  other
averments  made in reply, about ownership etc.	of the flat.
It  is also denied that in the absence of lawyers, there was
any  handicap,	as the parties are quite educated.  It	was,
however,  also	submitted in the reply that the	 payment  of
Rs.1,60,000/-  was  to be made by the husband-respondent  to
the  appellant-wife  within  4	months	 from  the  date  of
execution of the Memorandum of Agreement.  The agreement was
entered	 into  on  26.7.1991 and the decree of	divorce	 was
granted	 on  7.3.1992,	after  about 7 to 8  months  of	 the
agreement,  but no payment was made.  Raising several  other
pleas, she prayed for the rejection of the application.	 The
Family	Court, on the aforesaid application, passed an order
on  11.11.1992 amending the decree inserting all the Clauses
(1)  to	 (11) of the agreement in the amended  decree.	 The
order  of  amendment  of the decree first states  about	 the
decree	passed on 7.3.1992 and makes the amendment observing
:-  It is hereby ordered and decreed that the consent terms
incorporated  in  Memorandum of Agreement which is the	part
and  parcel  of	 the  Petition be included  in	decree	from
condition No.1 to Condition No.11.
It  is  to be noticed that no such prayer was made  in
the   application  for	incorporating	the  conditions	  of
agreement  in  the  decree.  The prayers were for  grant  of
mandatory  injunction.	So far legal position is  concerned,
there  would hardly be any doubt about the proposition	that
in  terms  of
Section 152
C.P.C., any error occurred in	 the
decree	on  account  of arithmetical or	 clerical  error  or
accidental  slip  may  be  rectified   by  the	court.	 The
principle  behind  the	provision is that  no  party  should
suffer	due to mistake of the court and whatever is intended
by  the	 court	while passing the order or  decree  must  be
properly  reflected  therein,  otherwise it  would  only  be
destructive  to	 the  principle of advancing  the  cause  of
justice.   A  reference to the following cases on the  point
may  be made:  The basis of the provision under
Section	 152
C.P.C.	 is  found  on	the   maxim  Actus  Curiae  Neminem
Gravabit i.e.  an act of Court shall prejudice no man (Jenk
Cent-118)  as  observed	 in  a case  reported  in
AIR	1981
Guwahati  41, The Assam Tea Corporation Ltd.  versus Narayan
Singh  and another
.  Hence, an unintentional mistake of	 the
Court  which  may  prejudice  cause of	any  party  must  be
rectified.  In another case reported in AIR 1962 S.C.  633
I.L.   Janakirama  Iyer and others etc.	 etc.	versus	P.M.
Nilakanta  Iyer	 it  was  found that by	 mistake  word	net
profit	was  written  in  the decree  in  place	 of  mesne
profit.	  This mistake was found to be clear by looking	 to
the  earlier part of the judgment.  The mistake was held  to
be inadvertent.
In
Bhikhi Lal and others versus Tribeni and
others
AIR 1965 S.C.  1935 it was held that a decree  which
was  in	 conformity with the judgment was not liable  to  be
corrected.
In another case reported in
AIR 1966 S.C.	1047
  Master Construction Co.  (p) Ltd.  versus State of Orissa
and  another
it has been observed that arithmetical  mistake
is a mistake of calculation, a clerical mistake is a mistake
in  writing  or	 typing whereas an error arising out  of  or
occurring  from accidental slip or omission is an error	 due
to  careless  mistake on the part of the Court liable to  be
corrected.   To illustrate the point, it has been  indicated
as  an	example that in a case where the order	may  contain
something  which  is not mentioned in the decree would be  a
case  of unintentional omission or mistake.  Such  omissions
are  attributable to the Court who may say something or omit
to say something which it did not intend to say or omit.  No
new  arguments	or re-arguments on merits are  required	 for
such rectification of mistake.	In a case reported in (1999)
3  S.C.C.  500 Dwarakadas Versus State of M.P.	and  Another
this  Court  has  held that the correction in the  order  or
decree	should	be  of	the mistake  or	 omission  which  is
accidental and not intentional without going into the merits
of  the	 case.	It is further observed that  the  provisions
cannot	be  invoked to modify, alter or add to the terms  of
the  original  decree so as to in effect pass  an  effective
judicial  order	 after the judgment in the case.  The  trial
court had not granted the interest pendente lite though such
a  prayer was made in the plaint but on an application moved
under
Section	152
C.P.C.  the interest pendente  lite	 was
awarded	 by  correcting the judgment and the decree  on	 the
ground	that non-awarding of the interest pendente lite	 was
an accidental omission.	 It was held that the High Court was
right  in  setting  aside  the order.  Liberal	use  of	 the
provisions  under
Section 152
C.P.C.  by the Courts  beyond
its  scope has been deprecated.
While taking the above view
this  Court  had  approved the judgment of the	Madras	High
Court  in
Thirugnanavalli Ammal versus P.  Venugopala Pillai
AIR  1940  Madras 29 and relied on Maharaj Puttu Lal  versus
Sripal Singh

      reported	in  AIR 1937 Oudh 191:	ILR 12 Lucknow	759.
Similar	 view is found to have been taken by this Court in a
case  reported	in (
1996) 11 S.C.C.  528 State of Bihar	 and
another	 versus Nilmani Sahu and another
where the Court  in
the guise of arithmetical mistake on re-consideration of the
matter	came to a fresh conclusion as to the number of trees
and  the valuations thereof in the matter which had  already
been  finally  decided.
Similarly  in	  the  case  of
Bai
Shakriben  (dead)  By  Natwar  Melsingh	 and  others  versus
Special	 Land  Acquisition Officer and another
reported  in
(1996)	4 S.C.C.  533 this Court found omission of award  of
additional  amount under
Section 23
(1-A), enhanced interest
under
Section 28
and solatium etc.  could not be treated as
clerical   or	arithmetical  error  in	 the   order.	 The
application  for amendment of the decree in awarding of	 the
amount as indicated above was held to be bad in law.
As  a  matter  of	 fact  such  inherent  powers  would
generally  be  available  to   all  courts  and	 authorities
irrespective  of  the fact whether the provisions  contained
under
Section 152
C.P.C.  may or may not strictly apply  to
any  particular	 proceeding.  In a matter where it is  clear
that  something which the Court intended to do but the	same
was  accidentally  slipped or any mistake creeps in  due  to
clerical  or arithmetical mistake it would only advance	 the
ends of justice to enable the Court to rectify such mistake.
But  before exercise of such power the Court must be legally
satisfied  and	arrive at a valid finding that the order  or
the  decree contains or omits some thing which was  intended
to  be otherwise that is to say while passing the decree the
court  must  have in its mind that the order or	 the  decree
should	be passed in a particular manner but that  intention
is  not translated into the decree or order due to clerical,
arithmetical  error  or	 accidental  slip.   The  facts	 and
circumstances  may  provide clue to the fact as to what	 was
intended  by the court but unintentionally the same does not
find mention in the order or the judgment or something which
was  not intended to be there stands added to it.  The power
of  rectification  of  clerical,   arithmetical	 errors	  or
accidental  slip does not empower the court to have a second
thought	 over the matter and to find that a better order  or
decree	could  or  should be passed..  There should  not  be
re-consideration  of  merits  of  the matter to	 come  to  a
conclusion that it would have been better and in the fitness
of  things to have passed an order as sought to be passed on
rectification.	 On a second thought court may find that  it
may  have committed a mistake in passing an order in certain
terms	but  every  such  mistake   does  not	permit	 its
rectification  in  exercise  of Courts inherent	 powers	 as
contained  under
Section 152
C.P.C.  It is to be confined to
something  initially intended but left out or added  against
such intention.	 So far the legal proposition relied upon by
the  learned  Single  Judge and the Honble  Division  Bench
deciding  the matter in its LPA jurisdiction, we are totally
in  agreement  with the same i.e.  an unintentional  mistake
which  occurred due to accidental slip has to be  rectified.
The  question however which requires consideration is as  to
whether	 on the facts of the present case and the principles
indicated  above,  it  could  be said  that  there  was	 any
clerical  or  arithmetical error or accidental slip  on	 the
part of the Court or not.
Thus  coming  to	the facts of the case it  is  to  be
noticed	 that  in  Paragraph  8 of  the	 main  petition	 for
dissolution  of	 the marriage it has been averred  that	 the
agreement  arrived at between the parties on 26.7.91 may  be
treated as part and parcel of the petition while passing the
order  in the case accordingly.	 The relief however  claimed
in  paragraph 14 of the petition as quoted earlier indicates
that  specifically decree for divorce alone was prayed	for.
There  was no prayer to the effect that the agreement may be
made  a part of the decree or the terms and conditions given
in  the agreement may be incorporated in the decree.  It may
be  observed  that whatever forms part of the petition	does
not  automatically  become  a  part  of	 the  decree  unless
specifically it is so provided.	 It can only be kept in mind
while passing the decree.  The same seems to be the averment
in  paragraph 8 of the petition.  Next, coming to the prayer
made in the application dated June 30, 1992 for modification
of  the	 decree,  it  is for grant of  orders  of  mandatory
injunctions  of	 different nature and in different terms  as
quoted	in the earlier part of this judgment.  Again,  there
is  no prayer for incorporating the terms and conditions  of
the  agreement dated 26.7.1991 in the decree.  So it is	 not
something   which  can	be  said  to  have  been  left	 out
accidentally  earlier.	 Paragraph 3 of the application	 for
modification  quoted  earlier, indicates a different  reason
for not passing decree relating to other matters.  It is not
shown  to  be on the ground of clerical error or  accidental
slip  on  the part of the Court.  We have also	perused	 the
order  dated 11.11.1992 passed by the family court  allowing
the  application  for modification.  It is a  lengthy  order
running into 11 pages at places discussing the merits of the
matter	as well.  Paragraph 5 of the order reads as follows:
It  was	 stated	 by  the  appellant  that  though  original
petition  contain the agreement which was part and parcel of
the  original petition, in which the terms of the modalities
were  agreed  upon by the parties regarding the disposal  of
the  matrimonial  flat.	 Inadvertently those terms were	 not
included  in  decree and therefore the appellant also  prays
that a decree be suitably amended.
According	 to the observations of the Court as  quoted
above the case of the respondent-husband was that it was due
to  inadvertence  that	the terms of the contract  were	 not
included  in  the decree but we find that this was  not	 the
case  of  the  respondent-  husband in Paragraph  3  of	 his
application  for  modification of the order.   according  to
which  the  parties being lay persons without assistance  of
lawyers	 had  failed  to  ask  for the	relief	as  per	 the
agreement  in  their prayer clause.  Consequently order	 was
silent	on  those reliefs.  No averment of  inadvertence  by
reason	of which court may not have included those terms  in
the  decree  has  been	indicated  in  the  application	 for
modification of the decree.  It is only an effort to improve
upon  the  case	 as  taken  up	by  the	 respondent  in	 his
application.  Again we find that in Para 16 of the order the
learned judge of the family court after referring to certain
decisions  cited  by the parties holding some of them to  be
applicable and others not, held as follows:  I have already
pointed	 out  in the earlier paragraph of my  judgment	that
both  the  parties intended to get divorce and agreement  to
that  effect was entered into between the parties which form
part  of  the pleading and both parties	 initially  accepted
that  it should also form part of the decree (underlined by
us to emphasize)

      It  is to be noticed that no such prayer was ever made
by  the	 parties that the agreement should form part of	 the
decree.	  Paragraph 8 of the petition for dissolution of the
marriage  only averred that the agreement be treated as part
and  parcel  of	 the  petition	 while	passing	 the   order
accordingly.  We have already adverted to this aspect of the
matter	in  the earlier part of this judgment.	The  learned
judge  therefore arrived at the conclusion that it  appeared
that  the predecessor in office has inadvertently  forgotten
to  incorporate the terms and conditions of the agreement in
the  decree which was an accidental omission.  It is against
the  case  as taken up by the respondent in his	 application
vide   its  Paragraph  3.    The  unfounded  observation  of
accidental  omission on the part of the Court as made by the
Family	Court  seems to have been taken into account by	 the
learned	 Single	 Judge in the writ petition and the  learned
Division  Bench	 deciding  the matter in appeal.   There  is
nothing	 on the record to indicate that the learned judge of
the  family  court  intended to incorporate  the  terms	 and
conditions  of	the agreement in the decree.  It would	have
been  a	 different  case  if it was  shown  that  the  Court
intended  to  incorporate  those terms but  accidentally  it
slipped	 or  the  court forgot to do so.  But  there  is  no
material on the basis of which intention of the family court
can  be inferred for incorporating the terms and  conditions
of  the agreement in the decree for divorce on the basis  of
which it can be said that whatever was intended by the court
could  not be reflected in the decree.	There is not even  a
whisper	 about	the Memo of Agreement dated 26.7.91  in	 the
narration made in the decree dated 7.3.92.  The respondents
prayer	for grant of mandatory injunction, as quoted in	 the
earlier part of this judgment, by way of modification of the
decree	dated  7.3.1992, has been rightly not granted.	 The
application  was  thus	liable	to be  rejected	 instead  of
incorporating  the terms and conditions of the agreement  in
the  decree  in respect of which no prayer was made  in	 the
application  for modification of decree.  We may also make a
brief mention of one aspect of the matter without meaning to
enter  into  the merits of that question i.e.  in regard  to
the  transfer  of  the flat, which seems to be the  bone  of
contention,   on   payment   of	   Rs.1,70,000/-   by	 the
husband-respondent to the wife.	 Much has been said about it
in  the	 application for modification and in reply  thereof.
The  payment  was to be made within four months of  entering
into  the agreement, that is to say, by 26th November, 1991.
On  such  payment  being made the wife was to  transfer	 the
property  in  favour  of the husband.  The decree  has	been
passed	on  7.3.1992.  Undisputedly the amount has not	been
paid  to the wife.  The payment was ever offered or in time,
if  at all, is a disputed question between the parties which
need  not  be  gone into in these proceedings.	But  it	 may
possibly  have	some  bearing on the question by  reason  of
which  the Family Court did not incorporate the terms of the
agreement  in  the decree or for that reason namely  payment
having	not been made the parties may have preferred to keep
silent	about  it before the Family Court on 7.3.1992  while
the  Court  was	 passing the decree.  The main part  of	 the
agreement  related  to divorce by mutual consent as  it	 had
become	impossible  for the couple to live  together.	This
fact  alone finds mention in the decree passed by the family
court  dated 7.3.1992.	All that we mean to indicate is that
there may be other possible reasons for the family court for
not  incorporating the terms and conditions of the agreement
in   the  decree,  or  the   reason  as	 indicated  by	 the
husband-respondent  in	Paragraph 3 of his  application	 for
modification  of the decree itself.  In the above background
and  looking  to the prayers made by the  respondent-husband
for   granting	 mandatory  injunction	in  our	  view	 the
application   for  rectification  of   decree  was   totally
misconceived  and was only liable to be dismissed rather  to
incorporate  terms  and	 conditions of the  agreement  dated
26.7.1991  in  respect	of which no prayer was made  in	 the
application  for  modification nor in the original  petition
for  dissolution  of  marriage	more  particularly  when  no
accidental  slip  on the part of the Court was indicated  in
the  application nor the same being substantiated.  In	view
of  the	 discussion held above we allow this appeal and	 set
aside  the orders passed by the High Court and family  court
dated	 11.11.1992    allowing	    the	  application	 for
rectification/modification of the decree dated 7.3.1992.  In
the  facts and circumstances of the case there would however
be no order as to costs.
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4152 OF 1991

Municipal Council, Kota, Rajasthan			      Appellant(s)
Versus
The Delhi Cloth & General Mills Co. Ltd.,
Delhi, etc. etc.							   Respondents

WITH

(Civil Appeal Nos.4153/1991, 2994/1984 & 2842/1989)





J U D G M E N T


RAJU, J.
These appeals involve for consideration an interesting question
as to the nature and character of the levy of Dharmada, as it is called
in the form of an octroi by the Municipal Council, Kota in Rajasthan
State, which, according to respondents, is not really an octroi, but the
levy and demand of dharmada tax as such on the goods imported by
the respective respondent-companies into the municipal limits of Kota.
It is necessary to trace the origin of this levy in this part of the State of
Rajasthan.
From the records and materials placed before us, it transpires
that in 1860 A.D. the late Ruler of Kota, claimed to be the Sovereign
Authority to make even laws, imposed, though on the basis of also a
volition expressed by the traders in the locality to pay one such, the
levy of dharmada on the traders of `Nandgaon (the ancient name of
Kota city), as a compulsory levy by the authority of the said law made
by the Ruler.  The Schedule of rates of dharmada, so imposed, was
said to have continued till 1894 when it came to be sanctioned also by
the Resolution dated 6.11.1894 of the Municipality Committee.  This
seems to have in succession followed by another Schedule of octroi
dated 22.11.1922 issued by the Superintendent  of Custom and Chief
Excise Officer, Kota State, revised subsequently in 1923.  It is also
disclosed that prior to 1929 cases of evasion of Chungi/Dharmada
were entertained and decided in the Court of Magistrate, Kota State,
under
Section 106
of the Customs Act, then in force and evasion of
octroi and dharmada were said to have been made even as a penal
act punishable under the said Act.  In the year 1929, the Kota State
Chungi Act was said to have been passed empowering the levy and
collection of dharmada by the Municipal Board, Kota.  In 1959, the
Rajasthan Municipalities Act
saved the operation of the Chungi Act,
1929.
The Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959 (hereinafter called the
Act) enacted a scheme of taxation for imposition of various
categories of taxes by the local authorities classified as obligatory
taxes in Section 104 and other taxes that may be imposed in Section
105, besides making provisions for levy of property tax, etc.  Section
104, as it stood at the relevant point of time, obligated every Municipal
Board by a mandate of law to levy  at such rate and from such date
as the State Government may in each case direct by Notification in the
Official Gazette and in such manner as is
laid down in
this Act and as
may be provided in the rules made by the State Government in this
behalf, the following taxes, namely
(1); (2)  An octroi on goods and
animals brought within the limits of the Municipality for consumption,
use or sale therein.
Coming to the Notifications issued stipulating the rates, it may
be stated at this stage that after the coming into force of the
Constitution of India, several Notifications came to be issued from
time to time such as, i.e., Notification No.F.2(150)LSG/50 dated
21.8.1950; Notification published in the Official Gazette dated
17.12.1951; Notification No.F.150LSG/60 dated 1.2.1962 successively
one after the other, in supersession of the earlier one.
It is seen that subsequently the Government has issued another
Notification dated 13.5.1968 under
Section 104(2)
of the Act
authorising the Municipal Council, Kota, to levy octroi under three sub-
heads for different and specific purpose and objects, namely, (1)
Octroi proper; (2) Dharmada; and (3) Nirkhi, as follows:-
Rajasthan Gazette
Extraordinary

 Jaipur,  May 13, 1968

Notification Tax F.144(2) D.L.B. 161 :-
In supersession of current rates of octroi of
Kota Municipal Board, the State Government in
exercise of power conferred by Section 104(2) of the
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959 (Rajasthan Act
No.38/1959) hereby directs that the octroi will be levied
on goods and animals brought within the limits of Kota
Municipality for use, consumption or sale at the rates
specified in the following Schedule from the date of
publication of the Schedule:
Schedule
Name of Goods		 Specified rate	    Per quantity
Serial Nos. 1 to 101
DHARMADA

1. Grains all types				 0.02 nP    per Qntl.

Upto Serial No.18

ANIMALS AND BIRDS, ETC.
Serial Nos.19 to 31
INFLAMABLE & CLEANING MATERIALS FOR USE AS
FUEL, ETC.
Serial Nos.32 to 40
BUILDING & CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS
Serial Nos.41 to 49
MEDICINES, CHEMICALS, PERFUMES, COSMETIC
MATERIALS,ETC.
Serial No.50


SHAHARNAMA NIRKHI, MUNICIPAL COUNCIL, KOTA

     Grains all types				1.00	    per two

quintals.
Tukham Roghan			0.01


XX				XX			XX


				     By the order the Governor
					 Sd/- P.N. Seth
				  Deputy Secretary(Admn.)
We shall now advert to the history of the present litigation and
the stage at which it has been brought to this Court in the above
appeals with particular reference to the facts in C.A. No.4152/91.  The
respondent-company in C.A. No.4152/91 filed Civil Suit No.51/79 in
the Court of the Additional Munsif and Judicial Magistrate, First Class
No.2, Kota (South), seeking for a prohibitory relief against the
appellant that it should not raise any demand of dharmada tax on any
of the goods imported by the company or take up any other
proceedings for the recovery of the same and the appellant should
neither impose nor realise any Dharmada tax on the raw materials
enumerated in the plaint, when brought by the company within the
Municipal limits of Kota and for a consequential permanent injunction
to that effect.	 The sum and substance of the claim of the respondent-
company was that Section 104(2) enabled the State Government to
authorise and as a consequence thereof, empower the appellant to
levy the octroi tax, the kind of which envisaged in Entry 52 of List II of
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India and that the
Notification dated 13.5.1968 insofar as it empowered the appellant to
levy and collect Dharmada is illegal, unauthorised, unacceptable,
unreasonable and, therefore, null and void.  In justification of the said
plea, it was urged that there is no provision in any of the Entries
contained in List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution for
imposing dharmada tax and in the absence of any specific law made
by the State Legislature, there can be no legal basis for the levy of
dharmada tax by the municipality.  Though, as noticed earlier, in the
judgment of the Division Bench, the English translation of the
Notification issued in 1962 has been extracted, reference is also made
in the plaint to the Notification dated 13.5.1968 with a brief mention of
the contents thereof by stating that under the said Notification the
appellant has been authorised to levy octroi tax on goods brought
within the Municipal limits for sale, consumption and use at the rates
specified in the Schedule to the notification from the date of its
publication in the Official Gazette and that so far as `dharmada is
concerned, below the caption of the word `dharmada  various articles
have been enumerated and found divided into 14 categories and in
every such category not only the names of the articles but the rate of
dharmada on each category of those goods are also specified therein.
It is also one of the objections of the respondent - plaintiff that on the
same goods on which octroi tax is payable, dharmada tax cannot be
imposed at all with two different names.  The stand taken by the
appellant before the Civil Court was that dharmada is not separate
from the octroi levy but on the other hand is part and parcel of the
same levy for a specific purpose and recovered along with the octroi
and, therefore, was well within the power and competency of the
appellant to levy by virtue of the statutory Notification issued under
Section 104(2)
of the Act.  Reliance was also placed on
Article 277
of
the Constitution of India in addition to relying upon the Kota State
Chungi Act, 1929   and
Section 2
of the Rajasthan Municipalities Act
for the continued authority to levy the same.
The learned Trial Judge by his judgment and decree dated
26.11.1979 held that dharmada levy is also octroi and justified under
Section 104(2)
of the Act.  Aggrieved, the respondent-companies
pursued the matter in appeal in Civil Regular Appeal No.District
Judge/12/80 and the learned Additional Civil Judge, Kota, by his
judgment dated 8.9.81 concurred with the conclusion of the learned
Trial Judge and dismissed the appeal.  Thereupon, the matter has
been pursued before the High Court. The learned Single Judge,
placing reliance upon the earlier decision of a Division Bench in D.B.
Special Appeal No.154/73, which is the subject-matter of Civil Appeal
No.2994 of 1984 before us, allowed the claim of the respondent-
company.  It may be pointed out at this stage that the Division Bench
sustained the challenge to the levy at the instance of the respondent-
companies by holding that
Section 104(2)
of the Act only dealt with the
obligatory taxes like octroi and cannot be held to include `dharmada
tax and, therefore, the State Government could not have authorised
the appellant-Municipality to collect dharmada on the entry of goods
within the municipal limits of Kota.  Though the Division Bench while
sustaining the claim of the company therein not only issued a
perpetual injunction restraining the appellant from levying and
collecting any dharmada tax on the goods brought by the company
within the limits of the Municipal Council, but also granted a decree,
though not specifically prayed and sought for as required in law,
directing refund of collections made, the learned Single Judge in the
case dealt with by him though upheld the claim for prohibitory relief,
yet applied the doctrine of undue enrichment and on the view that the
respondent-companies have already realised the dharmada tax paid
by passing over the same to the customer, the company also ought
not to be allowed to retain the same and consequently instead of
ordering refund to the company directed refund of the amounts
collected (within six months) to the State of Rajasthan with a further
direction as to the manner in which such amount has to be utilised by
the State.  It is in such circumstances these appeals have been filed
before this Court by the Municipal Council, Kota.
Mr. Altaf Ahmad, learned Additional Solicitor General appearing
for the appellant, strenuously contended that whatever be the
nomenclature in substance, the levy and collection under the heading
of dharmada being a levy on the entry of goods brought within the
limits of the Muncipality for consumption, use and sale therein, it is
essentially an octroi covered by Entry 52 of List-II of the Seventh
Schedule to the Constitution of India and the mere fact that for
historical reasons and administrative purposes, different names and/or
labels were given to the levy would not change the nature and
character of the tax to render it any the less an octroi or different in
content and character than the one which it really is octroi.  Placing
reliance on the historical origin of the levy, it is also contended that the
collections from the dharmada are being specifically earmarked for
carrying out the charitable objects and obligations such as for feeding
and clothing of the poor and the needy; for giving financial aid to
educational institutions for maintaining Gaushalas and providing
fodder to animals and rearing destitute cows; for taking care of stray
dogs; for performing the last rites of unclaimed dead-bodies; for
running Aushdhalyas, Dharamshalas, water huts; for distribution of
books to poor boys and clothes and blankets to poor people; for giving
subsidies to School, arranging sports, providing aid; for extension of
hospitals and supplying medical instruments for the same and even so
many such charitable schemes and objects.  It is claimed that the levy
thus came to be made as dharmada, though it was well not only open
but within the competency and jurisdiction of the State Legislature as
well as the Government to authorise the Municipality to levy and
collect for all those purposes under the specific category of octroi
itself.	 The levy otherwise made under various headings such as octroi
proper, dharmada and Nirkhi are stated to be only to continue the long
established practice of maintaining the distinction based upon the
different purposes for which the octroi was being levied under different
categories or names.  Argued the learned counsel further that in the
absence of any specific prohibition or restriction in any law governing
the particular levy, the State is entitled to a larger area of discretion
and latitude in fashioning its own scheme, pattern, method or class of
fiscal measures designed in the best possible manner that suits its
financial and budgetary exigencies and necessities. As long as, in pith
and substance, the levy satisfies the character of octroi, it is asserted,
that how and in what form and manner and for what purposes the
octroi or portions of the octroi are collected or utilised should be left to
the discretion of the State.  It is also contended that as a matter of
principle, there is nothing illegal or unlawful and unconstitutional even
to levy more than one tax or rates of tax on the same taxable event as
long as all such levies or rates put together is not shown or
substantiated to be either expropriatory or irrational.
Dr. A.M. Singhvi, learned senior counsel for the appellant in
C.A.No. 4152/91, apart from adopting the submissions of the other
senior counsel, noticed supra, further contended that as long as the
levy satisfied the ingredients of the tax authorised to be imposed, it is
irrelevant as to by what name the same is called or identified and that
the dharmada levy in question having had its origin in pre-constitution
laws at any rate is also saved and protected by virtue of
Article 277
of
the Constitution of India as well as
Section 2
of both the the 1951 and
1959 Act.  Reliance has also been placed on Section 105 (i), (ii), (iii)
and (iv) to justify the levy in question.  Both the learned counsel
appearing for the appellants also relied upon the doctrine of
prospective over-ruling by contending that the High Court ought not to
have interfered with the levy and collections made for the period prior
to the declaration of law by the Court and, at any rate should not have
ordered	 for the refund of the tax already collected and spent on
various charitable objects by the Municipal Council, either to the
respondent-companies or to the Government, particularly when in the
normal course of events the respondent-companies would have
necessarily passed on the same to the consumers with the cost price
of the products manufactured and sold by them.
Shri Shanti Bhushan, learned senior counsel appearing for the
respondent-company, whose submissions have been adopted by the
other learned counsel, with equal vehemence and force, contended
that the levy of tax by the name of dharmada is unknown to law and
there is no authority to provide for imposition of such a tax under the
Constitution either by the State Legislature or the Government and
consequently even by Local Authority and, therefore, the same has
rightly been set aside by the High Court.  It was also contended that
Section 104(2)
of the Act empowers the Government only to prescribe
the rate and date for the levy of octroi  in the manner provided in the
Act and the Rules and, therefore, the very language of the Section
precludes any argument that dharmada  could be included in the octroi
in any manner.	Dharmada, it is contended, is a well-known concept
and when the same Notification issued by the Government advisedly
stipulates levy of octroi and dharmada separately, both cannot be
claimed to be the same but instead considered as separate levies
altogether.  It is also further contended that municipal fund created has
to be applied in respect of various purposes enumerated in Sections
98, 99, 101 and 102 and the sum collected could not be sent on
Gaushalas, an item totally not permitted under law.  Anything in
excess of the rates fixed as octroi cannot be said to be octroi at all,
according to the respondents, and therefore, dharmada sought to be
levied over and above, by a separate name cannot also be called
octroi.	 So far as the relief of refund granted is concerned, it has been
contended for the respondents that there is no material on record to
show that they have passed on the tax to the consumers and that a
levy, which has been held to be unauthorised and illegal, if found to
have been also collected by a public authority, has to be refunded to
the person who paid it under the coercion of law.
Reference has also
been made to the interim orders passed by this Court during the
pendency of the appeals,  granting leave to the appellant to recover
from the companies, half of the dharmada tax due with effect from the
date of the High Court Judgment with a further condition that in the
event of the appeal being dismissed the amount recovered should be
refunded to the company with interest  at 12% per annum.
Consequently, it is contended that the appellants must be made to
refund the tax collected in terms of the orders of this Court once their
claims in the appeal fail and no plea based either on the `doctrine of
undue enrichment or the principle of prospective over-ruling could be
permitted to be even raised.  In traversing the claim of the appellant
based on
Articles 277
and
376
of the Constitution of India, it has been
urged that those Articles will have no relevance or application to the
cases on hand.	Reliance has been placed upon the decision reported
in
The Commissioner of Income Tax, (Central) Delhi, New Delhi
Vs. Bijli Cotton Mills (P) Ltd., Hathras, District Aligarh
[(1979) 1
SCC 496], to substantiate the stand based upon the nature and
character of Dharmada sought to be levied and collected.
We have carefully considered the submissions of the learned
counsel appearing on either side in the light of the case law placed
before us for our consideration.   The main issue that looms large for
consideration in these appeals is as to the real character and nature of
the levy sought to be imposed and collected under the name of
Dharmada and if the answer is to be that it is in no way different from
octroi and it is one and the same it  would become unnecessary for us
to advert to the other aspects of the submission made on either side.
The genetic history of levy of octroi has been judicially noticed
by this Court on many an occasion.
In
Burmah-Shell Oil Storage
and Distributing Co. of India Ltd., Belgaum Vs. Belgaum	 Borough
Municipality, Belgaum
[AIR 1963 SC 906] a Constitution Bench of
this Court not only traced the emergence of this concept as a limb of
public finance but also succinctly noticed the successive stages of its
development before it got crystallised into a topic of legislative power
as enumerated in Entry 52 of List-II of the Seventh schedule to the
Constitution of India in the following manner:
14. The particular tax was octroi and there
was no description of the tax.	The word octroi
comes from the word octroyer which means
to grant and in its original use meant an
import or a toll or a town duty on goods
brought into a town.  At first octrois were
collected at ports but being highly productive,
towns began to collect them by creating octroi
limits.	 They came to be known as Town
duties.	 These were collected not only on
imports but also on exports see Beuhler:
Public Finance (3rd Edn.) p. 426.  Grice in his
National and Local Finance p.303 says that
they were known as ingate tolls because they
were collected at toll gates or barriers.
Normally, they were levied on goods meant for
consumption but in Seligmans Encyclopaedia
of Social Sciences Volume IX page 570,
octrois are described without any reference to
consumption or use.  This is how the editors
describe octrois:-
As compared with the facilities of
the National Government the
possibilities of raising revenue by
local bodies are quite limited.	 All
forms of indirect taxation are
practically closed to local
authorities.  They are unable to
levy customs duties, although they
may collect the so-called octrois;
that is, duties levied on goods
entering town.
15. It will be noticed that in the
Government of
India Act
octroi was named but not described
and now the Constitution avoids the word
octroi, as did the
Government of India Act
1935 before, and gives a description.  In the
Boroughs Act the definition of octroi includes
Terminal Tax.  Terminal tax, as the Indian
Statutory Commission points out, formerly
meant in Indian fiscal terminology a tax which
was levied at Railway Stations and collected
by the Railway Administration on all goods
imported or exported from the Station.	It was
also collected from passengers in some
municipalities.	 We also learn from the Report
that on the recommendation of a Committee
appointed in 1908 terminal tax took the place
of octroi in a large number of Municipalities at
first in the United Provinces and then in others.
At first the Government of India were not in
favour of such a change.  Octrois were levied
on goods brought into a local area for
consumption, use or sale and were indirect
taxes but terminal taxes were regarded as
direct.	 On July 6, 1917, the Government of
India by a Resolution reversed their former
policy and agreed that the conversion was not
a change from indirect to direct taxation.
Terminal taxes were of the nature of octrois,
but were not quite the same.  The main
differences were, that there was no system of
refunds under the Terminal Tax Rules
(Terminal taxes as Findlay Shirras tells us
were sometimes known as octrois without
refunds) and for octroi to be levied the goods
must be brought in for sale, use or
consumption.
16. After the Scheduled-tax Rules the
collection of terminal tax was restricted to
those areas in which octroi was levied on or
before July 6, 1917.  Most of the municipal
laws allowed collection of terminal taxes only if
octrois were not levied.  As the Taxation
Enquiry Commission observes: (Vol. III Ch. IV
page 401).
the most important
difference lies in the requirement
peculiar to octroi that, for this tax to
become leviable, the goods must
not only enter the area, but must
be for the purpose of
consumption, use or sale therein.
Usually, this requirement is sought
to be satisfied by (a) the ab initio
exemption of the goods which
merely pass through the area,
whether the exit is immediate or
after an interval, or (b) by the
subsequent refund of the tax
collected on such goods.
Exemptions and refunds, therefore,
are the distinguishing features of
the octroi system.
17. Octrois and terminal taxes were different
taxes though they resembled in one respect,
namely, that they were leviable in respect of
goods brought into a local area.  While
terminal taxes were leviable on goods
imported or exported from the Municipal limits
denoting thereby that they were connected
with the traffic of goods, octrois, according to
the legislative practice then obtaining were,
leviable in respect of goods brought into a
Municipal area for consumption or use or sale.
It is not necessary to cite the Municipal Acts
prior to 1935 but a reference to them will amply
prove that such was the tax which was
contemplated as octroi.
18.
When the Government of India Act
1935
was enacted terminal taxes became a central
subject, vide entry No. 58 of List 1, which
reads as follows:-
58. Terminal taxes on goods or
passengers carried by railway or
air.
At that time, it was suggested by Sir
Walter Leyton that both octrois and terminal
taxes should be provincial subjects and that it
would perhaps be possible to fuse the two.
The Joint Committee, however, recommended
otherwise and terminal taxes were separated
from octrois and included in the central list.
The proceeds of the terminal taxes, however,
were to be distributed among the provinces.  In
allocating octrois to the Provinces, the word
itself was avoided because terminal taxes are
also octroi in a sense and instead a description
of the tax was mentioned in entry No.49, which
has been quoted already, and which read
Cesses on the entry of goods into a local area
for consumption, use or sale.  This scheme
has been repeated in the Constitution with the
difference that the entry relative to terminal tax
now reads terminal taxes on goods and
passengers carried by railway, sea or air, and
the word taxes replaced the word cesses in
the entry relative to octrois.
19. The history of these two taxes clearly
shows that while terminal taxes were a kind of
octroi which were concerned only with the
entry of goods in a local area irrespective of
whether they would be used there or not;
octrois were taxes on goods brought into the
area for consumption, use or sale.  They were
leviable in respect of goods put to some use or
other in the area but only if they were meant
for such user.
When the Government of India
Act
, in its Scheduled Tax Rules, mentioned
octrois, it intended to give the power to levy
taxes in this well-understood sense, namely,
on the entry of goods in a local area for
consumption, use or sale.
There is no challenge in these cases to the levy of octroi as such
but what is questioned is that which is purported to be levied and
collected as Dharmada only which though the appellant Municipal
Council would contend is only a levy of octroi for Dharmada purposes
or to meet the obligations cast upon the council to carry out the
various public charitable objects enumerated under
Sections 98
,
99
,
101
and
102
of the Act, is challenged by the respondent-companies to
be a different and separate tax, unwarranted, unauthorised and
uncalled for under the provisions of the
Constitution, the Act
and
notification issued under
Section 104 (2)
of the Act and therefore,
illegal.  Though, strong reliance has been placed upon the decision
reported in (1979) 1 SCC 496 (supra) to contend that a payment of
Dharmada is always understood as a gift or voluntary payment by
commercial or trading custom for charitable purposes, in our view the
said judgment though may be of help to understand the nature of
Dharmada collected by traders from customers as a customarily
established trade practice in certain areas or fields can be of no
assistance whatsoever for determining the legality, propriety and
validity of the notification issued under
Section 104 (2)
of the Act or
the levy and recovery of octroi sought to be made under the heading
of  Dharmada.  Yet another important fact to be noticed and firmly
recorded is that there is no challenge by the respondent-companies to
the levy on the ground that the levy and collection of Dharmada and
Nirkhi under the Notification taken together with octroi or separately as
octroi renders the levy either expropriatory or irrational, since such
issues pertaining to the constitutional validity of a levy cannot be
raised before ordinary civil courts and that too in a collateral manner,
in a bare suit for injunction.
Entry 52 of List-II of the Seventh schedule to the Constitution of
India enables the State Legislatures to enact a law providing for the
levy and collection of taxes on the entry of goods into a local area for
consumption, use or sale therein otherwise known as octroi and/or
authorise the local authorities concerned to levy and collect the same.
Section 104 (2)
of the Act enables every Municipal Board to levy at
such rate and from such date as the State Government direct by
notification in the official gazette and in such manner as provided in
the Act and the rules to be made by the Government an octroi on
goods and animals  brought within the limits of the Municipality for
consumption, use or sale therein.  The levy of tax envisaged under
Section 104 as a whole, has been classified as `obligatory tax with a
duty to levy, once notified by the Government, unless specifically got
exempted from doing so from the Government by means of a
notification, therefor under the proviso, thereto.
The Notification under challenge issued in the undoubted and
indisputed exercise of powers under
Section 104 (2)
of the Act provide
a schedule enumerating the class or category of goods and the rate of
tax obligated to be levied by the Municipal Board.  In the said schedule
apart from specifying the levy to be made as octroi provision has
been made to levy also Shaharnama Dharmada and Nirkhi
Shaharnama with a specific enumeration and description of the class
or category of goods, as and when such goods are brought into the
Municipal limits for consumption, use or sale therein and the rates as
well.  The scheme underlying the notification issued in exercise of the
powers under
Section 104 (2)
of the Act seem to be to provide for an
additional levy and collection of octroi on certain class or category of
goods, under the nomenclature of Dharmada or Nirkhi, indicative
more of the specific purpose or object of the demand so made but
again only on goods brought within the limits of the Kota Municipality
for consumption, use or sale demonstrating thereby that the collection
under the name of Dharmada as well as Nirkhi is also by way of an
octroi, the levy being on the very and only incidence of the entry of the
goods and animals within the municipal limits for consumption, use or
sale therein. If that be the correct position could it be legitimately
questioned or challenged on the mere ground or for the only reason of
there being a multiple rates of levy or double taxation.
Whenever a challenge is made to the levy of tax, its validity may
have to be mainly determined with reference to the legislative
competence or power to levy the same and in adjudging this issue the
nature and character of the tax has to be inevitably determined at the
threshold.  It is equally axiomatic that once the legislature concerned
has been held to possess the power to levy the tax, the motive with
which the tax is imposed become immaterial and irrelevant and the
fact that a wrong reason for exercising the power has been given also
would not in any manner derogate from the validity of the tax.
In M/s
Jullundur Rubber Goods Manufacturers Association vs The
Union of India and another
(AIR 1970 SC 1589) this Court while
dealing with a challenge to the levy of rubber cess under
Section 12
(2)
of the Rubber Act, 1947 as amended in 1960 observed that the tax
in the nature of excise duty does not cease to be one such merely
because the stage of levy and collection has been as a matter of
legislative policy shifted by actually providing for its levy and collection
from the users of rubber, so long as the character of the duty as
excise duty is not lost and the incidence of tax remained to be on the
production or manufacture of goods.  Likewise, once the legislature is
found to possess the required legislative competence to enact the law
imposing the tax, the limits of that competence cannot be judged
further by the form or manner in which that power is exercised.
In
(Morris) Leventhal and others vs David Jones, Ltd. (AIR 1930 PC
129), the question arose as to the power of the legislature to impose
Bridge Tax, when the power to legislate was really in respect of tax
on land.  It was held therein as follows:
The appellants contention that though directly
imposed by the legislature, the bridge tax is
not a land tax, was supported by argument
founded in particular on two manifest facts.
The bridge tax does not extend to land
generally throughout New South Wales, but to
a limited area comprising the City of Sydney
and certain specified shires, and the purpose
of the tax is not that of providing the public
revenue for the common purposes of the State
but of providing funds for a particular scheme
of betterment.	No authority was vouched for
the proposition that an impost laid by statute
upon property within a defined area, or upon
specified classes of property, or upon specified
classes of persons, is not within the true
significance of the term a tax.	 Nor so far as
appears has it ever been successfully
contended that revenue raised by statutory
imposts for specific purposes is not taxation.
[Emphasis supplied]

	A Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court, in a decision
reported in Raza Buland Sugar Co. Ltd., Rampur vs Municipal
Board, Rampur (AIR 1962 Allahabad 83) had an occasion to consider
the nature and character of an impost levied by the name, water tax,
when the power was to levy tax on buildings.
The Division Bench,
while applying the ratio in
AIR 1930 PC
129 (supra) held as
hereunder:
5. Tax means burden of charges imposed by
the legislative power of a State on person or
property to raise money for public purposes.
The expression fee connotes recompense for
services rendered.  There is an element of
quid pro quo in the case of fee.  It is not so in
the case of a tax.  The learned counsel for the
petitioner pointed out that cl.(b) of Sec.129
provides that water tax is to be imposed solely
with the object of defraying the expenses
connected with construction, maintenance,
extension or improvement of municipal water
works and that all moneys derived therefrom
shall be expended on the aforesaid object.  He
argued that the fact that the money raised from
water tax is to be spent only on the supply of
water, introduces an element of quid pro quo.
The argument does not appear to be tenable.
Sec.129 (B) mentions the object of the tax.  As
the maintenance of regular supply of water and
extending the supplies is one of the most
beneficial public purposes, the section lays
down that the money realised from this impost
is to be spent on the construction,
maintenance and extension of water works so
that the purpose may not suffer on account of
paucity of funds.  In (Morris) Leventhal vs
David Jones Ltd., AIR 1930 PC 129, their
Lordships of the Judicial Committee held that
there was no authority for the proposition that
revenue raised by statutory imposts for specific
purposes is not taxation.
XX			    XX				    XX
10. It is obvious that the subject-matter of
water tax is not water.	 Though it is called
water tax, it is not levied on its production.	As
explained by their Lordships of the Judicial
Committee in Governor-General in Council vs
Province of Madras, AIR 1945 P. C. 98, it is
not the name of the tax but its real nature, its
pith and substance as it has sometimes been
said, which must determine into what category
it falls.			       [Emphasis supplied]

	We affirm the statement of law thus made above to be correct
and in our view it is not the nomenclature used or chosen to christen
the levy  that is really relevant or determinative of the real character or
the nature of the levy, for the purposing of adjudging a challenge to
the competency or the power and authority to legislate or impose a
levy.  What really has to be seen is the pith and substance or the real
nature and character of the levy which has to be adjudged, with
reference to the charge viz., the taxable event and the incidence of the
levy.  We are convinced on the indisputable facts on record that the
levy sought to be imposed and recovered as Dharmada being only on
the goods brought within the municipal limits of Kota for consumption,
use or sale therein the same in truth, reality and substance is only an
octroi for the purpose of carrying out the several public charitable
objects statutorily enjoined upon the Municipal Board and enumerated
in Sections 98 and 99 and those undertaken pursuant to the
stipulations contained in
Sections 101
and
102
of the Act.  The mere
fact that it is called by a different name (all the more so when the word
octroi itself is not found used in Entry 52 of List-II of the Seventh
Schedule) for historical reason and administrative needs or exigencies
by the draftsmen of the notification does not in any manner either
undermine the nature and character of the levy or render it any the
less a levy envisaged under Entry 52 of List-II of the Seventh
Schedule. The various charitable objects and ameliorative schemes
and projects for which the taxes realised under the classified head of
Dharmada are claimed to be spent cannot as the provisions of the Act
stand enacted be said to be either unauthorised or without the
sanction of law.  That, apart, the irregularity or illegality, if any involved
in spending the sum after collection cannot have any impact on or
adversely affect, the otherwise competency of the Authority concerned
to impose a levy, well within its legislative competence and further not
shown to be violative of any provisions of the Constitution of India.
Neither the High Court has gone into any such question of illegality in
the matter of spending the tax realised nor are there any materials on
record placed before us to substantiate any such claim by the
respondent-companies in this regard.
There is no warrant or justification in law for the High Court
proceeding on an assumption that permitting the levy even as octroi
twice over would suffer the vice of double taxation and therefore bad
in law, unmindful of the well settled position of law in this regard, also.
A Constitution Bench of this Court in the decision reported in M/s Jain
Bros. and others vs The Union of India and others (AIR 1970 SC
778) in unmistakable terms declared the position to be as hereunder:
It is not disputed that there can be double
taxation if the legislature has distinctly enacted
it.  It is only when there are general words of
taxation and they have to be interpreted they
cannot be so interpreted as to tax the subject
twice over to the same tax (vide Channell, J.,
in Stevens v. The Durban-Roddepoort Gold
Mining Co. Ltd., (1909) 5 Tax Cas 402.	The
Constitution does not contain any prohibition
against double taxation even if it be assumed
that such a taxation is involved in the case of a
firm and its partners after the amendment of
Section 23 (5)
by the Act of 1956.  Nor is there
any other enactment which interdicts such
taxation. It is true that
Sec.3
is the general
charging section.  Even if
Section 23(5)
provides for the machinery for collection and
recovery of the tax, once the legislature has, in
clear terms, indicated that the income of the
firm can be taxed in accordance with the
Finance Act
of 1956 as also the income in the
hands of the partners, the distinction between
a charging and a machinery section is of no
consequence.  Both the sections have to be
read together and construed harmoniously.  It
is significant that similar provisions have also
been enacted in the Act of 1961.  Sections 182
and 183 correspond substantially to
Section 23
(5)
except that the old section did not have a
provision similar to sub-section (4) of Section
182.  After 1956, therefore, so far as registered
firms are concerned the tax payable by the firm
itself has to be assessed and the share of
each partner in the income of the firm has to
be included in his total income and assessed
to tax accordingly.  If any double taxation is
involved the legislature itself has, in express
words, sanctioned it.  It is not open to any one
thereafter to involve the general principles that
the subject cannot be taxed twice over.
In Avinder Singh etc., vs State of Punjab and another (AIR
1979 SC 321) this Court has once again held as follows:
A feeble plea that the tax is bad because of
the vice of double taxation and is
unreasonable because there are heavy prior
levies was also voiced.	 Some of these
contentions hardly merit consideration, but
have been mentioned out of courtesy to
counsel.  The last one, for instance, deserves
the least attention.  There is nothing in
Art.265
of the Constitution from which one can spin out
the constitutional vice called double taxation.
(Bad economics may be good law and vice
versa).	 Dealing with a somewhat similar
argument, the Bombay High Court gave short
shrift to it in Western India Theatres, AIR 1954
Bom. 261.  Some undeserving contentions die
hard, rather survive after death.  The only
epitaph we may inscribe is: Rest in peace and
dont be re-born!  If on the same subject-
matter the legislature chooses to levy tax twice
over there is no inherent invalidity in the fiscal
adventure save where other prohibitions exist.
In
Sri Krishna Das vs Town Area Committee, Chirgaon
[1990
(
3) SCC 645] and Radhakishan Rathi vs Additional Collector, Durg
& Ors.
[1995 (4) SCC 309] the same position is found reiterated.
Though taxation of the same thing under different names is
nonetheless double taxation in popular sense, the expertise
exposition of the topic seem to also lean in favour of the revenue, in
that the legislature has been considered to possess the power to levy
one or more tax or rates of tax on the same taxable event and since in
these areas large latitude and wide discretion has always been
allowed to the State to choose its own method or kind of tax or mode
and purpose of levy and recovery, unless there is any prohibition in the
Constitution or the very law enacted by the legislature itself prevents
such a thing happening no infirmity can be said to vitiate such a levy.
Wherever the taxes are imposed by different legislatures or authorities
or where one of the two alone is a tax or where it is for altogether
different purposes or when it is indirect rather than direct, there is no
scope even for making any grievance of double taxation, at all.	 In the
absence of any impediment specifically created in the Constitution of a
country or the legislative enactment itself, the desirability or need
otherwise to avoid such levies has been held to pertain to areas of
political wisdom of policy making and adjusting of public finances of
the State, and not for the Law Courts, though Courts would unless
there is clear and specific mandate of law in favour of such multiple
levies more than once, in construing general statutory provisions lean
in favour of an interpretation to avoid double taxation.  So much are
the principles or statement of law governing a challenge to any levy on
the ground of Double Taxation.
Now coming to the facts and circumstances of the cases before
us, we find that the levy is specific, definite and positive in terms, with
a definitely disclosed object leaving no room for any doubt or any
exercise to clear such assumed doubts.	We have carefully gone
through the original Notification in vernacular published in the Gazette
dated 13.5.1968, noticed supra, and we find that the rates of the levy
under challenge have been notified as part and parcel of one and the
same Schedule to the said Notification and not by any different or
more than one Schedule and that too by means of a simultaneous
exercise of powers under
Section 104(2)
of the Act and not on
different occasion or time.  Though it is seen that some of the
classified items or commodities enumerated in various Entries overlap
those found in the other Entries under different captions including
Dharmada, they are not mere mechanical repetitions in toto, viewed
either from their classification, enumeration or determination of the
rates as well as the measure or quantity with reference to which the
actual levy is to be made and collected.  Therefore, the mere
stipulation of plurality of rates in respect of some or the other of the
commodities/goods under different classified groups for different
purpose by itself will not render it to be dubbed or castigated as
`Double Taxation for spearheading a challenge on them.	The
Notification under consideration cannot, in our view, be said to involve
the imposition of any double tax and the High Court has gone wrong in
proceeding upon such an erroneous assumption and declaring
thereby the levy for Dharmada purposes to be bad and illegal.
For all the reasons stated above, the appeals are accepted and
allowed.  The judgments of the High Court allowing the claims of the
respondent companies by granting injunction and refund are hereby
set aside.  The suits filed by the respondent-companies shall stand
dismissed. But in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order
as to costs.
..J.
									( V. N. Khare )


..J.
									( Doraiswamy Raju )


New Delhi,
March 2, 2001.
13
29