[Cites
12
, Cited by
91
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Punjab & Ors vs Bhajan Singh & Anr on 27 February, 2001
Equivalent citations: AIR 2001 SUPREME COURT 1098, 2001 (3) SCC 565, 2001 AIR SCW 968, (2001) 3 JT 249 (SC), 2001 (2) SCALE 246, 2001 (2) LRI 136, 2001 (4) SRJ 108, 2001 (3) JT 249, 2001 (2) UJ (SC) 1128, (2001) 2 SCALE 246, (2001) 2 LANDLR 53, (2001) 2 RAJ LW 185, (2001) 3 SUPREME 179, (2001) 2 RECCIVR 507, (2001) 4 ICC 482
Bench:
K.T.Thomas
,
R.P.Sethi
CASE NO.:
 Special Leave Petition (crl.) 9325-9326  of  2000



PETITIONER:
STATE OF PUNJAB & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
BHAJAN SINGH & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	27/02/2001

BENCH:
K.T.Thomas, R.P.Sethi




JUDGMENT:
L.....I.........T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T..J

      SETHI,J.	  Leave	 granted.    Election  process	 was
scuttled and the democratic values throttled by a bureaucrat
who  happened  to  be  Principal   Secretary  of  the  Local
Government  Department (hereinafter referred to as "the said
Secretary")  of	 the State of Punjab at the  relevant  time.
Flouting  all  norms,  violating  statutory  provisions	 and
showing	 scant	respect to the principles of law,  the	said
Secretary    deprived	respondent     No.1,   the   elected
representative	of the people, to perform his duties firstly
as  Member  and then as the President of  the  Municipality,
obviously to oblige his political opponents who incidentally
happened  to  belong to the ruling parties (Shiromani  Akali
Dal  and BJP) in the State of Punjab.  Inaction attributable
to  the	 said  Secretary  in performance  of  his  statutory
obligations  and instead ill-action taken by him is a matter
of  concern  not only for the respondent No.1 but all  those
who  believe  in  the  rule  of	 law  and  the	preservance,
development and conservation of democratic institutions with
their  values  in the country.	There is no gainsaying	that
free,  fair,  fearless	and   impartial	 elections  are	 the
guarantee  of a democratic polity.  For conducting,  holding
and  completing the democratic process, not only a potential
law  based  upon requirements of the society tested  on	 the
touchstone  of experience of times, but also an independent,
impartial  apparatus  for implementing and giving effect  to
the results of the election is the sine qua non for ensuring
the   compliance  of  statutory	  provisions   and   thereby
strengthening  the  belief of the common man in the rule  of
law, assured to be given to the people of this country.	 Any
attempt	 made  to weaken the system, particularly  when	 its
intention  is likely to affect the socio-political fabric of
the  society,  if not checked and curtailed, may  result  in
consequences  which could not be else but disastrous to	 the
system.	  No  person,  much  less a civil  servant,  can  be
permitted  to frustrate the Will of the people expressed  at
the  elections, by his acts of omission and commission.	 The
law relating to the elections is the creation of the statute
which  has to be given effect to strictly in accordance with
the  Will  of  the Legislature.	 The respondent NO.1  was  a
candidate  to the elections of the Muncipal Council, Samrala
(Punjab)  held	on 2.1.1998.  He was a candidate of the	 CPI
(M)  and was elected as a Municipal Councillor along with 12
others.	   A  meeting  was   called  by	 the  Sub-Divisional
Magistrate  on	6.4.1998  for	administering  the  oath  of
allegiance  to the elected members of the Municipal  Council
and  for  election of its President and Vice President.	  It
appears	 that all the elected members, with the exception of
those  belonging to BJP and Shiromani Akali Dal attended the
meeting	 and  took the oath.  Congress Members proposed	 the
name  of respondent No.1 and the Returning Officer  declared
him  elected as President of the Municipal Council (Annexure
P-6).	Despite	 election  of  the President  and  the	Vice
President,  the	 notification in terms of
Section 24
of	 the
Punjab	Municipal Act, 1911 (hereinafter referred to as "the
Act")  was not issued by the State Government.	Aggrieved by
the  inaction  of  the	appellants,  particularly  the	said
Scretary,  the	respondent  No.1 on 15.5.1998 filed  a	writ
petition being Writ Petition No.7105 of 1998 praying therein
for  the  issuance  of	a writ	of  mandamus  directing	 the
appellants  to issue notification regarding his election  as
President  of the Municipal Council, Samrala in the  meeting
held  on  6.4.1998.   Written  statement in  the  said	writ
petition  was filed in the High Court on 13th August,  1998.
In  the	 meanwhile  a show cause notice dated  1.7.1998	 was
issued	to  the	 respondent NO.1 proposing  to	take  action
against	 him under
Section 16(1)(e)
of the Act and  removing
him  from the Membership of Nagar Panchayat/Council, Samrala
(Ludhiana).   The  show cause notice was accompanied by	 the
details of the allegations wherein it was stated:  "Regional
Deputy	Director,  Local Government, Ludhiana has  intimated
vide  his letter No.DDLG/S3/ 2258 dated 21.4.1998 before the
issuance of the notification for the President in accordance
with  the instructions of the Government you have interfered
in  the	 working  of the Nagar Council and  did	 not  behave
properly.   By	doing so you have misused the powers  vested
under
Section	16(1)(e)
of the Punjab Municipal Act,  1911.
Therefore,  it	is  proposed to take  action  under
Section
16(1)(e)
of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 and to remove him
from the membership."
The  respondent No.1 submitted his reply on 23rd July,
1998   and   the  said	 Secretary  vide  his	notification
No.6/16/980-3LGIII/4498	  dated	   9.4.1998    removed	 the
respondent  No.1  not only from the Presidentship  but	also
from  the Membership of the Nagar Council, Samrala.  Feeling
aggrieved,  the respondent No.1 filed a writ petition in the
High  Court  which  was allowed vide the order	impugned  by
quashing   the	impugned  notification	 and   issuance	  of
directions  to the respondents therein to notify the name of
the  respondent	 No.1 herein within a week.  The  respondent
No.1  was  also held entitled to the payment of costs  which
was  quantified	 at Rs.10,000/-.  Assailing the judgment  of
the High Court, Mr.Rajiv Dutta, Senior Advocate who appeared
for the appellants submitted that as the respondent No.1 had
not  been  properly  elected as President of  the  Municipal
Council,  he by assuming the charge of that post abused	 his
position  and incurred a disqualification to be a member  of
the  Municipal Council.	 Referring to
Sections 16
and
24
of
the  Act,  the	learned Senior Advocate submitted  that	 the
action	of the said Secretary was legal, valid and according
to  law.  The judgment of the High Court has been termed  to
be  contrary to law.  According to him, the State Government
had  the discretion to notify or not to notify the  election
of  the President in terms of sub-section (2) of
Section  24
of the Act.  It is contended that as the respondent No.1 was
proved to have 'flagrantly abused' the position as Member of
the Council, he had incurred a disqualification under clause
(e)  of	 sub-section (1) of
Section 16
which  justified	 the
action	by  the appellants for his removal.
Chapter III  of
the  Act
deals with the constitution of Council  which	 has
been  defined under
Section 2(4)
to mean a Municipal Council
or  a Nagar Panchayat, as the case may be, constituted under
Section	 12
of	 the  Act.  Under
Section  13A
,  the  State
Government  has been empowered to direct holding of  general
elections  of  the  members  of	 the  Municipalities  or  an
election  to  fill  the casual vacancy by  the	issuance  of
notification.	As  soon  as a notification is	issued,	 the
Election  Commissioner	is mandated to take necessary  steps
for holding such elections.  It may be noticed at this stage
that  the  general  elections  to   the	 Panchayat  and	 the
Municipalities	are  to be conducted by the  State  Election
Commission  constituted	 under	the
Punjab  State  Election
Commission  Act, 1994
(Punjab Act No.19 of 1994).  After the
general elections of the Municipality, election of President
and Vice President is to be conducted in terms of
Section 20
of  the	 Act.  The term of the office of the President of  a
Municipality  is  co-terminus with the term of	Municipality
under
Section	21
of	the Act.  No  elected  member  of  a
Municipality  can enter upon his duties as such member until
he  has taken or made, at a meeting of the Municipality,  an
oath  or affirmation of his allegiance to India in the	form
prescribed under sub-section (1) of
Section 24
.	 Sub-section
(2)  of
Section  24
of   the	Act  provides:	 "The  State
Government  shall  notify  in  the  Official  Gazette  every
election  of a President of a Municipality and no  President
shall enter upon his duties as such until his election is so
notified:
Provided	that  the  State Government  may  refuse  to
notify	the  election  as President of any  person  who	 has
incurred  a  disqualification  under this Act or  under	 any
other  law  for the time being in force, subsequent  to	 his
election as member of the Municipality;
Provided	further that the State Government shall	 not
refuse	to  notify  the election of  the  President  without
giving	an  opportunity	 of  being heard  to  the  concerned
person."
It  is  not  disputed  that despite  the	election  of
respondent  No.1 as President on 6.4.1998, a notification in
terms  of  sub-section (2) of
Section 24
of the Act was	 not
issued	forcing	 the respondent NO.1 to file  Writ  Petition
No.7105	 of 1998 in the High Court on 15.5.1998.  We do	 not
agree  with  the  argument  of	 Mr.Dutta  that	 the   State
Government  or the said Secretary had an unbriddled power or
option	to  notify  or	not to notify the  election  of	 the
President  in  the Official Gazette.  Such an argument	will
not  only  be contrary to the concept of democracy  and	 the
rule of law but in fact flagrant violation of the mandate of
the  Act as incorporated in Sub-section (2) of
Section 24
of
the  Act.   A duty is cast upon the Government to notify  in
the   Official	Gazette	 every	 election  of  President  of
Municipality  as is evident from the words "shall notify  in
the  Official Gazette" used in the sub- section.  The  State
Government  has	 the  authority	 to  refuse  to	 notify	 the
election  of  a President, of any person who has incurred  a
disqualification  under	 the Act or under any other law	 for
the  time  being  in force, subsequent to  his	election  as
Member	of the Municipality provided that before refusing to
notify	 the  elections	 the   State  Government  gives	  an
opportunity   of  being	 heard	to  the	 concerned   person.
Admittedly,  the  State Government has failed to notify	 the
election  of  the President in the Official Gazette  without
assigning  any reason, much less "giving an opportunity"  to
the  respondent No.1.  The omission and inaction of the said
Secretary  cannot  be  made  a	basis  for  frustrating	 the
provisions  of	law  and  thereby  nullifying  the  peoples'
verdict returned in an election conducted in accordance with
the  provisions of law applicable in the case.	Even if	 the
respondent    No.1    had      allegedly    incurred	some
disqualification, the State Government was obliged to inform
him that his election as President of the Municipality could
not be notified for the aforesaid reason.  In the absence of
such  intimation, the omission to nofity cannot be justified
on  such  ground.   It	has   been  contended  that  as	 the
respondent No.1 had allegedly incurred a disqualification in
terms  of clause (e) of sub-section (1) of
Section 16
of the
Act,  the  State  Government was not obliged to	 notify	 his
election as President and was justified in removing him from
the  Membership of the Municipal Council.  Section  16(1)(e)
provides:   "Powers of the State Government as to removal of
members:   (1)	The  State Government may,  by	notification
remove	any  member of a committee other than  an  associate
member

      xxx xxx xxx
(e)  if, in the opinion of the State Government he has
flagrantly  abused his position as a member of the committee
or has through negligence or misconduct been responsible for
the  loss, or misapplication of any money or property of the
committee."
It  may  be  noticed that
Section 16
deals  with	 the
powers	of the State Government to remove a member under the
circumstances  mentioned  therein and does not refer to	 the
disqualification mentioned in proviso (1) to sub-section (2)
of
Section  24
of  the Act.  We also	do  not	 agree	with
Mr.Dutta  that
Section 16
prescribes  the  disqualification
referred  to  in  the  aforesaid proviso.  It  is  also	 not
correct	  to  say  that	 no  other   disqualifications	 are
prescribed  under the Act or under any other law and
Section
16
of	the Act is the only provision upon which  the  State
Government  can rely for taking action under sub-section (2)
of
Section  24
of the Act.  It appears that the  appellants
have  overlooked the provisions of the
Punjab State Election
Commission  Act,  1994
which deals with the constitution  of
the   State   Election	Commission   and  for  vesting	 the
superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of
the  electoral rolls for and in the conduct of all elections
to  the Panchayat and Municipalities in the State of  Punjab
and  to provide for all matters relating to or ancillary  or
in  connection	with  the provisions of	 the  Panchayat	 and
Municipalities in terms of the provisions of Part IX and IXA
of  the Constitution.  Chapter IV in general and
Section  11
in   particular	 deals	with   the   disqualifications	 for
Membership  of	a  Panchayat or	 Municipality.
Section  11
reads:	 "Disqualifications for membership of a Panchayat or
a  Municipality	 - A person shall be disqualified for  being
chosen	as,  and  for  being a member of a  Panchayat  or  a
Municipality, -
(a)   if	he  is	not  a	citizen	 of  India,  or	 has
voluntarily  acquired the citizenship of a foreign State, or
is under any acknowledgement of allegiance or adherence to a
foreign State;	or
(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by
a competent court;  or
(c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;  or
(d)  if  he  has, in proceedings for  questioning	 the
validity  or regularity of an election, been found guilty of
any corrupt practice;  or
(e)  if  he  has	been found  guilty  of	any  offence
punishable  under  Section 153A or Section 171E	 or  Section
171F  or  Section  376 or Section 376A or  Section  376B  or
Section	 376C or Section 376D or Section 498A or Section 505
of  the	 Indian Penal Code, 1960 or any	 offence  punishable
under  Chapter XIII of this Act unless a period of six years
has elapsed since the date of such conviction;	or
(f)  if he holds an office of profit under a Panchayat
or a Municipality;  or
(g)  if  he  holds  an  office  of  profit  under	 the
Government of India or any State Government;  or
(h)  if  he is interested in any	subsisting  contract
made  with,  or any work being done for, that  Panchayat  or
Municipality   except  as  a   share-holder  (other  than  a
Director)  in  an incorporated company or as a member  of  a
co-operative society;  or
(i)  if he is retained or employed in any professional
capacity either personally or in the name of a firm in which
he  is	a  partner,  or	 with  which  he  is  engaged  in  a
professional  capacity,	 in  connection with  any  cause  or
proceeding  in	which the Panchayat or the  Municipality  is
interested or concerned;  or
(j)  if  he,  having held any office under  the  State
Government or any Panchayat or any Municipality or any other
State  level  authority	 or any Government  company  or	 any
corporated  body owned or controlled by the State Government
or  Government	of India, has been dismissed  from  service,
unless	a  period  of  four  years  has	 elapsed  since	 his
dismissal."
Disqualification	contemplated "under any law for	 the
time  being  in force" under proviso to sub-section  (2)  of
Section 24
are, therefore, the disqualification as mentioned
in
Section 11
of the Punjab State Election Commission	Act,
1994.	The  appellants have nowhere stated or	alleged	 any
such  disqualifications attributable to the respondent No.1.
We  also  do not accept the plea of the appellants  that  by
assuming  his  duties  as   President,	the  respondent	 had
allegedly, "flagrantly abused" all his position as a member,
thereby incurring the wrath of the State Government in terms
of
Section  16(1)(e)
or
Section 20
of the Act.	 The  clause
"flagrantly  abused  of	 his position as member"  means	 the
doing  of  such	 act or acts by a member of a  committee  in
disregard  of his duty which would shock a reasonable  mind.
The  nature  of	 the 'abuse' before it could  be  termed  as
'flagrant', must, in the circumstance be glaring, notorious,
enormous,  scandalous or wicked.  There is nothing on record
to  show or suggest that the respondent No.1 in his capacity
as  member  or	President took any undue  advantage  of	 his
position  or  under the colour of his office  committed	 any
particular  irregularity or reprehensive acts.	Any  alleged
contravention  of  the	provisions  of	the  Act  cannot  be
categorised  as "flagrant abuse of power" by a member of the
Committee.   The mere contravention, if any, (which was	 not
in this case) in respondent No.2 entering upon his office as
President  before his name was approved and published in the
Official Gazette, particularly on account of wilful omission
of  the State Government cannot be called either a 'flagrant
abuse  of  position' as a member or 'abuse of power'  within
the  contemplation of
Section 16(1)(e)
and
Section 20
of the
Act.   The appeal which is bereft of any merit is liable  to
be  dismissed.	 We are at pain to note that by his acts  of
omission  and commission the said Secretary has consistently
and persistently deprived the respondent No.1 of the duty to
assume	and discharge his duties as member and President  of
the  Municipal	Council, despite his election from  2.1.1998
till  date.  The term of the office of the Municipality is a
fixed  term out of which three years of the respondent	No.1
have  been wasted in uncalled for and forced litigation upon
him.  No law can compensate the loss of opportunity provided
to  the	 respondent  No.1 for serving the people  after	 his
election  as  Member and President of the Municipality.	  We
find  it a fit case to award exemplary costs and are of	 the
firm  view  that such costs should not be burdened upon	 the
State  exchequer.  The said Secretary who is responsible for
the  violation of the statutory provisions and weakening the
concept	 of rule of law, is, therefore, personally liable to
pay  the costs from his own pockets.  While dismissing	this
appeal	we  direct the said Secretary to personally pay	 the
costs  of Rs.25,000/- to the respondent No.1 within a period
of two months.