[Cites
20
, Cited by
123
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Maharashtra & Anr vs Najakat Alia Mubarak Ali on 9 May, 2001
Equivalent citations: AIR 2001 SUPREME COURT 2255, 2001 AIR SCW 2059, 2001 ALL MR(CRI) 1519, 2001 (4) SCALE 71, 2001 (3) LRI 44, 2001 SCC(CRI) 1106, 2001 BOMCRSUP 676, 2001 (1) JT (SUPP) 279, 2001 (2) ORISSALR 151, 2001 (5) BOM CR 676, 2001 (6) SCC 311, 2001 (2) UJ (SC) 1510, 2001 (6) SRJ 259, (2001) ILR (KANT) (2) 5537, (2001) 4 SUPREME 45, (2001) 21 OCR 151, (2001) 3 RAJ LW 458, (2001) 2 RECCRIR 778, (2001) 4 SCJ 220, (2001) 2 CURCRIR 244, (2002) 2 ALLCRIR 1813, (2001) 4 SCALE 71, (2002) 44 ALLCRIC 609, (2001) 2 CHANDCRIC 214, (2001) 4 ALLCRILR 492, (2001) 3 CRIMES 9, 2001 (4) BOM LR 486, 2001 BOM LR 4 486
Author:
R.P. Sethi
Bench:
R.P. Sethi
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.) 617  of  2001



PETITIONER:
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
NAJAKAT ALIA MUBARAK ALI

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	09/05/2001

BENCH:
R.P. Sethi




JUDGMENT:
SETHI,J.
L...I...T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T..J

    Despite  perusing the lucid judgment of Thomas, J.	from
different angles and being aware of its far reaching effects
in  the	 country,  so far as the under trial  prisoners	 are
concerned,  I  could not persuade myself to agree  with	 the
interpretation given regarding the scope and implications of
Section	 428
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, (hereinafter
referred to as 'the Code').
Section  428
of the Code was brought on the statute book
for  the  first	 time in 1973.	It was incorporated  in	 the
light  of  the	proposal  put forward by  the  Joint  Select
Committee  appointed  for that purpose.	 The  Committee	 had
noted,	with  distress, that in many cases  accused  persons
were  kept  in	prison for very long period  as	 under-trial
prisoners  and	in some cases the sentence of  imprisonment,
ultimately  awarded,  was a fraction of the period spent  in
jail  as  under-trial  prisoners.   Despite  the  fact	that
sometimes  courts had been taking into account the period of
detention  undergone as under-trial prisoners while  passing
sentence  and  occasionally  the  sentence  of	imprisonment
restricted  to	the period already undergone.  But that	 was
not  always  the case as in many cases the  accused  persons
were made to suffer jail life for a period out of proportion
to  the	 gravity of offence or even the punishment  provided
under  the statute.  The Committee noted with concern that a
large  number  of persons in the over-crowded jails  of	 the
country	 were under-trial prisoners.  The Section was sought
to  remedy  the	 said  unsatisfactory state  of	 affairs  by
providing  for	setting	 off the period of detention  as  an
under-trial  prisoners against the sentence of	imprisonment
imposed on the accused.
The purpose of incorporating
Section 428
was that period
of  detention  undergone  by the accused be  given  set	 off
against the sentence of imprisonment imposed upon him in the
same  case.   Before  the  incorporation  of  the  aforesaid
section,  the  accused, upon conviction, had to undergo	 the
awarded	 sentence of imprisonment notwithstanding the length
of  period  spent by him in detention during  investigation,
inquiry or trial of the case.
Section 428
of the Code is preceded by
Section 427
which
provides that when any person already undergoing sentence of@@
	 JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
imprisonment  is  sentenced  on a subsequent  conviction  of@@
JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
imprisonment,  such  imprisonment  shall   commence  at	 the
expiration  of	the  commencement  to	which  he  has	been
previously  sentenced,	unless	the court directs  that	 the
subsequent  sentence  shall  run   concurrently	 with	such
previous  sentence.   (underlining supplied)
Section 427
of
the  Code  thus	 authorises  a court of law  to	 direct	 the
sentence  awarded  by  it  to  run  concurrently,  obviously
keeping	 in  view the facts and circumstances pertaining  to
the   case   or	  the	accused.   His	 detention   pending
investigation,	inquiry and trial in that case or some other
cases  being  relevant	consideration  while  directing	 the
sentences  to  run consecutively or concurrently.   A  plain
reading	 of
Section 428
of the Code makes it clear that	 the
period	of detention which the section permits to be set off
against	 the  term of imprisonment, imposed on	the  accused
upon  conviction, must be during the investigation,  inquiry
or  trial  in connection with the same case in which he	 has
been  convicted.
Dealing with the nature of detention	 for
the  purposes of the section, this Court in
Govt.  of Andhra
Pradesh	 & Anr.	 v.  Anne Venkateswara Rao
, etc.  [AIR	1977
SC  1096  = (1977) 3 SCC 298] held:  "
Section  428
provides
that  the period of detention of an accused as an undertrial
prisoner  shall be set off against the term of	imprisonment
imposed on him on conviction.  The section only provides for
a  "set off", it does not equate an "undertrial detention or
remand	detention  with	 imprisonment on  conviction".	 The
provision  as  to  set off expresses a	legislative  policy;
this  does not mean that it does away with the difference in
the two kinds of detention and puts them on the same footing
for all purposes."
In
Champalal Poonjaji Shah v.  State of Maharashtra
[AIR
1982  SC  791], where the petitioner was shown to have	been@@
	  JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
detained  firstly  under  the provisions of MISA  and  later@@
JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
under  the provisions of COFEPOSA and after he was convicted
by a Magistrate and his conviction was set aside by the High
Court, the State filed an appeal by special leave, which was
allowed	 by  this Court on August 12, 1981 (reported in	 AIR
1981  SC  1675) by setting aside the Judgment  of  acquittal
passed	by  the High Court and restoring that of  the  trial
magistrate  convicting the accused under different heads  of
charges	 and  sentencing  him  to  suffer  imprisonment	 for
various	 terms ranging from two years to four years.   Later
in  the review petition filed, it was submitted on behalf of
the accused that the total of the three periods of detention
should be set off against the imprisonment imposed upon him.
Rejecting the contention, the Court held:
"We	 are  unable  to agree with the submission  of	Shri
Jethmalani.   In the very case cited by the learned counsel,
the  Court  negatived  the contention  that  the  expression
'period	 of detention' in
Sec.428
Code of Criminal Procedure
included the detention under the
Prevention Detention Act
or
the
Maintenance of Internal Security Act
.  It was  observed
(para 7):
"It	 is  true that the section speaks of the  period  of
detention  undergone by an accused person, but it  expressly
says  that  the detention mentioned refers to the  detention
during	the  investigation, enquiry or trial of the case  in
which  the  accused person has been convicted.	The  section
makes  it clear that the period of detention which it allows
to  be	set off against the term of imprisonment imposed  on
the  accused on conviction must be during the investigation,
enquiry or trial in connection with the 'same case' in which
he  has	 been convicted.  We therefore agree with  the	High
Court that the period during which the Writ Petitioners were
in  preventive	detention  cannot  be set  off	under  S.428
against the term of imprisonment imposed on them"
After   holding  that  the	 period	 during	 which	 the
petitioners  therein were in preventive detention could	 not
be  'set  off' under
Section 428
Code of Criminal  Procedure
against	 the term of imprisonment imposed on them, the Court
went  on  to  consider whether the period during  which	 the
petitioners  were  in  preventive detention  could  for	 any
reason	be considered as period during which the petitioners
were  in  detention  as under-trial prisoners  or  prisoners
serving	 out  a	 sentence  on conviction.  In  the  case  of
prisoner  A.V.	 Rao,  the  Court   held  that	the   period
commencing  from  the date when he would have normally	been
arrested pursuant to the First Information Report registered
against	 him should be reckoned as period of detention as an
under-trial  prisoner.	 In  the case  of  another  prisoner
Krishnaiah  it was held that the period during which he	 was
in  preventive	detention subsequent to the  conviction	 and
sentence  imposed  upon him should be treated  as  detention
pursuant  to conviction and sentence.  The case before us is
altogether  different.	The petitioner had been acquitted by
the  High  Court before any of the orders of detention	were
made against him.  There can be no question of the detention
being  considered as detention pursuant to conviction;	 nor
can  the detention be treated as that of an undertrial.	  It
is  only  in  circumstances where the  prisoner	 would	have
unquestionably	been  in  detention  in	 connection  with  a
criminal  case if he had not been preventively detained, his
preventive  detention  might be reckoned as detention as  an
undertrial prisoner or detention pursuant to conviction, for
the purposes of S.428 Criminal P.C."
A  perusal	of the section unambiguously indicates	that
only  such accused is entitled to its benefit of that period
of   detention	 which	 he   has   undergone	during	 the
investigation,	enquiry or trial of the same case.  It	does
not  contemplate of the benefit of set-off of the period  of
detention  during  investigation,  inquiry or trial  in	 any
other  case.   The  purpose and object of  the	section,  as
pointed	 out  by  Brother Thomas,J., is aimed  at  providing
amelioration  to  a prisoner in a case where he has been  in
detention  for no fault of his.	 The section, however,	does
not intend to give any benefit or bonus to an accused guilty
of  commission of more than one crime by treating the period
of  detention during investigation, inquiry and trial in one
case as that period in the other cases also for the purposes
of  set-off  in the sentence.  Such an entitlement  requires
the  judicial  determination which can be adjudicated  by  a
court  awarding the sentence in exercise of its powers under
Section 427 of the Code.  The words "period of detention, if
any,  undergone by him during the investigation, inquiry  or
trial  of  the	same  case" are important  to  indicate	 the
paramount  concern  and	 intention  of	the  legislature  to
protect	 the  interests of under-trial prisoners  by  giving
them  the  set-off  of that period
in "that  case
",  at	 the
conclusion  of	the trial.  The Section makes it clear	that
the  period  of	 detention  which it allows to	be  set	 off
against	 the term of imprisonment imposed on the accused, on
conviction,  must  be during the investigation,	 inquiry  or
trial  in connection with the same case in which he has been
convicted.
By introducing the provision of set off, the legislature
intended to mitigate, to a great extent, the hardship caused@@
	 JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
to  the	 accused persons by reason of their being unable  to@@
JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
come   out  on	bail  during   the  trial   period.    While
interpreting  Section 428 of the Code, the underlying object
of the Section cannot be lost sight of.	 Any set off claimed
under  Section 428 has necessarily to be within the terms of
the  Section and not beyond it.	 No accused person can claim
that  irrespective of the terms of Section 428 of the  Code,
he  is entitled to the benefit of set-off in each and  every
case.	A  bare	 reading of the Section	 indicates  that  an
accused	 person	 who  has been convicted  and  sentenced  to
imprisonment  for a term is entitled to claim set off of the
period	 of   detention	  undergone  by	  him	during	 the
investigation, inquiry or trial of the same case against the
term of imprisonment imposed on him on such conviction.	 The
section has imposed some restrictions for a convicted person
claiming the benefit of set off which are as under:-
(i) The imprisonment should be for a term.
(ii)  The  imprisonment  should not be  one	 awarded  in
default of payment of fine.
(iii)  The period of detention undergone by the  accused
person	during	the investigation, inquiry or  trial  should
relate	to  the	 same  case in which  he  is  convicted	 and
sentenced to undergo imprisonment for a term.
The	 dictionary meaning of the word "same" is identical;
referring  to  a person or thing just mentioned;   the	same
thing  as previously mentioned.	 It generally refers to	 the
last   preceding  antecedents;	 one   and  the	 same;	 not
distinct.   Generally  speaking the "same case"	 would	thus
mean  "same  transaction"  for which the  accused  has	been
tried.	 Two different criminal cases, therefore, cannot  be
treated	 to be the "the same case" in relation to an accused
for the purposes of determining the applicability of Section
428 of the Code.
The	 accused tried for various offences in one trial can
be  held to be entitled to the benefit of Section 428 of the@@
	 JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
Code being tried for the "same case".  The words "same case"@@
JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
appearing  in  the  section  are   ejusdem  generis  to	 the
preceding  words "investigation, enquiry or trial".  If	 the
period	of  detention relating to investigation, enquiry  or
trial  is  in  a different case that would  not	 ipso  facto
entitle	 the accused to claim the benefit of Section 428 but
that  may  permit  him	to persuade the	 court	to  pass  an
appropriate  orders in terms of Section 427, keeping in view
the  period  of his under-trial detention in other cases  as
well.	It is the need of the time that the court convicting
the  accused should develop a healthy practice of specifying
in  the order the total period of pre-conviction  detentions
that he has undergone
in that case
or in some other case for
the purposes of awarding the sentence upon conviction.
In
Shabbu	&  Anr.	 v.  State of U.P.   &	Anr.
[1982
Crl.L.J.   1757]  a Full Bench of the Allahabad	 High  Court@@
		    JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
held:@@
JJJJJ

    "It	 is  thus  obvious  that
Section  428
Cr.P.C.,  is
intended  to  relieve the anguish of undertrials  for  their
prolonged  detention  in  jail	 during	 the  investigation,
inquiry	 or  trial  of a case.	Its object is  to  confer  a
special	 benefit  upon	a convict whereby his  liability  to
undergo	 the imprisonment, ultimately imposed upon him in  a
case,  stands  reduced	by the period during  which  he	 has
remained  in  jail  as an under-trial prisoner in  the	same
case.  It simply aims at setting off or crediting the period
of  pre-  conviction  detention	 of the accused	 of  a	case
towards	 the  sentence ultimately awarded to him  after	 his
conviction in that very case."
After  referring  to  the  judgments of  this  Court  in
Mr.Boucher  Pierre  Andre  v.  Superintendent  Central	Jail
Tihar
,	[
AIR  1975 SC 164], Suraj Bhan v.  Om  Prakash
[air
1976  sc  648],	 Govt.	of A.P.	 v.  A.V.Rao  [AIR  1977  SC
1096], the earlier judgment of that Court in
Nasim v.  State
of  U.P.
[1978 All LJ 1284], the judgment of the Delhi High
Court  in
K.C.	 Das v.	 State
[1979 Crl.LJ 362],  of  Bombay
High  Court  in Jaswant Lal Harjivan Das Dholkia  v.   State
[1979  Cri.LJ 971], Mohan Lal v.  State of U.P.	 [1979	Luck
LJ  272], the Full Bench further held that under Section 428
the period of detention as an under-trial of an accused in a
particular  case  can be set off only towards  the  sentence
ultimately  awarded  to	 him in that very case.	  The  Court
further held:
"Whether  or  not the detention of a person in one	case
should	also be treated to be his detention for the purposes
of any other case, wherein he is wanted, is a question to be
decided	 upon the facts and circumstances of each case.	  No
set formula can be laid down in that behalf."
Dealing  with  the scope and object of Section 428	this
Court  in
Raghbir Singh v.  State of Haryana
[1984 (4)	 SCC
348] held:
"There  was no provision corresponding to Section 428 of
the  Code in the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1898 which	 was
repealed  and  replaced	 by  the   present  Code.   It	 was
introduced  with the object of remedying the  unsatisfactory
state  of  affairs that was prevailing when the former	Code
was  in	 force.	  It was then found that many  persons	were
being  detained	 in prison at the pre-conviction  stage	 for
unduly	long periods, many times for periods longer than the
actual	sentence  of imprisonment that could be	 imposed  on
them on conviction.  In order to remedy the above situation,
Section	 428  of the Code was enacted.	It provides for	 the
setting	 off  of the period of detention as  an	 under-trial
prisoner  against  the sentence of imprisonment	 imposed  on
him.  Hence in order to secure the benefit of Section 428 of
the Code, the prisoner should show that he had been detained
in prison for the purpose of investigation, inquiry or trial
of the case in which he is later on convicted and sentenced.
It  follows  that if a person is undergoing the sentence  of
imprisonment imposed by a court of law on being convicted of
an  offence in one case during the period of  investigation,
inquiry	 or  trial of some other case, he cannot claim	that
the  period occupied by such investigation, inquiry or trial
should be set off against the sentence of imprisonment to be
imposed	 in  the  latter  case	even  though  he  was  under
detention  during such period.	In such a case the period of
detention  is  really a part of the period  of	imprisonment
which  he  is undergoing having been sentenced	earlier	 for
another	 offence.   It	is  not	  the  period  of  detention
undergone  by him during the investigation, inquiry or trial
of  the	 same  case in which he is later  on  convicted	 and
sentenced to undergo imprisonment.  He cannot claim a double
benefit	 under Section 428 of the Code i.e.  the same period
being  counted as part of the period of imprisonment imposed
for  committing	 the former offence and also being  set	 off
against	 the  period of imprisonment imposed for  committing
the  latter offence as well.  The instruction issued by	 the
High  Court in this regard is unexceptionable.	The stand of
the State Government has, therefore, to be upheld."
After  going  through  the scheme of the  Code  and	 the
object	for  which  Section  428 was  incorporated,  I	have
reached	 the conclusion that the law
laid down by
this Court
in
Raghubir Singh
's case(supra) does not require any review
or a new interpretation.  Taking any other view would amount
to  legislating	 and  amending	the plain  meanings  of	 the
section.   Giving  a  contrary interpretation may,  in	some
cases,	be against the public policy.  Any person accused of
a heinous crime, in that even, be at liberty to commit minor
offences  and  being under trial prisoner in the main  case,
eventually may not get any imprisonment of law for the minor
offences  committed  by	 him.  It cannot be  the  object  of
civilised criminal jurisprudence to encourage the repetition
of  crime  by  adoption of an approach of  liberality.	 The
commercial  approach  of sale of commodities  providing	 for
purchasing of one expensive item and getting three free with
it,  cannot  be imported into criminal justice system.
The
views  of  Guwahati High Court in
Lalrinfela Vs.   State  of
Mizoram	 and Ors.
(1982 Crl.L.J 1793), Andhra Pradesh	High
Court  in
Gedala Ramulu Naidu Vs.  State of A.P.  and	Anr.
(1982  Crl.
Law  Journal 2186) and Madras  High  Court  in
Chinnasamy  Vs.	  State of Tamil Nadu and Ors.
(1984	Crl.
Law  Journal  447) would amount to giving bonus to a  person
accused	 of  a	heinous	 crime to have	the  minor  offences
committed  with it virtually without any punishment of	law.
Delhi High Court in
K.C.  Das Vs.  The State
(1979 Crl.	 Law
Journal	 362)  is  shown to have adopted an  approach  which
apparently is contradictory in terms.  After holding:
"The  words	 "of  the  same case"  are  important.	 The
section speaks of the "period of detention" undergone by the
accused	 person,  but it expressly says that  the  detention
mentioned  refers to the detention during the investigation,
inquiry or trial of the case in which the accused person has
been  convicted.  The section makes it clear that the period
of  detention which it allows to be set off against the term
of  imprisonment impugned on the accused on conviction	must
be  during the investigation, inquiry or trial in connection
with the "same case" in which he has been convicted."
the	 Court by referring to an illustration formulated by
itself	in  para  3  of the judgment, posed  a	question  to
itself, an answered the same, observing:
"Will  it  not  be true to say that the  accused  is  an
undertrial  prisoner in the second case in our illustration.
If  it	is  so	he  will be entitled to	 set  off  his	pre-
conviction  period against the term of imprisonment  imposed
on him in the second case as in the first.  We see no ground
to deny him the benefit in the second case."
For	 reaching at this conclusion the reliance was placed
upon  the judgment of this Court in
Govt.  of Andhra Pradesh@@
	  JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
and  Anr.   Vs.	 Anne Venkateswara Rao
.	 etc.  (supra).	  In@@
JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
that  case,  this  court had nowhere held that the  set	 off
contemplated under Section 428 of the Code can be claimed by
a  convicted  person, irrespective of his detention  in	 the
same case or in some other case.
The	 object of criminal justice system is to reform	 the
criminal  but  not  to encourage him for the  repetition  of
crime.	 Penology has a twin object, i.e.  (i) punishing the
criminal  to avoid repetition of crime and (ii) to endeavour
for  his reform wherever possible.  The increasing crime  in
the  country has seriously to be taken note of.	 Crime is an
act  of	 warfare  against community touching new  depths  of
lawlessness.   The object of imposing deterrent sentences is
to  protect  the  community against callous  criminals;	  to
administer  as	clearly	 as possible to	 others	 tempted  to
follow	into lawlessness on a war scale if they are  brought
to  and	 convicted, deterrent punishment will follow and  to
deter  criminals  from	repeating  their  criminal  acts  in
future.	  Fazal	 Ali,J.	 in
Maru Ram Vs.  Union of  India
[
1981 (1) SCC 106) rightly observed:
"The  question, therefore, is - should the country	take
the  risk  of  innocent	 lives being lost at  the  hands  of
criminals  committing  heinous crimes is the holdy  hope  or
wishful	 thinking  that	 one day or the other,	a  criminal,
however dangerous or callous he may be, will reform himself.
Valmikis  are  not  born  everyday and to  expect  that	 our
present	 generation, with the prevailing social and economic
environment, would produce Valmikis day after day is to hope
for the impossible."
Discretion	of treating under-trial detention period may
be relevant consideration for the Court while passing orders
in  terms of Section 427 of the Code but the accused  cannot
be  permitted  to  claim set off of the	 under-trial  period
undergone  by him in connection with other cases.  Powers of
the  Court  to impose sentences should not be allowed to  be
regulated at the instance or discretion of the accused.
The fall out of the interpretation giving the benefit of
detention  during  investigation, inquiry and trial  in	 one
case,  in  the other case, may also tempt the  investigating
agencies not to arrest the accused for the commission of the
second	offence pending conclusion of the trial and  passing
of  sentence  in  the  first  case.   After  conviction	 and
sentence in a criminal case, if arrested in the second case,
the  accused  shall not be entitled to claim the benefit  of
Section	 428  of  the  Code   because  the  sentence,	upon
conviction,  can obviously be not equated with the period of
detention  contemplated	 under Section 428 of the Code.	  As
such  by adopting such a recourse, the courts would not,  in
any  case, advance the interests of justice but actually and
factually  frustrate  its purpose defeating the	 concept  of
speedy trial in criminal cases.
Facts  of this case are that the respondent was arrested
on  29th  November,  1995  in	connection  with  CR  707/95
registered  at	Khar  Police Station,  Mumbai.	 During	 the
investigation it transpired that he was also involved in the
offences  registered  vide CR 737/95 on 29th November,	1995
Santacruz  Police  Station.  He was shown arrested  in	both
crime numbers.	After being chargesheeted in both the cases,
he  was	 tried	separately.   In one of	 the  cases  he	 was
convicted and sentenced under
Sections 395
and
397
of IPC on
3.4.1998.   The	 learned  Judge held that  the	accused	 was
entitled  to  set off under
Section 428
of Cr.P.C.  for	 the
period	of  custody already undergone.	He was convicted  in
the  second  case for the offences punishable under
Section
392
,
395
of IPC and held entitled to set off under
Section
428
of	 Cr.P.C.  The respondent prayed for his	 release  as
according  to him, he had already served sentences.  Relying
upon the Government Resolution dated 7th September, 1974 the
Jail  Authorities  refused to release the respondent on	 the
ground that he could not be given set off in the second case
as he had been given set off in the first case.	 The accused
filed  a  petition  in the High Court which was	 allowed  by
impugned  order,  holding that the convict was	entitled  to
benefit of Section 428 of the Code in both the cases for the
period	of detention undergone by him during  investigation,
inquiry and trial.
In	the  light  of the view I have	taken  the  impugned
judgment of the High Court cannot be sustained and is liable@@
	    JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
to be set aside.  Allowing the appeal filed by the State the@@
JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
judgment  impugned is set aside holding that the  respondent
is  not	 entitled to the benefit of set off in the  sentence
awarded to him in the second case.