[Cites
3
, Cited by
75
]
Supreme Court of India
Grosons Pharmaceuticals (P) Ltd. & Anr vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh & Ors on 5 September, 2001
Equivalent citations: AIR 2001 SUPREME COURT 3707, 2001 AIR SCW 3533, 2001 ALL. L. J. 2440, 2001 (9) SRJ 42, (2002) 1 JCR 15 (SC), 2001 (8) SCC 604, (2001) 7 JT 500 (SC), (2001) 4 RECCIVR 645, (2001) 3 ARBILR 298, (2001) 4 ALL WC 3051, (2001) 6 SCALE 209, (2001) 6 SUPREME 840, (2001) 3 SCJ 470, (2001) 4 PAT LJR 145
Author:
V. N. Khare
Bench:
V.N. Khare
,
B.N. Agrawal
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil) 708  of  1993



PETITIONER:
GROSONS PHARMACEUTICALS (P) LTD. & ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	05/09/2001

BENCH:
V.N. Khare & B.N. Agrawal




JUDGMENT:
V. N. KHARE, J.
The appellant herein is a small scale industry engaged in manufacture
and sale of drugs and was registered with the Directorate of Industry (Stores
Purchase Section), Kanpur, U.P. As a result of the aforesaid registration, the
appellant was an approved contractor for supply of drugs to the government
departments.  The appellant, in pursuance thereof, had been supplying drugs
to the U.P. government.	 It appears that that certain irregularities came to the
notice of the government in purchase of medicines and, therefore, a
vigilance inquiry was set up as a result of which the record and product of
the appellant were seized.  Further, criminal prosecution  was also launched
against the appellant under provisions of
Prevention of Corruption Act
read
with
Section 120
IPC.  Under such circumstances, the State government
served a  notice on the appellant to show cause why it should not be
blacklisted in its dealing with the government.	 It appears that the appellant
sent a reply to the show cause notice.	The State Government on expiry of
the period  for reply by the appellant passed an order blacklisting the
appellant.   The order indicated that the period of blacklisting will be till the
disposal of the case pending in the Court as well as till the final decision is
arrived at in the investigation of proceedings instituted against the firm on
various accounts.  The appellant challenged the aforesaid order by means of
a writ petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India.	 The said writ
petition was dismissed.	 Aggrieved, the appellant challenged  the said order
and judgment by way of special leave petition in this Court.  The said special
leave petition was numbered as 10087/91.  When the matter came up for
hearing before a Bench of this Court, this Court was of the view that the
State Government  was required to  reconsider the matter along with the
explanation submitted by the appellant while keeping the impugned order in
tact.  With the aforesaid direction, the special leave petition was disposed of.
In pursuance of the direction of this Court, the State government
reconsidered the matter and affirmed the earlier order of blacklisting the
appellant.  The appellant again challenged the said order by means of a writ
petition before the High Court.	 The High Court looked into the record and
found that elaborate reasons were recorded and thereafter the order of
blacklisting was passed.  In that view of the matter, the writ petition was
dismissed.  It is against the said judgment, the appellants have preferred this
appeal.
Learned counsel appearing for the appellant, urged that seeing the
nature and seriousness of the order passed against the appellant, the
respondent ought to have supplied all the materials on the basis of which the
charges contained in the show cause notice were based  along with show
cause notice and in the absence of  supply of materials, the order impugned
is against the principles of natural justice.  We do not find any merit in this
contention.  Admittedly, the appellant has only contractual relationship with
the State government and the said relationship is not governed by any
statutory Rules.  There is no statutory rule which requires that an approved
contractor cannot be blacklisted without giving an opportunity of show
cause.	  It is true that an order blacklisting an approved contractor results in
civil consequences and in such a situation in the absence of statutory rules,
the only requirement of law while passing such an order	 was to observe the
principle of audi alteram partem which is one of the facet of the principles
of natural justice.  The contention that it was incumbent upon the respondent
to have supplied the material on the basis of which the charges against the
appellant were based was not the requirement of principle of audi alteram
partem.	 It was sufficient requirement of law that an opportunity of show
cause was given to the appellant before it was blacklisted.  It is not disputed
that in the present case, the appellant was given an opportunity to show
cause and he did reply to the show cause which was duly considered by the
State Government.  We are, therefore,  of the view that that the procedure
adopted by the respondent while blacklisting the appellant was in conformity
with the principles of natural justice.
It was then urged that the impugned order blacklisting the appellant
does not contain any reasons and, therefore, the order is invalid.  We do not
find any merit in the submission.  The High Court summoned the entire
record and found that elaborate reasons were recorded by the State
Government while passing the order blacklisting the appellant.	The High
Court further recorded a positive finding that the State Government has
passed the impugned order after recording elaborate reasons and summary of
which is contained in the impugned order.
For the aforesaid reasons, we do not find any merit in the appeal and it
fails and is dismissed accordingly.  There shall be no order as to costs.
J.
							(V. N. Khare)



							...J.
							(B. N. Agrawal)
September 05, 2001