[Cites
18
, Cited by
45
]
Supreme Court of India
Amery Pharmaceuticals And Anr vs State Of Rajasthan on 16 March, 2001
Equivalent citations: AIR 2001 SUPREME COURT 1303, 2001 (4) SCC 382, 2001 AIR SCW 1132, 2001 (2) SCALE 483, 2001 SCC(CRI) 724, 2001 ALL MR(CRI) 1980, 2001 (2) LRI 373, 2001 CALCRILR 342, 2001 FAJ 133, 2001 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 349, 2001 (4) SRJ 274, 2001 (2) UJ (SC) 1061, (2001) 3 JT 497 (SC), (2001) 3 PAT LJR 171, (2000) 3 BLJ 92, 2001 BLJR 1 233, (2001) 2 EASTCRIC 73, (2001) SC CR R 579, 2001 CRILR(SC&MP) 349, (2001) 2 MADLW(CRI) 617, (2001) 2 RECCRIR 265, (2001) 2 SCJ 400, (2001) 2 CURCRIR 8, (2001) 2 SUPREME 376, (2001) 2 ALLCRIR 1074, (2001) 2 SCALE 483, (2001) 42 ALLCRIC 798, (2001) 1 CHANDCRIC 247, (2001) 2 ALLCRILR 10, (2001) 2 CRIMES 33, (2001) 20 OCR 622, (2001) 1 EFR 650, 2001 (2) ANDHLT(CRI) 18 SC, (2001) 2 ANDHLT(CRI) 18
Bench:
K.T. Thomas
,
R.P. Sethi
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  300 of 2001

PETITIONER:
AMERY PHARMACEUTICALS AND ANR.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF RAJASTHAN

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 16/03/2001

BENCH:
K.T. THOMAS & R.P. SETHI

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

2001 (2) SCR 449

The Judgment of the Court was delivered by

THOMAS, J. Leave granted.
Appellant, a pharmaceutical concern, succeeded in stalling prosecution
proceedings launched against it by a Drug Inspector for a long period of
well over a decade by now, and the trial remians where it started at. In
the meanwhile the appellant concern and its proprietor sauntered through
all the tiers of the judicial hierarchy and reached the apex Court and at
all these forums they have one technical objection about the
maintainability of the prosecution launched against them.
The events started on 30-4-1998 when a Drags Inspector visited a medical
retail shop at Kota (Rajasthan) and purchased a drag formulation by the
trade name "Ashoka Liquid Extract". The said purchase was made for the
purpose of sampling it under the provisions of the
Drags and Cosmetics Act,
1940
(for short "the Act"). When one of the portions of sample was tested
by the Government Analyst (Jaipur) he reported that the sample was "mis-
branded, adulterated and spurious drug". The retailer disclosed the address
of M/s. Chetan Medical Stores, Kota (as the distributor or wholesaler) from
whom the drug was obtained. On being contacted the said distributor dis-
closed the name of the appellant concern and its proprietor as the manufac-
turers of the drug.
A complaint was filed by the Inspector on 5.12.1990 against all the persons
for the offences under
Section 27(b)
, (c) and (d) of the Act. After hearing
the arguments at the preliminary stage the trial magistrate framed a charge
for the aforesaid offences against the appellants alone and the remaining
accused were discharged. Appellants thereupon filed a revision petition
before the Sessions Court contending that no charge could have been framed
against them because the Inspector did not send or give one portion of the
sample to the appellants and thereby the mandatory provision contained in
Section 23(4)(iii)
of the Act was not complied with. The Sessions Judge
repelled the said contention as well as certain other contentions (which
are not relevant as they were not followed up by the appellants later).
Nonetheless, the Sessions Judge expressed the view that there is no
material on record to show that the drug is spurious. Hence the count under
Section 27(c)
of the Act was deleted from the charge while the remaining
counts were upheld as per the order passed by the Sessions Judge on
23.11.1995. Appellants thereafter moved the High Court of Rajasthan under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure by focussing on the
contention that there was non-compliance with the provision contained in
Section 23(4)(iii)
of the Act on the premise that the Inspector did not
deliver one portion of the sample to the appellants. A Single Judge of the
High Court declined to accede to the said contention and dismissed the
petition filed by the appellants as per the order impugned in this appeal.
Mr. Alok Singh, learned counsel for the appellants contended that non-
supply of one portion of sample to the manufacturer, who is joined as an
accused in the complaint, has resulted in depriving him of a valuable right
to test the correctness of the report of the Government Analyst. Learned
counsel further contended that the consequence of such non-supply is that
the conclusiveness attached by law regarding the findings mentioned by the
Government Analyst is lost and the report of the Government Analyst would
not be binding on the manufacturer. In order to examine the correctness of
the above contention we may look at the relevant provisions of the Act.
Section 27
of the Act renders a person who manufactures for sale or for
distribution, or who sells or stocks or offers for sale any adulterated or
spurious drug, liable to a punishment with imprisonment for a time which
shall not be less than one year though a maximum is provided.
Section 23
of
the Act empowers an Inspector to take sample of any drug for the purpose of
test or analysis.
Section 25
empowers a Government Analyst to whom a
portion of the sample has been submitted for test, to deliver a report to
the Inspector, in triplicate, stating the facts discerned in the test or
analysis.
Section 25(2)
of the Act says that the Inspector shall deliver one copy of
the report to the person from whom the sample was taken, another copy of
the report to the person whose name and address have been disclosed to the
Inspector. The third copy shall be retained by the inspector for use in any
prosecution in respect of the sample.
Section 25(3)
of the Act reads thus :
"Any document purporting to be a report signed by a Government Analyst
under this Chapter shall be evidence of the facts stated therein, and such
evidence shall be conclusive unless the person from whom the sample was
taken or the person whose name, address and other particulars have been
disclosed under
section 18A
has, within twenty-eight days of the receipt of
a copy of the report, notified in writing the Inspector or the Court before
which any proceedings in respect of the sample are pending that he intends
to adduce evidence in controversion of the report."
Learned counsel for the appellants contended that the conclusiveness of the
report of the Government Analyst as envisaged in the sub-section would nail
the manufacturer with the findings in the report as he would otherwise be
disabled from controversing the said findings, because he has no right to
challenge such findings due to the absence of a portion of the sample with
him.
The aforesaid contention is advanced on a misconception that the mode of
challenge against the report of the Government Analyst is by sending the
portion of the sample kept with the vendor (the person from whom the sample
was taken). The requirement of sub-section (3) is that one of the persons
to whom the copy of the report is given, if he wants to challenge the
report, has to notify the trial court or the Inspector concerned of the
intention to adduce evidence in controversion of the report. If he does not
do so within 28 days of receipt of a copy of the report of the Government
Analyst its consequence would be that the facts contained in the report
would become conclusive as against those persons. The notice to be given
shall convey the intention of the person concerned, "to adduce evidence in
controversion of the report". If such a notice is given, it is open to the
person who gives such notice, to adduce any evidence for the purpose of
contradicting the findings in the report. But if such person fails to give
any such notice within the said period of 28 days the findings in the
report would operate as conclusive evidence against the person who failed
to give such notice.
One of the modes of challenging the report is indicated in sub-section (4)
of
Section 25
. It reads thus :
"Unless the sample has already been tested or analysed in the Central Drugs
Laboratory, where a person has under sub-section (3) notified his intention
of adducing evidence in controversion of a Government Analyst's report, the
Court may, of its own motion or in its discretion at the request either of
the complainant or the accused cause the sample for the drug or cosmetic
produced before the Magistrate under sub-section (4) of
section 23
to be
sent for test or analysis to the said Laboratory, which shall make the test
or analysis and report in writing signed by, or under the authority of, the
Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory the result thereof, and such
report shall be conclusive evidence of the facts stated therein."
If the person who was given a copy of the report of the Government Analyst
notifies his intention to challenge the report it is open to the court to
forward the portion of the sample kept in the court, to the Central Drugs
Laboratory. The sub-section further envisages that any of the parties
involved in the criminal proceedings (the accused as well as the
complainant) can make a request to the court that the portion of the sample
produced by the Inspector before the Magistrate may be sent to the Central
Drugs Laboratory. When the said Central Drugs Laboratory sends a report
after conducting the analysis or tests, the facts contained therein become
conclusive evidence.
In this context it is useful to refer to the procedure prescribed for the
Inspector to follow while taking sample of the drug or medicine etc.
Section 23
of the Act contains the procedure to be followed. If the sample
is taken from a retailer or a distributor, the Inspector shall divide the
sample into four portions, seal and mark them and permit the person from
whom the sample was taken to add his own seal or mark on such portions of
the sample. Sub-section (4) of
Section 23
is the relevant provision to be
referred to now. It reads thus :
"The Inspector shall restore one portion of a sample so divided or one
container, as the case may be, to the person from whom he takes it, and
shall retain the remainder and dispose of the same as follows :-
(i) One portion or container he shall forthwith send to the Govern-ment
Analyst for test or analysis;
(ii) the second he shall produce to the Court before which proceed-ings, if
any, are instituted in respect of the drug or cosmetic; and
(iii) the third, where taken, he shall send to the person, if any, whose
name, address and other particulars have been disclosed under
section 18A
."
In this context it is necessary to extract
Section 18A
of the Act also
which is as under :
"18A. Disclosure of the name of the manufacturer, etc.- Every person, not
being the manufacturer of a drug or cosmetic or his agent for the
distribution thereof, shall, if so required, disclose to the Inspector the
name, address and other particulars of the person from whom he acquired the
drug or cosmetic."
Thus, the obligation of the Inspector is to give one portion of the sample
to the person whose name, etc. have been disclosed as the person from whom
the vendor acquired the drug. The requirement of the provision would stand
complied with when the Inspector gives one portion of the sample to the
person from whom he took the sample, and forward the second portion to the
Government Analyst and the third portion to the court (before which the
prosecution is pending) and the fourth portion to the person whose name and
address, etc. were disclosed by the vendor. This position is made very
clear as can be seen from the first proviso to sub-section (3) of
Section
23
of the Act. That proviso says that "where the sample is taken from
premises whereon the drug is being manufactured, it shall be necessary to
divide the sample into three portions only." (emphasis supplied). In such
case one portion shall be given to the manufacturer and the remaining two
portions are to be dealt with in accordance with clause (i) and clause (ii)
of sub-section (4), i.e. one portion to be sent to the Government Analyst
and the second to be produced before the court. In such a case, there is no
utility for clause (iii) of the sub-section. This aspect of non-utility of
the third clause in such a situation is amplified by the words employed in
that clause itself, (i.e. "where taken")- In other words, where it is not
taken, that clause has no utility.
Thus, in a case where the drug or medicine has passed from the manufacturer
to a wholesaler (a distributor) and then to a retailer, the obligation of
the Inspector (who takes the sample from a retailer) as for giving portions
of the sample would end up by giving it to the retailer and also to the
distributor (from whom the retailer bought the drug).
It was contended that since a manufacturer is not entitled to get a copy of
the report of the Government Analyst as of right (when the sample was taken
from a retailer) the manufacturer would be disabled from challenging the
correctness of the facts stated in the report and such deprivation would
visit him with hard consequences as the facts stated in the report would
become conclusive evidence against him. Learned counsel submitted that such
a provision which disables an accused from disproving the correctness of
the facts contained in a document which would nail him down, is unfair and
unreasonable besides being oppressive. This amounts to violation of the
fundamental right enshrined in
Article 21
of the Constitution, according to
the learned counsel.
In support of the above contention learned counsel cited some deci-sions.
In Drugs Inspector v. M/s. Modem Drugs and another, (1982) Drugs Cases 26
Madras, a single judge of the Madras High Court considered the contention
raised on behalf of a manufacturer, who was convicted under
Section 27
of
the Act, that non-supply of copy of the report of the Govern-ment Analyst
and a portion of the sample had deprived him of the right to challenge the
correctness of the report. Learned single judge while appreci-ating the
difficulty of the Drug Inspector who was only obliged by law to make four
portions of the sample as the maximum, has observed that the legislature
should have envisaged a case like the present one where there are number of
accused persons who are entitled to have each one portion of the sample and
a copy of the report of the Government Analyst. Learned single judge
further suggested that the defect in the Act requires rectification. After
stating that it was the business of the legislature and not that of the
judge, the High Court has chosen to acquit the appellant manufacturer.
In Kiran Dev Singh v. State of Himachal Pradesh, (1990) Drugs Cases 324
(HP), a Division Bench of the High Court of Himachal Pradesh held thus :
"The provisions of the Act, when read in the light of the scheme thereof,
lead to the unmistakable conclusion that it is incumbent upon the Drug
Inspector to make, a copy of the report of the Analyst as also a part of
the sample, available to the manufacturer where his identity becomes known
before he is actually proceeded against from the initial stages by being
made a party to the complaint filed by the Inspector. This is the mandate
of law lest the manufacturer is deprived of an effective opportunity for a
defence to the effect that the drug manufactured by him, out of which the
sample was drawn is not lacking in necessary standard of quality. The
manufacturer should have access to the report and a part of the sample
drawn from his product within a reasonable period to enable him to exercise
the right of adducing evidence in controversion of the report of the
analyst which describes his product as lacking in necessary standards of
quality."
Shir R.N. Trivedi, learned Additional Solicitor General contended that the
observations made in those decisions cannot be approved because it is open
to the manufacturer in prosecution cases against him to adduce evidence for
controversing the facts stated in the reports of Government Analyst in the
manner indicated in
Sections 25(3)
and (4) of the Act. Learned Additional
Solicitor General invited our attention to a two-Judge Bench decision of
this Court in
State of Haryana v. Brij Lal Mittal
, [1998] 5 SCC 343. In
that decision the point convassed before us did not arise, because on the
facts therein it was admitted that the manufacturer was served with a copy
of the report of the Government Analyst, but he did not notify his
intention to adduce evidence in controversion of the said report. The legal
position convassed in this case relates to a situation where the Inspector
did not serve copy of the report to the manufacturer since he had no legal
obligation to do so. Now we have to seriously examine the contention of
both sides, particularly in view of the observations made in the decisions
of the High Courts cited supra.
Section 25(3)
of the Act says that any document purporting to be a report
signed by a Government Analyst shall be evidence of the facts stated
therein "and such evidence shall be conclusive". The only exception
provided in the sub-section is, if the person from whom the sample was
taken or the person whose name, etc., have been disclosed under
Section
18A
, gives notice in writing that he intends to adduce evidence in
controversion of the report he has the liberty to disprove it. Of course
there is a time limit fixed for giving such notice. According to the
provision, such notice shall be given within 28 days of receipt of a copy
of the report.
When a manufacturer in a given situation is not entitled to get a copy of
the report of the Government Analyst as of right, as happened in this case,
what can he do for the purpose of challenging the report? There is yet
another situation when a manufacturer can be arraigned in the case. It is
envisaged in
Section 32A
of the Act. It reads thus :
"32A. Power of Court to implead the manufacturer, etc. - Where, at any time
during the trial of any offence under this Chapter alleged to have been
committed by any person, not being the manufacturer of a drug or cosmetic
or his agent for the distribution thereof, the Court is satisfied, on the
evidence adduced before it, that such manufacturer or agent is also
concerned in that offence, then, the Court may, notwithstanding anything
contained in sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) of
section 319
of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, proceed against him as though a prosecution had
been instituted against him under
section 32
."
What would such a manufacturer, who is impleaded as per the above
provision, do when he too is not entitled to be supplied with either a
portion of the sample or even a copy of the report of the Government
Analyst?
The extent of the implication of the words "such evidence shall be
conclusive" as employed in
Section 25(3)
of the Act has to be understood
now.
Section 4
of the Evidence Act says that when one fact is declared by
the said Act to be conclusive proof of another "the court shall, on proof
of one fact, regard the other as proved, and shall not allow evidence to be
given for the purpose of disproving it." The expression "conclusive
evidence" employed in
Section 25(3)
of the Act cannot have a different
implication as the legislative intention cannot be different. Such an
import as for the word "conclusive" in the interpretation of statutory
provisions has now come to stay. If so, what would happen if the
manufacturer is disabled from challeng-ing the facts contained in the
document which would visit him with drastic consequences when he is
arraigned in a trial. Any legal provision which snarls an indicted person
without affording any remedy to him to disprove an item of evidence which
could nail him down cannot be approved as consistent with the philosophy
enshrined in
Article 21
of the Constitution. The first effort which courts
should embark upon in such a situation is to use the power of
interpretation to dilute it to make the provision amenable to
Article 21.
In our view the court should lean to an interpretation as would avert the
consequences of depriving an accused of any remedy against such evidence.
He must have the right to disprove or controvert the facts stated in such a
document at least at the first tier. It is possible to interpret the
provisions in such a way as to make a remedy available to him. When so
interpreted the position is thus: The conclusiveness meant in
section 25(3)
of the Act need be read in juxtaposition with the persons referred to in
the sub-section. In other words, if any of the persons who receives a copy
of the report of the Government Analyst fails to notify his intention to
adduce evidence in controversion of the facts stated in the report within a
period of 28 days of the receipt of the report, then such report of the
Government Analyst could become conclusive evidence regarding the facts
stated therein as against such persons. But as for an accused, like the
manufacturer in the present case, who is not entitled to be supplied with a
copy of the report of the Government Analyst, he must have the liberty to
challenge the correctness of the facts stated in the report by resorting to
any other modes by which such facts can be disproved. He can also avail
himself of the remedy indicated in sub-section (4) of
Section 25
of the Act
by requesting the court to send the other portion of the sample remaining
in the court to be tested at the Central Drugs Laboratory. Of course, no
court is under a compulsion to cause the said sample to be so tested if the
request is made after a long delay. It is for that purpose that a
discretion has been conferred on the court to decide whether such sample
should be sent to the Central Drugs Laboratory on the strength of such
request. However, once the sample is tested at the Central Drugs Laboratory
and a report as envisaged in
Section 25(4)
of the Act is produced in court
the conclusiveness mentioned in that sub-section would become
incontrovertible.
In Vetcha Venkata Raju v. State of Andhra Pradesh, (1994) Drugs Cases 94
(AP) a manufacturer was prosecuted in a situation similar to the present
case and he was convicted by the trial court which was confirmed by the
Sessions Court. He raised a contention before the High Court of Andhra
Pradesh that he is precluded from exercising a valuable right to get the
sample examined by the Central Drugs Laboratory as provided under
Section
25(4)
of the Act because the portion of the sample or copy of the report
was not supplied to him. As against the said contention the Public
Prosecutor in that case pointed out that any other manufacturer also would
be under such a disability if he is prosecuted in exercise of the powers
under
Section 32A
of the Act because there is no provision for serving him
with a copy of the report in such situation. A Single Judge of the Andhra
Pradesh High Court, in the wake of the above contentions, observed that if
the manufacturer is pros-ecuted by impleading him as per
Section 32A
of the
Act he cannot claim the right to be supplied with a copy of the report of
the Government Analyst, but if he is prosecuted in consequence of the
disclosure made under
Section 18A
such manufacturer would be entitled to a
portion of the sample as well as a copy of the report of the Government
Analyst. According to learned Single Judge, failure to supply such things
to the manufacturer who was made an accused as per
Section 18A
could cause
prejudice to him. But no such prejudice can be caused by a manufacturer
impleaded under
Section 32A
of the Act, according to the learned single
judge. Consequently the conviction and sentence passed on the manufacturer
in that case were set aside by the High Court.
We are unable to understand the rationale in drawing a hiatus between a
manufacturer who is arraigned as an accused at the first instance itself
and another manufacturer who is arraigned in exercise of the powers under
Section 32A
of the Act, as regards his right to challenge a document
purporting to be the report of the Government Analyst. The right to
challenge the report must, as of right, be available to both such
manufacturers who are prosecuted for the offence.
When the provision can be interpreted in such a way as to avert absurd
consequences in the manner indicated above it is not congenial to the
interest of criminal justice to acquit the manufacturers of forbidden
medicines or drugs on a technical ground that there is a lacuna in the
legislation by not supplying copy of the report of the Government Analyst
to the manufacturer in certain situations. To adopt the course of
acquitting such offending manufacturers only on the legislative lacuna (if
at all it is lacuna) would be hazardous to public health and the lives of
the patients to whom drugs are prescribed by medical practitioners would be
in jeopardy. Hence, when the legislative provision is capable of being
interpreted as we did now, the courts need not feel helpless in
administering criminal justice in accordance with the objects sought to be
achieved by the statute.
In the result we dismiss this appeal.