[Cites
24
, Cited by
59
]
Supreme Court of India
Shipping Corpn. Of India Ltd vs C.L. Jain Woolen Mills & Ors on 10 April, 2001
Equivalent citations: AIR 2001 SUPREME COURT 1806, 2001 AIR SCW 1547, 2001 CLC 662 (SC), 2001 (3) SCALE 279, 2001 (2) LRI 518, 2001 (5) SCC 345, 2001 (5) SRJ 304, (2001) 129 ELT 561, (2001) 96 ECR 625, (2001) 3 MAD LJ 51, (2001) 3 SUPREME 345, (2001) 3 SCALE 279, (2001) 3 BLJ 671, (2001) 2 CURLJ(CCR) 592, (2001) 4 JT 507 (SC)
Author:
B.N. Agrawal
Bench:
B.N. Agrawal
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil) 2681  of  2001



PETITIONER:
SHIPPING CORPN. OF  INDIA LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
C.L. JAIN WOOLEN MILLS & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	10/04/2001

BENCH:
G.B. Pattanaik S.N. Phukan & B.N. Agrawal




JUDGMENT:
WITH
Civil Appeal Nos.  2682-2684 of 2001.
(@ S.L.P.(c) Nos. 5001, 9021/99 and SLP (c) No. 3063/2001
respectively)

L...I...T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T..J
JUDGMENT

PATTANAIK,J.
Leave Granted.
In	this  batch  of appeals, a common  question  of	 law
having	arisen,	 they  were  heard together  and  are  being
disposed  of  by  this common judgment.	  The  question	 for
consideration  is whether the appellant, who under the terms
of  the	 contract  between him and the owner of	 the  goods,
having a lien over the goods, until the dues are paid can be
forced to release the goods, without charging any demurrage,
merely	because	 the customs authorities issued a  detention
order  for  a  specified  period ?   We	 would	discuss	 the
question  in  relation to the facts in the case between	 the
Shipping  Corporation of India vs.  C.L.  Jain Woolen Mills.
The  respondent	 C.L.	Jain   Woolen  Mills,  imported	 the
consignment  of polyester filament yarn from Korea to India.
The  port  of  load  was  Busan in Korea  and  the  port  of
discharge  was Bombay in India, but the place of delivery of
goods  was ICD, Delhi.	The goods thus being brought to	 the
port of Bombay were discharged but there had been no customs
clearance at Bombay and the sealed container was transhipped
to  ICD,  Delhi,  where	 it   remained	with  the  Container
Corporation  of India.	The Shipping Corporation of India is
engaged	 in the business of carriage of goods.	On the terms
and  conditions contained in the Bill of Lading, in  respect
of  the	 goods consigned to it, the corporation claims	that
the  goods  cannot be released unless demurrage charges	 are
paid.	After the goods arrived in Delhi and remained in the
custody	 of the appellant, the customs authorities being  of
the  opinion that import of polyester filament yarn weighing
5,376  kgs.   was unauthorised and directed confiscation  of
the  same,  valued at Rs.11.5 lakhs under
Section 111(d)
of
the Customs Act, 1962.	The said customs authorities however
permitted the owner to redeem the goods on payment of Rs.  7
lakhs.	That apart, a penalty of Rs.  1 lakh was also levied
under
Section 112(a)
of the Customs Act.  The owner of	 the
goods  assailed the order before the Customs, Excise &	Gold
(Control)  Appellate  Tribunal	[for   short  CEGAT].	 The
tribunal  instead  of deciding the objections raised by	 the
owner  to  the	validity  of the  order	 of  the  Additional
Collector  of Customs, ordered that the advance licence	 and
DEEC  Book be amended and adjourned the appeal for a  period
of three months.  The owner, therefore, approached the Delhi
High  Court by filing a writ petition, which was  registered
as Writ Petition No.  1604/91, praying quashing of the order
of  the	 customs  authorities, confiscating  the  goods	 and
imposing  the  penalty and that of the Import Trade  Control
Authority enhancing the export obligation from 14,497.5 kgs.
to  22,330 kgs.	 of polyester fabric.  It was the contention
of  the owner before the High Court that in accordance	with
the  export  policy  and the Duty  Exemption  Scheme,  raw
materials  could  be  cleared for home	consumption  without
payment	 of  import  duty.  To avail of	 the  facility,	 the
importer  is  required to apply for grant of licence  called
the  Advance  Licence  and on the basis of the	same,  raw
materials  could  be imported without payment of  any  duty.
According  to  the owner, under the licence, thus issued  by
the  Controller of Imports and Exports, entitling import  of
raw   materials	 without  payment  of  duty,   the   customs
authorities   committed	 error	in   proceeding	  with	 the
confiscation  proceedings and ordering confiscation as	well
as  levying penalty.  The customs authorities as well as the
Controller  of Imports and Exports had been arrayed as party
respondents  in the writ petition.  Both of them as well  as
Union  of  India  resisted the claim of the owner,  who	 had
imported  the goods in question.  The High Court disposed of
the  writ  petition by judgment dated 9th  September,  1994,
quashing  the  order of the Additional Collector of  Customs
dated  10th August, 1990 as well as the order of the Customs
Excise	and  Gold  (Control) Appellate Tribunal	 dated	21st
March, 1991 and directed the Collector of Customs to release
the  goods forthwith.  The High Court also further held that
since  the action of the customs authorities is illegal, the
goods  in  question  will have to be released to  the  owner
without payment of any detention or demurrage charges by the
owner.	 Needless  to mention, the Shipping  Corporation  of
India,	the  appellant	in the present appeal, who  was	 the
carrier	 and  who under the Bills of Lading had a lien	over
the goods, until the dues are paid had not been made a party
to  the aforesaid writ petition.  At this stage it may	also
be  noticed that during pendency of the writ petition in the
High  Court, an interim order had been passed, entitling the
owner  to  take	 release of the goods on payment of  Rs.   5
lakhs to the customs authorities and a bank guarantee of Rs.
5  lakhs  but the owner had not taken advantage of the	said
interim	 order	and  the goods continued to  remain  in	 the
custody	 of the present appellant and demurrage charges went
on  accruing.  The order of Delhi High Court was assailed in
this Court by filing a Special Leave Petition by the Customs
Authorities  but  that Special Leave Petition however  stood
dismissed on 13.11.95 in SLP No.  5671/95.  The owner of the
goods  having  failed  in  his	attempt	 to  get  the  goods
released,  notwithstanding  the orders of the High Court  in
CWP  No.   1604/91,  filed an application for  initiating  a
contempt  proceeding,  which  was   registered	as  CCP	 No.
120/95.	  The  High  Court  however came to  hold  that	 the
authorities  cannot  be held to be guilty of disobeying	 the
orders	of the Court and accordingly, dismissed the contempt
petition.   While  dismissing  the  contempt  petition,	 the
learned	 Judge,	 granted  liberty to the owner to  move	 the
Division  Bench of the High Court for appropriate directions
regarding  payment of demurrage/detention charges.  Pursuant
to  the aforesaid observations in the contempt	proceedings,
an  application	 being	filed  by the owner,  the  same	 was
registered  as CM 4829/96.  That application was disposed of
by  the	 Division Bench of Delhi High Court by	order  dated
18th  January, 1999.  The Division Bench, while disposing of
the  petition,	came  to hold that the	entitlement  of	 the
carrier	 of the goods to charge demurrage charges and if so,
whether	 the customs authorities would be liable to pay	 the
same  or not is not required to be answered and is a matter,
which  should  be sorted out between those two	corporations
and the customs authorities.  But so far as the owner of the
goods  are  concerned,	he  having   been  absolved  of	 any
liability  to  pay  the demurrage charges by virtue  of	 the
judgment  of  Delhi  High  Court dated	9.9.94	in  CWP	 No.
1604/91,  he  would  be entitled to get the  goods  released
without payment of the detention and demurrage charges.	 The
High  Court, therefore called upon the customs department as
well  as the two corporations, who are the carriers to	sort
out  the  matter within a specified period and further	held
that if any detention or demurrages charges are payable, the
same  shall  be paid by the customs department within  three
weeks.	 It  further  directed	the carrier  of	 the  goods,
including  the	appellant  to release the  goods  after	 the
customs	 department  pays the  detention/demurrage  charges.
Notwithstanding	 the  aforesaid order, the goods  not  being
released,   when  a  fresh   contempt  petition	 was  filed,
registered  as CCP No.	89/99, the High Court issued  notice
on 25.2.99, calling upon the alleged contemnor to file their
reply  by  11th March, 1999.  Against the initiation of	 the
aforesaid  contempt proceeding, the Shipping Corporation  of
India  filed SLP No.  3391/99.	The order dated 18.1.99	 was
also  assailed	by  the	  Shipping  Corporation,  which	 was
registered  as SLP No.	5001/99.  The container	 Corporation
of  India  filed  a  special  leave  petition  on  identical
circumstances  and raising identical question, which is	 SLP
No.   9021/99.	 The Union of India also assails  the  order
dated	18.1.99	 by  filing   Special  Leave  Petition	 No.
3063/2001  along  with	the application for  condonation  of
delay.
This  batch of cases were listed before a Bench  of
two  learned Judges on 11th February, 2001 and after hearing
the  matters for sometime, the Bench felt that there appears
to  be some inconsistency between the decision of this Court
in
Union of India vs.  Sanjeev Woolen Mills
, 1998(9) SCC 647
and  the Grand Slam Internationals case reported in 1995(3)
SCC 151 and as such observed that the cases should be placed
before	a  Three Judge Bench and that is how, this batch  of
cases are before this three Judge Bench.  When these appeals
by grant of special leave were placed before the Three Judge
Bench  on  1st	March, 2001, we had directed  the  goods  be
released  to  the  owner  without any  conditions  but	such
release	 will  be subject to the ultimate decision in  these
appeals.
The	 stand of the carriers in this Court is that in view@@
							JJJJ
of  the provisions of the
Bills of Lading Act
as well as the@@
JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
terms  and  conditions	under  which  the  goods  have	been
imported  the  corporation-carrier retains a lien  over	 the
goods until all the dues including the demurrage charges are
paid  and  the	order of the Delhi High Court  in  the	writ
petition  to which these carriers were not parties, will not
obliterate  that  right.   The further contention  of  these
corporations  is  that	the order of the  High	Court  dated
18.1.99	 without  determining the rights of the carrier	 and
directing   to	sort  out  the	 matter	 with  the   customs
authorities  is unsustainable and as such the same should be
set  aside.   The stand of the customs authorities  and	 the
Union  of  India  on  the other hand  is  that	the  customs
authorities  cannot be required to pay the demurrage charges
merely	because	 the  action of the customs  authorities  in
detaining  the goods was found to be illegal by the Court of
law.   According to the Union of India in such a case when a
detention  certificate is issued by the customs authorities,
the  carrier  of  goods will not be entitled  to  claim	 any
demurrage  charges notwithstanding the terms and  conditions
of  the contract under which the goods had been carried	 and
on  this score, the order of the High Court dated 18.1.99 is
erroneous.   The contention of the importer of the goods  on
the  other hand is that in view of the findings of the	High
Court  in  CWP No.  1604/91, specifically holding  that	 the
goods  in questions be released without payment of demurrage
or  detention charges and the further finding to the  effect
that  the  order of the customs authorities in	confiscating
and  levying  penalty is illegal and invalid,  the  importer
cannot	be  made liable to pay the demurrage  and  detention
charges.   It is the further submission of the importer that
notwithstanding the clear directions of the High Court, non-
release	 of goods was a gross violation of the Courts order
and,  therefore,  the  appropriate   authorities  should  be
suitably dealt with.
In view of the submissions made at the Bar appearing for
different  parties, referred to earlier, the first  question
that  arises  for  consideration is whether in the  case  in
hand,  the  importer of the goods can be made liable to	 pay
any  demurrage/detention  charges?   It is  undisputed	that
under  the  terms  and conditions of Bills  of	Lading,	 the
carrier	 had  a lien over the goods until all the  dues	 are
paid and the goods having been kept, not being released, the
corporation-carrier   was  entitled  to	  charge   demurrage
charges.   But	in  view of the specific directions  of	 the
Delhi  High Court in the writ petition filed by the importer
of  the goods, challenging the legality of the order of	 the
customs	 authorities  in confiscating the goods and  levying
penalty	 and that order having reached finality by dismissal
of  the special leave petition against the same filed by the
Union  of  India, the liability of the importer to  pay	 the
demurrage  charges  ceases  and	  that	question  cannot  be
re-opened.
The next question that arises for consideration which is
a  larger  issue, namely if the customs authorities  do	 not
release	 the  goods  and initiates proceedings	and  finally
passes	order  of confiscation but that order is  ultimately
set  aside in appeal and it is held by Court of law that the
detention   of	the  goods  was	  illegal,  then   in	such
circumstances  whether the carrier of the goods who had lien
over  the  goods for non- payment of duty, can	enforce	 the
terms  and  conditions of the contract against	the  customs
authorities,  making the said authorities liable to pay	 the
demurrage  charges.  Needless to mention, demurrage  charges
are levied for the place the goods occupy and for the period
it remains not being released, on account of lack of customs
clearance.  It may be noticed at this stage that the customs
authorities  exercise its power under the provisions of	 the
Customs Act
whereas the claim of the Corporation who acts as
a  carrier  is	based upon the terms and conditions  of	 the
contract  between  the importer and the carrier.  So far  as
the  powers  of the customs authorities are  concerned,	 the
same are circumscribed by the provisions of the
Customs Act,
1962
.
Section 8
of the Customs Act empowers the  Collector
of  Customs to approve proper places in any customs port  or
customs airport or coastal port for unloading and loading of
goods  and specify the limits of the customs area.
Section
33
prohibits unloading of imported goods at any place other
than  the  place  approved under
Section 8(a)
of  the	Act.
Section	 34
provides that the imported goods shall  not  be
unloaded from any conveyance except under the supervision of
the  proper  officer.
Section 45
provides for clearance  of
imported  goods.  The same provision may be extracted herein
below in extenso:
Sec.45
Restrictions on custody and removal of imported
goods:
(1)	 Save as otherwise provided in any law for the	time
being  in  force, all imported goods, unloaded in a  customs
area  shall  remain in the custody of such person as may  be
approved  by  the [Commissioner of Customs] until  they	 are
cleared	 for  home  consumption	 or are	 warehoused  or	 are
transhipped  in	 accordance with the provisions	 of  Chapter
VIII.
(2) The person having custody of any imported goods in a
customs	 area,	whether under the provisions of	 sub-section
(1)  or under any law for the time being in force  (a)shall
keep  a record of such goods and send a copy thereof to	 the
proper	officer;   (b)	shall not permit such  goods  to  be
removed	 from  the  customs area or  otherwise	dealt  with,
except	under  and  in	accordance with	 the  permission  in
writing of the proper officer.
(3)	 Notwithstanding  anything contained in any law	 for
the time being in force, if any imported goods are pilferred
after  unloading  thereof  in a customs area  while  in	 the
custody	 of  a person referred to in sub- section (1),	that
person shall be liable to pay duty on such goods at the rate
prevailing on the date of delivery of an import manifest or,
as  the case may be, an import report to the proper  officer
under
section 30
for the arrival of the conveyance in which
the said goods were carried.
Under  the aforesaid provision, the imported goods would
remain	in the custody of the person approved by the Customs
Commissioner, until they are cleared for home consumption or
are  warehoused	 or are transhipped in accordance  with	 the
provisions  of	Chapter VIII.
Section 47
of the Act is	 the
provision to obtain clearance of goods for home consumption.
Section	 49
provides for storage of imported goods in public
warehouse,  or	in a private warehouse, if permitted by	 the
Deputy	Commissioner of Customs or Assistant Commissioner of
Customs.
Under  Chapter  IX	of   the  Act
,	the   Deputy
Commissioner  or  Assistant  Commissioner   of	Customs	 may
appoint	 public	 warehouses  wherein dutiable goods  may  be
deposited,  as	provided  in
Section 57
of the	Act.   Under
Section	  58
,	the  Deputy    Commissioner   or   Assistant
Commissioner  may  even license private	 warehouses  wherein
dutiable  imported  goods  could  be  deposited.   But	 all
warehoused  goods  would  be subject to the control  of	 the
proper	officer	 of the customs department, as	provided  in
Section 62
and the owner of the goods is required to pay the
rent  and warehouse charges to be fixed by the	Commissioner
of  Customs, as provided in
Section 63
.	 No warehoused goods
could  be taken out of the warehouse except for clearance of
home  consumption  or for removal to another  warehouse,  as
stipulated  in
Section 67
of the Act.
Section 68
provides
the  procedure	which an importer would follow for  clearing
the  warehoused goods for home consumption.  The  expression
warehouse  has	been  defined in
Section 2(43)
to  mean	 a
public	warehouse  appointed under
Section 57
or  a  private
warehouse  licensed  under
Section 58
.	It is thus  apparent
from  different provisions mentioned above that the  customs
authorities  have  full power and control over the  imported
goods and without the permission of the customs authorities,
the goods cannot be cleared.  But at the same time, there is
no  provision  in the
Customs Act
, conferring power  on	 the
Customs	 Authorities  to  prohibit  or	injunct	 any   other
authority  where the imported goods are stored from charging
the  demurrage charges for the services rendered for storing
the  imported  goods.  We are not concerned in	the  present
case with the provisions of either the Major Ports Trust Act
or  International  Airport Authorities Act, as the  imported
goods had not been stored either in any Major Port or in the
international  air  cargo.  It may however be  necessary  to
examine some of the provisions of the
Bills of Lading Act
as
well  as  the
Contract Act
, since the claim  of  both,	 the
Shipping  Corporation  and Container  Corporation,  charging
demurrage  for	the space occupied for the goods, not  being
released, is on account of the contract between them.
Under
the  Indian  Bills of Lading Act, 1956
, every  consignee  of
goods,	named  in a Bill of Lading and every endorsee  of  a
Bill  of  Lading,  is vested with absolute  right  over	 the
goods.	 The  Bill  of	Lading is a  well  known  mercantile
document  of  title,  which is transferred in  the  business
world  by endorsement passing to the endorsee, the title  of
the  goods  covered  by such Bill of  Lading.	Clause	(18)
provides  for  payment	of  demurrage  charges	in  case  of
non-clearance  of goods within the free time available.	 The
said clause is extracted herein below in extenso:
Clause 18  Delivery of goods in Container:	If receipt
of goods in container(s) is not taken by the merchant within
48  hours  after  discharge from the vessel  (or  after	 the
arrival	 of the goods at place of delivery if named  herein)
the  carrier shall be at liberty at his discretion either to
unpack	the  container(s)  and to put the goods in  safe  on
behalf	of  the	 merchant  and at the  merchants  risk	and
expense	 or  to	 charge	 demurrage in  accordance  with	 the
carriers  tariff  applicable  to the route over	 which	the
goods  are carried.  If unpacking the goods of	container(s)
is  required for whatever reason and the contents cannot  be
identified  as	to  the marks and numbers,  cargo  sweepings
liquid	residue	 and  any unclaimed contents  not  otherwise
accounted  for shall be allocated for completing delivery to
the merchant.  The carrier shall not be required to separate
or  deliver  goods  in	accordance with	 the  brand,  marks,
numbers, size or types of packages as stated by the merchant
in  his	 particulars  but only to deliver  total  number  of
containers  (if	 same loaded by the merchant or packages  or
units)	(if container(s) loaded by the carrier) shown on the
face of this Bill of Lading.
Clause  (2)	 of  the Bill of Lading	 defines  Carriers
Tariff as follows:
Clause (2)- Carriers Tariff:
The terms of the carriers applicable tariff are
incorporated herein and copies of the relevant
provisions of the applicable tariff are obtainable
from the carrier or the agents upon request.  In the
case of inconsistency between this Bill of Lading
and the applicable tariff, this Bill of Lading shall
prevail.
Clause  (14)  confers a lien on the goods for  all	sums
payable under the contract.  The said clause is quoted below
in extenso:
Clause (14).  FREIGHT ETC.	EARNED


    ........All	 unpaid	 charges shall be paid in  full	 and
without any offset, counterclaim or deduction.	Any error in
freight	 or other charges or in the classification of  Goods
is subject to correction and if on correction the freight or
charges	 are  higher the Carrier may collect the  additional
amount from shipper or consignees.  The Carrier shall have a
lien on the Goods and any documents relating thereto for all
sums  payable  to the Carrier under the contract  (including
without	 limitation unpaid freight and dead freight upon any
portion	 of the Goods covered by the Shipping Order  granted
in  respect hereof which may not have been shipped) and	 the
General	 Average contribution to whomsoever due and for	 the
cost  of recovering the same and for that purpose shall have
the  right  to sell the Goods by public auction	 or  private
treaty	without notice to the Merchant.	 The Merchant  shall
indemnify  the Carrier against all and any costs incurred by
the Carrier in exercising his rights under this clause.
The	 expression Carrier under the definition clause in
the  Bill of Lading means the Shipping Corporation of  India
Limited	 and/or associated company on whose behalf the	Bill
of Lading has been signed.
The	 two  provisions of the
Contract Act
, on  which	 Mr.
Dave, appearing for the appellant, strongly relied upon, may
now  be	 noticed.  Section 170 is the right of lien  of	 the
bailee for the services rendered in respect of the goods and
the  bailee has right to retain the goods until he  receives
due  remuneration for the services he has rendered.  Section
171  is	 the General lien of bankers, factors,	wharfingers,
attorneys and policy brokers, who also retain as a security,
the  goods bailed to them.  The contention of Mr.  Dave, for
the  appellant	is  the	 right of  the	appellant  to  claim
demurrage  charges in respect of the goods, which is in	 his
custody,  the  said  goods  not	 being	released,  within  a
specified period, flows from the terms and conditions of the
contract  between the importer and the corporation and	that
right  cannot  be  taken  away by issuance  of	a  detention
certificate  by the Customs authorities under the provisions
of  the
Customs Act
and as such even if a Court directs that
the  importer  is not liable to pay the	 demurrage  charges,
because of the illegal detention of the goods by the customs
authorities,  the appellant would not be bound by the  same,
particularly,  when  the  appellant was not a party  to	 the
proceedings   between  the  customs   authorities  and	 the
importer.   Learned Additional Solicitor General, Mr.  Mukul
Rohtagi	 however,  on the other hand contends  that
Section
45(2)(b)
of  the Customs Act prohibits release of  imported
goods  from the customs area, except in accordance with	 the
permission in writing of the proper officer.  The expression
otherwise  dealt with in the aforesaid provision is also a
restriction  placed on the custodian and that is a  complete
embargo	 for  the goods being released.	 The prohibition  in
question  is  in  relation to removal of goods	as  well  as
dealing with the goods in any manner.  This being the manner
of  restrictions imposed for removal of the goods and at the
same  time, conferring power on the customs authorities,  if
after initiation of adjudication proceedings, a Court of law
nullifies the same and the customs authorities then issues a
detention certificate, then the importer would not be liable
for  paying  any  demurrage   charges,	notwithstanding	 the
contract  between the importer and the appellant, and at any
rate,  the  customs authorities cannot be fastened with	 the
liability  of paying the demurrage charges.  In this view of
the  matter, the order of the Delhi High Court dated 18.1.99
must be held to be erroneous.  The rival contentions require
careful	 examination  of  the different	 provisions  of	 the
Customs	 Act,  the  Contract  Act as well as  the  Bills  of
lading.
Before   examining	 the  correctness   of	 the   rival
submissions,   one   thing  is	 crystal  clear	  that	 the
relationship  between the importer and the carrier of  goods
in  whose  favour the Bill of lading has been consigned	 and
who has stored the goods in his custody, the relationship is
governed  by the contract between the parties.
Section	 170
of the Indian Contract Act engraft the principle of Bailees
lien,  namely if somebody has received the articles on being
delivered  to  him and is required to store the	 same  until
cleared for which he might have borne the expenses, he has a
right  to detain it until his dues are paid.  But it is	 not
necessary  in  the  case in hand to examine the	 common	 law
principle  and the bailees lien inasmuch as the very  terms
of  the contract and the provisions of the Bills of Lading,,
unequivocally conferred power on the appellant to retain the
goods,	until  the dues are paid.  Such rights	accruing  in
favour of the appellant cannot be nullified by issuance of a
certificate  of detention by the customs authorities  unless
for such issuance of detention certificate any provisions of
the
Customs  Act
authorises.	We had not  been  shown	 any
provisions  of	the
Customs  Act
, which  would	 enable	 the
customs	 authorities  to compel the carrier, not  to  charge
demurrage  charges,  the moment a detention  certificate  is
issued.	  It  may  be  undoubtedly  true  that	the  customs
authorities  might have bona fide initiated the	 proceedings
for  confiscation  of  the goods which	however,  ultimately
turned out to be unsuccessful and the Court held the same to
be  illegal.   But  that  by itself, would  not	 clothe	 the
customs authorities with the power to direct the carrier who
continues  to retain a lien over the imported goods, so long
as  his	 dues  are  not paid, not to  charge  any  demurrage
charges nor the so- called issuance of detention certificate
would  also  prohibit  the carrier from raising	 any  demand
towards	 demurrage  charges,  for   the	 occupation  of	 the
imported  goods	 of the space, which the proprietor  of	 the
space is entitled to charge from the importer.	The importer
also  will  not	 be entitled to remove his  goods  from	 the
premises  unless customs clearance is given.  But that would
not  mean  that	 demurrage charges could not  be  levied  on
importer  for  the space his goods have occupied, since	 the
contract  between  the	importer and the proprietor  of	 the
space  is in no way altered because of the orders issued  by
the  customs authorities.  The learned Additional  Solicitor
General,  vehemently argued and pressed sub-
section 2(b)
of
Section	 45
in support of his contention that the  imported
goods  have  to	 be  dealt   with  in  accordance  with	 the
permission  in writing of the proper officer of the  customs
department  and	 in  exercise  of such	power  when  customs
authorities  initiate adjudication proceeding and ultimately
confiscate  and levy penalty, when such order is struck down
and  a detention certificate is issued, the said issuance of
detention  certificate	would  come  within  the  expression
otherwise  dealt  with	used  in
Section  45(2)(b)
,   and
therefore, the proprietor of the space would be bound not to
charge	any demurrage charges.	We are unable to accept this
contention inasmuch as the expression otherwise dealt with
used  in
Section 45(2)(b)
, in the context in which  it	 has
been  used,  cannot be construed to mean, it authorises	 the
customs	 officer to issue a detention certificate in respect
of the imported goods, which would absolve the importer from
paying	the  demurrage charges and which would	prevent	 the
proprietor  of the space from levying any demurrage charges.
Having scrutinized the provisions of the
Customs Act
, we are
unable	to  find  out any provision which  can	be  remotely
construed to have conferred power on the customs authorities
to  prevent  the  proprietor of the space from	levying	 the
demurrage charges and, thereby absolving the importer of the
goods  from  payment  of  the same.  In	 fact  the  majority
decision  in  Grand Slam Internationals case,  1995(3)	SCC
151, clearly comes to the aforesaid conclusion with which we
respectfully agree.
We	have  also  examined the decision of this  Court  in
Union  of  India vs.  Sanjeev Woolen Mills
, 1998(9) SCC	 647
and  we	 do not find any apparent inconsistency between	 the
decision of this Court in Grand Slam and that of the Sanjeev
Woolen	Mills.	In Sanjeev Woolen Mills, the imported  goods
were  synthetic	 waste	(soft quality), though	the  customs
authorities  detained  the same, being of the  opinion	that
they  were  prime fibre of higher value and not soft  waste.
On account of non-release, the imported goods incurred heavy
demurrage  charges  but the customs  authorities  themselves
gave  an undertaking before the High Court that in the event
the  goods are found to be synthetic waste, then the Revenue
itself	would  bear  the   entire  demurrage  and  container
charges.   Further the Chief Commissioner of Customs,  later
had ordered unconditional release of goods and yet the goods
had  not been released.	 It is under these circumstances and
in  view  of the specific undertaking given by	the  customs
authorities, this Court held that from the date of detention
of  the	 goods	till the customs authorities  intimated	 the
importer,  the	importer  would not be required to  pay	 the
demurrage  charges.  But
in that case
even subsequent to the
orders	of the customs authorities on a suit being filed  by
one  of	 the  partners	of the importer-firm,  an  order  of
injunction  was	 issued and, therefore it was held that	 for
that  period,  the importer would be liable for	 paying	 the
demurrage and container charges.  The judgment of this Court
in  Sanjeev Woolen Mills, therefore, was in relation to	 the
peculiar  facts and circumstances of the case and the  Court
had  clearly observed that the order in question is meant to
do  justice to the importer, looking to the totality of	 the
circumstances and the conduct of customs authorities.  Thus,
we  see no inconsistency between the ratio in Sanjeev Wollen
Mills  and  the Judgment of this Court in Grand Slam.	That
apart,	the  judgment in Grnd Slam was a three	judge  bench
judgment.   In the case in hand, as has already been  stated
earlier,  the  earlier	judgment of Delhi High	Court  dated
9.9.94	in  C.W.P.   No.  1604/91, has become  final,  which
entitles  the  importer	 to get the goods  released  without
payment	 of  the  detention and demurrage charges.   In	 the
contextual  facts, notwithstanding the judgment of the	High
Court,	the  goods  not having been released,  the  impugned
order  and  direction  dated 18.1.99, cannot be held  to  be
infirm	in  any manner.	 In the absence of any provision  in
the
Customs Act
, entitling the customs officer to  prohibit
the  owner of the space, where the imported goods have	been
stored from levying the demurrage charges, levy of demurrage
charges	 for non-release of the goods is in accordance	with
the  terms and conditions of the contract and as such  would
be  a  valid levy.  The conclusion of the High Court to	 the
effect	that  the  detention  of the goods  by	the  customs
authorities was illegal and such illegal detention prevented
the   importer	from  releasing	  the  goods,  the   customs
authorities  would be bound to bear the demurrage charges in
the  absence of any provision in the
Customs Act
,  absolving
the  customs  authorities  from	  that	liability.
Section
45(2)(b)
of  the  Customs Act cannot be construed  to	have
clothed	 the customs authorities with the necessary  powers,
so  as	to  absolve  them of the  liability  of	 paying	 the
demurrage  charges.   In the aforesaid premises, we  see  no
infirmity  with the directions given by the Delhi High Court
on  18.1.99.   The  goods in question, having  already	been
directed  to  be  released,  without   the  payment  of	 the
demurrage  charges,  the  importer must have got  the  goods
released.   Having  regard  to	the fact  situation  of	 the
present	 case, it would be meet and proper for us to  direct
the  Shipping  Corporation and Container Corporation, if  an
application is filed by the customs authorities to waive the
demurrage charges.  The appeal is disposed of accordingly.
37