[Cites
4
, Cited by
187
]
Supreme Court of India
Siddalingamma And Anr vs Mamtha Shenoy on 18 October, 2001
Equivalent citations: AIR 2001 SUPREME COURT 2896, 2001 AIR SCW 4345, (2002) 1 ANDHLD 6, (2001) 7 SUPREME 870, 2002 HRR 117, (2001) 2 RENCR 539, 2001 (8) SCC 561, 2002 SCFBRC 17, (2002) 46 ALL LR 18, (2002) 1 MAD LW 600, (2001) 2 RENCJ 539, (2001) 2 RENTLR 569, 2002 ALL CJ 1 337, (2001) 7 SCALE 345, (2001) 9 JT 268 (SC)
Author:
R.C. Lahoti
Bench:
Chief Justice
,
R.C. Lahoti
,
P. Venkatarama Reddi
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  7292 of 2001

PETITIONER:
SIDDALINGAMMA AND ANR.

RESPONDENT:
MAMTHA SHENOY

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 18/10/2001

BENCH:
DR. A.S. ANAND, C.J. & R.C. LAHOTI & P. VENKATARAMA REDDI

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

2001 Supp(4) SCR 366

The Judgment of the Court was delivered by

R.C. LAHOTI, J. A decree for recovery of possession passed by the Trial
Court against the respondent has been reversed by High Court in a revision
preferred by her. The aggrieved landlady has filed this petition seeking
special leave to appeal under
Article 136
of the Constitution.
Leave granted.
The suit premises are situated in Rajaji Nagar, Bangalore. The appellant
ho. 1 is admittedly the owner and landlady of the premises and respondent
is holding the same as a tenant on a monthly rent of Rs. 1100. Appellant
no. 2 was joined as plaintiff because she used to collect rent for and on
behalf of appellant no. 1. The respondent's eviction was sought for on the
ground available under Section 21(1) (h) of the Karnataka Rent Control Act,
1961. It is not disputed that there are eleven members in the family of
appellant no. 1 and residing with her presently in a house situated in
village Bettalasoor. In the petition filed on 25.2.1993 the requirement as
set out in the petition was that appellant no. 1's husband was suffering
from asthma and respiratory problems and taking oxygen regularly from the
cylinder and for medical treatment he was frequently required to be taken
to Bangalore from Bettalasoor, a village situated at some distance from
Bangalore. The appellant No. 1 was having two sons and grand-children
living at the village with her and the grand-children were required to be
shifted to Bangalore for better education. The accommo-dation in occupation
of appellant no. 1 and her family members was too small and inconvenient
for all the family members to reside in. It was also submitted that the
respondent was running a beauty parlour and also an ice-cream shop. She was
financially sound and able to secure alternate accommodation. The
respondent would not suffer any hardship if she was required to vacate the
suit premises and in the event of eviction being denied the landlord would
suffer great hardship. Thus comparative hardship of the landlord was
greater than that of the tenant.
It appears that when the case was being tried appellant no. 1's husband
expired. It also appears that appellant no. 1 does not have any issue of
her own. Those who are residing with her are not her own sons and grand
children but her real sister's sons whom she treats as her adopted sons and
their children. The petition for eviction was amended by moving an
application on 22.1.1997 whereby it was submitted that the appellant no. 1
herself was not keeping well and she required better treatment which was
available at Bangalore and there-fore she intended to shift from the
village house to her own house situated in the city of Bangalore along with
her adopted sons. The prayer for amendment though contested by the
respondent, was allowed by the Trial Court.
In a detailed judgment dated 4.3.1997, the learned Trial Judge held that
the suit premises were required for the use of the appellant no. 1 and her
family members. The appellant no. 1 was aged about 55 years, who was not
maintain-ing good health and was referred by the doctor in village
Bettalasoor for treatment to be taken at Bangalore and in the interest of
better treatment of hers she needed to shift her residence to Bangalore.
The younger children in the family of appellant no.l were also required by
the appellant no. 1 to be shifted to Bangalore so that they could have the
benefit of better schooling and better educational facilities at Bangalore.
The Trial Court also found that the accom-modation in Bangalore was better
and sufficient for occupation by the appellant no. 1 and her family members
who are presently residing in an accommodation not sufficient for their
occupation in the house at Bettalasoor. The requirement of the appellant
no. 1 of the suit premises having been found to be reasonable and bona fide
the Trial Court held that the appellant no. 1 was entitled to decree for
eviction of the tenant/respondent. The Trial Court further held that in
case the eviction was ordered the respondent-tenant would not be put to any
hard-ship and therefore comparative hardship lay more on the side of the
appellant. Having evaluated the unit of accommodation in the light of the
strength of the family members of the appellant no. 1 the Trial Court also
held that it was not possible to pass an order of partial eviction.
Let it be noted here itself that there was some embellishment in the case
of the appellant no. 1 inasmuch as what was stated to be 'two sons of
appellant no. 1' were in fact not her own sons but the sons of her sister.
The appellant no. 1 not having any children of her own was treating her
sister's two sons as her adopted sons. Nevertheless, it was almost admitted
that they along with their families which includes their wives and children
have always been residing with the appellant no. 1. It was not disputed
that the number of persons residing with appellant no. 1 was eleven.
Deciding the revision preferred by respondent-tenant, the High Court held
that appellant no. 1's husband, whose sickness and need for treatment at
Bangalore was the principal cause pleaded in the eviction petition for
shifting to Bangalore, having expired, the cause had ceased to exist during
the pendency of the petition. The appellant did not have any children of
her own and because the appellant tried to project her sister's sons as her
own sons there appeared to be mala fides on her part. Insofar as her own
deteriorating health and need for taking treatment at Bangalore is
concerned, the High Court observed - "no doubt the petitioner has placed
some material with regard to her ill-health but her health is not such a
serious one warranting her shifting to Bangalore." Stating these
circumstances the learned Single Judge of the High Court con-cluded that
keeping in view the social purpose sought to be achieved by the welfare
legislation of Rent Control Law, the Trial Court had committed a patent
error in directing eviction of the tenant. The High Court did not go into
the question of comparative hardship. The High Court allowed the revision
and directed the eviction petition to be dismissed but observed at the fag
end -"before concluding, taking into consideration the material facts I
deem it proper to observe that the petitioner be permitted to file a second
petition if she so chooses notwithstanding this petition by stating correct
facts if she is desper-ately in need of the same."
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties we are of the option that
the appeal deserves to be allowed and while setting aside the order of the
High Court, the order of the Trial Court deserves to be restored.
Rent Control Legislation generally leans in favour of tenant; it is only
the provision for seeking eviction of the tenant on the ground of bona fide
requirement of landlord for his own occupation or use of the tenanted
accom-modation which treats the landlord with some sympathy.
In
Shiv Sarup
Gupta v. Dr. Mahesh Chand Gupta
, [1999] 6 SCC 222 this Court has held that
a bona fide requirement must be an outcome of a sincere, honest desire in
contra-distinction with a mere pretext for evicting the tenant on the part
of the landlord claiming to occupy the premises for himself or for any
member of the family which would entitle the landlord to seek ejectment of
the tenant. The question to be asked by a judge of facts, by placing
himself in the place of the landlord, is, whether in the given facts proved
by material on record the need to occupy the premises can be said to be
natural, real, sincere, honest? If the answer be in the positive the need
is bona fide. The concept of bona fide need or genuine requirement needs a
practical approach instructed by the realities of life. An approach either
too liberal or too conservative or pedantic must be guarded against. If the
landlord wishes to live with comfort in a house of his own, the law does
not command or compel him to squeeze himself and dwell into lesser premises
so as to protect the tenant's continued occupation in tenancy premises.
In
Deena Nath v. Pooran Lal
, [2001] 5 SCC 705 this Court has held that bona
fide requirement has to be distinguished from a mere whim or fanciful
desire. The bona fide requirement is in praesenti and must be manifested in
actual need so as to convince the court that it is not a mere fanciful or
whimsical desire.
The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the need of the
appellant no. 1 who is now a widowed landlady was also in issue from the
very beginning though in the then circumstances it was the need of her
husband which was the centre of emphasis. Unfortunately, the husband
expired during the pendency of the petition. This changed circumstance
shifted the emphasis contained in the reason for shifting from village
habitat to the landlady's premises in the city of Bangalore; earlier it was
on the consideration for health of the landlady's husband which now is on
the consideration for health of the landlady herself. Medical prescription
given by the doctor at Bettalasoor was produced in evidence referring the
landlady for treatment at Bangalore as the facilities for orthopaedic
treatment which the landlady needed to undergo were available in the city
of Bangalore and not in the village of present residence of the landlady.
It is common knowledge that orthopaedic ailments render frequent travelling
of the patient uncomfortable and difficult and therefore the desire of the
landlady to shift to Bangalore for her own treatment is a felt-need in
praesenti and there is nothing unnatural, un-real or insincere about it. In
addition, the school going children residing with the landlady as members
of her family need to be shifted to the city of Bangalore and stay thereat
in the interest of schooling in educational institutions with better
ambience, facilities and standards. It is true that in the petition for
eviction, as originally filed, the health condition of the landlady herself
and the factum of children residing with her not being her own grand-
children were not pleaded, nevertheless evidence was allowed to be let in
without objection and was recorded by the Trial Court. An application for
amendment under
Order 6, Rule 17 of the CPC
was moved and the deficiency in
the pleadings stood removed by the amendment permitted by the Trial Court
in exercise of its discretionary jurisdiction to do so. The order
permitting the amendment was not put in issue promptly. Even the High Court
in its impugned order has not found fault with the order of the Trial Court
permitting the amendment nor has it expressed an opinion that leave granted
by the Trial Court for amendment in the eviction petition suffered from any
error of jurisdiction or discretion. On the doctrine of relation back,
which generally governs amendment of pleadings unless for reasons the Court
excluded the applicability of the doctrine in a given case, the petition
for eviction as amended would be deemed to have been filed originally as
such and the evidence shall have to be appreciated in the light of the
averments made in the amended petition. The High Court though set aside the
order of the Trial Court but it is writ large from the framing of the order
of the High Court, especially the portions which we have extracted from the
order of the High Court and reproduced in earlier part of this judgment,
that the learned single Judge of the High Court also was not seriously
doubting the genuineness of the landlady's requirement on the material
available on record but was not feeling happy with the contents of the
eviction petition as originally filed and an over-zealous attempt on the
part of the landlady in projecting her sister's sons and grand-children as
her own. The High Court did not doubt that the landlady was not in a sound
state of health and that a large-size family was with her nor was it
disputed by the tenant that the number of members in the family of the
landlady residing with her was eleven. In such facts and circumstances, "
in our opinion, the High Court ought to have adopted a realistic and
objective approach rather than feeling sceptical about the landlady's
mannerism. Had the High Court not been convinced of the landlady 's
requirement it would not have given her the liberty of filing a fresh
petition solely by "stating correct facts". In our opinion, driving the
widowed landlady to the need of filing a fresh eviction petition and to the
rigmarole of litigation would be subversive of the ends of justice. The
need of the landlady is, as borne out from the amended pleadings and
material brought on record, bona fide and not arbitrary, whim-sical or
fanciful. In a civil case, once an amendment has been unreservedly
permitted to be incorporated in the pleadings, the correctness of the facts
introduced by amendment cannot be doubted solely on the ground that they
were not stated in the original petition. So also genuineness of the
landlady's statement, supported by medical prescription, that she needed to
have treatment at Bangalore cannot be doubted by the Court forming an
opinion that the ill-health of landlady was not so serious as to warrant
her shifting to a city from a village and then substituting its opinion for
the seriousness felt by the landlady. The requirement pleaded and proved
was neither a pretext nor a ruse adopted by the landlady for evicting the
tenant. In such circumstances, in our opinion, the order of the Trial Court
deserves to be restored. On the question of comparative hardship as also on
the issue of partial eviction, having our-selves evaluated the well-
reasoned findings recorded by the Trial Court we are inclined to uphold the
same more so when they have not been reversed by the High Court.
For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is allowed. The judgment of the High
Court is set aside and that of the Trial Court restored. However, the
respondent-tenant is allowed four months' time to vacate the suit premises
subject to her filing before the Trial Court the usual undertaking on her
affidavit that she would deliver vacant and peacful possession to the
landlady on or before the expiry of four months and in between she would
clear the arrears of rent, if any, and continue to pay rent falling due
month by month and shall not induct any one else in the premises. Costs as
incurred.