[Cites
8
, Cited by
42
]
Supreme Court of India
Ram Sahan Rai vs Sachiv Samanaya Prabandhak & Anr on 21 February, 2001
Equivalent citations: AIR 2001 SUPREME COURT 1173, 2001 AIR SCW 925, 2001 ALL. L. J. 698, 2001 (1) UPLBEC 856, 2001 (3) SERVLJ 299 SC, 2001 (2) LRI 949, 2001 (3) SCC 323, 2001 (2) UJ (SC) 1324, 2001 (3) SRJ 428, (2001) 3 JT 95 (SC), (2001) 89 FACLR 109, (2001) 2 SCT 231, 2001 LABLR 392, (2001) 1 BANKCLR 523, (2001) 98 FJR 628, (2001) 2 ALL WC 927, (2001) 2 SCALE 136, (2001) 2 ESC 340, (2001) 2 LAB LN 38, (2001) 2 SUPREME 109, (2001) 1 CURLR 1028, (2001) 1 LABLJ 1073, (2001) 3 MAD LW 416, 2001 SCC (L&S) 584
Author:
B.N. Agrawal
Bench:
B.N. Agrawal
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil) 3162  of  1997



PETITIONER:
RAM SAHAN RAI

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SACHIV SAMANAYA PRABANDHAK & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	21/02/2001

BENCH:
G.B. Pattanaik & B.N. Agrawal.




JUDGMENT:
L...I...T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T..J
PATTANAIK,J.
Plaintiff  is the appellant and assails the Judgment  of
the  learned Single Judge of Allahabad High Court in  Second
Appeal	No.683	of 1996.  The plaintiff filed the  suit	 for
declaration that the order of his removal from service dated
15.4.87	 was  illegal, arbitrary, null and void and  without
jurisdiction  and  the same may be set aside and it  may  be
declared that the plaintiff is continuing in service and for
all  other  consequential benefits.  It was alleged  in	 the
plaint	that  he  was appointed as a Clerk in  the  District
Co-operative  Bank,  Defendant No.  2 and was posted in	 the
accounts section.  He had taken leave on medical grounds and
had  left the bank after handing-over charge to one Virendra
Nath.	The Acting Secretary, who according to the plaintiff
was not competent to frame any charges against him, issued a
set  of charges, alleging the mis-conduct of serious  nature
for  illegal  absence  from  duties   and  finally,  it	 was
indicated  that the plaintiff has been removed from  service
on  finding  him guilty of the charges, without holding	 any
inquiry	  and  without	affording  an  opportunity  to	 the
plaintiff  to defend himself.  The defendant No.  2 did file
a  written  statement,	denying the assertions made  in	 the
plaint	and further stated that continuous absence from duty
without	 permission  was  a  gross  mis-conduct,  which	 was
established  in the proceedings and, therefore, the order of
termination  was valid.	 Though the defendant No.  2 filed a
written statement, but thereafter did not participate in the
proceedings.   The  suit however was  ultimately  dismissed.
Against	 the  judgment	and decree of the trial	 Judge,	 the
plaintiff preferred an appeal and even though the defendants
were  served,  but they never contested and  ultimately	 the
appeal	was  heard  ex	parte.	The  lower  appellate  Court
rejected   the	plaintiffs  contention	 that  the   Acting
Secretary  did	not  have the power of passing an  order  of
termination.   But it came to the conclusion that the  order
of  termination	 casting  stigma  being based on  a  set  of
charges of serious misconduct on the part of the delinquent,
it  was obligatory for the competent authority to follow the
procedure  prescribed  for inflicting major  punishment	 and
since in the case in hand, no charge-sheet was served and no
show  cause  notice was given and as such the  principle  of
natural	 justice  and fair play had not been  followed,	 the
impugned  order	 is  illegal, invalid  and  inoperative	 and
cannot	be  sustained.	The lower Appellate Court also	took
into  consideration  the  averments   made  in	the  written
statement,  which  made a reference to a serious  charge  of
misappropriation  and fabrication of the account books.	  On
consideration  of  the relevant provisions of the U.P.	 Co-
operative
Societies Act
as well as the service rules framed
thereunder,  the lower Appellate Court came to hold that the
mandatory  provisions,	not having been complied  with,	 the
order  of termination is vitiated.  With these	conclusions,
the appeal having been allowed, the defendant-bank moved the
High  Court  in Second Appeal.	The Second  Appellate  Court
agreed	with the findings of the lower Appellate Court	that
no   disciplinary  proceedings	had   been  taken  and	 the
circumstances	indicated   in	  the	written	  statement,
culminating  in order of termination had never been  brought
on  record,  and,  therefore,  the order  of  dismissal	 was
rightly	 held  to  be without jurisdiction and	contrary  to
Regulation  85
by  the lower Appellate Court.	 But  having
agreed	with the findings of the lower Appellate Court	that
the  order of dismissal is illegal and invalid, the same not
having	been  passed  after complying  with  the  prescribed
procedure  under law, the High Court set aside the  Judgment
and  decree  of the lower Appellate Court on a finding	that
the suit is essentially one for enforcement of a contract of
personal  service  and	such a suit must be held to  be	 not
maintainable  in  the  Civil  Court.
In  coming  to	this
conclusion,  the  learned Judge relied upon the decision  of
this  Court  in	 the case of
Executive	Committee  of  Vaish
Degree	College,  Shamli and Ors.  vs.	Lakshmi	 Narain	 and
Ors.
, 1976(2) SCC 58.
Mr.	 Rakesh U.  Upadhyay, the learned counsel, appearing
for  the appellant, contended before us that the U.P.  State
Co-operative  Land  Development Bank has been held  by	this
Court to be an instrumentality of the State and an authority
under
Article	12
and	 it  is	 controlled  by	 the   State
Government   and  service  conditions	of  the	  employees,
particularly  in regard to the disciplinary proceedings, are
statutory in nature.  This has been so held by this Court in
the  case  of
U.P.State Co-operative Land  Development	Bank
Ltd.   vs.   Chandra Bhan Dubey and Ors.
1999(1)  SCC	741.
The  defendant-Bank  stands on the same footing as the	U.P.
State  Co-operative  Land Development Bank and an  order  of
termination  of an employee of such bank if is found to have
been  passed without compliance of the principle of  natural
justice	 and  without following the procedure prescribed  by
law,  then  the said order is null and void and,  therefore,
employees  right could be enforced notwithstanding the fact
that  service  is  one of contract.
Mr.   Upadhyay  further
contended  that	 in view of law
laid down by
this  Court  in
S.R.   Tiwari  vs.   District Board, Agra
, 1964(3)  SCR	 55,
indicating  the	 instances  under which	 an  employee  could
obtain	a  declaratory	judgment   that	 the  dismissal	 was
wrongful  and in the case in hand, the relationship  between
the  plaintiff	and defendant-bank being employment under  a
statutory  body, which statutory body had acted in breach of
mandatory  obligation  imposed by the statute, the  ultimate
order  is  null	 and  void and as  such	 the  plaintiff	 was
entitled  to  the declaration sought for and the High  Court
committed  serious error in interfering with the judgment of
the  lower Appellate Court.
Mr.  Upadhyay also stated	that
the  Constitution Bench decision in Sirsi Municipality	case
[1973(1)  SCC  409]  fully supports his contention  and	 the
order of dismissal passed by the statutory authority being a
nullity	 for  non-compliance  of the  principle	 of  natural
justice	 as well as for not following the procedure provided
for  imposing of a major penalty, the declaration sought for
could  be granted notwithstanding the contract of employment
and,  therefore,  the impugned judgment must be held  to  be
unsustainable in law.
Mr.	  Sunil	 Gupta, appearing for the respondent on	 the
other  hand  relied  upon  the judgment	 of  this  Court  in
Integrated  Rural  Development Agency vs.  Ram Pyare  Pandey
1995  Supp.(2) SCC 495, and submitted that the	relationship
between	 the  employer and the employee being one of  purely
contract,  the	same cannot be enforced by the Civil  Court,
even  if  the order of termination is illegal and  the	High
Court,	therefore  was justified in holding that  the  Civil
Court could not have granted the specific relief of contract
of service.
In	view of the rival submissions at the Bar, the  first
question  that	arises	for consideration is,  what  is	 the
status	of  the defendant- District Co-operative Bank?	 The
status	of  the	 said  bank is no doubt	 of  a	Co-operative
Society,  registered under the
U.P.  Co-operative  Societies
Act,  1965
and is constituted under the U.P.	Co-operative
Land  Development  Bank	 Act, 1964.  But an  examination  of
different provisions of the rules, bye-laws and regulations,
unequivocally  indicate that the State Government  exercises
all-pervasive  control	over the bank and its employees	 and
the  service  conditions of such employees are	governed  by
statutory  rules,  prescribing entire gamut of procedure  of
initiation  of disciplinary proceedings by framing a set  of
charges	 and  culminating  in	inflicting  of	 appropriate
punishment,  after complying with the requirements of giving
a   show  cause	 and  an   opportunity	of  hearing  to	 the
delinquent.   This  being  the position and in view  of	 the
judgment  of  this  Court  in
U.P.State  Co-operative	Land
Development  Bank  Ltd.	 vs.  Chandra Bhan Dubey  and  Ors.
,
1999(1)	 SCC  741, the conclusion is irresistible  that	 the
defendant  bank	 is  undoubtedly an instrumentality  of	 the
State.
Once  it is held that the defendant is a  statutory
body and is a State and in the matter of passing an order of
dismissal  of  an employee, it did not follow the  mandatory
provisions  of	the rules and regulations and the order	 was
passed	in gross violation of principle of natural  justice,
then  the  third  exception to the  general  principle	that
contract   of	personal  service   cannot   ordinarily	  be
specifically  enforced,	 as indicated in
S.R.Tiwaris
case
1964(2)	 SCR  55  which has also been relied upon  in
Vaish
Degree	College
case  1976(2)	SCC   58  would	 apply	and,
therefore,  the conclusion of the High Court must be held to
be  erroneous in the facts and circumstances of the  present
case.	The  decision  of  this Court  in  Integrated  Rural
Development  Agency  1995  Supp.(2)  SCC 495  will  have  no
application  at all, as
in that case
the agency in  question
was  held not to be an instrumentality of the State nor	 the
State had any control over the affairs of the society and in
such  a	 case,	therefore, the relationship  of	 master	 and
servant	 is  purely  one of contract and
in that  case
,	 the
relief of specific performance of contract of service cannot
be  granted.   But the aforesaid decision in our  considered
opinion, is of no application to the facts and circumstances
of  the present case.  In the aforesaid premises, we have no
hesitation  in coming to the conclusion that the High  Court
committed  serious  error  of law in  interfering  with	 the
judgment  and  decree  of the lower  Appellate	Court.	 We,
therefore, set aside the impugned judgment and decree of the
High  Court in Second Appeal No.  683 of 1996 and affirm the
judgment of the 1st Additional District Judge, Ghazipur, and
consequently, the suit is decreed.
We,	 however,  further  hold that though  the  plaintiff
would  be  allowed his continuity of service and  any  other
benefits,  flowing  from such continuity of service, but  he
will  not  be  entitled to any salary from the date  of	 his
termination  on	 15.4.1987  till the judgment of  the  lower
Appellate  Court dated 9.9.1992.  This appeal is accordingly
allowed	 with  the  aforesaid directions  and  observations.
There however will be no order as to costs.
..........................................J.

(G.B. PATTANAIK)


..........................................J.

(B.N. AGRAWAL)

New Delhi
February 21, 2001.
13