[Cites
13
, Cited by
32
]
Supreme Court of India
S.H. Rangappa vs State Of Karnataka And Anr on 3 October, 2001
Equivalent citations: AIR 2001 SUPREME COURT 3863, 2002 (1) SCC 538, 2001 AIR SCW 4313, 2001 AIR - KANT. H. C. R. 3038, (2002) 1 PAT LJR 1, (2001) 3 UPLBEC 2449, (2002) 2 MAD LW 534, (2002) 1 CIVLJ 76, (2002) 1 LANDLR 461, (2001) 7 SUPREME 687, (2002) 1 ICC 182, (2001) 45 ALL LR 628, (2001) 4 ALL WC 3176, (2002) 1 ANDH LT 36, (2001) 4 CURCC 204, (2002) 1 MAD LJ 105, (2002) 1 ALLMR 661 (SC), (2001) 4 RECCIVR 629, (2001) 7 SCALE 219, (2002) 1 JLJR 28, 2003 ALL CJ 2 814, (2001) 8 JT 545 (SC)
Bench:
B.N. Kirpal
,
N. Santosh Hegde
,
P. Venkatarama Reddi
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  7077 of 2001

PETITIONER:
S.H. RANGAPPA

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF KARNATAKA AND ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 03/10/2001

BENCH:
B.N. KIRPAL & N. SANTOSH HEGDE & P. VENKATARAMA REDDI

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

2001 Supp(3) SCR 545

The Judgment of the Court was delivered by KIRPAL, J.
C.A. No. 7077 of 2001 @ SLP (C) No. 22637 of 1997. Leave granted.
Whether the notification under
Section 6(2)
of the Land Acquisition Act,
1894 (hereinafter referred to as "the Act") should be published within the
period prescribed by the proviso to
Section 6(1)
of the said Act, is the
only question which arises for consideration in this case.
The notification dated 29th November, 1987 was issued and published in the
Official Gazette on 28th January, 1988. The same was published in the
newspaper on 23rd February, 1988. This notification was issued under
Section 4(1)
of the Act wherein it was stated that the lands indicated in
the Schedule thereto were intended to be acquired for the public purpose of
construction of houses by the Karnataka Housing Board. Persons interested
were informed that they could file objections to the proposed acquisition.
This notification was published in the newspaper on 23rd February, 1988
whereafter objections were filed under
Section 5A
of the Act. On 22nd
February, 1989 a declaration was made signed by the competent authority
under
Section 6(1)
of the Act. It was stated therein that after
verification of the Report of the Housing Commissioner and taking into
consideration objections under Section 5A, it was declared that the lands
specified in the Schedule thereto were acquired for the public purpose for
construction of different categories of houses by Karnataka Housing Board.
This declaration which was dated 22nd February, 1989 was published in the
Official Gazette on 9th March, 1989.
The appellant herein challenged the validity of the notification under
Section 6
primarily on the ground that this notification was barred by
time. It was contended by the learned counsel that the notification under
Section 6(1)
had to be issued within one year of the publication of
Section
4
notification and this not having been done the said notification was
liable to be quashed. The Single Judge of the High Court did not accept
this argument. It was observed that the declaration was made within one
year under
Section 6(1)
on 22nd February, 1989. The said
Section 6
did not
provide for any period of limitation within which the declaration had to be
published and, therefore, once the declaration was made within the
prescribed period, the notification was valid. The writ appeal met with no
success. Hence, this appeal by special leave.
It is contended by the learned senior counsel for the appellant that on a
correct interpretation of
Section 6
, the declaration which was issued has
to be published within one year of the publication of
Section 4
notification.
Section 6
reads as follows :
"6. Declaration that land is required for a public purpose - (1) Subject to
the provisions of Part VII of this Act, [when the [appropriate Government]
is satisfied, after considering the report, if any, made under Section 5-A,
sub-section (2)], that any particular land is needed for a public purpose,
or for a Company, a declaration shall be made to that effect under the
signature of a Secretary to such Government or of some officer duly
authorized to certify its orders, and different declarations may be made
from time to time in respect of different parcels of any land covered by
the same notification under
Section 4
, sub-section (1), irrespective of
whether one report or different reports has or have been made (wherever
required) under Section 5-A, sub-section (2)] :
[Provided that no declaration in respect of any particular land covered by
a notification under
Section 4
, sub-section (1) -
(i) published after the commencement of the Land Acquisition Act (Amendment
and Validation) Ordinance, 1967 (1 of 1967), but before the commencement of
the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1984, shall be made after the expiry
of three years from the date of the publication of the notification; or
(ii) published after the commencement of the Land Acquisition (Amendment)
Act, 1984, shall be made after the expiry of one year from the date of the
publication of the notification;]

Provided further that no such declaration shall be made unless the
compensation to be awarded for such property is to be paid by a Company, or
wholly or partly out of public revenues or some fund controlled or managed
by a local authority.
[Explanation : 1 - In computing any of the periods referred to in the first
proviso, the period during which any action or proceeding to be taken in
pursuance of the notification issued under
Section 4
, sub-section (1), is
stayed by an order of a Court shall be excluded.
Explanation : 2 - Where the compensation to be awarded for such property is
to be paid out of the funds of a corporation owned or controlled by the
State, such compensation shall be deemed to be compensation paid out of
public revenues.]

(2) [Every declaration] shall be published in the Official Gazette, [and in
two daily newspapers circulating in the locality in which the land is
situate of which at least one shall be in the regional language, and the
Collector shall cause public notice of the substance of such declaration to
be given at convenient places in the said locality (the last of the dates
of such publication and the giving of such public notice, being hereinafter
referred to as the date of the publication of the declaration), and such
declaration shall state] the district or other territorial division in
which the land is situate, the purpose for which. it is needed, its
approximate area, and where a plan shall have been made of the land, the
place were such plan may be inspected.
(3) The said declaration shall be conclusive evidence that the land is
needed for a public purpose or for a Company, as the case may be; and,
after making such declaration, the [appropriate Government] may acquire the
land in manner hereinafter appearing."
Declaration under
Section 6
is preceded by issuance of a notification under
Section 4
which indicates the intention of the Government to inter alia
acquire land for a public purpose. Pursuant to the issuance of the same,
objections can be filed and after hearing the same,
Section 6(1)
enables
the appropriate authority if it is satisfied, after considering the report
made under
Section 5A
of the Act, that if any particular land is needed for
a public purpose, then a declaration is to be made under the signature of
an appropriate officer. Where notification under
Section 4
is published
after the commencement of the Land Acquisition Amendment Act, 1984, as in
the present case, proviso (ii) requires that such a declaration shall not
be made after the expiry of one year from the date of the publication of
Section 4
notification.
We wish to clarify that the words "publish" and "from the date of
publication of the notification" occuring in proviso (ii) to
Section 6(1)
refer to the publication of the
Section 4
notification and have no
reference to the publication of any notification under
Section 6
. Under
Section 6(1)
, it is only a declaration which is required to be made, the
time limit being within one year of the publication of the
Section 4
notification. The main purpose for the issuance of a declaration under
Section 6
is provided by sub-section (3), namely, that the declaration is
conclusive evidence that the land is needed infer alia for a public purpose
and after the making of the declaration the appropriate Government may
acquire the land in the manner provided by the Act. Sub-section (2)
requires the declaration to be published in the Official Gazette and in two
daily newspapers circulating in the locality in which the land is situate
and in addition thereto the Collector is also required to cause public
notice of the substance of the declaration to be given in the convenient
places in the said locality.
It is pertinent to note that sub-section (2) of
Section 6
does not
prescribe any time limit within which the declaration made under
Section
6(1)
is to be published. It is well known that after an order or
declaration is made there can be a time gap between the making of the order
or a declaration and its publication in the Official Gazette. Whereas the
time limit for the making of an order is provided under
Section 6(1)
, the
legislature advisedly did not provide for any time limit in respect of the
steps required to be taken under sub-section (2) of
Section 6
. If the
contention of Mr. G.L. Sanghi, the learned senior counsel for the appellant
is correct, the effect would be that not only the declaration would have to
be published within the time prescribed under the proviso to
Section 6
( 1)
but all other steps, like publication in the daily newspaper and the
Collector causing public notice of the declaration to be given at a
convenient places in the locality, must also be completed within a period
of one year of
Section 4
notification. This could certainly not be a
consequence contemplated by the legislature. As already observed, the
purpose of
Section 6
notification being to give a final declaration with
regard to the need of the land for public purpose, the interest of the land
owners was sufficiently safeguarded with the requirement of the making of
the declaration under
Section 6(1)
within a prrescribed period. It is
difficult for us to read into sub-section (2) the provisions of the proviso
to
Section 6(1)
which relate to the time limit for issuance of the
notification under
Section 6(1)
. This view which we have expressed
hereinabove finds support from a decision of a Bench of four Judges of this
Court in the case of Khadim Hussain v. State of U.P. & Ors., [1976] 1 SCC
843. The question which arose in that case related to the time within which
the declaration made under
Section 6(1)
had to be published in the Gazette.
Repelling the contention that there was any time prescribed for publication
of the declaration this Court held as follows:
"25.'"It is clear from the provisions set out above that the object of the
notification under
Section 6
is to ensure that the Government is duly
satisfied, after an enquiry at which parties concerned are heard, that the
land under consideration is really needed for a public purpose and that the
declaration is to operate as conclusive evidence to show that this is so.
The conclusiveness of this declaration cannot be questioned anywhere if the
procedure dealing with its making has been observed. The notification which
takes place under
Section 6(2)
, set out above, follows and serves only as
evidence of the declaration. That the declaration is shown by the fact that
it has to be signed by a Secretary or other officer duly authorised. The
declaration is in the form of an order. The notification is its publication
and proof of its existence. It has been shown, in the case before us, that
the deemed notification under
Section 6
took place about three and a half
months after the expiry of two years from the commencement of the ordinance
of 1967. But, it is not argued on behalf of the appellant that the
declaration under
Section 6
was similarly delayed. Presumably, it was
within time.
26.  A look at the amendment introduced by the
Section 4(2)
of the Land
Acquisition (Amendment; and Validation) Act, 1967, shows that it is
declaration which has to take place within two years of the expiry of the
commencement of the ordinance which came into force on January 20, 1967. In
fact, Section 4(2) of the Amendment Act of 1967, set out above, itself
makes a distinction between a "declaration" under
Section 6
and its
"notification" under
Section 4
of the principal Act. It does not say that
no notification under
Section 6
of the principal Act can take place beyond
the time fixed. The prohibition is confined to declarations made beyond the
specified period. If the case of the appellant could be that no declaration
was made within the prescribed time, it was his duty to prove it. He has
not discharged that onus.
27.  As indicated by the Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court, the
amendment of 1967, was the result of a decision of this Court in the
State
of M.P. v. Vishnu Prasad Sharma
holding successive, notifications, under
Section 6
, with excessive intervening delay between a notification under
Section 4(2)
and a declaration under
Section 6
, keeping the owner or other
person entitled to compensation in suspense between a declaration and its
notification is shown to exist, it may raise a suspicion about the
existence of the declaration itself or about the bona fides of acquisition
proceedings. This however, is not the position in the case before us.
Neither the existence nor the bona fides of the declaration have been
questioned. It has not been either asserted or shown, as already mentioned,
that no declaration was made within the period of time fixed for it. We,
therefore, reject the last objection also."
While referring to the decisions of this Court in
Bachhittar Singh v. The
State of Punjab
, [1962] Suppl.
3 SCR 713 as well as
Krishi Utpadan Mandi
Samiti & Anr. v. Makrand Singh & Ors.
, [1995] 2
SCC 497 and Eugenia
Misquita & Ors. v. State of Goa & Ors.
, [1997] 8 SCC 47, Mr. Sanghi,
learned senior counsel contended that the observations of this Court in
Khadim Hussain's case require reconsideration. With respect, we are unable
to agree with this for more than one reason.
Firstly, the decision in
Khadim Hussain's case was rendered by four Judges and the said decision is
binding on us, apart from the fact that on the interpretation of the
provisions of
Section 6
we are in agreement with the views expressed by the
Bench in that case.
Secondly, as far as
Bachhittar Singh
's case is
concerned that related to notings on the file made by a Minister and the
question which arose was whether that was on order which could have been
regarded to have been passed. By referring to the provisions of
Article 166
of the Constitution of India, this Court held that
the said decision
would
not be regarded as an order of the Government.
In
Krishi Utpadan
's case and
Eugenia
's case there was no reference made to the binding decision of this
Court in Khadim Hussain 's case. Even otherwise, in both these cases,
declaration under
Section 6
had been published within one year of the
notification under
Section 4
and the question in the form in which it has
arisen for consideration in the instant case did not arise there.
Mr. Sanghi also drew our attention to the observations of this Court in
Senjeeva Nagar Medical and Health Employees Co-operative Housing Society v.
Mohd. Abdul Bawahab
, [1996] 3 SCC 600. While referring to the various
provisions of the Act at page 606, it was observed that "the declaration
should be within one year." Mr. Sanghi contends that this is a decison of
three Judges which we should follow.
We are unable to accept this for the
reason that what arose for consideration before the Court in
Senjeeva
Nagar
's case was the provision of
Section 4
as amended by the State of A.P.
which fixed time limit of 40 days for giving public notice on the substance
of a notification under
Section 4(1)
. The Court was called upon
in that
case
to consider whether a declaration under
Section 6(1)
was required to
be published in a Gazette within one year of the publication of
Section 4
Notification.
Therefore, the aforesaid observation is only an obiter and
contrary to the decision of this Court of a larger Bench in Khadim Hussain
's case which decision has neither been referred to in the Senjeeva Nagar's
case or in the
Krishi Utpadhan Mandi
's case and in
Eugenia
's case.
Following the decision of this Court in Khadim Hussain's case with which we
agree, this appeal is dismissed but with no order as to costs.
C.A. No. 7078/2001 @ SLP (C) No. 3455 of 1999. Leave granted.
For the reasons stated hereinabove, this appeal is also dismissed.