[Cites
8
, Cited by
76
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs Rajendra Prabhu & Anr on 21 March, 2001
Equivalent citations: AIR 2001 SUPREME COURT 1672, 2001 (4) SCC 472, 2001 AIR SCW 1407, 2001 (2) SCALE 608, 2001 SCC(CRI) 745, (2001) 4 JT 97 (SC), 2001 (4) JT 97, 2001 (4) SRJ 383, (2001) 129 ELT 286, (2001) 96 ECR 221, (2001) 2 SCALE 608, (2002) SC CR R 399, (2001) 2 SUPREME 545
Bench:
S.P. Bharucha
,
N. Santosh Hegde
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil) 3077  of  1999



PETITIONER:
UNION OF INDIA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
RAJENDRA PRABHU & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	21/03/2001

BENCH:
S.P. Bharucha, N. Santosh Hegde & Y.K. Sabharwal.




JUDGMENT:
L...I...T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T..J

SANTOSH HEGDE, J.
The respondent herein was intercepted in the early hours
of  22nd  October, 1994 by the Circle Inspector	 of  Police,
Chalakudy  while  he  was travelling in a car.	 The  Police
recovered  30 gold biscuits of foreign markings from him and
the  respondent	 was  handed over to the  Superintendent  of
Customs,  SCP  Unit,  Kodungalloor.  It is stated  that	 the
respondent  made  a  statement the same day to	the  Customs
authorities  that he had purchased the said gold from one P.
Thomas	of Kottayam for Rs.15 lakhs and that he did not have
any  document  to  prove the licit importation of  the	said
gold.	Therefore, the gold was seized under the
Customs Act
under a reasonable belief that the gold biscuits were liable
to  be confiscated under the provisions of the
Customs	Act
.
On  23.10.1994,	 the respondent made a statement before	 the
Customs	 Officers  wherein  he reiterated that the  gold  in
question  was  purchased  from	one   P.Thomas	and  gave  a
telephone  number as belonging to said Thomas.	The  efforts
of  the	 Customs Officers to locate the said  Thomas  proved
futile	as he was found to be a non- existing person and the
telephone  number given by the respondent was found to be  a
telephone   registered	in  the	 name	of  State  Bank	  of
Travancore, Mannanam Branch.
On	28.10.1994,  i.e., 6 days later, one Balan  wrote  a
letter	to  the	 Central Excise	 Superintendent,  SCP  Unit,
Kodungalloor and claimed that he had bought 42 gold biscuits
from  Dubai on 19.10.1994 and cleared the same on payment of
customs duty at Trivandrum Airport.  He also stated that out
of  the same he had handed over as many as 30 gold  biscuits
to the respondent herein for selling them at Coimbatore.  He
enclosed  a  copy of the receipt indicating the	 payment  of
duty  on 42 gold biscuits.  After the receipt of the  letter
of  said Balan, i.e.  on 31.10.1994, the respondent wrote  a
letter	corroborating  the  claim  of	said  Balan.   In  a
subsequent  statement  made on 14.11.1994 he  retracted	 the
statement  made	 to the Customs Officers on  23.10.1994	 and
affirmed the claim of said Balan.
Both  the  respondent as well as Balan were issued	show
cause notices by the Customs authorities asking why the gold
in  question  should not be confiscated and penalty  imposed
under  the
Customs  Act
.  Pursuant to the said	 show  cause
notice,	 the  respondent as well as Balan filed a reply	 and
after hearing the parties the Commissioner of Central Excise
and  Customs, Cochin by his order dated 12.1.1996 held	that
the  gold  seized from the respondent was not duty-paid	 and
not   imported	legally	 and   accordingly  was	 liable	  to
confiscation  under
Section 11(a)
of the Customs Act,  1962.
He  further  held that the respondent from whose  possession
the  gold was seized was liable for a penalty under
Section
112(b)
of  the	 Customs  Act, 1962  and  accordingly  while
confiscating  the gold in question imposed a penalty of	 Rs.
5  lakhs on the respondent.  The said Commissioner, however,
came  to the conclusion that the said Balan was only lending
his  name  in order to make the importation of	gold  licit,
hence  he  has	not committed any offence  punishable  under
Section	 112(a)
and  (b), and held him not  liable  to	 any
penalty under
Section 112
of the Customs Act.
The	 respondent and said Balan both preferred an  appeal
before	the  Customs  Excise  &	 Gold  (Control)   Appellate
Tribunal,  South  Zonal	 Bench at  Madras  (the	 tribunal)
wherein	 it was contended that since the gold biscuits	were
seized	by the Police originally, the provisions of
Section
123
of the Customs Act, 1962 cannot be invoked.  Therefore,
in  the absence of any presumption being available in favour
of  the Department the burden was on the Department to prove
that  the  gold	 in  question was  smuggled.   It  was	also
contended  that	 in  view  of  the  fact  that	the  initial
statement  of  the  respondent was taken  under	 duress	 and
coercion,  and	also  in  view of the  fact  that  the	said
statement  was	retracted, his original statement cannot  be
taken  into  account.  It was also argued that the  document
produced by said Balan established the fact that the gold in
question  was  legally imported after payment of duty.	 The
tribunal,  after  hearing the parties while  dismissing	 the
appeal,	 reduced  the penalty imposed on the appellant	from
Rs.  5 lakhs to Rs.  4 lakhs.
Aggrieved  by  the	said  order  of	 the  tribunal,	 the
appellant  respondent herein as well as said Balan preferred
a  writ	 petition  before  the High Court  of  Kerala  which
petition came to be allowed by the judgment and order of the
High  Court  dated 5.1.1999 and the High Court by  the	said
order  came  to the conclusion that the finding recorded  by
the statutory authorities is based on no evidence and can be
regarded as perverse, consequently issued a direction to the
Commissioner  of  Central Excise, Cochin, to return  the  30
gold biscuits seized from the respondent herein.
It	is  against the judgment of the High Court that	 the
appellants  have preferred this appeal.	 It is contended  on
behalf	of  the appellants before us that both the  original
and  the appellate authorities have carefully considered the
material  that	was placed before them by the Department  as
well  as  the  respondent  and	said Balan  (who  is  not  a
respondent  in this appeal before us) and having appreciated
the  evidence on record, the said authorities have correctly
come  to  the conclusion that the gold in question  was	 not
legally	 imported into India.  It was also pointed out	that
from the first statement of the respondent it was clear that
he  did	 not even know who was the importer of the gold	 and
whether	 any duty was paid for the import of the said  gold.
It  was	 also  pointed out that the respondent	was  not  in
possession  of any document to show the licit importation of
the  gold.   In the said background, the authorities  justly
came  to  the conclusion that the respondent at the time  of
his arrest was transporting gold which was smuggled into the
country.   It was also contended that the authorities  below
have correctly held that the document produced by said Balan
could  not  be	correlated  to	the  gold  seized  from	 the
respondent  and	 it was only an attempt on the part  of	 the
respondent  and said Balan to misuse the document which	 has
no  connection	with  the  gold	 seized.   In  this  factual
background  according to the appellants before us, the	High
Court  exercising  a  power  under Article  226/227  of	 the
Constitution  of  India	 could not have	 re-appreciated	 the
evidence  on  record  and come to  a  different	 conclusion.
According  to the appellants, the finding of the High  court
that  the decision of the authorities impugned before it was
either	 based	on  no	evidence   or  perverse	 is   wholly
unjustified.   On  behalf of the respondent before us  while
supporting  the judgment of the High Court, it is  contended
that  the authorities below failed to take note of the	fact
that  the  original statement of the respondent was in	fact
obtained  under	 duress and the said statement	was  rightly
retracted once the respondent was out of the clutches of the
Customs Officers and, therefore, no reliance could have been
placed	on the original statement made by the respondent  to
the  Customs  Officers.	 In support of this contention,	 the
counsel	 for  the respondent drew our attention to a  noting
made by the Magistrate on 24.10.1994 when the respondent was
produced before him which reads thus:
The	 accused  is  produced before me at 6.30  p.m.	 He
stated	that  he was threatened while  recording  statement.
But  no physical harm was caused to him.  No visible mark of
violence  also.	  Perused the remand report for the  reasons
stated	therein	 accused is remanded to sub Jail,  Ernakulam
till 30.10.1994.
Based  on the above notings of the Magistrate on  behalf
of  the respondent, it is contended that the said  statement
made  to  the Customs Officers cannot be relied upon and  if
the  same is eschewed, according to the counsel, there is no
other material based on which the respondent could have been
found guilty of possessing or transporting smuggled gold.
Having  heard learned counsel for the parties and  after
perusing the records, we are of the opinion that even though
the  High  Court  rightly noticed its  limited	jurisdiction
under
Articles	 226
and
227
of the Constitution,  it  still
proceeded  to  reappreciate  the   evidence  on	 record	 and
substitute its subjective opinion in place of the concurrent
findings given by the statutory authorities.  We are also of
the  opinion  that  the finding of the High Court  that	 the
conclusions  arrived at by the statutory authority were	 not
based  on any evidence or could be regarded as perverse,  is
erroneous  and contrary to facts.  Therefore, it has  become
necessary  for us to refer, though briefly, to the  findings
arrived	 at by the statutory authorities while deciding this
case  to  find out whether the High Court was  justified  in
reversing  the	finding	 of fact recorded by  the  statutory
authorities.
It	is an undisputed fact that the respondent herein was
intercepted  in the early hours of 22.10.1994 by the  Police
of  Chalakudy.	 During that process, Police recovered	from
his  possession	 as  many as 30 gold biscuits  with  foreign
markings.   The	 respondent  was  then handed  over  to	 the
Customs	 Authorities  at  Kodungalloor	 who  recorded	 his
statement  in which admittedly the respondent did state that
he  purchased the said gold biscuits from one P.  Thomas  of
Kottayam for a sum of Rs.15 lacs.  He had also admitted that
he  did not have any document to prove the licit importation
of  the said gold.  According to the case of the appellants,
it  is	because	 of  that that the gold was  seized  by	 the
officials of the Customs under the provisions of the
Customs
Act
on	 the reasonable belief that the said  gold  biscuits
were  smuggled and liable for confiscation.  The  respondent
was thereafter produced before the jurisdictional Magistrate
on 24.10.1994 when he did mention before the Magistrate that
he  had made a statement under threat but the Magistrate has
recorded  that	no physical harm was caused to him  nor	 any
physical  marks	 of violence were found on his	person,	 and
thereafter  the	 said  Magistrate remanded him	to  judicial
custody	 till 30.10.1994.  It is also to be noticed that  on
an  inquiry, it was found that the name of P.  Thomas  given
by  the	 respondent  was found to be a bogus  name  and	 the
telephone  number  of the said Thomas was also a  fictitious
one  inasmuch  as the said telephone belonged to  the  State
Bank  of  Travancore.	Therefore,   the  authorities  below
rightly came to the conclusion that at the time when he made
the  statement	the  respondent	 was not in  a	position  to
explain	  the  circumstances  under   which  he	 came	into
possession  of the said gold and had obviously put forward a
false  case.  The authorities below have also taken note  of
the   fact  that  when	the   respondent  moved	  the	bail
application,   he  had	in   specific  terms  retracted	 his
statement  made	 earlier  but  on  a  consideration  of	 the
material  on  record,  they  chose to rely  on	the  earlier
statement holding his later retraction was an after thought.
It  is only on 28.10.1994 that one Balan came forward with a
claim  that  he	 had imported the said gold  from  Dubai  on
19.10.1994  and	 that  he  had	paid  the  customs  duty  at
Trivandrum airport.  In that claim statement, Balan had also
stated	that  he  handed  over	30  gold  biscuits  to	 the
respondent  for selling them at Coimbatore.  The authorities
below came to the conclusion that this belated claim of said
Balan  could not be believed because if as a matter of	fact
the  gold was licitly imported into this country, and  Balan
had  as a matter of fact given the gold to the respondent to
sell  it  in Coimbatore then there was absolutely no  reason
why  the  respondent could not have disclosed the source  of
the  gold which was found in his possession as being legally
imported and belonging to Balan.  Both the authorities below
also  rejected the document produced by Balan on the  ground
that  the  gold	 mentioned  in that document  could  not  be
correlated  to the gold recovered from the possession of the
respondent.    We  do  not  find   any	perversity  in	 the
appreciation  of this evidence by the original authority and
the  tribunal.	It is based on these facts and circumstances
that  the gold seized from the possession of the  respondent
was  confiscated  by the order of the original authority  as
confirmed by the appellate authority.  These findings of the
authorities below to which we have made a brief reference to
show  that the findings are based on the material on  record
and,  in  our  opinion, are arrived at on a  reasonable	 and
legitimate assessment of the evidence on record.
The	 High Court, however, by the impugned order came  to
the  conclusion that the initial burden of proving that	 the
goods in question were smuggled, lay on the Department which
according to it, was not discharged by the Department.	This
conclusion  of	the  High  Court is  obviously	based  on  a
misappreciation	 of the evidence that was already considered
by  the lower authorities.  The High Court, in our  opinion,
not  only  erred  in  reappreciating  the  evidence  already
considered  by	the  authorities below and in  that  process
committed  a  further error of substituting  its  subjective
opinion	 in  the  place of the findings of  the	 authorities
below.	Therefore, we are of the opinion that the finding of
the  High  Court  that	the concurrent	conclusions  of	 the
statutory  authorities were either not based on evidence  or
were perverse, is unsustainable.
On behalf of the respondents, it was contended before us
that  the  Department could not have taken advantage of	 the
presumption  available under
Section 123
of the Customs Act,
1962  in  view	of the fact that the gold  in  question	 was
seized	originally not by the Customs authorities but by the
Police personnel.  From the material available on record, we
find  that  on finding the respondent carrying the  gold  in
question,  the Police as a matter of fact did not seize	 the
gold  but  actually  produced the respondent with  the	gold
which  was in his possession, before the Customs Authorities
who in fact on such production, seized the gold.  Be that as
it  may,  we notice that the appellate authority itself	 did
not  choose  to	 rely upon any presumption  available  under
Section 123
of the Customs Act but proceeded to consider and
rely  upon the material that was available to establish that
on  the	 date of arrest the respondent was in possession  of
unmarked  gold	biscuits;  in regard to origin of  which  or
importation  of which the respondent was either ignorant  or
was  not  willing  to  divulge and  remained  evasive.	 The
authorities  also  have	 taken note of	other  materials  on
record to which we have already made reference and which, in
our  opinion,  are sufficient in the circumstances  of	this
case  to  come	to  the conclusion that the  gold  found  in
possession  of the respondent is liable for confiscation and
the  respondent	 was  liable  for the penalty  de  hors	 the
presumption  contemplated  under
Section 123
of the  Customs
Act.
For	 the reasons stated above, this appeal succeeds, the
impugned judgment is set aside and the order of confiscation
and  the  penalty  as  imposed by the  Commissioner  and  as
modified by the tribunal shall be restored.