[Cites
17
, Cited by
44
]
Supreme Court of India
Municipal Corporation Of Greater ... vs Pratibha Industries Limited on 4 December, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 650, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 891, 2019 (2) ABR 510, (2018) 15 SCALE 714, (2019) 127 CUT LT 949, (2019) 197 ALLINDCAS 183, (2019) 1 ALLMR 478, (2019) 1 ARBILR 1, (2019) 1 CAL HN 249, (2019) 1 JLJR 248, (2019) 1 MAD LJ 379, (2019) 1 ORISSA LR 212, (2019) 1 PAT LJR 317, (2019) 2 ANDHLD 107, (2019) 3 CIVLJ 502, 2019 (3) SCC 203, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 971
Author:
R. F. Nariman
Bench:
M.R. Shah
,
R.F. Nariman
REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11822 OF 2018
                    (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 10415 OF 2018)


                MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF GREATER
                MUMBAI & ANR.                                          … Appellant(s)

                                          Versus


                PRATIBHA INDUSTRIES LTD. & ORS.                        … Respondent(s)



                                                 JUDGMENT
R. F. Nariman, J.
1)       Leave granted.


                2)       The present appeal raises questions relatable to the High Court’s

                power of recall of its orders.


                3)       By a Tender Notice dated 19.09.2008, supply, installation and
maintenance of water meters of various sizes were called for. The Tender

                Notice contained Clause 22, which reads as under:-
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
NATARAJAN
Date: 2018.12.08
11:50:08 IST
Reason:
1
“22. Jurisdiction of Courts:
In case of any claim, dispute or difference arising in
           respect of the contract, the cause of action thereof
           shall be deemed to have arisen in Mumbai and all
           legal proceedings in respect of any such claim,
           dispute or difference shall be instituted in a
           competent court in the city of Mumbai only.
           If any dispute, difference or claim is raised by either
           party relating to any matter arising out of the
           contract, the aggrieved party may refer such dispute
           within a period of 7 (seven) days to the concerned
           Deputy Municipal Commissioner (DMC) of Municipal
           Corporation of Greater Mumbai, who shall constitute
           a committee comprising of 3 (three) MCGM Officers
           i.e., concerned DMC or Director (ES & P), Chief
           Engineer other than the Engineer of contract &
           concerned C.A. the committee shall give decision in
           writing within 60 (sixty) days.
Appeal from the order of the Committee may be
           referred to Municipal Commissioner (M.C.) of
           Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai within 7
           (seven) days. Thereafter, M.C. shall constitute the
           committee comprising of 3 (three) DMC including
           DMC in charge of finance Department. The decision
           given by this Committee shall be final and binding
           upon the parties/bidders.”
4)   However, when the Tender Notice was accepted and an agreement

between the parties was entered into, Clause 13 of the General Conditions

of Contract was applied. This clause stated as follows:-
2
“Disputes and Arbitration:
13.1 No Arbitration is allowed.
13.2 In case of disputes or difference of opinion
           arising between the Hydraulic Engineer and the
           bidder, the bidder can refer the matter to the
           Municipal Commissioner of Greater Mumbai with an
           advance copy to the Hydraulic Engineer and the
           decision of Commissioner will be final in such case.”
5)   An application under Section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,

1996 (in short ‘the Act’) was filed by the respondent before the High Court

of Bombay, asking for an interim injunction restraining the encashment of

the first and third bank guarantees that were given by the respondent in

pursuance of the Tender, amounting to a sum of Rs. 16,23,400/- (Rupees

Sixteen Lakhs, Twenty Three Thousand and Four Hundred only) and Rs.
6,23,00,000/- (Rupees Six Crores, Twenty Three Lakhs only) respectively.

On 23.06.2017, this petition was allowed and the injunction that was prayed

for was granted. On the next date of hearing, i.e., on 27.06.2017, Justice K.

R. Shriram recorded what transpired as follows:-
“1. Mr. Makhija, counsel for Petitioners, on
           instructions states that Petitioners are ready and
           willing to go for arbitration and suggest that Mr.
           Justice V.M. Kanade (retired) be appointed as the
           Sole Arbitrator. Mr. Bharucha, senior counsel for
           Respondent (MCGM), on instructions from Mr.
           Agashe, Assistant Engineer (Meter Work Shop) City-
3
representative of Respondent, who is present in
            court, states that Respondents have no objection to
            the suggestion made by Mr. Makhija and Mr. Justice
            V.M. Kanade (retired) be appointed as the Sole
            Arbitrator.
2. In view of the above, Mr. Justice V. M. Kanade
            (retired) is appointed as the Sole Arbitrator to decide
            on all issues between parties arising out of or in
            connection with or with reference to the Tender
            dated 19.09.2008 along with Corrigendum issued by
            Respondent No. 1 for supply installation and
            maintenance of AMR water meters of various sizes
            in the City area of Mumbai consisting of wards A, B,
            C, D, E, F/North, F/South, G/North and G/South (the
            Project)…”
6)    A Notice of Motion was filed by the appellant before us on 03.07.2017

to recall the aforesaid order appointing Justice V.M. Kanade (retired) as a

Sole Arbitrator. It was clearly stated therein that:-
“I say that the concerned officer Shri A.M. Agashe-
            Asst. Engineer (Meter Workshop) (City), who was
            present in the Court was not aware that contract has
            no arbitration clause which is as follows:-
“17. Disputes and Arbitration:
13.1 No Arbitration is allowed.
13.2 In case of disputes or difference of
               opinion arising between the Hydraulic
               Engineer and the bidder, the bidder can refer
               the matter to the Municipal Commissioner of
               Greater Mumbai with an advance copy to the
               Hydraulic Engineer and the decision of
               Commissioner will be final in such case.”
4
I say that Shri A.M. Agashe-Asst. Engineer (Meter
           Workshop) (City) is not empowered to take decision
           regarding appointment of the Arbitrator in the above
           Petition.”
7)   By an order dated 12.09.2017, the learned single Judge referred to

the recall application and the affidavit of the Commissioner, and also

referred to Clause 13 of the General Conditions of Contract and Clause 22

of the Tender Notice and observed that they were not arbitration clauses at

all, but in-house proceedings, which could be taken at the behest of the

aggrieved party. This being so, the learned single Judge recalled the order

appointing Justice V.M. Kanade (retired) as a sole Arbitrator. An appeal was

filed under Section 37 of the Act by the respondent herein, which

succeeded before the Division Bench. According to the Division Bench,

since Section 5 of the Act mandated that there would be no judicial

intervention as provided for in Part I of the Act and since there is no

provision in Part I for any court to review its own order, the review petition

filed was not maintainable. The impugned order would, therefore, have to

be set aside. The appeal filed by the respondent under Section 37 was

allowed.
8)   Shri Ranjit Kumar, leaned senior counsel for the appellant, has

argued before us that it is obvious that on a perusal of Clause 13 and
5
Clause 22, no arbitration is provided for and that these are only in-house

procedures. He went on to state that it is always inherent in a High Court,

being a court of record, to recall its own orders, and has cited certain

judgments together with the High Court (Original Side) Rules. According to

him, the appeal under Section 37 itself was not maintainable and for all

these reasons, the impugned order should be set aside.
9)    On the other hand, Shri Shekhar Naphade, learned senior counsel

argued on behalf of the respondent, stating that the
Arbitration Act
is a self-

contained Code, and, this being so, it is not possible to look outside the four

corners of the Act to find a review power. This may apply even to
Article 215
of the Constitution of India. He argued that Clause 13 and Clause 22 are

clearly arbitration clauses inasmuch as a dispute has to be referred for

decision to a Committee and thereafter to an Appellate Committee, after

which, the decision rendered by the Appellate Committee is final and

binding. According to Shri Naphade, the correct course could only have

been to apply to Justice V.M. Kanade (retired) under
Section 16
of the Act

on whether an arbitration clause does or does not exist. He added that

since
the Code of Civil Procedure
(in short ‘the Code’) will not apply,

therefore, there is no question of inherent power contained in Section 151

of the Code applying either.
6
10)   The clauses which Shri Naphade has referred to as arbitration

clauses cannot, prima facie, be regarded as such. Sub-clause 13.1 clearly

states, “No Arbitration is allowed”. Sub-clause 13.2 cannot then be read as

an arbitration clause. Also, on the assumption that Clause 22 would be the

applicable clause, it is clear that the said clause has a marginal note which

reads: Jurisdiction of Courts. The first paragraph of Clause 22 specifically

deals with competent courts in the city of Mumbai only having exclusive

jurisdiction in respect of claims, disputes etc. arising in respect of the

contract. The second paragraph and the third paragraph, according to Shri

Naphade, would amount to an arbitration clause as the Committee

mentioned therein is to give a decision, which is appealed again before

another Committee which gives a decision which shall be final and binding

upon both the parties. We are of the view that Clause 22 deals with

disputes that may arise under the agreement which can either be dealt with

by an in-house procedure or by courts, as the case may be. By no stretch of

imagination could this in-house procedure be stated to be an agreement to

arbitrate between the parties. In any case, what is important on the facts of

this case, is that neither of these clauses has been invoked. The Court’s

order dated 27.06.2017, clearly shows that Justice Kanade was appointed

as Sole Arbitrator thanks to Mr. Agashe, Assistant Engineer, having no
7
objection to the same. As has been stated in the recall application and the

affidavit of the Commissioner, Mr. Agashe was not empowered to take any

decision regarding appointment of an Arbitrator. This being the undisputed

position before the Court, it is clear that an oral agreement between the

parties de hors Clause 13 and Clause 22 could not have been arrived at.

We must also remind ourselves that this agreement was arrived at during

the course of hearing of a
Section 9
petition. In the present case, nobody

has applied under
Section 11
to appoint an Arbitrator in accordance with

either Clause 13 or Clause 22.
11)   Insofar as the High Courts’ jurisdiction to recall its own order is

concerned, High Courts are courts of record, set up under
Article 215
of the

Constitution of India.
Article 215
of the Constitution of India reads as under:-
“Article 215. High Courts to be courts of record.—
            Every High Court shall be a court of record and shall
            have all the powers of such a court including the
            power to punish for contempt of itself.”


It is clear that these constitutional courts, being courts of record, the

jurisdiction to recall their own orders is inherent by virtue of the fact that

they are superior courts of record. This has been recognized in several of

our judgments.
8
12)   In
National Sewing Thread Co. Ltd. v. James Chadwick & Bros
.
Ltd., 1953 SCR 1028, this Court has held as under:-
“……
The Trade Marks Act
does not provide or lay
           down any procedure for the future conduct or career
           of that appeal in the High Court, indeed
Section
           77
of the Act provides that the High Court can if it
           likes make rules in the matter. Obviously after the
           appeal had reached the High Court it has to be
           determined according to the rules of practice and
           procedure of that Court and in accordance with the
           provisions of the charter under which that Court is
           constituted and which confers on it power in respect
           to the method and manner of exercising that
           jurisdiction. The rule is well settled that when a
           statute directs that an appeal shall lie to a Court
           already established, then that appeal must be
           regulated by the practice and procedure of that
           Court. This rule was very succinctly stated by
           Viscount Haldane L.C. in National Telephone Co.
Ltd. v. Postmaster-General
, [1913] A.C. 546 in these
           terms:-
“When a question is stated to be referred to an
              established Court without more, it, in my
              opinion, imports that the ordinary incidents of
              the procedure of that Court are to attach, and
              also that any general right of appeal from its
              decision likewise attaches.”

           The same view was expressed by their Lordships of
           the Privy Council in
R.M.A.R.A. Adaikappa Chettiar
           v. Ra. Chandrasekhara Thevar
, (1947) 74 I.A. 264,
           wherein it was said:-
“Where a legal right is in dispute and the
              ordinary Courts of the country are seized of
              such dispute the Courts are governed by the
9
ordinary rules of procedure, applicable thereto
   and an appeal lies if authorised by such rules,
   notwithstanding that the legal right claimed
   arises under a special statute which does not,
   in terms confer a right of appeal.”

Again in Secretary of State for
India v. Chellikani
Rama Rao
, (1916) I.L.R. 39 Mad. 617, when dealing
with the case under the Madras Forest Act their
Lordships observed as follows:-
“It was contended on behalf of the appellant
   that all further proceedings in Courts in India
   or by way of appeal were incompetent, these
   being excluded by the terms of the statute just
   quoted. In their Lordships’ opinion this
   objection is not well-founded. Their view is that
   when proceedings of this character reach the
   District Court, that Court is appealed to as one
   of the ordinary Courts of the country, with
   regard to whose procedure, orders, and
   decrees the ordinary rules of the Civil
   Procedure Code apply.”

Though the facts of the cases laying down the
above rule were not exactly similar to the facts of the
present case, the principle enunciated therein is one
of general application and has an apposite
application to the facts and circumstances of the
present case.
Section 76
of the Trade Marks Act
confers a right of appeal to the High Court and says
nothing more about it. That being so, the High Court
being seized as such of the appellate jurisdiction
conferred by
section 76
it has to exercise that
jurisdiction in the same manner as it exercises its
other appellate jurisdiction and when such
jurisdiction is exercised by a single Judge, his
judgment becomes subject to appeal under Clause
15 of the Letters Patent there being nothing to the
contrary in the
Trade Marks Act
.”
10
13)   To similar effect is our judgment in
Shivdev Singh & Ors. v. State of

Punjab and Others
, AIR 1963 SC 1909, wherein this Court has stated as

under:
“10. … It is sufficient to say that there is nothing in
Article 226
of the Constitution to preclude a High
            Court from exercising the power of review which
            inheres in every Court of plenary jurisdiction to
            prevent miscarriage of justice or to correct grave
            and palpable errors committed by it…”
14)   Also, in
M.M. Thomas v. State of Kerala and Another
, (2000) 1 SCC

666, this Court has held as follows:-
“14. The High Court as a court of record, as
            envisaged in
Article 215
of the Constitution, must
            have inherent powers to correct the records. A court
            of record envelops all such powers whose acts and
            proceedings are to be enrolled in a perpetual
            memorial and testimony. A court of record is
            undoubtedly a superior court which is itself
            competent to determine the scope of its jurisdiction.
            The High Court, as a court of record, has a duty to
            itself to keep all its records correctly and in
            accordance with law. Hence, if any apparent error is
            noticed by the High Court in respect of any orders
            passed by it the High Court has not only power, but
            a duty to correct it. The High Court’s power in that
            regard is plenary.
In
Naresh Shridhar Mirajkar &
            Ors. v. State of Maharashtra
, AIR 1967 SC 1 : [1966]
3 SCR 744, a nine-Judge Bench of this Court has
            recognised the aforesaid superior status of the High
11
Court as a court of plenary jurisdiction being a court
            of record.”
15)   Insofar as Shri Naphade’s arguments that the Act is a self-contained

Code,
Section 5
of which interdicts a review or recall application, suffice it to

state that having held that there is no arbitration agreement pursuant to the

order dated 27.06.2017, the Act will not apply.
16)   This being the case, the impugned judgment of the Division Bench of

the High Court is set aside. Shri Naphade urges us to continue the order

dated 23.06.2017 for a period of four weeks from today so that he may

approach the appropriate forum. We continue the said order for a period of

four weeks from today. The appeal is disposed of accordingly.
………………………….J.
                                           (R.F. NARIMAN)



                                           ………………………….J.
                                           (M.R. SHAH)
New Delhi,
Dated: December 4, 2018.
12