[Cites
8
, Cited by
11
]
Supreme Court of India
Akhil Bhartvarshiya Marwari Agarwal ... vs Brijlal Tibrewal And Ors. on 14 December, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 1389, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 1158
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
M. R. Shah
,
Ashok Bhushan
,
A.K. Sikri
1

                                                                               REPORTABLE


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 12088­12089 OF 2018
                              [Arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 10093­10094 of 2016]



       Akhil Bhartvarshiya Marwari Agarwal
       Jatiya Kosh & Ors                                                 .. Appellants

                                                    Versus

       Brijlal Tibrewal & Ors.                                             .. Respondents

       WITH 
       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 12090/2018 @ SLP(C) No. 15056/2016
       and Contempt Petition Nos. 25­26/2018



                                               J U D G M E N T




       M. R. Shah, J.
1.                Leave granted in all the Special Leave Petitions.
2.                As all these appeals are interconnected between the same parties
Signature Not Verified
and with respect to the same properties, these are being disposed of
Digitally signed by
SUSHIL KUMAR
RAKHEJA
Date: 2018.12.14
19:41:51 IST
Reason:
by this common judgment.
2
3.   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned order dated

23.12.2014 in F. A. No. 466 of 2010 and the order dated 04.07.2015

in Civil Application No. 1698 of 2015 in F.A.No.466 of 2016 passed by

the High Court of Judicature at Bombay (hereinafter referred to as the

‘High   Court’),   the   original   Defendants   have   preferred   the   present

appeals.
3.1 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned final order

dated 10.09.2015 passed by the High Court in Writ Petition No. 992 of

2015   the   original   Petitioners   of   the   aforesaid   Writ   Petition   have

preferred the present appeals.
4.    The facts leading to the present appeals in nutshell are as under:
That Appellant No. 1 Trust­ Akhil Bhartvarshiya Marwari Agarwal

Jatiya   Kosh   (hereinafter   referred   to   as   the   ‘Trust’)   was,   registered

under
Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950
.  According to the Trust, under

a   duly   registered   Conveyance   dated   30.10.1974,   the   Trust   acquired

9797 sq. meters of land with a charitable object of providing Housing

to   weaker   sections   of   the   Society.     That   the   said   area   of   9797   sq.

meters   included   the   Plot   bearing   CTS   No.   97/A­5/2   of   Village

Chinchavli, Malad (East), Mumbai admeasuring 2593.70 sq. meters.

According to the Trust, the Mumbai Municipal Corporation sanctioned
3
the plan of the Trust in the year 1974­75 for construction of building

A­1 to be constructed on sub­plot carved out of CTS No. 97/A­5/2 (the

disputed property).  That the building A­1 was to consume the area of

1009.70 meters equivalent to 1205 sq. yards.  That, between 1975­78,

the   Trust   constructed   building   A­1   comprising   of   20   Flats   each

admeasuring   built­up   area   of   588   sq.   ft.   and   the   purchasers   took

possession of the respective flat.  Thereafter, about 26 years after they

took   possession,   the   Purchasers­Respondents   herein   the   original

Plaintiffs filed Suit No. 4111 of 2004, inter alia, for directing the Trust

and others to execute the Conveyance of Plot No. A/1 claiming that

they were entitled to the Plot area of around 1205 sq. yards (1009.70

sq.meters).  That the original Plaintiffs prayed for the following reliefs

in the Suit:
a)    That it is declared that the Defendant No. 1 is bound and liable:
i)     To complete the said building A/1 in accordance with the

             building plans sanctioned by and in terms of the conditions

             of   IOD   and   CC   issued  by   the  Defendant   No.  2   in  respect

             thereof.
ii)    To obtained Occupation Certificate for the said building No.

             A/1.
iii)   To provide  supply of municipal water to the said building
4
A/1.
iv)     To   obtain   building   Completion   Certificate   for   the   said

             building A/1.
v)      To form co­operative housing society of the Plaintiffs.
vi)     To   convey   the   said building  A/1  together  with  the  plot of

             land J/1.
b)   That this Hon’ble Court may be pleased to pass permanent order

directing:
i)        Defendant   No.   1   to   obtain   occupation   certificate   and

             municipal water connection to the said building A/1.
ii)     Defendant No. 1 to form co­operative housing society of the

             plaintiffs.
iii)    Defendant No. 1 to convey the said building together with

             plot   J/1   to   the   Co­operative   Housing   Society   of   the

             Plaintiffs.
iv)     Defendant No. 1 not to carry out any construction upon the

             said      plot J.

     v)      Defendant   No.   2   to   cancel   the   permission   given   to   the
Defendant No. 1 to carry out construction on the said plot

             “J”.
vi)     Defendant   No.   2   not   to   give   any   further   permission   to
5
Defendant No. 1 to carry out any construction on the said

             plot “J”.
vii)   Defendant   No.   2   to   take   necessary   actions   against

             Defendant   No.   1   for   carrying   out   construction   of

             unauthorized hutments.
viii) Defendant   No.   2   to   take   necessary   actions   against

             Defendant No. 1 for cutting of trees.
4.1 It   was   the   case   on   behalf   of   the   original   Plaintiffs   that   the

Plaintiffs have paid full purchase price for purchase of their respective

flats in the said building A­1, constructed by the original Defendant

No. 1, Trust.   That, though the Trust handed over the possession of

the flats to the respective flat owners and they are put in possession

and occupation of the respective flats, the Trust have failed to obtain

occupation certificate of the said building in terms of the IOD and CC

issued   by   the   Corporation.     That   it   was   the   case   on   behalf   of   the

original Plaintiffs that the original Defendant No. 1 Trust, as promoter

under   the   provisions   of
Maharashtra   Ownership   Flats   Act,   1963
(hereinafter referred to as the ‘MOFA’) were bound to enter into the

agreement,   as   prescribed   under   the   said   Act   with   all   such   flat

purchasers   for   sale   of   the   flats.     It   was   the   case   on   behalf   of   the
6
original   Plaintiffs   that,   under   the   provisions   of   the   ‘MOFA’   and,

otherwise also, it is the basic duty and responsibility of the Trust to

provide   all   the   essential   supplies   and   services   including   supply   of

water,   electricity   and   sanitary   services   to   be   enjoyed   by   the   flat

purchasers.     It   was   also   the   case   of   the   original   Plaintiffs   that   the

Trust   was   bound   to   form   the   Co­operative   Society   of   the   flat

purchasers   under   the   ‘MOFA’,   however,   though   the   Trust   collected

from   each   of   the   flat   purchasers   an   amount   of   Rs.   351/­   towards

membership fee and share money of such Society, they did not form

such  a Co­operative  Society. It was a specific case on behalf of the

original   Plaintiff   that   the   building   occupied   by   the   plaintiffs   are

consisting of ground plus four storeys and the total built­up area is

around   1205   sq.   meters.     It   was   the   case   on   behalf   of   the   original

Plaintiffs that, under the provisions of law, the Plaintiffs and/or the

Society to be formed by the flat purchasers are entitled to an area of

land corresponding to the built­up area of building so constructed of

such land utilizing the FSI permissible at the relevant time.  It was the

further case on behalf of the original Plaintiffs that despite the above,

the Trust original Defendant No. 1, made an attempt to carry out some

construction   just   adjacent   to   the   said   building   A­1   of   the   plaintiffs
7
which was registered by the plaintiffs even by making complaint to the

Defendant No.2, Corporation.  However, as no action was taken by the

Corporation   for   illegal   and   unauthorized   construction   on   the   plot

adjacent to building A­1, the original Plaintiffs instituted the aforesaid

Suit and prayed for the aforesaid reliefs.
4.2 The Suit was resisted to by the original Defendants.  The original

Defendant No. 1 Trust and original Defendants Nos. 3 to 17, filed the

common written statement denying the averments and allegations in

the Suit.  It was the case on behalf of the original Defendant, so stated

in the written statement that the original Defendant No. 1 and 3 to 17

are the owners of property bearing CTS Nos. 97/A­5/2, 97/A­5/4 and

97/A­5/3 total admeasuring 9797 sq. meters.  That the property was

purchased   by   the   Trust   with   intention   to   develop   the   same   for   the

benefit   of   middle­class   citizens.     The   application   was   made   to   the

Divisional   Registrar   to   grant   permission   which   was   granted   on

20.12.1975.   That   thereafter,   Defendant   No.   1   Trust   appointed   an

Architect,   for   the   purpose   of   submitting   plans.   The   plans   were

submitted   for   construction  of  14  buildings,  each  being   ground   plus

four   upper   floors.     It   was   further   contended   that   the   Trust   could

complete only one building, as further construction could not be done

because of the declaration of the Suit Plaint as the surplus land under
8
Urban Land Ceiling Act
.  The appeal preferred by the Trust was partly

allowed in 1993 and 1998 and only 4000 sq. meters area was declared

as surplus land.   It was submitted that, therefore, the Trust has to

drop the idea of further development and it was, therefore, decided to

construct   structures   for   only   charitable   purposes   like   Schools,

Colleges   etc.     It   was   further   contended   that   the   plot   is   effectively

divided   into   three   parts,   first   part   is   building   occupied   by   the

plaintiffs, second is the School building and the third being the plot

reserved for garden.   It was further contended that FSI in respect of

the   plot   in   which   the   plaintiffs’   building   is   situated   is   not   fully

consumed   and   they   are   entitled   to   consume   full   FSI   by   putting   up

additional   construction   for   charitable   purposes   and   only   thereafter

they   are   ready   and   willing   to   convene   the   property.     It  was   further

contended that there is no agreement entered into with any of the flat

purchasers and  that only after approval of the draft, the agreement

can be entered into. It was submitted that after compliance of all these

formalities,   the   original   Defendant   No.   1   Trust,   can   consider   the

formation of the society.   Therefore, it was requested to dismiss the

Suit.
4.3 That the learned Trial Court framed the following issues:
1)   Does the defendant no. 2 prove that the suit is maintainable
9
in absence of notice u/
section 527
of MMC Act?
2)    Does   plaintiff   prove   that   he   is   entitled   for   direction   to

           defendant no. 1

           I.     To complete the building A­1 in accordance with the

                  building   plans   sanctioned   by   and   in   terms   of   the

                  condition   from  IOD  and   CC   issued  by   the   defendant

                  no. 2 Corporation in respect thereof?
II.    To obtain occupation certificate for the building     no.
A­1.
III.   To provide supply of municipal water to the building

no.­A.

           IV.    To   obtain   building   completion   certificate   for   building

no. ­A.

           V.     To form co­operative housing society of the front age.

          VI.     To convey building no. A­1 with the plot of land J­1 to

           the purchasers.
3)    Does plaintiff prove that they are entitled for the reliefs as

prayed?
4)    What decree/order?
4.4 That on behalf of the plaintiffs as many as seven witnesses came

to be examined who were all flat purchasers.
10
4.5 On behalf of Defendant. one Omprakash Didwanja DW­1 came to

be examined.  Both the parties produced the documentary evidences.

That, on appreciation of evidence, the learned Trial Court decreed the

Suit as under:
“Defendant   No.1   shall   execute   and   register   the   agreements   in
favour   of   flat   purchasers   as   per
Section   4
of   ‘MOFA’   at   the   cost   of
plaintiffs within three months from the date of order.
Defendant   No.1   shall  complete  the  suit  building  in  accordance
with   the   building   plans   sanctioned   as   per   IOD   and   CC   issued   by
Defendant No. 2 and obtain Occupation Certificate within four months
from   the   date   of   order.     If   defendant   no.   1   failed   to   do   so   within
stipulated time, plaintiffs shall get the work done through any other
Builder of their choice and recover the cost from defendant no. 1 and
thereafter BMC shall grant Occupation Certificate to the plaintiffs.
Defendant   No.1   is   also   directed   to   make   the   necessary
compliance   for   obtaining   supply   of   municipal   water   to   the   suit
building.
Defendant   No.   2   shall   supply   the   municipal   water   to   the   suit
building on humanitarian ground till the full compliance is made by
plaintiffs and defendant no. 1.
Defendant   No.   1   is   directed   to   form   a   co­operative   Housing
Society of the flat purchasers of the suit building within four month
from the date of order:­
      Defendant No. 1 is entitled to the balance FSI of the said plot of
land which was available to them at the time of sanction of original
plans,   which   Defendant   No.   1   is   entitled   to   consume   the   same   till
11
conveyance is registered.
Defendant No. 1 shall convey the title and execute documents in
favour of the society in respect of the suit building and land to the
extent of suit building as shown in the plans within six months from
the date of the order, failing which plaintiffs shall be entitled to apply
before   the   Competent   Authority   u/section   5A   for   unilateral
conveyance in their favour.
Decree be drawn accordingly.”
5.    That   feeling   aggrieved   and   dissatisfied   with   the   judgment   and

decree passed by the Trial Court decreeing the Suit No. 4111 of 2004,

the   original   Defendants   (except   for   Defendant   No.   2   Corporation)

preferred the First Appeal No. 466 of 2010 before the High Court. At

this stage, it is required to be noted that during the pendency of the

Suit, the Society of the flat purchasers was registered in the name of

Agrasen Co­operative Housing Society Ltd. under the provisions of the

Maharashtra Co­operative
Societies Act, 1960
.  Thereafter, during the

First Appeal preferred by the original Defendants, in the year 2014,

the   Society   initiated   proceedings   before   Divisional   Registrar,   Co­

operative Societies for execution of Conveyance Deed. That, thereafter,

the   High Court  dismissed   the Appeal No. 466 of 2010 by  judgment

and order dated 04.12.2014.   The High Court specifically held that a

Deed   of   Conveyance   of   the   land   to   the   extent   of  the  building   to   be
12
executed within nine months.
5.1 It appears that in the proceedings before the Divisional Registrar

initiated by the Society, the Trust filed a reply before the Divisional

Register on 10.12.2014 pointing out that the Respondents herein the

original Plaintiffs were entitled to the Conveyance of land admeasuring

1009   sq.   meters   only   and   not   2593.70   sq.   meters   as   claimed   by

original   Plaintiffs.     That,   thereafter,   the   High   Court,   on   an   oral

application of the Respondents herein by way of “Note for speaking to

the   Minutes”   clarified   that   the   words   “2700   sq.   feet”   appearing   in

paragraph 8 of the judgment and order dated 04.12.2014 should be

read as “2700 sq. meters”.  It appears that as the objection was raised

by the Trust before the Divisional Registrar that the Respondents are

entitled to Conveyance of land admeasuring 1009 sq. meters only and

not 2593.70 sq. meters as alleged and prayed, and to get over the said

objection   of   the   Appellants   before   the   Divisional   Registrar,   the

Respondents­original Plaintiffs again made an oral application by way

of   “Note   for   speaking   to   the   Minutes”   alleging   that   though   in   the

paragraphs 8 and 9 of the judgment and order dated 04.12.2014, it

was mentioned that the Respondents were entitled to get the Deed of

Conveyance   executed   in   respect   of   the   area   equivalent   to   2700   sq.

meters, but in the operative part,  it was mentioned that Conveyance
13
in   respect   of   the   land   only   to   the   extent   of   plot   be   executed   and,

therefore, the order deserves to be corrected by way of mentioning the

area of 2700 sq. meters.  That by the impugned order, the High Court

virtually modified its earlier order dated 04.12.2014 and directed the

execution   of   the   deed   of   Conveyance   of   the   land   to   the   extent   of

building i.e. 2700 sq. meters.  It appears that on the basis of the order

dated 23.12.2014 passed by the High Court directing to execute the

Conveyance   of   the   land   to   the   extent   of   the   building   i.e.   2700   sq.

meters, vide order dated 13.01.2015, the Divisional Registrar passed

an   order   granting   deemed   Conveyance   of   the   area   admeasuring

2593.70 sq. meters.
5.2 It appears that, thereafter, the Appellant herein, the Trust and

other filed Civil Application No. 1698 of 2015 in F.A. No. 466 of 2010,

praying   for   modification   of   the   direction   to   execute   the   deed   of

Conveyance   to   the   extent   of   2700   sq.   meters.     Simultaneously,   the

Petitioner   also   filed   Writ   Petition   No.   992   of   2015,   challenging   the

order   passed   by   the   Divisional   Registrar   granting   the   deemed

Conveyance.
5.3 That by impugned order the High Court has dismissed the Civil

Application   No.   1698   of   2015   in   First   Appeal   No.   466   of   2010.
14
However,   by   dismissing   the   Civil   Application,   the   High   Court   has

further clarified that the appellants shall be entitled to consume the

balance FSI of plot of the land.  That by the impugned order, the High

Court has also dismissed the Writ Petition No. 992 of 2015 and has

confirmed the order of deemed Conveyance for the area admeasuring

2593.70 sq. meters.
6.    Feeling   aggrieved   and   dissatisfied   with   the   impugned   order

passed by the High Court below “Note for speaking to the Minutes” in

First   Appeal   No.   466   of   2010   as   well   as   the   order   passed   in   Civil

Application   No.   1698   of   2015   in   First   Appeal   No.   466   of   2010,   the

original Defendants­Appellants have preferred the present SLP (Civil)

Nos. 10093­94 of  2016.   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the

order   passed   by   the   High   Court   in   Writ   Petition   No.992/2015,   the

original Petitioners have preferred the SLP (C) Nos. 15056 of 2016.
7.    Shri  C.A.  Sundaram,   learned Senior  Advocate and Shri Shyam

Divan,   learned   Senior   Advocate   have   appeared   on   behalf   of   the

respective   Appellants   in   respective   Appeals   and   Shri   Neeraj   Kishan

Kaul,   learned   Senior   Advocate,   Shri   P.S.   Patwalia,   learned   Senior

Advocate and Shri R.P. Bhatt, learned Senior Advocate have appeared

on behalf of the contesting Respondents­original Plaintiffs.  Shri Pallav
15
Shishodia, learned senior counsel has also appeared on behalf of the

Respondent, Municipal Corporation.
8.    Shri   C.   A.   Sundaram,   learned   Senior   Advocate   appearing   on

behalf   of   the   Appellants­original   Private   Defendants   has   vehemently

submitted that the impugned orders are not sustainable at law.  


8.1 It is vehemently submitted by learned counsel that the impugned

order dated 23.12.2014 passed in F.A. No. 466 of 2010 on the “Note

for speaking to the Minutes” is wholly unsustainable under the law

and is wholly without jurisdiction.
8.2 It is vehemently submitted by learned counsel that the impugned

order below “Note for speaking to the Minutes”, is, as such, can be

said to be wholly without jurisdiction inasmuch as such order could

not have been passed on the “Note for speaking to the Minutes”.  It is

vehemently submitted by the learned counsel that an application for

“Note for speaking to the Minutes” is required to be entertained only

for   the   limited   purposes   of   correcting   the   typographical   error   or   an

error through oversight, which may have crept in while transcribing

the original order.   It is submitted that as such, the impugned order

on   the   “Note   for   speaking   to   the   Minutes”     is   virtually   modifying

and/or   reviewing   the   earlier   order   passed   in   First   Appeal   and,
16
therefore,   such   an   order   could   not     have   been   passed   by   the   High

Court on an  application for “Note for speaking to the Minutes”.  It is

submitted that while passing the impugned order, the High Court has

given   further   directions   and,   thereby,   has   virtually   modified   the

original order.  It is submitted that such a course was not open to the

High Court while deciding the said “Note for speaking to the Minutes”.

It   is   submitted   that,   therefore,   the   impugned   order   on   “Note   for

speaking to the Minutes” is not sustainable at law.
In support of his

above   submissions,   the   learned   Senior   Advocate   has   heavily   relied

upon   the   decision   of   Gujarat   High   Court   in   the   case   of
Kotak

Mahindra   Bank   Ltd.   Vs.   Official   Liquidator
of   M/s.   Gujrat   BD

Luggage Ltd. 2012 SCC Online Gujrat 4339 as well as the decision

of  the  Division Bench of the Bombay High Court in the case of the
Artson   Engineering   Ltd.   Vs.   Indian   Oil   Corporation   Ltd.
2015

SCC Online Bombay 39.
8.3 It   is   further   submitted   by   learned   counsel   that   such   an   order

passed on “Note for speaking to the Minutes” is virtually modifying its

earlier judgment and order in Frist Appeal.   It is submitted that as

such, while at the time of deciding and disposing of the First Appeal, a

specific submission was made on behalf of the parties with respect to
17
the   area  for   which  the   Deed of Conveyance to be executed and the

submission   on   behalf   of   the   respective   parties   were   noted   and

thereafter the High Court dismissed the appeal without any specific

reference whether the Deed of Conveyance to be executed for the total

area of 2700 sq. meters.   It is submitted that, therefore, even if an

independent review application would have been preferred
in that case
also such an order could not have been passed, which is passed as

such   on   the   “Note   for   speaking   to   the   Minutes”,   which   is   not

sustainable as submitted hereinabove.
8.4 It is further submitted by learned counsel that even otherwise the

impugned order could not have been passed by the High Court and

that  too in  the appeal  preferred by the appellants more particularly

when the  High Court  dismissed the appeal preferred by  Appellants­

original  Private   Defendants  and confirmed the  judgment  and decree

passed the learned Trial Court.  It is vehemently submitted that by the

impugned order, as such the High Court has granted the relief which

as such was not specifically granted by the learned Trial Court while

decreeing the Suit preferred by the original Plaintiffs.  It is submitted

that   when   against   the   judgment   and   decree   passed   by   the   learned

Trial Court, only the original Private Defendants preferred the appeal

and   there   was   neither   any   cross   objection   preferred   by   the   original
18
Plaintiffs nor any appeal preferred by the original Plaintiffs, the High

Court could not have passed such order (apart from the fact passing

the order on “Note for speaking to the Minutes”), when the High Court

dismissed the appeal.  It is submitted that at the most the High Court

can/could   have   dismissed   the   appeal   confirming   the   judgment   and

decree   passed   by   the   learned   Trial   Court.     It   is   submitted,   that   by

dismissing   the   appeal   preferred   by   the   Appellants­original   Private

Defendants and when neither there was any cross objection nor any

appeal preferred  by the  original Plaintiffs, the High Court could not

have passed any order beyond the judgment and decree passed by the

learned   Trial   Court.     It   is   submitted   that   by   passing   the   impugned

order   as   such   the   High   Court   has   granted   the   relief   and   issued

directions   which   is   beyond   the  judgment   and   decree   passed   by   the

learned Trial Court.   It is submitted that, therefore, thereafter when

the appellants preferred the application to recall the order passed on

“Note   for   speaking   to   the   Minutes”,   the   High   Court   ought   to   have

recalled such order.     It is submitted that, however, the High Court

has mechanically rejected the review application.  It is submitted that,

therefore, the  impugned orders passed on “Note for speaking to the

Minutes”, and the order passed in review application deserves to be

quashed and set aside.
19
8.5 It is further submitted by the learned counsel that even otherwise

the High Court has committed grave error in passing the impugned

order   on   “Note   for   speaking   to   the   Minutes”   directing   the

Appellants/original Defendants to execute the Deed of Conveyance of

the land to the extent of building i.e. 2700 sq. meters.  It is submitted

that while  passing  the  impugned order  and directing the appellants

the original Defendant No. 1 to execute the Deed of Conveyance of the

land to the extent of the building i.e. 2700 sq. meters, the High Court

has not at all considered the fact that as such the built up area of the

building (A­1), even as per the original Plaintiff was admeasuring 1009

sq. meters (1205 sq. yards).
8.6 It   is   further   submitted   that   as   such   the   built­up   area   of   the

building A­1 was admeasuring 1009 sq. meters even as per the Plan

approved   and   the   Suit   was   filed   only   to   execute   the   Deed   of

Conveyance to the extent of area of the building.  It is submitted that,

therefore, also the High Court has committed grave error in directing

to execute the Deed of Conveyance to the extent of building i.e. 2700

sq. meters.
8.7    It is submitted by learned counsel that even otherwise it is not

appreciable how the High Court has arrived at the figure of 2700 sq.
20
meters.   It is submitted that even that was not the case on behalf of

the plaintiffs.
8.8 It   is   further   submitted   by   the   learned   counsel   that   even   the

averments made in the Plaint, the Plaintiffs so stated in paragraph 18,

that the total built­up area of building of A­1 is around 1205 sq. yards

(wrongly stated as 1205 sq. meters).  It is submitted that in paragraph

18 the Plaintiffs specifically stated and it was the specific case that

original   Plaintiffs   and/or   the   Society   to   be   formed   by   the   flat

purchasers are entitled to an area of land corresponding to the built­

up area of the building so constructed on such land utilizing the FSI

permissible   at   the   relevant   time.     It   is   submitted   that   it   was

specifically stated in paragraph 18 in the Plaint that the Plaintiffs are

entitled  to  a  minimum  plot area of around 1205 sq. yards (wrongly

stated   as   1205   sq.   meters)   or   thereabout.     It   is   submitted   that,

therefore, the impugned orders passed by the High Court directing to

execute the Deed of Conveyance to the extent of 2700 sq. meters is

beyond   even   the   case   on   behalf   of   the   Plaintiffs   so   pleaded   in   the

Plaint.
8.9 Taking   us   to   the   reply   filed   on   behalf   of   the   Municipal

Corporation, it is vehemently submitted by learned counsel that even
21
according   to   the   Corporation   as  per   approved  layout   plan,   CTS   No.

97/A­5/2 on which building A­1 on the total area of 1009 sq.meters

was   constructed   was   total   measuring   2593.70   sq.   meters.     It   is

submitted, therefore, in any case, how the High Court has arrived at

the figure of 2700 sq. meters is not at all appreciable.  It is submitted

that   when   the   entire   plot   bearing   CTS   No.   97/A­5/2,   as   per   the

approved layout plan was of 2593.70 sq. meters on which building A­1

was constructed admeasuring 1009 sq. meters, there is no question of

executing the Deed of Conveyance more than that more particularly

2700   sq.   meters   as   directed   by   the   High   Court   while   passing   the

impugned order on “Note for speaking to the Minutes”.


8.10 It   is   further   submitted   by   the   learned   counsel   that   even   while

passing   the   decree   and   allowing   the   Suit,   the   learned   Trial   Court

specifically   directed   the   original Defendant No. 1 to convey  the title

and execute documents in favour of the Society in respect of the Suit

building and the land to the extent of Suit building as shown in the

Plans i.e. 1009 sq. meters.  It is submitted, therefore, while dismissing

the appeal preferred by the Appellants, the High Court could not have

passed any order beyond the decree passed by the learned Trial Court,

more particularly, when the original Plaintiffs neither filed any cross

objection nor preferred any appeal.
22
8.11 It is further submitted by learned counsel that even the original

Private Defendants used the FSI corresponding to the built­up area of

the   building   A­1   i.e.   1009   sq.   meters.     It   is   further   submitted   that

what   was   sold/sought   to   be   conveyed   to   the   original

Plaintiffs/Occupiers   was   the   building   A­1   admeasuring   1009   sq.

meters   only.     It   is   submitted,   therefore,   that   they   could   not   have

sought any relief beyond the area admeasuring 1009 sq. meters.  It is

submitted, therefore, as such they rightly averred in the Plaint that

they are entitled to the Deed of Conveyance to the extent of the land of

the building i.e. 1009 sq. meters.  It is submitted, therefore, even the

learned Trial Court also while passing the Decree directed to execute

the Deed of Conveyance accordingly.
8.12 The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Appellants have

taken   us   to   the   layout   plans   and   had   submitted   that   on   the   plot

bearing   CTS   No.   97/A­5/2   other   three   buildings   were   also   to   be

constructed   over   and   above   building   A­1,   however,   during   the

pendency   of   litigation   under   the
Urban   Land   Ceiling   Act
,   further

construction   was   not   made.     It   is   submitted   that,   therefore,   at   the

most   original   Plaintiff   shall  be   entitled   for   execution   of   the   Deed   of

Conveyance to the extent of 1009 sq. meters only, that is the land on
23
which   building   A­1   was   constructed   which   was   sold   to   the   original

Plaintiffs and its Members.
8.13 Making   the   above   submission   made   by   Shri   C.A.   Sundaram,

learned   Senior   Advocate   appearing   on   behalf   of   the   Appellant   has

requested   to   allow   present   Appeals   and   quash   and   set   aside   the

impugned orders passed by the High Court.
9.    Shri Shyam Divan, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf

of   the   Appellants   in   Civil   Appeals   arising   out   of   the   SLP(Civil)   No.

15056 of 2016 has reiterated what was submitted by Shri Sundaram,

learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the Appellants in Civil

Appeals   arising   out   of   SLP   (Civil)   Nos.10093­94   of   2016.     He   has

further   submitted   that   as   such   the   order   passed   by   the   Divisional

Registrar directing of deemed Conveyance of the land to the extent of

2593.70 sq. meters is as such based upon and relying upon the order

passed by the High Court below the “Note for speaking to the Minutes”

(the impugned order before this Court).  It is submitted that, therefore,

once the impugned order passed by the High Court passed below the

“Note for speaking to the Minutes” is set aside, as prayed for by the

Appellants, the order passed by the Divisional Registrar confirmed by

the   High   Court   would   automatically   go.     It   is   submitted   that   even
24
otherwise,   even   on   merits   also   the   order   passed   by   the   Divisional

Registrar of deemed Conveyance of the land to the extent of 2593.70

sq. meters is not sustainable and is actually illegal.   It is submitted

that, therefore, the High Court ought to have allowed the writ petition

preferred by the appellants.
9.1   Making  above   submission it is requested to allow the present

appeals and quash and set aside the order passed by the High Court

dismissing   the   Writ   Petition   confirming   the   order   of   deemed

Conveyance of the land to the extent of 2593.70 sq. meters passed by

the Divisional Registrar.
10. All these appeals are vehemently opposed by Shri Neeraj Kishan

Kaul,   learned   Senior   Advocate,   Shri   P.S.   Patwalia,   learned   Senior

Advocate and Shri R.P. Bhatt, learned Senior Advocate appearing on

behalf of the original Plaintiffs.
10.1 Learned   counsel   appearing   on   behalf   of   the   original   Plaintiffs

have vehemently submitted that, in the facts and circumstances of the

case, no error has been committed by the High Court in passing the

impugned   order   on   “Note   for   speaking   to   the   Minutes”.     It   is

vehemently   submitted   by   learned   counsel   appearing   on   behalf   the

original Plaintiffs that when it was pointed out to the High Court that
25
while disposing of the appeal, though there was specific observation in

paragraphs 8 and 9 that the Deed of Conveyance is to be executed for

2700 sq. meters, while passing the operative portion of the order there

was no specific reference to the area of the land and, therefore, when

the   same   was   pointed   out   by   submitting   “Note   for   speaking   to   the

Minutes”, the same is rightly corrected by the High Court by passing

the impugned order.   It is submitted that the impugned order on the

“Note for speaking to the Minutes”, as such can neither be said to be

either   wholly   without   jurisdiction   as   contended   on   behalf   of   the

Appellants   nor   it   can   be   said   to   be   an   order   reviewing/modifying

earlier order passed in First Appeal.
10.2 It   is   vehemently   submitted   by   learned   counsel   for   the   original

Plaintiffs   that   even   in   the   prayer   clause   in   the   Suit,   in   paragraph

37(vi), it was prayed to direct the original Defendant No. 1 to convey

the   said   building   A­1   together   with   the   plot   of   land   J­1.     It   is

submitted that the building A­1 might have been constructed on the

land   admeasuring   1009   sq.   meters,   however,   the   entire   plot   was

admeasuring 2593.70 sq. meters.  It is submitted that, therefore, the

Suit was for 2593.70 sq. meters of land.  It is submitted that even the

Defendants’   witness­DW­1­   Omprakash   Didwanja   in   his   cross­

examination   specifically   admitted   that   the   Suit   building   has   been
26
constructed on the plot of land admeasuring 2573.31 sq. meters. It is

submitted that, therefore, the High Court has not committed any error

in   directing   the   Appellant­original   Defendant   No.   1,   to   execute   the

deed   of   Conveyance   of   the   land   to   the   extent   of   the   plot   area.

However,   the   learned   counsel   appearing   on   behalf   of   the   original

Plaintiffs   are   not   in   a   position   to   satisfy   how   the   High   Court   has

arrived   at   the   figure   of   2700   sq.   meters   of   the   land   for   which   the

Defendant No. 1 is directed to execute the Deed of Conveyance.  It is

submitted that, in any case, the original Defendant No. 1 is required to

execute   the   Deed   of   Conveyance   of   the   land   total   admeasuring

2593.70 sq. meters which is the area of the plot.
10.3 It   is   further   submitted   by   learned   counsel   that,   as   such,   the

original   Defendants   constructed   the   building   A­1   only   and   it   is   an

admitted position that, thereafter, no construction has been made on

the remaining land of the plot.  It is submitted that even the original

Defendant   No.   1   used   the   FSI   of   the   total   area   of   the   plot.     It   is

submitted that, therefore, the original Defendant No. 1 has to execute

the Deed of Conveyance of the land to the extent of at least 2593.31

sq. meters.  It is submitted that even the Divisional Registrar also, not

only on the basis of the order passed by the High Court impugned in

the   present   appeals,   even   on   considering   the   materials   on   record,
27
passed an order of deemed Conveyance of the land to the extent of

2593.31 sq. meters.
10.4 Making   above   submissions   and   relying   upon   the   layout   plans

sanctioned by the Corporation, it is requested to dismiss the present

appeals.   The   learned   Senior   Advocate   appearing   on   behalf   of   the

original Plaintiffs has submitted that even by the impugned orders the

High Court has passed in favour of the Appellants herein to the extent

allowing the additional FSI.
11. Heard the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respective

parties   at   length.     We   have   also   gone   through   the   impugned   order

passed by the High Court passed below the “Note for speaking to the

Minutes”.     While   passing   the   impugned   order,   the   High   Court   has

directed the Appellants herein to execute the Deed of Conveyance of

the land to the extent of the building i.e. 2700 sq. meters in favour of

the   original   Plaintiffs   and/or   the   Society.     It   is   also   required   to   be

noted   that   while   passing   the   impugned   order   in   Civil   Application

No.1698   of   2015   in   First   Appeal   No.466   of   2010,   in   which   it   was

requested   by   the   Appellants   herein   to   modify   the   order   dated

23.12.2014 passed below the “Note for speaking to the Minutes”, the

High Court has even further clarified that the Appellants herein are
28
entitled to consume balance FSI of plot of land.   Therefore, in short,

the orders passed by the High Court passed below “Note for speaking

to the Minutes” in First Appeal No.466 of 2010 and the order passed

in Civil Application No.1698 of 2015 in First Appeal No.466 of 2010

are impugned in the present appeals.   Therefore, the short question

posed   for   the   consideration   of   this   Court   is   whether   such   an

order/orders   could   have   been   passed   by   the   High   Court   below   the

“Note for speaking to the Minutes”?
12. Having heard the learned counsel for the respective parties and

considering   the   impugned   order   passed   by   the   High   Court   passed

below the “Note for speaking to the Minutes”, we are of the opinion

that   while   passing   such   order   below   the   “Note   for   speaking   to   the

Minutes”,   the   High   Court   has   travelled   beyond   its   jurisdiction   in

regard to the scope of deciding a “Note for speaking to the Minutes”.  A

“Note for speaking to Minutes” is required to be entertained only for

the   limited   purpose   of   correcting   a   typographical   error   or   an   error

through   oversight,   which   may   have   crept   in   while   transcribing   the

original order.   Once, the judgment/order is pronounced and if any

party to the same wants any rectification of any typographical error

and any clerical mistake regarding the date or number, such a party

may apply to the concerned Court for correcting such an error in the
29
judgment/order.     However,   a   “Note   for   speaking   to   the   Minutes”

cannot be considered at par with a review application or in a given

case, with an application for clarification/modification of an order.  A

“Note for speaking to the Minutes” can never be considered to be an

application of such a nature.  While passing the impugned order below

the “Note for speaking to the Minutes”, the High Court has virtually

modified its original order passed in First Appeal.   While passing the

impugned order, the High Court has given further directions as if the

High   Court   is   passing   the   order   on   an   application   for

clarification/modification.   Therefore, such a course was not open to

the High Court while deciding a “Note for speaking to the Minutes”.

Since, the High Court has travelled beyond its jurisdiction in regard to

the scope of deciding a “Note for speaking to the Minutes”, we have no

option but to set aside the impugned order passed below the “Note for

speaking to the Minutes”.
12.1 Even otherwise, the impugned orders are not sustainable at law.

It is required to be noted that it was the Appeal before the High Court,

preferred   by   the   Appellants   herein–original   Defendants,   challenging

the judgment and decree passed by the learned Trial Court, by which

the learned Trial Court specifically passed a decree directing the only

Defendant No.1 to convey the title and execute  document in favour of
30
the Society in respect of Suit Building and land to the extent of Suit

Building.     The   Suit   Building,   from   the   material   on   record,   it   is

emerging   that   the   area   of   the   building   was   1009.70   sq.   meters.

Against   that   judgment   and   decree,   original   Private   Defendants­

Appellants were before the High Court.  The Trial Court never passed

any decree directing the Appellants to execute the Deed of Conveyance

to the extent of 2700 sq. meters of land.  Therefore, while dismissing

the appeal, even otherwise, the High Court could not have passed any

further   order   beyond   the   judgment   and   decree   passed   by   the   Trial

Court   and   that   too   in   absence   of   any   cross   objection   and/or   cross

appeal preferred by the original Plaintiffs.   In an Appeal preferred by

the   original   Defendants,   as   observed   above,   at   the   most,   the   High

Court can dismiss the Appeal and confirm the judgment and decree.

However, the Appellants­original Defendants cannot be put in a worse

condition   than   beyond   the   judgment   and   decree   passed   by   learned

Trial Court which was appealed before the First Appellant Court and

that too in the absence of any cross­appeal or cross objection by the

original Plaintiffs.   Therefore also, the impugned orders passed by the

High Court which, as such, will go beyond the judgment and decree

passed   by   the   learned   Trial   Court   are   not   sustainable,   more

particularly,   in   absence   of   any   cross­appeal   and/or  order  the   cross
31
objection   by   the   original   Plaintiffs.     Once   the   High   Court   has

dismissed the Appeal preferred by the Appellants­original Defendants
,
in   that   case
,   in   an   appeal   preferred   by   the   original   Defendant,   the

High   Court   could   not   have   passed   any   further   order   beyond   the

judgment   and   decree   passed   by   the   learned   Trial   Court   appealed.

Thus,   by  passing  the  impugned order, it can be said that the High

Court   has   passed   order   beyond   the   scope   and   ambit   of   the   Appeal

before it and has exceeded in its jurisdiction not vested in it.


12.2 Even   otherwise,   it   is   not   appreciable   how   the   High   Court   has

arrived at the figure of 2700 sq. meters.  It appears from the material

on record that it was never the case on behalf of the original Plaintiffs

that the original Defendant No.1 shall execute the Deed of Conveyance

of the land to the extent of 2700 sq. meters.   Even considering the

map   sanctioned   by   the   Corporation   and   even   considering   the   reply

filed by the Corporation before this Court, it appears that the total plot

area of CTS No. 97/A­5/2 on which the building A­1 was constructed,

was   2593.70   sq.   meters,   out   of   which   there   was   a   construction   of

building A­1 on the land admeasuring 1009.70 sq. meters.  Therefore

also,   the   impugned   order   passed   by   the   High   Court   directing   the

Appellants   herein­original   Defendant   No.1   to   execute   the   Deed   of

Conveyance in respect of the land to the extent of 2700 sq. meters is
32
not sustainable.
12.3 Even otherwise, it is required to be noted that in the Plaint/ Suit

before the Trial Court it was specifically averred by the Plaintiffs that:
i)     Building occupies by the Plaintiffs are consisting of ground

     plus four storeys and the total built­up area is 1205 sq. meters;
ii)    That under the provisions of law, the Plaintiffs and/or the

     Society to be formed by the flat purchasers are entitled to an area

     of   land   corresponding   to   the   built­up   area   of   the   building   so

     constructed   on   such   land   utilizing   the   FSI   permissible   at   the

     relevant time;
iii)   The Plaintiffs are entitled to a minimum plot are of around

     1205 sq. yards.
It cannot be disputed that the building A­1 was constructed on

     the   land   admeasuring   1205   sq.   yards­1009.70   sq.   meters   and

     that   was   the   total   built­up   area   of   building   A­1   which   was

     occupied by the Plaintiffs.
The   Plaintiffs,   therefore,   cannot   go   beyond   the   averments   and

     pleadings in the Plaint.   Therefore, the Plaintiffs could not have

     even   asked   for   the   execution   of   the   Deed   of   Conveyance   in

     respect of the land beyond the built­up area of building A­1, more

     particularly, when the Allottees/original Plaintiffs can claim the
33
rights with respect the building A­1 only.
12.4 The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the original Plaintiffs

have heavily relied upon the cross­examination of DW­1 Omprakash

Didwanja and have submitted that the Defendants’ witness specifically

admitted that the Suit building has been constructed on the plot of

the land admeasuring 2573.31 sq. meters and, therefore, the Plaintiffs

were entitled to the Deed of Conveyance with respect to the entire plot

of land 2573.31 sq. meters.   The same has no substance. There is a

difference and distinction between the built­up area of building and

the plot area. As observed above, the Plaintiff specifically averred and

pleaded   in   paragraphs   18   that   they   are   entitled   to   an   area   of   land

corresponding to the built­up area of the building so constructed on

such land.  Therefore also, the High Court is not justified in directing

Defendant No.1 to execute the Deed of Conveyance with respect to the

land admeasuring to the extent of 2700 sq.meters.
12.5 In   view   of   the   above   and   for   the   reasons   stated   above,   the

impugned   orders   passed   by   the   High   Court   dated   23.12.14   passed

below “Note for speaking to the Minutes”, in First Appeal No.466/2010

and   the   order   dated   04.07.15   passed   in   Civil   Application

No.1698/2015   in   First   Appeal   No.466/2010   deserve   to   be   quashed
34
and set aside and the Civil Appeals arising out of the said orders are

required to be allowed.
13. So far as the Appeals arising out of the impugned judgment and

order   passed   by   the   High   Court   dated   10.09.2015     in   WP©

No.992/2015 is concerned, it appears that the Divisional Registrar of

the Co­operative Societies has passed an order of deemed Conveyance

of the area admeasuring 2593.70 sq. meters, which was the subject

matter in the Writ Petition before the High Court and the High Court

by   impugned   judgment   and   order   has   dismissed   the   Writ   Petition

confirming   the   order   passed   by   the   Divisional   Registrar   granting

deemed Conveyance of the area admeasuring 2593.70 sq.meters.


13.1    Having heard the learned counsel for the respective parties and

considering   the   order   passed   by   the   Divisional   Registrar   of   deemed

Conveyance   of   the   area   admeasuring   2593.70   sq.meters,   it   appears

that the Divisional Registrar considered the orders passed by the High

Court below  “Note for speaking to the Minutes”’ in the First Appeal as

well as solely relying upon the property card.   However, as observed

hereinabove,     while   deciding   the   Appeals   arising   out   of   the   order

passed by the High Court below “Note for speaking to the Minutes”,

the   original   Plaintiff­Society   shall   not   be   entitled   to   the   Deed   of
35
Conveyance to the extent of area admeasuring 2700 sq.meters and/or

even   2593.70   sq.meters   and   they   shall   be   entitled   to   the   Deed   of

Conveyance   of   the   area   admeasuring   1009.70   sq.meters   which   was

the built up area of building A­1 and, therefore, for the reasons stated

hereinabove,  the impugned judgment and order passed by the High

Court   dated   10.09.2015   in   Writ   Petition   ©   No.992/2015   confirming

the order passed by the Divisional Registrar Co­operative Societies of

deemed Conveyance of the area admeasuring 2593.70 sq.meters also

deserves to be quashed and set aside and the Appeals arising out of

the   impugned   orders   passed   by   the   High   Court   in   W.P.   No.  992   of

2015 deserves to be allowed.
14. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, all these

appeals succeed and are hereby allowed.  The impugned orders dated

23.12.2014 passed by the High Court of Bombay passed below “Note

for speaking to the Minutes” in First Appeal No.466/2010 as well as

the   impugned   order   dated  04.07.2015  passed  by  the  High  Court  of

Bombay   in   Civil   Application   No.1698   of   2015   in   First   Appeal

No.466/2010 are hereby quashed and set aside.
15. The impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court of

Bombay dated 10.04.2015 in Writ Petition © No.992/2015 confirming
36
the   order   passed   by   the   Divisional   Registrar   of       the     Co­operative

Societies   of   deemed   Conveyance   of   the   area   admeasuring   2593.70

sq.meters is also hereby quashed and set aside and consequently the

order passed by the Divisional Registrar of Deemed Conveyance of the

area admeasuring 2593.70 sq.meters is hereby quashed and set aside

and it is directed and the same is modified to the extent of granting

deemed Conveyance of the area admeasuring 1009.70 sq.meters only.

The Appeals stand disposed of accordingly.
16. In   the   facts   and   circumstances   of   the   cases,   there   will   be   no

order   as   to   costs.       In   view   of   the   disposal   of   the   Appeals,   the

Contempt Petitions as well as the interlocutory application pending, if

any, shall also stand disposed of.
…….………………………..J.
                                                (A.K. SIKRI)


                                                ……………………………..J.
                                                (ASHOK BHUSHAN)


                                                ……………………………..J.
                                                (M. R. SHAH)
New Delhi,
December 14, 2018