[Cites
31
, Cited by
77
]
Supreme Court of India
Dr.Ashwani Kumar vs Union Of India And Ors. Ministry Of ... on 13 December, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SC (SUPP) 2541, 2019 (2) SCC 636, (2019) 73 OCR 588, (2019) 1 RECCIVR 324, (2018) 15 SCALE 873, (2019) 2 ALL WC 1080, (2019) 127 CUT LT 401, (2019) 2 JCR 221 (SC), AIRONLINE 2018 SC 867
Author:
Madan B. Lokur
Bench:
Deepak Gupta
,
Madan B. Lokur
REPORTABLE

                                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                 CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                            WRIT PETITION (C) No. 193 OF 2016

                         Dr. Ashwani Kumar                                        ....Petitioner

                                                              versus

                         Union of India & Ors.                                   .... Respondents


                                                            JUDGMENT
Madan B. Lokur, J.
1.    “Social justice” in the Preamble of our Constitution has been given

                         pride of place and for good reason since it is perhaps the most important

                         and significant form of justice.
2.    In his address on Constitution Day on 26 th November, 2018 the

                         Hon’ble President of India emphasised that social justice remains a

                         touchstone of our nation building. The conceptualisation of justice by our

                         Constitution framers was as much valid in 1949 (when the Constituent

                         Assembly debates took place) as it is today. But, with times having

                         changed, varied situations have emerged which may not have existed in

                         1949 and were perhaps not foreseen at that time. The Hon’ble President
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK GUGLANI
Date: 2018.12.13
12:02:18 IST
spoke on the subject of justice and particularly social justice in the
Reason:
following words:
W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                              Page 1
                   “In the Preamble, justice is not seen as unidimensional. It is
                   viewed as having implications across political, economic and
                   social spheres. Political justice implies the equal participation of
                   all adults in the political process and the just formulation and
                   implementation of laws. Economic justice implies the ultimate
                   eradication of poverty, equal opportunities to earn a livelihood,
                   and fair wages. As such the expansion of economic,
                   entrepreneurship and job opportunities are among examples of
                   economic justice.
Given the diverse history of our people, and given imbalances
                   and hierarchies that have sometimes marked our past, social
                   justice remains a touchstone of our nation building. At the
                   simplest level, it implies the removal of societal imbalances and
                   the harmonisation of rival claims and needs of different
                   communities and groups. Social justice is about providing
                   equal opportunities.
Such a conceptualisation of justice was valid in 1949 and broadly
                   remains relevant today. Even so, the 21st century has brought
                   new challenges. No doubt the concept of justice - political,
                   economic and social – has a resilient core but it needs to be
                   thought of in innovative ways. It requires to be applied afresh
                   to emerging situations – situations that may not have existed
                   or been foreseen when our Constitution framers were at
                   work.” (Emphasis supplied by us).
3.    The rights of elderly persons is one such emerging situation that

      was perhaps not fully foreseen by our Constitution framers. Therefore,

      while there is a reference to the health and strength of workers, men and

      women, and the tender age of children in
Article 39
of the Constitution

      and to public assistance in cases of unemployment, old age, sickness and

      disablement and in other cases of undeserved want in
Article 41
of the

      Constitution, there is no specific reference to the health of the elderly or

      to their shelter in times of want and indeed to their dignity and sustenance

      due to their age.
4.    Eventually, age catches up with everybody and on occasion, it
W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                         Page 2
      renders some people completely helpless and dependent on others, either

      physically or mentally or both. Fortunately, our Constitution is organic

      and this Court is forward looking. This combination has resulted in path-

      breaking developments in law, particularly in the sphere of social justice

      which has been given tremendous importance and significance in a

      variety of decisions rendered by this Court over the years. The present

      petition is one such opportunity presented before this Court to recognise

      and enforce the rights of elderly persons - rights that are recognised by
Article 21
of the Constitution as understood and interpreted by this Court

      in a series of decisions over a period of several decades, and rights that

      have gained recognition over the years due to emerging situations.

      Brief background
5.    The petitioner Dr. Ashwani Kumar has preferred a writ petition

      under
Article 32
of the Constitution with regard to enforcement of the

      rights of elderly persons under
Article 21
of the Constitution.        The

      petitioner, who appears in person, has made several prayers in the writ

      petition but during the course of submissions, he limited the relief prayed

      for to four issues. These are:
1.     Pension for the elderly.
2.     Shelter for the elderly.
3.     Geriatric care and medical facilities for the elderly.
W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                       Page 3
4.     Effective implementation of the
Maintenance and Welfare of
                   Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007
(‘
MWP Act
’).
6.   During the course of the proceedings and submissions, we were

       assisted by HelpAge India through Mr. Mathew Cherian as Amicus

       Curiae and Mr. Nikhil Dey a social activist as an Intervener. We were

       also assisted by the learned Additional Solicitor General appearing for

       the Union of India who specifically underlined the fact that the Union of

       India does not consider this as an adversarial litigation.
7.   We propose to take up the issues raised by the petitioner in seriatim

       but leave it open to him and the learned Amicus to agitate any further

       issues that may arise during the pendency of the public interest petition.

      The right to dignity and adequate pension
8.   It has come on record that the Union of India has categorised the

       elderly as those who are above 60 years of age and up to 79 years of age

       belonging to one category and those above 80 years of age belonging to

       another category. The record shows that pension was fixed for persons

       between the age of 60-79 years at ₹ 200 per month by the Union of

       India under a scheme called the Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension

       Scheme.    An amount of ₹ 500 per month was fixed by the Union of

       India for persons above 80 years of age.
9.   Interestingly, the pension amount was fixed more than a decade

W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                       Page 4
       ago with the latest revision in 2007. It is submitted on the side of the

       petitioner that the amount is a pittance and is wholly inadequate to

       advance the constitutional mandate of
Article 21.
If the current value of

       the rupee is taken into consideration then in real terms the amount

       actually works out to about ₹ 92 per month on the lower scale.
10. There is no doubt that the Scheme places a corresponding

       obligation   on      the   State   Governments     and    Union    Territory

       Administrations to make contributions but their contributions are

       varying, as per the affidavits filed in this Court, from less than ₹ 500 per

       month to ₹ 2000 per month. One of the directions prayed for by the

       petitioner is that a realistic pension ought to be paid to the elderly and it

       is his suggestion that it should be at least half the minimum wage.
11.   It was submitted by the petitioner, ably supported by the learned

      Amicus and the intervenor that the right to live with dignity is a

      fundamental right recognised by
Article 21
of the Constitution. We do not

      doubt this and surely the Union of India would also not doubt this. The

      further submission of the petitioner was that availability of adequate

      finances is necessary for a person to live a life of dignity. An elderly

      person, particularly someone who is in an old age home is unable to look

      after himself and therefore needs financial assistance. This can be made

      available only if there is a viable pension scheme that is implemented


W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                       Page 5
      with sincerity and which can be taken advantage of by an elderly person.
12.   In support of his submissions, reliance was placed by the petitioner

      on four significant decisions of this Court which hold that the right to

      dignity is integral to the right to life guaranteed by
Article 21
of the

      Constitution.
13.
In
Francis Coralie Mullin v. Administrator, Union Territory of

       Delhi1
this Court acknowledged that the right to life guaranteed by
Article 21
of the Constitution includes the right to live with dignity

       which includes, inter alia, nutrition, clothing and shelter - all of which

       require some finances. Provision for these basic necessities can be made

       only if the elderly are provided with some pension which is meaningful

       and not pension which is equivalent to ₹ 92 per month. Reference was

       made to paragraph 8 of the Report which reads as follows:
“8. But the question which arises is whether the right to life is
                   limited only to protection of limb or faculty or does it go further
                   and embrace something more. We think that the right to life
                   includes the right to live with human dignity and all that goes
                   along with it, namely, the bare necessaries of life such as
                   adequate nutrition, clothing and shelter and facilities for
                   reading, writing and expressing oneself in diverse forms,
                   freely moving about and mixing and commingling with fellow
                   human beings. Of course, the magnitude and content of the
                   components of this right would depend upon the extent of the
                   economic development of the country, but it must, in any view of
                   the matter, include the right to the basic necessities of life and
                   also the right to carry on such functions and activities as
                   constitute the bare minimum expression of the human-self……..”
                   (Emphasis supplied by us).
1 (1981) 1 SCC 608

W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                        Page 6
14.   Reference was made by the petitioner to
Aruna Ramachandra

      Shanbaug v. Union of India2
and
Common Cause v. Union of India
3

      wherein this Court categorically held that the right to life includes the

      right to live with dignity. It was said in paragraph 32 of the Report in

      Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug as follows:
“32. Whilst this Court has held that there is no right to die
                   (suicide) under
Article 21
of the Constitution and an attempt to
                   commit suicide is a crime vide
Section 309
IPC, the Court has
                   held that the right to life includes the right to live with human
                   dignity, and in the case of a dying person who is terminally ill or
                   in a permanent vegetative state he may be permitted to terminate
                   it by a premature extinction of his life in these circumstances and
                   it is not a crime vide Gian Kaur case.
[
Gian Kaur v. State of
                   Punjab
, (1996) 2 SCC 648]” (Emphasis supplied by us).
15.   Reference was also made by the petitioner to the opinion rendered

      by Justice Rohinton Fali Nariman in
K.S. Puttaswamy v. Union of India
4

      wherein it has been observed that several decisions of this Court have

      recognised human dignity as being an essential part of the fundamental

      rights chapter in the Constitution. This observation was made in

      paragraph 525 of the Report which reads as follows:
“525. ………..Many of our decisions recognise human dignity as
            being an essential part of the fundamental rights chapter. For
            example, see Prem Shankar Shukla v. Delhi Admn., (1980) 3 SCC 526 at
            para 21,
Francis Coralie Mullin v. UT of Delhi
, (1981) 1 SCC 608 at
            paras 6, 7 and 8,
Bandhua Mukti Morcha v. Union of India
, (1984) 3
            SCC 161 at para 10,
Maharashtra University of Health
            Sciences v. Satchikitsa Prasarak Mandal
, (2010) 3 SCC 786 at para
            37,
Shabnam v. Union of India
, (2015) 6 SCC 702 at paras 12.4 and 14
      2 (
2011) 4 SCC 454
3          (2018) 5 SCC 1
      4 (2017)10 SCC 1

W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                        Page 7
            and Jeeja Ghosh v. Union of India
, (2016) 7 SCC 761 at para 37. The
            dignity of the individual encompasses the right of the individual to
            develop to the full extent of his potential. And this development can
            only be if an individual has autonomy over fundamental personal
            choices and control over dissemination of personal information which
            may be infringed through an unauthorised use of such
            information…….” (Emphasis supplied by us).
16.   In view of the various decisions of this Court, there cannot now be

      any doubt that the right to live with dignity is, in effect, a part of the right

      to life as postulated in
Article 21
of the Constitution. Such a right would

      be rendered meaningless if an aged person does not have the financial

      means to take care of his basic necessities and has to depend for it on

      others. It is in this context that the petitioner submitted that all elderly

      persons must be granted adequate pension so that they are able to sustain

      themselves with dignity.
17. The learned Additional Solicitor General drew our attention to the

       National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) which was introduced

       on Independence Day, 1995 as a fully funded Centrally Sponsored

       Scheme. In the introduction to the Programme document, it is noted that

       the Directive Principles of State Policy of the Constitution enjoin upon

       the State to undertake within its means a number of welfare measures,

       targeting the poor and the destitute in particular.
Article 41
of the

       Constitution directs the State to provide public assistance to its citizens

       in the case of unemployment, old age, sickness and disablement as well


W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                        Page 8
       as in other cases of undeserved want, within the limit of the State’s

       economic capacity and development. Among the initial three

       components of the Programme are the National Old Age Pension

       Scheme which subsequently came to be known as the Indira Gandhi

       National Old-Age Pension Scheme
,
referred to above
. It was submitted

       that the Scheme is being implemented by the Government of India but

       active support is required from the State Governments and the Union

       Territory Administrations.
18.   While we cannot disagree with the learned Additional Solicitor

      General on the issue of active support, we are of opinion that both the

      Government of India and the State Governments and the Union Territory

      Administrations must work in tandem if they are to make the Pension

      Scheme workable and meaningful. In fact, it is submitted that the NSAP

      guidelines provide that State Governments may consider equal or more

      top-up to be considered for extending it to the beneficiaries.
19.   It was submitted by the learned Additional Solicitor General that

      the economic capacity of the Government of India and of the State

      Governments ought not to be overlooked and a caution has been

      administered by this Court in paragraphs 181 and 182 in the opinion of

      Justice B.P. Jeevan Reddy in
Unni Krishnan, J.P. v. State of Andhra

      Pradesh5
wherein it was held that the economic capacity of the State is

      5 (1993) 1 SCC 645

W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                      Page 9
      limited and is, ordinarily speaking, a matter within the subjective

      satisfaction of the State. This was in the context of the right to education

      but it is submitted that the principle laid down is equally applicable to the

      present petition. It was held by this Court as follows:
“181. Right to education after the child/citizen completes the age
                   of 14 years. The right to education further means that a citizen
                   has a right to call upon the State to provide educational facilities
                   to him within the limits of its economic capacity and
                   development. By saying so, we are not transferring
Article 41
from Part IV to Part III — we are merely relying upon
Article 41
to illustrate the content of the right to education flowing from
Article 21.
We cannot believe that any State would say that it
                   need not provide education to its people even within the limits of
                   its economic capacity and development. It goes without saying
                   that the limits of economic capacity are, ordinarily speaking,
                   matters within the subjective satisfaction of the State.
182. In the light of the above enunciation, the apprehension
                   expressed by the counsel for the petitioners that by reading the
                   right to education into
Article 21
, this Court would be enabling
                   each and every citizen of this country to approach the courts to
                   compel the State to provide him such education as he chooses
                   must be held to be unfounded. The right to free education is
                   available only to children until they complete the age of 14 years.
Thereafter, the obligation of the State to provide education is
                   subject to the limits of its economic capacity and
                   development. Indeed, we are not stating anything new. This
                   aspect has already been emphasised by this Court in
Francis C.
                   Mullin v. Administrator
,
Union Territory of Delhi [Francis C.
                   Mullin v. Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi
, (1981) 1 SCC
                   608] ………” (Emphasis supplied by us).
In this context, it is pointed out that the NSAP Scheme of the

      Government of India provided for a total budget of ₹ 9975 crores for

      covering over 3 crore below poverty line beneficiaries exclusively. It was




W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                         Page 10
      also submitted that linking pension to the index of inflation may not be

      appropriate since the pension provided is a welfare measure.
20.   While this may be so, the issue has, nevertheless, to be looked at

      from the humanitarian aspect as well.
The right to shelter
21.   It is about two decades since this Court recognised the right to

      shelter or the right to reasonable accommodation as one of the basic

      needs of any human being. Unfortunately, while there has been some

      positive development in this regard, attention has not been paid to the

      needs of the elderly who require special care and attention which, in

      many sections of our society, is missing. With this in mind, the petitioner

      emphasised the right to shelter and referred to several decisions, many of

      which recognise the right to adequate shelter as a fundamental right,

      which we believe applies to the elderly as well.
22.
In
Shantistar Builders v. Narayan Khimalal Totame6
this Court

      recognised the right to food, clothing and shelter as being a guarantee of

      any civilised society. As far as the right to shelter is concerned, it was

      observed that there is a right to reasonable accommodation. It was held in

      paragraph 9 of the Report as follows:
“9. Basic needs of man have traditionally been accepted to be
                   three — food, clothing and shelter. The right to life is
      6 AIR 1990 SC 630

W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                     Page 11
                    guaranteed in any civilized society. That would take within its
                    sweep the right to food, the right to clothing, the right to
                    decent environment and a reasonable accommodation to live
                    in……...” (Emphasis supplied by us).
23.    A much fuller discussion is to be found in
Chameli Singh v. State

      of Uttar Pradesh7
wherein this Court explained, in a sense, the

      requirements of the right to shelter. It was held in paragraph 8 of the

      Report that the right to shelter would include adequate living space but

      that does not mean a mere right to a roof over one’s head. It was held that

      the right to shelter when used as an essential requisite to the right to live

      should be deemed to have been guaranteed as a fundamental right. It was

      held in paragraph 8 of the Report as follows:
“8. In any organised society, right to live as a human being is not
                    ensured by meeting only the animal needs of man…….. Right to
                    shelter, therefore, includes adequate living space, safe and
                    decent structure, clean and decent surroundings, sufficient
                    light, pure air and water, electricity, sanitation and other civic
                    amenities like roads etc. so as to have easy access to his daily
                    avocation. The right to shelter, therefore, does not mean a mere
                    right to a roof over one's head but right to all the infrastructure
                    necessary to enable them to live and develop as a human being.
                    Right to shelter when used as an essential requisite to the right
                    to live should be deemed to have been guaranteed as a
                    fundamental right. As is enjoined in the Directive Principles,
                    the State should be deemed to be under an obligation to
                    secure it for its citizens, of course subject to its economic
                    budgeting………...” (Emphasis supplied by us).
24.    Finally, in
Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation v. Nawab Khan

      Gulab Khan8
this Court referred to and followed Chameli Singh. More
       7 (1996) 2 SCC 549
8 (1997) 11 SCC 121

W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                         Page 12
      importantly, reference was made to our obligations under international

      law, including the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the

      International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. The

      petitioner strongly relied upon our international obligations and submitted

      that apart from the law
laid down by
this Court in several judgements, we

      should respect and acknowledge our international obligations in regard to

      the right to shelter. Reference was made to paragraphs 12 and 25 of the

      Report which read as follows:
“12.
Article 19(1)(e)
accords right to residence and settlement in
                   any part of India as a fundamental right. Right to life has been
                   assured as a basic human right under
Article 21
of the
                   Constitution of India.
Article 25(1)
of the Universal
                   Declaration of Human Rights declares that everyone has the
                   right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-
                   being of himself and his family; it includes food,
                   clothing, housing, medical care and necessary social services.
Article 11(1)
of the International Covenant on Economic,
                   Social and Cultural Rights lays down that State parties to the
                   Covenant recognise that everyone has the right to standard of
                   living for himself and his family including food, clothing,
                   housing and to the continuous improvement of living conditions.
                   ……….
25…….The right to life enshrined under
Article 21
has been
                   interpreted by this Court to include meaningful right to life
                   and not merely animal existence as elaborated in several
                   judgments of this Court including Hawkers case [ SLPs Nos.
47-51 of 1996], Olga Tellis case [(1985) 3 SCC 545] and the
                   latest
Chameli Singh
case [(1996) 2 SCC 549] and a host of other
                   decisions which need no reiteration…..” (Emphasis supplied by
                   us).
25.   We are in full agreement with the view expressed by the petitioner

      but we must be aware of the caution given by this Court to the effect that

W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                       Page 13
      the right to shelter is subject to “economic budgeting” by the State. No

      blanket order can be prayed for by the petitioner or even argued for

      overlooking the financial capacity of the State. No doubt, at some stage

      the petitioner did contend that in matters of fundamental rights, financial

      issues take a backseat but it must be remembered at the same time that the

      resources of the country are not unlimited and when it comes to the Court

      directing the State to expend amounts, judicial restraint is necessary.
26.   The learned Additional Solicitor General referred to the recently

      revised Integrated Programme for Senior Citizens. It is noted in the

      introduction to the Programme that there has been a steady rise in the

      population of senior citizens in India. The number of elderly persons has

      increased from 1.98 crore in 1951 to 7.6 crore in 2001 and 10.38 crore in

      2011. It is projected that the number of 60+ in India would increase to

      14.3 crore in 2021 and 17.3 crore in 2026. The main objective of the

      Programme “is to improve the quality of life of the Senior Citizens by

      providing basic amenities like shelter, food, medical care and

      entertainment opportunities …..” It is also proposed to encourage

      productive and active ageing through providing support for capacity

      building activities. It was submitted that under this Programme grant-in-

      aid is given for running and maintenance of senior citizens homes, homes

      for elderly women etc.


W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                      Page 14
27.   There can be no doubt that the right to shelter is an important

      constitutional right and therefore shelter must be made available to

      everybody and to the maximum extent possible. With this in view, the

      Government of India has framed schemes, inter alia,         for homeless

      persons particularly in urban areas but it is time to recognize that there

      are a large number of elderly persons in several parts of the country,

      including rural India, who are rendered ‘homeless’ due to migration of

      their families to other parts of the country and even outside the country.

      While some of these elderly persons are certainly not destitute, but they

      do need assistance because of their age and are willing to pay and

      contribute for a roof over their head. In the absence of a suitable number

      of old age homes, and homes as per their status, they are left to fend for

      themselves making them vulnerable to mishaps and other unforeseen

      events.
The right to health
28.   It was submitted by the petitioner that medical facilities and

      geriatric care are not given the due importance that they deserve. He

      submitted that, by and large, it is older persons who require medical care

      more frequently than younger persons and if they are not provided the

      necessary medical facilities, it would adversely impact on their right to

      health. In support of his contention that the right to health is a human


W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                    Page 15
      right and a constitutional right, the petitioner referred to a few decisions

      which we detail hereinbelow.
29.
In
Vincent Panikurlangara v. Union of India
9 this Court did not

      specifically deal with the right to health of the elderly but it did make

      reference to
Article 21
of the Constitution and noted that it includes

      within it the right to live with human dignity. In fact,
Article 21
derives its

      life breath from some Articles in the Directive Principles of State Policy,

      particularly,
Articles 39
, 41
and
42
of the Constitution. While these

      Articles do not directly deal with the right to health of the elderly, it is

      quite obvious that when they refer to the protection of the health and

      strength of men and women, it must include the elderly. It was said in

      paragraph 16 of the Report as follows:
16. … “It is the fundamental right of everyone in this country,
                   assured under the interpretation given to
Article 21
by this Court
                   in
Francis Mullin
case [
Francis Coralie Mullin v. Administrator,
                   Union Territory of Delhi
, [(1981) 1 SCC 608] to live with human
                   dignity, free from exploitation. This right to live with human
                   dignity enshrined in
Article 21
derives its life breath from the
                   Directive Principles of State Policy and particularly clauses
(e) and (f) of
Article 39
and
Articles 41
and
42
and at the
                   least, therefore, it must include protection of the health and
                   strength of the workers, men and women, and of the tender age
                   of children against abuse, opportunities and facilities for children
                   to develop in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and
                   dignity, educational facilities, just and humane conditions of
                   work and maternity relief…..” (Emphasis supplied by us).
9 (1987) 2 SCC 165

W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                         Page 16
30.     A similar view was expressed by this Court in
Consumer

      Education & Research Centre v. Union of India
(
paragraph 25)10 and

      Kirloskar Brothers Ltd. v. Employees State Insurance Corpn.
(paragraph 10)11.
31.
In
State of Punjab v. Mohinder Singh Chawla
(
paragraph 4)12,

      Nagar Nigam v. AL Faheem Meat Exports (P) Ltd.
(paragraph 26)13 and

      in
Occupational Health and Safety Association v. Union of India
(paragraph 10)14 the right to health was given the status of a fundamental

      right flowing from
Article 21
of the Constitution. There is, of course, no

      going back on this.
32.     It has been brought to our notice by the learned Additional Solicitor

      General that the Government of India has launched the National

      Programme for Healthcare of the Elderly during 2010-11. The objective

      of this National Programme is to provide dedicated healthcare facilities to

      senior citizens, that is, those above 60 years of age at the primary,

      secondary and tertiary healthcare delivery system. The basic aim of the

      National        Programme   is   to   provide   separate    and   specialised

      comprehensive healthcare to senior citizens at various levels of the State

      healthcare delivery system including outreach services.

      10   (1995)   3 SCC 42
      11   (1996)   2 SCC 682
      12   (1997)   2 SCC 83
      13   (2006)   13 SCC 382
      14   (2014)   3 SCC 547.
W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                        Page 17
33.   The Union of India has also pointed out that the activities relating

      to the implementation of the National Programme are ongoing and it is

      not as if the objectives and goals of the National Programme can be

      achieved overnight.
34.   The petitioner concedes that the National Programme has some

      positive components but it is submitted that they are not being

      implemented effectively or have not been fully operationalised in some

      districts of the country. One of the gaps pointed out by the petitioner is

      that there is no reliable information about the number of beds reserved for

      geriatric care in government or private hospitals or information regarding

      specific geriatric centres. It is submitted that these details must be

      provided for all 719 districts of the country.
35.   We fully appreciate the view of the Union of India but at the same

      time, it must be emphasised that the National Programme is now about

      six or seven years old and it must be implemented with due earnestness,

      otherwise it will remain only a paper programme. There is undoubtedly a

      lot that has been achieved in the last few years but there is still a lot that

      is required to be achieved and we expect the Union of India and all the

      State Governments and Union Territory Administrations to take an active

      interest in the implementation of the National Programme.
W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                       Page 18
The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act
,
2007
36.       While the petitioner emphasized the constitutional rights available

      to everybody including the elderly, such as the right to live with dignity,

      the right to shelter and the right to adequate medical care and geriatric

      care, the petitioner relied, has an alternative, on statutory provisions for

      the existence of these rights. It was submitted by the petitioner that even

      if the Constitution was not to be given an expansive meaning, there are

      statutory rights which are enforceable by the elderly under a law made by

      Parliament and that is the
Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior

      Citizens Act, 2007
(MWP Act
)

      [   37.   The petitioner drew our attention to a few provisions of the
MWP

      Act
to substantiate his contention. In particular, he drew our attention to
Section 19
of the MWP Act which deals with the establishment of old age

      homes and requires each State Government to establish and maintain at

      least one old age home in every district in the country with each old age

      home having accommodation for 150 senior citizens who are indigent.

      Section 19 reads as follows:
19. Establishment of oldage homes-
1. The State Government may establish and maintain such
                    number of oldage homes at accessible places, as it may deem
                    necessary, in a phased manner, beginning with at least one in each
                    district to accommodate in such homes a minimum of one hundred
                    fifty senior citizens who are indigent.
W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                         Page 19
2. The State Government may, prescribe a scheme for
                  management of oldage homes, including the standards and various
                  types of services to be provided by them which are necessary for
                  medical care and means of entertainment to the inhabitants of such
                  homes.
Explanation. – For the purposes of this section, “indigent” means
                  any senior citizen who is not having sufficient means, as
                  determined by the State Government, from time to time, to
                  maintain himself.
38.    The submission of the petitioner and the learned Amicus is that

      though more than 300 old age homes have been established in different

      parts of the country, the requirement is of many more considering the

      large population of indigent elderly. It was submitted that some homes

      are in a dilapidated condition, without adequate facilities including

      geriatric care. In other words, in several instances, the law
laid down in
Section 19
of the MWP Act is being complied with only in letter and

      certainly not in spirit.
39.    Our attention was also drawn to
Section 20
of the MWP Act which

      provides for medical support for senior citizens. Government hospitals or

      hospitals funded fully or partially by the State Government are mandated

      to provide beds for all senior citizens, as far as possible. Facilities for

      geriatric patients are also required to be earmarked by this Section of the

      MWP Act.
Section 20
of the MWP Act reads as follows:
20. Medical support for senior citizen-
The State Government shall ensure that -
W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                       Page 20
                     i.    the Government hospitals or hospitals funded fully or
partially by the Government shall provide beds for all
                          senior citizens as far as possible;
ii.    separate queues be arranged for senior citizens;
                   iii.   facility for treatment of chronic, terminal and degenerative
                           diseases is expanded for senior citizens;
iv.    research activities for chronic elderly diseases and ageing is
                          expanded;
v.     There are earmarked facilities for geriatric patients in every
                          district hospital duly headed by a medical officer with
                          experience in geriatric care.
40.   The submission of the petitioner and the learned Amicus is that

      there is a huge gap between the law and its implementation and it is

      submitted that even though the
MWP Act
came into force in 2007 and

      more than a decade has passed since then, serious efforts have not been

      made by the Government of India or by the State Governments to ensure

      that medical facilities for the elderly and geriatric care is made available.
41.   It is further submitted by the petitioner that assuming for the sake

      of argument that the provisions of the
MWP Act
are in place and are

      being implemented as they should be, the elderly are not aware of their

      human rights guaranteed not only by the Constitution but also by the
MWP Act
. It is pointed out that
Section 21
of the MWP Act requires the

      State Governments to give publicity to the provisions of the said Act

      through all modes of public media. There is also a mandate for effective

      coordination between various ministries and departments of the State

W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                          Page 21
      Government to address the issues relating to the welfare of the elderly

      and more importantly, a periodic review is required to be conducted.
42.   The submission of the petitioner is that there is hardly any publicity

      given to the provisions of the
MWP Act
and despite efforts by several

      organisations such as HelpAge India, the rights of the elderly to shelter

      and medical facilities as well as geriatric care remains only a pipe dream.

      It is submitted that the Government of India must come out with a

      workable plan to give publicity to the provisions of the
MWP Act
so that

      the elderly can live the remainder of their life with dignity.

      Discussion
43.   Having heard the petitioner, the learned Amicus and others

      including the learned Additional Solicitor General, we are left in no doubt

      that the petition raises significant issues relating to the recognition and

      enforcement of the fundamental rights of the elderly. This is perhaps the

      first such petition on the subject and interestingly, the submissions of the

      petitioner are based entirely on
Article 21
of the Constitution and other

      supporting constitutional provisions.
44.   We accept that the right to life provided for in
Article 21
of the

      Constitution must be given an expansive meaning. The right to life, we

      acknowledge, encompasses several rights but for the time being we are

      concerned with three important constitutional rights, each one of them

W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                       Page 22
      being basic and fundamental. These rights articulated by the petitioner

      are the right to live with dignity, the right to shelter and the right to

      health. The State is obligated to ensure that these fundamental rights are

      not only protected but are enforced and made available to all citizens.
45.   The petitioner has raised, alternatively, an equally significant issue

      namely that even if the constitutional rights are not enforceable due to

      difficulties in “economic budgeting” even then the law enacted by

      Parliament in the form of the
MWP Act
mandates the protection and

      enforcement of the rights of elderly persons. It is quite clear, submitted

      the petitioner, that Parliament was fully aware of the financial impact of

      the law. Considerations of “economic budgeting” by the State both at the

      level of the Government of India and at the level of the State

      Governments must have been taken into account while enacting the

      legislation. Therefore, there cannot be any excuse of lack of finances

      either by the Government of India or by the State Governments in strictly

      implementing the provisions the
MWP Act
. In short, if not the

      constitutional then at least the statutory rights of elderly persons must be

      recognised and implemented.
46.   The consensus that emerged during the submissions was that this

      Public Interest Petition should not and cannot be taken as an adversarial

      litigation. With this agreement we had put it to the learned counsel and


W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                     Page 23
      parties before us to suggest ways and means to ensure that the rights of

      the elderly are addressed keeping in view the financial requirements and

      the availability of finances with the Government of India and the State

      Governments. One solution proffered was that this Court should issue a

      continuing mandamus so that there is effective implementation of the

      constitutional rights of the elderly and the provisions of the
MWP Act
.
47.   We are in agreement with the consensus view that emerged during

      the course of discussions and submissions and are of opinion that a set of

      directions issued by this Court will not fulfil the constitutional mandate or

      the mandate of the
MWP Act
. There is a need to continuously monitor

      the progress in the implementation of the constitutional mandate to make

      available to the elderly the right to live with dignity and to provide them

      with reasonable accommodation, medical facilities and geriatric care.

      While this may take some time, the only available solution is a continuing

      mandamus which is a well-recognised practice and procedure adopted by

      this Court in several cases to ensure that the rights of the people are

      respected, recognized and enforced and that social justice as postulated

      by the Preamble in the Constitution is given meaning and teeth.
48.   We wish to make it clear that we are not at all critical of the efforts

      made by the Government of India or by the State Governments, nor is this

      Public Interest Petition intended to undermine the efforts being made or


W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                      Page 24
      contemplated. Nevertheless, we are of the view that given the

      constitutional importance of the issues raised, focused and perhaps more

      vigorous efforts are needed.
49.   In this context, we may note that the learned Additional Solicitor

      General submitted that an evaluation study is contemplated on all aspects

      of the National Social Assistance Programme for use of best practices and

      to bring about uniformity in the implementation of the Scheme in all

      States. In addition, a social audit for the NSAP schemes is also

      contemplated and guidelines have been issued for a social audit as

      recently as on 30th November, 2018 for the launch of a social audit pilot

      in 21 States and Union Territory Administrations.
50.   To take this forward, we are of opinion that it would be appropriate

      to issue some initial directions so that effective contributions are made to

      recognise and enforce the rights of elderly persons.

      Directions
51.   Taking note of the submissions made by the parties before us and

      while complimenting them for a spirited support of the rights of the

      elderly, we issue the following directions for the time being:
1.     The Union of India will obtain necessary information from

                   all the State Governments and the Union Territories about


W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                     Page 25
                   the number of old age homes in each district of the country

                   and file a Status Report in this regard.
2.     The Union of India will also obtain from all the State

                   Governments the medical facilities and geriatric care

                   facilities that are available to senior citizens in each district

                   and file a Status Report in this regard.
3.     On the basis of the information gathered by the Union of

                   India as detailed in the Status Reports, a plan of action

                   should be prepared for giving publicity to the provisions of

                   the
MWP Act
and making senior citizens aware of the

                   provisions of the said Act and the constitutional and

                   statutory rights of senior citizens.
4.
Section 30
of the MWP Act enables the Government of India

                   to issue appropriate directions to the State Governments to

                   carry out and execute the provisions of the
MWP Act
. The

                   Central Government must exercise its power in this regard

                   and issue appropriate directions to the State Governments for

                   the effective implementation of the provisions of the
MWP

                   Act
. Alongside this, the Central Government must, in terms

                   of
Section 31
of the MWP Act, conduct a review for the




W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                       Page 26
                   purposes of monitoring the progress in implementation of

                   the
MWP Act
by the State Governments.
5.     Some of the schemes referred to hereinabove are

                   comparatively dated. It is high time that the Government of

                   India has a relook at these schemes and perhaps overhaul

                   them with a view to bring about convergence and avoid

                   multiplicity. In particular, the Government of India and the

                   State Governments must revisit the grant of pension to the

                   elderly so that it is more realistic. Of course, this would

                   depend upon the availability of finances and the economic

                   capacity of the Government of India and the State

                   Governments.
52.   The Status Reports should be filed by the Union of India through

      the learned Additional Solicitor General on or before 31st January, 2019.
53.   List the matters for further proceedings on receipt of the Status

      Reports.
………………………J.
                                                        (Madan B. Lokur)


      New Delhi;                                       .……………………..J.
      December 13, 2018                                  (Deepak Gupta)


W.P(Civil) No.193 of 2016                                     Page 27
                                                       REPORTABLE

                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                        CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                    WRIT PETITION (C) No. 81 OF 2015


Sanjeeb Panigrahi                                      .... Petitioner

                                  versus

Union of India & Ors.                                  .... Respondents


                              ORDER
For orders and directions, see W.P. (C) No.193 of 2016 –
Dr. Ashwani Kumar v. Union of India & Ors
.
………………………J.
                                              (Madan B. Lokur)


New Delhi;                                    .……………………..J.
December 13, 2018                               (Deepak Gupta)




                                             Page 28