[Cites
8
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Chairman,Bd.Of Trustee Sr.R.M.J, A.P. vs S. Rajyalaxmi (Dead) on 10 December, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 1355, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 1251
Author:
N.V. Ramana
Bench:
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
,
N. V. Ramana
REPORTABLE



                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                CIVIL APPEAL   NO. 7843 OF 2009 



              CHAIRMAN, BOARD OF TRUSTEE,                    …APPELLANT(s)
              SRI RAM MANDIR JAGTIAL
              KARIMNAGAR DISTRICT, A.P


                                                 VERSUS

              S. RAJYALAXMI (DEAD) & ORS.                              …RESPONDENT(S)
JUDGMENT 

               N.V. RAMANA, J.
1.              The present appeal arises out of the impugned judgment dated

              18th  November 2006, passed by the High Court of Judicature at

              Hyderabad   in   Appeal   Suit   No.   1964   of   1993   wherein   the   High

              Court   allowed   the   appeal  preferred  by  the  respondents  and  set
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
aside the order of the Subordinate Judge in O.S. No.69 of 1987,
     SATISH KUMAR YADAV
     Date: 2018.12.10
     14:54:15 IST
     Reason:
thereby decreeing the suit in favour of the respondents­plaintiffs.
1
2.   A brief reference to the facts may be necessary for the disposal of

     the   present   case.   The   original   plaintiff   no.1  (predecessor­in­

     interest of respondent nos. 1 to 6 herein) and original plaintiff no.2

     (respondent  no.7 herein) preferred a suit against the defendants

     (appellant   and   respondent   no.8,9   and   10   herein)   seeking   a

     declaration that they are the owners of the suit schedule ‘A’ house

     bearing H. No. 5­6­69 (old), 6­1­7 (old), reassigned new nos. 6­1­

     81 and 6­1­81/1 situated at Brahminwadi, Jagtial.  The original

     plaintiffs had also prayed for a declaration that the suit schedule

     ‘B’ properties are not in existence and the said properties do not

     belong   to   the   temple.   Lastly,   they   also   sought   a   consequential

     relief   of   permanent   injunction   against   the   defendants   from

     interfering with the peaceful possession and enjoyment of the suit

     property.
3.   The   respondents­plaintiffs  claimed  to   be  the   owners   of  the   suit

     schedule  “A” house  and   further  contended that they  have been

     residing   in   the   suit   property   since   the   time   of   their   ancestors.

     Hence   it   is   recorded   in   their   name   and   they   have   been   paying

     taxes   to   the   municipality   with   respect   to   the   same.   A   Ram

     Mandir, situated to the west of the suit property bearing H.Nos.5­

     6­70   (old)   &   6­1­8   (old)   corresponding   to   H.No.6­1­82   (new),
2
which   is   shown   as   Endowments   property   by   the   Endowments

     department.   Plaintiff   no.1   has   stated   that   the   eastern   and

     southern boundaries of the temple are shown to be the house of

     the plaintiffs. The plaintiffs also brought to the notice of the court,

     the permission dated 14.10.1977, granted in their favour by the

     municipality, for re­roofing. The original plaintiff no.1 and plaintiff

     no.2 effectuated an oral partition of the suit schedule ‘A’ property

     on 27.6.1983.
4.   The  cause  of  action  in the present suit arose when respondent

     no.9   (defendant   no.2­   Deputy   Commissioner   of   Endowments

     Department)   allegedly   passed   an  ex­parte  order   on   24.10.1986

     declaring   the   suit   schedule   ‘A’   house   and   movable   properties

     shown in schedule ‘B’ and other properties belonged to the Ram

     Mandir, Jagtial in O.A. No.70 of 1985. Pursuant to the same, the

     appellant   (defendant   no.4­Chairman   Board   of   Trustee   Sri   Ram

     Mandir) filed a Petition in the court of Judicial Magistrate, under
Section 93(2)
of A.P. Charitable and Hindu Religious Institutions

     and Endowments Act 1966 (hereinafter referred to as “the Act”)

     for   the   delivery   of   possession   of   suit   schedule   ‘A’   and   the   suit

     schedule   ‘B’   properties   alongside   other   properties   of   the   Ram

     Mandir in Cr. M. P No. 173 of 1987.
3
5.   The   respondents­plaintiffs,   apprehending   abrupt   interference   in

     possession and enjoyment of the suit property, preferred this suit

     for  declaration of  title  and perpetual injunction concerning suit

     schedule ‘A’ and ‘B’ properties in O.S. no.69 of 1987.
6.   The   appellant   (defendant   no.4)  resisted   the   suit   on   multiple

     grounds.   Although  the   appellant  (defendant  no.4) admitted that

     the   ancestors  of   the  plaintiffs  were performing  “Annasatram” at

     the Ram Mandir, he particularly denied that the ancestors of the

     plaintiffs  had constructed the suit schedule ‘A’ house about 100

     years back along with H. No. 6­2­21. The suit schedule ‘A’ house

     was constructed from the funds donated by the devotees.  It was

     further alleged that the plaintiff no.1 had filed O.A no.2 of 1973

     under
Section   77
of   the   Act   before   the   Deputy   Commissioner

     Endowments   Department   Hyderabad  (defendant   no.2)  for

     declaration that the Ram Mandir is not an endowment property,

     but  the   same   was   dismissed by  the Deputy  Commissioner  vide

     order dated 26.12.1976.  The Deputy Commissioner held that the

     temple is a public institution which is registered and entered in

     the   book   of   endowments.   Aggrieved,   the   plaintiff   no.1   had

     preferred   O.S.   no.134   of   1977   under
Section   78
of   the   Act,

     seeking   to   set   aside   the   earlier   order   passed   by   the   Deputy
4
Commissioner. This suit was also dismissed on 19.08.1981 and

     has now attained finality. However, the plaintiffs being the priests

     got the suit property mutated in their favour during the pendency

     of   the   proceeding.   Since,   plaintiff   no.1   was   the   pujari   and   was

     looking   after   the   affairs   of   the   temple,   he   misrepresented   the

     matter   before   the   Assistant   Commissioner   of   the   Endowments

     Department (defendant no.3) at the time of preparing the list of

     properties of the Ram Mandir and got his name illegally recorded.

     The plaintiff no.1 had also concocted several documents, such as

     municipal   permission   for   re­roofing.   Further,   all   the   mutations

     and entries made or done in the municipality are in his capacity

     of   being   a   Pujari   and   custodian   of   the   temple,   and   not   as   the

     owner of the property. The appellant  further submitted that the

     Schedule B properties are in existence and are in the custody of

     the   plaintiff   no.1   itself,   who   supressed   this   fact.   Lastly,   the

     appellant,  submitted   that   the   plaintiffs   have   exhausted   all

     remedies   and   have   filed   the   suit   to   prolong   the   litigation   and

     hence is liable to be dismissed.
7.   The   trial   court,   taking   into   consideration   the   aforesaid

     submissions of the parties and the dispute in the present case,

     framed the following issues:
5
i.     Whether   the   plaintiffs   are  entitled  for   the  declaration
                  that  the  suit  property are belonging to them  and the
                  schedule   “B”   properties   are   not   in   existence   and
                  whether they are not the properties of the Ram Mandir?
           ii.    Whether   the   plaintiffs   are   entitled   for   the   permanent
                  injunction?
iii.   Whether the suit is barred by the res judicata?
iv.    Whether the court fee paid is not correct?
           v.     To what relief?
8.   The   trial   court,   after   perusing   both   oral   and   documentary

     evidence   on   record,   dismissed   the   suit   preferred   by   the

     respondents­plaintiffs. The trial court held that the instant suit is

     not barred under the principle of res­judicata, as the earlier suit

     in O.S. No. 134 of 1977 was dismissed only for the default of the

     plaintiff   no.1.   However,   as   the   respondents­plaintiffs  failed   to

     prove the source of their title they will not be entitled to claim the

     relief of permanent injunction.
9.   Aggrieved by the aforesaid dismissal of the suit, the respondents­

     plaintiffs  preferred   an   appeal   before   the   High   Court   in   Appeal

     Suit no. 1964 of 1993. The High Court set aside the order of the

     trial court stating that the same was passed without considering

     the facts and law in the correct perspective. Thereby, the High

     Court vide order dated 18.11.2006 allowed the appeal preferred

     by the respondents­plaintiffs and decreed the suit in their favour

     by placing reliance on the documentary and oral evidence placed
6
on   record.   The   High   Court   observed   that,   the   alleged   suit

      property was not included in the book of endowments, moreover,

      the   plaintiffs   have   been   paying   taxes   in   regard   to   the   suit

      property in their name. Therefore, the defendants in the guise of

      a   certificate   cannot   claim   the   suit   premises.   Aggrieved,   by   the

      aforesaid order of the High Court decreeing the suit in favour of

      the   respondents­plaintiffs,  the   appellant  (defendant   no.4)  has

      preferred the present appeal.
10.   Heard the learned counsels for both the parties.
11.   The counsel on behalf of the appellant (defendant no.4) submitted

      that the High Court gravely erred in decreeing the suit in favour

      of the respondents­plaintiffs by merely relying on the entry in the

      book of endowments as to the boundaries. Further, the counsel

      averred that, the plaintiff no.1 manipulated the record showing

      himself to be the owner of the suit property, whereas he was a

      pujari  acting   as   a  custodian  of the temple.  Lastly,  the counsel

      rested his argument by stating that since the certificate issued by

      the Deputy Commissioner in O.A. No. 70 of 1985 is still valid, the

      plaintiffs are not entitled to a decree restraining the defendants

      from   dispossessing   them   from   Schedule   ‘A’   property   and

      recovering Schedule ‘B’ property.
7
12.   On   the   contrary   the   counsel   on   behalf   of   the   respondents­

       plaintiffs submitted that, the suit property was never recorded as

       an   endowment.   On   the   contrary,   the   suit   property   was   earlier

       recorded in the name of the ancestors of the plaintiffs and now it

       devolves in the name of plaintiffs. The permission granted by the

       municipality   on   14.10.1977,   to   construct   the   re­roofing

       strengthens the presumption in their favour. Therefore, the High

       Court was correct to decree the suit in their favour by relying on

       the documentary and oral evidence placed on record.
13.    At the outset it is pertinent to peruse few significant evidences

       adduced by both the parties.
14.    The   plaintiffs  had   examined P.W.3 (Purohith) to prove that the

       suit property  was  partitioned in the year 1914 vide Arbitration

       Award dated 21.12.1914. But this document was never placed on

       record in the earlier rounds of litigation. On the contrary, plaintiff

       no.1 in the earlier litigation in O.A. No. 2 of 1973 had stated that,

       the suit property was not a Mandir but a house which was built

       by his father after obtaining due permission from the local tehsil

       in 1927. The aforesaid contradiction draws suspicion as to the

       credibility of the witness, as regards to the building of the suit
8
house and temple in 1927 and fact of partition pursuant to the

      arbitration agreement in 1914, which are inconsistent.
15.   D.W.2, who  was once acting as the fit person on behalf of the

      trust   of   Ram   Mandir   stated   that,   even   the   suit   schedule   ‘A’

      property was a part of the endowment property.
16.   D.W.3,   further   clarified   the   status   of   the   suit   schedule   ‘A’

      property by stating that it was used as lodging by the pilgrims

      and pujaris, it was also used to cook food for distribution. D.W.3

      also contended that,  the name of the plaintiffs got recorded as

      the owners as they were the pujaris of the temple.
17.   The plaintiffs in order to substantiate their claims furthers placed

      on   record   documentary   evidences   comprising   of   permissions

      granted by the municipality, property tax assessment papers, tax

      receipts and extract of the Book of Endowments of Ram Mandir.
After   perusing   evidence   on   record,   we   observe   that,   the

      respondents­plaintiffs in order to prove their title has relied upon

      several permissions of the municipality and tax receipts to prove

      his   title.   But   while,   the   aforesaid   documents   might   imply

      possession   but   they   cannot   be   relied   to   confer   title   upon   the

      holder.   Further,   the   respondents­plaintiffs   have   strongly   relied

      upon the book of endowments as maintained by the Endowment
9
Department which shows the boundaries of the temple. In any

       case, this document alone is not sufficient to claim the title over

       the suit premises as it was only intended to demarcate the temple

       premises.
18.    On the contrary, the appellant­defendant no.4  has put forth the

      earlier   order   dated   26.12.1976   passed   by   the   Deputy

      Commissioner   in   O.A.   No.   2   in   1973,   involving   the   same   suit

      property. It was categorically held therein, that the suit property is

      related to the temple, and the plaintiff no.1 is staying therein to

      perform   his   duty.   The   earlier   order   also   stated   that,   the   suit

      property was originally granted as Inam to the forefathers of the

      plaintiffs for the conducting pooja and to feed the brahmins. In the

      aforesaid order, it also noted that, the plaintiff had removed the

      idols from the suit temple to meet his personal needs.  Aggrieved,

      by the aforementioned order in O.A. No. 2 in 1973, plaintiff no.1

      thereafter had filed O.S. No.134/77, before the Chief Judge, City

      Civil Court which came to be dismissed on 19.08.1981 for default,

      hence has attained finality. Therefore, the present suit involving

      the   same   property   seeking   similar   relief   as   O.S.   No.134/77   is

      barred by time. However, the defence has also clearly averred that

      since the plaintiffs and their forefathers were working as pujaris in
10
the   Ram   Temple,   the   endowment   department   in   order   to

      demarcate the Ram Mandir itself, mentioned the suit property as

      the   adjoining   premises.   Keeping  in   view   the   aforesaid   facts   and

      circumstances, the plaintiffs have failed to produce any evidence

      to counter the case put forth by the appellant­defendant no.4.
19.    It   is   an   established   position   of   law   that,   the   burden   to   prove

      ownership   over   the   suit   property   is   on   the   plaintiff.   (See
Corporation   of   City   of   Bangalore   vs.   Zulekha   Bi   and   Ors.
(2008) 11 SCC 306). This court in the case of
Parimal vs. Veena
(2011) 3 SCC 545, held that:
19.  The   provisions   of
Section   101
of   the
              Evidence Act provide that the burden of proof
              of   the   facts   rests   on   the   party   who
              substantially asserts it and not on the party
              who   denies   it.   In   fact,   burden   of   proof   means
              that a party has to prove an allegation before he
              is  entitled   to  a  judgment  in  his favour.
Section
              103
provides   that   burden   of   proof   as   to   any
              particular fact lies on that person who wishes the
              court   to   believe   in   its   existence,   unless   it   is
              provided by any special law that the proof of that
              fact   shall   lie   on   any   particular   person.   The
              provision   of
Section   103
amplifies   the   general
              rule of
Section 101
that the burden of proof lies
              on the person who asserts the affirmative of the
              facts in issue.
(emphasis supplied)
20.    In the present case, the respondents­plaintiffs failed to discharge

       their   burden   of   proof   by   being   unable   to   furnish   necessary
11
documentary   and   oral   evidence   to   prove   their   claim.   But,   the

      High   Court   without   appreciating   the   aforesaid   evidences   and

      claims made by the appellant (defendant no.4), decreed the suit

      in   favour   of   the   respondents­plaintiffs   by   solely   relying   on   the

      entry made in the book of endowments department stating the

      boundaries   of   the   temple.   The   aforesaid   judgment   of   the   High

      Court   is   untenable   in   law   as   it   is   based   on   erroneous

      appreciation of evidence.
21.   In light of the aforesaid observations we set aside the judgment of

      the   High   Court   decreeing   the   suit   in   favour   of   respondents­

      plaintiffs  in   the   absence   of   any   evidence   to   substantiate   their

      claim.
22.   Resultantly,   we   restore   the   order   passed   by   the   Subordinate

      Judge, Jagtial in O.S 69 of 1987. The appeal is allowed, however,

      without any order as to costs. Pending applications, if any, shall

      also stand disposed of.
……………………………..J.
                                                             (N. V. Ramana)


                                                      ……………………………..J.
                                                   (Mohan M. Shantanagoudar)
         NEW DELHI,
         DECEMBER 10, 2018.
12
13