[Cites
20
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Tata Motors Ltd. vs The State Of Jharkhand Department Of ... on 14 December, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 861
Author:
A.K. Sikri
Bench:
M.R. Shah
,
A.K. Sikri
1

                                                                                       REPORTABLE

                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 5299-5304 OF 2003


     M/S. TATA MOTORS LIMITED
                                                                     .....APPELLANT(S)
                                           VERSUS

     STATE OF JHARKHAND AND OTHERS                                 .....RESPONDENT(S)


                                                       WITH

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6591 OF 2003

                                                        AND

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 8-12 OF 2004



                                               JUDGMENT
A.K. SIKRI, J.
A common question of law which arises in all these appeals

                         pertains to levy of tax by the respondent No.1 State under
Section 6
of

                         the Bihar Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1994 (hereinafter referred to as

                         the ‘Bihar Act’) on the chasis of the motor vehicles manufactured by the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ASHWANI KUMAR
appellants during the period these chasis are in their “possession”, i.e.,
Date: 2018.12.14
16:14:48 IST
Reason:
before they are delivered to the dealers and/or the purchasers of the

                         said vehicles.
2
2) The Bihar Act envisages three kinds of taxes, namely:
(a) on registered vehicles under
Section 5
of the Act;
(b) on vehicles held under trade certificates as per Section 6 of the Act; and
(c) in respect of vehicles registered, where the registration is temporary, a

   marginal tax under
Section 7(4)
of the Act.
3) As would be noticed, tax under Section 5 of the Bihar Act is paid by the

   ultimate buyers who, on purchase of vehicles and becoming owners thereof, get

   these vehicles registered in their names. After the manufacture of the vehicle

   and before it is sold to the ultimate buyer to use the said vehicle, a temporary

   registration is required by the manufacturer under Section 7 of the Bihar Act.
Since this registration is temporary for a limited duration, a fractional tax is

   paid by the manufacturer or dealer under Section 7(4) of the Bihar Act.
Section

   6
, on which the fulcrum of dispute revolves, deals with those vehicles which are

   in possession of a manufacturer or dealer in the course of his business and are

   held under trade certificates.
Sections 5
,
6
and
7
are reproduced below in order

   to have an idea of the payment of these three motor vehicle taxes:
"5. Levy of tax – (1) Subject to other provisions of this Act, on and
         from the date of commencement of this Act, every owner of a registered
         motor vehicle shall pay tax on such vehicle at the rate specified in
         Schedule I.

         (2) Subject to other provisions of this Act, on and from the date of
         commencement of this Act, every owner of a registered motor vehicle
         shall pay Additional Motor Vehicles Tax on such vehicle at the rate
         specified in Schedule II.
3
(3) The State Government may, by notification from time to time,
         increase the rate of tax specified in the Schedules:
Provided that no such increase shall, during any year, exceed fifty
         percent of the rate of taxes prescribed in the Schedules.
6. Tax payable by a manufacturer or a dealer – A tax at the annual
         rate specified in Schedule III in lieu of the rates specified in Schedule I
         shall be paid by a manufacturer or a dealer in motor vehicles in respect
         of the motor vehicles in his possession in the course of his business as
         such manufacturer or dealer under the authorisation of trade certificate
         granted under the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989.
7. Payment of tax –

                               xx             xx           xx

         (4) In the case of motor vehicles temporarily registered under
Section 43
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, the tax for vehicles other than
         personalised vehicles shall be levied at the rate of 1/12th of the tax
         payable for the year for such vehicles. In case of extension of the period
         of temporary registration under the proviso to sub-section (2) of Section
         43 tax at the rate of 1/12th payable for the year shall be payable on every
         extension of temporary registration for period of 30 days or part thereof;
Provided that for temporary registration of personalised vehicles the
         rates of tax will be Rs.50/- for a motor cycle (including moped, scooter
         and cycle with attachment for propelling the same by mechanical power)
         and Rs.100/- for a motor car.”
4) As is clear from the reading of these Sections,
Section 5
is the charging section

   as per which every owner of a registered motor vehicle is under an obligation to

   pay tax on such vehicle, rates whereof are specified in Schedule I. Insofar as
Section 6
is concerned, liability is cast on the manufacturer of motor vehicles or

   a dealer in motor vehicles to pay tax in respect of motor vehicles in his

   possession in the course of his business as a manufacturer or a dealer, under the

   authorisation of trade certificate granted under the Central Motor Vehicle Rules,

   1989 (hereinafter referred to as ‘MV Rules’).           Here tax is at annual rate
4
specified in Schedule III, which is ‘in lieu’ of the rates specified in Schedule I.

   It clearly implies, therefore, that a manufacturer or dealer pays the tax in respect

   of vehicles in his possession for which he has been granted trade certificate

   which authorises him to possess the said vehicle before it is sold to the ultimate

   consumer. Obviously, the rate specified in Schedule III is much lesser than the

   tax which is payable by the registered owner under Section 5 of the Bihar Act.
5)
Section 7(4)
, on the other hand, applies to those cases where the motor vehicles

   are temporarily registered under
Section 43
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988

   (hereinafter referred to as the ‘
MV Act
’). In contrast with
Section 6
, here the

   person, unlike the manufacturer or dealer having trade certificate, gets the

   vehicle registered on temporary basis. The tax levied here is 1/12th of the tax

   payable for the year for such vehicles.
6) The three situations, thus, become obvious.               A manufacturer after

   manufacturing motor vehicle would be in possession of the said vehicle till it is

   delivered to a dealer. Likewise, a dealer would remain in possession of such a

   vehicle till it is sold to the consumer. Ordinarily, a motor vehicle cannot be

   driven unless it is registered. That requirement is provided under
Section 39
of

   the MV Act. It is in consonance with this provision that under Section 5 of the

   Bihar Act, tax is levied by the respondent State on the owner of the registered

   vehicle, at the time of registration. Since this tax is to be paid by the ultimate

   owner who purchases the vehicle, to avoid double taxation and payment of
5
same tax by the manufacturer or dealer, Rule 33 of the MV Rules exempts such

   manufacturer or dealer from the necessity of registration subject to the

   condition that they obtain trade certificates from the registering authority. It is

   because of the reason that in the course of their business as manufacturer or

   dealer the vehicle would come on the road and would be driven. For this

   reason, a dealer or a manufacturer of motor vehicle is permitted to obtain trade

   certificate so that he is exempted from registering the vehicle in his name. The

   Bihar Act, even in such a case, contemplates levy of tax. This tax is payable

   under
Section 6
at the annual rate specified in Schedule III, as noted above. In

   case a dealer or a manufacturer is not having trade certificate, in order to drive

   the motor vehicle during the period it remains with him, he is supposed to get

   the vehicle registered for a temporary period. This temporary registration is to

   be done as per the provisions contained in
Section 43
of the MV Act. It may be

   clarified that such temporary registration can be obtained by any person who is

   the owner of a motor vehicle and is not confined to a dealer or a manufacturer.

   An owner who gets the vehicle temporarily registered in his name is supposed

   to pay tax under the Bihar Act though at a much lesser rate than the rate

   specified in Schedule I, inasmuch as it is only at the rate of 1/12th of the tax

   payable for the year for such vehicles.        It is because of the reason that

   temporary registration is for a period of one month.
7) All the appellants in these appeals fall in the category of manufacturers or

   dealers of the motor vehicles. They have paid taxes under
Section 7(4)
of the
6
Bihar Act. Likewise, in respect of those vehicles retained and used by the

   appellants for their own purposes and not sold, these appellants have discharged

   their tax liability under Section 5 of the Bihar Act as well.
8) In the aforesaid backdrop, the issue is as to whether such manufacturers or

   dealers, like the appellants herein, are liable to pay tax under
Section 6
as well.

   To reiterate, after the manufacture of the vehicle when it remains with the

   manufacturer (or when it remains with the dealer after delivery thereof to the

   dealer by the manufacturer) and before it is sold to the ultimate consumer, the

   vehicle is brought on the road and is driven. It maybe for the purpose of testing

   the technical suitability of such a vehicle or when it goes for delivery from the

   manufacturer’s factory to the dealer’s showroom. Likewise, dealer may also

   drive this vehicle for limited purpose, say it is driven by the customer etc.

   Since, a vehicle cannot be brought on road and be driven without any valid

   registration, contemplates two situations to meet such contingencies.            It

   provides for temporary registration under
Section 43
of the MV Act. Another

   option is given to those manufacturers or dealers who obtain trade certificates

   from the registering authority and in such a case as per Rule 33 of the Motor

   Vehicle Rules, manufacturers or dealers are exempted from the necessity of

   registration. The appellants in these appeals are either manufacturers or dealers.

   They have paid taxes under Section 7(4) of the Bihar Act. In respect of such

   vehicles, taxes also stand paid under Section 5 of the Bihar Act. Question of

   additional tax liability under
Section 6
of the Act arises in this backdrop.
7
9) Before we answer this question, it would be necessary to take note of those

   amendments in the Central Government, i.e.,
MV Act
from time to time which

   have bearing on these cases.
10)
Section 2(8)
of the MV Act (the Central Act) provides the definition of

   ‘dealer’. As per this provision, as originally stood, a manufacturer was also

   included in the definition of ‘dealer’. However, this provision was amended

   vide Act 54 of 1994 whereby the Legislature omitted ‘manufacturer’ from the

   ambit of the expression ‘dealer’.         The manufacturer, therefore, no more

   remained the dealer. The amended definition of ‘dealer’ which came into effect

   with effect from November 14, 1994, is as under:
"2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

         (8) “dealer” includes a person who is engaged—
(a) [* * *]
(b) in building bodies for attachment to chassis; or
(c) in the repair of motor vehicles; or
(d) in the business of hypothecation, leasing or hire-purchase of motor
         vehicle;”
11)      Thus, under the Central Act, prior to its amendment in November, 1994,

   motor vehicles would require registration in all events, save and except those

   which were in possession of “dealers”. In the latter event, the vehicles could be

   temporarily kept under a trade certificate, which, under the rules, provides

   extremely limited mobility. In November, 1994, manufacturers were taken out

   of this exception by amendment in the definition of dealers.
8
12)     The Bihar Motor Vehicle Rules, 1992 (Bihar Rules) as applicable in the

  State of Bihar and in some other States were amended as empowering the

  manufacturers themselves to act as authorities, who could grant temporarily

  registration. Thus, under the revised scheme post November, 1994, it is only a

  dealer (other than a manufacturer) who could keep a vehicle for a limited period

  of time under a trade certificate. Manufacturers, therefore, would have to

  temporarily register the vehicle under Section 43 of the Central Act. Upon its

  purchase, the customer would then register the vehicle finally under Section 39

  of the Central Act.
13)     The State of Bihar enacted
Bihar Motor Vehicles Taxation Act
in April

  1994 at a time when the manufacturers also could continue in possession of

  Tariff heading vehicles under a trade certificate.
14)     After the amendment of 1984, the facility of trade certificate to a

  manufacturer stands withdrawn. The manufacturer undoubtedly can possess a

  vehicle, which is in his factory as long as it is not used in any place contrary to

  Section 39 of the Bihar Act. The only manner in which a manufacturer can use

  a vehicle is the manner indicated under
Section 39
without obtaining a

  registration.
15)     Prior to the above-said amendment of the Central Act, a Division Bench

  of the Patna High Court took the view that vehicles, which were in use, would

  either require a registration certificate, permanent or temporary, or would
9
require a trade certificate. A manufacturer who is required to obtain a trade

      certificate but did not do so, would not escape the net of tax by being the

      beneficiary of his own wrong.
16)     To complete the narrative, it would also be pertinent to mention that after

      the amendment in November, 1994, as noted above, when the Assessing

      Authority sought to levy tax under Section 6 of the Bihar Act, this action was

      challenged by the appellants by filing writ petitions in the High Court of Patna.
In those writ petitions, vires of Section 6 of the Bihar Act were also challenged.

      The challenge was repelled by the High Court vide its judgment dated July 03,

      1998, with the leading case known as Tata Engineering and Locomotive

      Company Ltd. vs. State of Jharkhand1 (TELCO case). This judgment has

      attained finality as Special Leave Petition thereagainst was dismissed by this

      Court. After the aforesaid judgment, the District Transport Office, Jamshedpur

      again confirmed the demand of tax under
Section 6
of the Act vide his order

      dated July 05, 1999 in the case of the appellant/TELCO. This order was

      confirmed by the Appellate Authority at Ranchi on December 18, 1999 as well

      as by Revisional Authority by his order dated April 20, 2000.      Writ petitions

      were filed challenging this order in the High Court which have been dismissed

      vide impugned judgment dated September 24, 2002. In appeal Nos. 5299-5304

      of 2003 validity of the judgment is questioned. Civil Appeal Nos. 5299-5304 of

      2003 arise out of this judgment.
1                 AIR 1999 Patna 62
10
17)     Civil Appeal Nos. 8-12 of 2004 are filed by a dealer who has paid the tax

  under
Section 6
of the Act as well, however, for delayed payment, penalty and

  interest are imposed which were challenged by the said appellants in the High

  Court and the High Court has dismissed the case of the appellants vide its

  judgment dated July 22, 2003 following its judgment in TELCO case.
18)     It is in this conspectus, this Court is to first determine the question of

  liability of tax under Section 6 of the Bihar Act and in the event this tax is

  upheld, question of penalty and interest would have to be determined.
19)      We may point out that before the High Court, the appellants had

  challenged the vires of
Section 6
on the ground that the State Legislature lacks

  competence to make a provision of this nature. It was pointed out that
Section

  6
levies the tax on a manufacturer or a dealer of motor vehicles merely on

  ‘possession’ thereof by such a manufacturer or a dealer. It was argued that the

  Bihar Act was enacted by the State Legislature under Entry 57 of List II (State

  List) of the VIIth Schedule to the Constitution of India, which entry does not

  empower the State Legislature to impose tax on vehicle merely on possession.

  This entry reads as under:
"Taxes on vehicles, whether mechanically propelled or not, suitable for
        use on roads, including tram cars subject to the provisions of entry 35 of
        List III.”
20)     The High Court, however, rejected this contention with the reason that

  under this entry, taxes on vehicles which are suitable for use on roads can be
11
imposed and it was undisputed case of the parties that the vehicles

  manufactured by the appellants are suitable for use on roads. Therefore, the

  provision which stipulates the manufacturer or a dealer of a motor vehicle, in

  respect of the motor vehicle in his possession in the course of business as such a

  manufacturer or dealer shall pay tax, is within the legislative competence of

  Entry 57. This contention has been raised before us as well. However, we do

  not agree with the appellants as the reasoning given by the High Court is the

  correct analysis of Entry 57 of List II of VIIth Schedule to the Constitution.
21)     Insofar as argument predicated on the amendment in the
Motor Vehicles

  Act
(the Central Act), 1988 is concerned, we again find that the High Court has

  rightly concluded that this amendment would have no relevance to the

  provisions contained in the Bihar Act. Whether the definition of a dealer

  includes manufacturer or not would be immaterial inasmuch as under Section 6

  of the Bihar Act, the Legislature has made provision to tax both the dealer as

  well as the manufacturer. We agree with the following observations of the High

  Court in this behalf:
"7. ...It goes without saying also that 1994 Act has been enacted under
        and in terms of Entry 57 (supra) by the State Legislature; whereas 1988
        Act has been enacted by the Union Parliament under and in terms of
        Entry 35 of the Concurrent List. Also, whereas the Preamble to 1988
        Acts states that the Act has been enacted to consolidate and amend the
        law relating to Motor Vehicles, the Preamble to 1994 Act states that this
        Act has been made with a view to regulate the imposition and levy of tax
        on Motor Vehicles in the State of Bihar (as it was at the relevant time).
Both the Act
, therefore, deal with two different fields of legislation and
        the areas of their operation are also different, having been enacted by
        two different classes of Legislatures, one in terms of the power
        exercisable and vested under clause (2) and the other in terms of the
12
power vested and exercisable under clause (3) of
Article 246
of the
            Constitution. Therefore, at the risk of repetition, we have no hesitation
            in saying that any change or alteration in one Act cannot be said to have
            any effect upon the other.”
22)     We also agree with the respondents that the tax was in respect of motor

      vehicles in possession of the manufacturer in the course of his business as a

      manufacturer, or in possession of the dealer in the course of his business as a

      dealer under the authorization of trade certificate granted under the Central

      Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989. The manufacturer comes in the possession of the

      motor vehicle after the vehicle is manufactured and is suitable for use on roads.

      The dealer in the course of his business of getting the Motor Vehicle from the

      manufacturer and selling it to a customer comes in the possession of the Motor

      Vehicle on the basis of a trade certificate granted under the Central Motor

      Vehicle Rules, 1989. Neither earlier nor now there is any obligations in a

      manufacturer to obtain a trade certificate under the 1989 Rules for carrying on

      the business of a manufacturer.
23)     It is pertinent to mention that a challenge to the constitutionality of
Section 6
laid by the appellants in the earlier round of litigation, in regard to the

      same Assessment Years, was repelled and constitutional validity of
Section 6
was upheld in Telco case.
The High Court had in coming to such a conclusion,

      referred to the judgment of this Court in
Bolani Ores Ltd. v. State of Orissa2
,
Travancore Tea Estates Co. Ltd. & Ors. v. State of Kerala & Ors.3
and M/s

2                  (1974) 2 SCC 777
3                  (1980) 3 SCC 619
13
Central Coal Fields Ltd. v. State of Orissa & Ors.4. Once
Section 6
is held to

      be valid, it is only the interpretation thereof which was to be gone into by the

      High Court in this round, in order to find out whether the assessment orders

      passed in respect of these appeals were valid or not. On interpreting this

      provision, as observed earlier as well, liability to pay tax under
Section 6
is

      linked with the incidence of manufacturer or the dealer possessing the vehicle

      which is suitable for use on road during the the course of his business.
24)     A half-hearted argument was also made by the appellants to the effect that
Section 6
uses the expression ‘in lieu of the rates specified in Schedule I’ and it

      was argued that the tax which is to be paid is either as per Schedule I i.e. in

      accordance with Section 5 of the Bihar Act or at the annual rates specified in

      Schedule III. It was emphasised that the words ‘in lieu of’ cannot be read as ‘in

      addition to’. However, there is no merit in this argument as well.
Sections 5
and
6
operate in altogether different contexts. Under
Section 5
, tax is payable at

      the time of registration of the vehicle, which is payable by the registered owner.

      In contrast,
Section 6
is the stage before that as it is on the event of the vehicle

      being possessed by the manufacturer or dealer.         We, therefore, are of the

      opinion that the appellants are liable to pay tax under Section 6 of the Bihar

      Act. May be,
Section 6
is not happily worded. But the intent is to convey that

      tax will not be payable as per Schedule I which is payable under
Section 5
but

      in place thereof it would be payable as per Schedule III.


4                  1992 Supp. (3) SCC 133
14
25)     Insofar as imposition of penalty is concerned, it is as per the provisions of
Section 23
of the Act which mentions that for non-payment of tax under the

      Act, penalty can be imposed. The appellants have referred to the judgment of

      this Court in
Hindustan Steel Ltd. v. State of Orissa5
which describes the

      nature of penalty as under:
"8.
Under the Act
penalty may be imposed for failure to register as a
            dealer —
Section 9(1)
read with
Section 25(1)(a)
of the Act. But the
            liability to pay penalty does not arise merely upon proof of default in
            registering as a dealer. An order imposing penalty for failure to carry out
            a statutory obligation is the result of a quasi-criminal proceeding, and
            penalty will not ordinarily be imposed unless the party obliged either
            acted deliberately in defiance of law or was guilty of conduct
            contumacious or dishonest, or acted in conscious disregard of its
            obligation. Penalty will not also be imposed merely because it is lawful
            to do so. Whether penalty should be imposed for failure to perform a
            statutory obligation is a matter of discretion of the authority to be
            exercised judicially and on a consideration of all the relevant
            circumstances. Even if a minimum penalty is prescribed, the authority
            competent to impose the penalty will be justified in refusing to impose
            penalty, when there is a technical or venial breach of the provisions of
            the Act or where the breach flows from a bona fide belief that the
            offender is not liable to act in the manner prescribed by the statute.
            Those in charge of the affairs of the Company in failing to register the
            Company as a dealer acted in the honest and genuine belief that the
            Company was not a dealer. Granting that they erred, no case for
            imposing penalty was made out.”
26)     It was argued that action of the appellants was bona fide inasmuch as

      when the notices were received for the first time for payment of tax under
Section 6
of the Act, the same were challenged albeit the validity of
Section 6
was upheld by the High Court. Thereafter, tax was paid by the appellants

      though challenged again in the present round of litigation. On that basis, it was
5           (1969) 2 SCC 627
15
argued that action of the appellants was bona fide.
27)     In order to test this argument, we shall have to consider the provision

  under which penalty can be imposed. The provision in the Act is
Section 23
and Rule 4 of the Taxation Rules provides for the rates of penalty.
Section 23
reads as under:
"Liability to pay penalty for non-payment of tax in time. - If the tax
        payable in respect of a vehicle other than personalised vehicle has not
        been paid during prescribed period, the person liable to pay such tax
        shall pay together with the arrears of tax, a penalty at the rates prescribed
        by the State Government.”
28)     Rule 4, likewise, is to the following effect:
"4. Due date of payment and penalty for non-payment of taxes in time.—
        (1) For vehicles other than personalised vehicles the due date of payment
        of tax shall be the date of expiry of the period for which the tax has been
        last paid. In cases where no such tax had previously been paid, the date
        of acquisition of the vehicle or the date when such tax is imposed by law
        shall be due date for tax payment. For payment of differential taxes
        under the provision of
Section 8
, the due date shall be within seven days
        from the date of alteration in the vehicle or the change in its use.
(2) Where the tax for any period in respect of a vehicle has not been paid
        as required under the provisions of sub-rule (1) and continues to remain
        unpaid thereafter, the taxing officer may impose penalty in respect of
        such vehicles at the rate specified in the table below:—

                                      TABLE

         Period                       Amount of penalty
(i) If paid within fifteen Nil. This will be treated as a grace
         days from the due date of period.
payment.
(ii) If paid after fifteen Penalty to be charged at the rate of
         days but within 30 days of 25 per cent, of the tax.
         the due date of payment.
(iii) If paid after 30 days Penalty to be charged at the rate of
16
but within 60 days of the 50 per cent, of the taxes due.
             due date of payment.
(iv) If paid after 60 days Penalty to be charged equal to the
             but within 90 days of due taxes due.
date of tax payment.
(v) If paid beyond 90 days Penalty to be charged will be twice
             after the due date.        the taxes due.
(3) Where the composite fee in respect of vehicles plying under National
            Permit Scheme has not been paid within the due date as required under
            the provisions of the said Scheme, the Taxing Officer shall impose
            penalty at the rate provided in the said Scheme, in respect of such
            vehicle.”
29)
Section 23
, in no uncertain terms, lays down that any person who does

      not pay the tax during the prescribed period shall pay a penalty at the rate

      prescribed by the State Government together with arrears of tax. Therefore, for

      non-payment of the tax within the prescribed period, penalty becomes payable

      at the rates specified in Rule 4. The vires of
Section 6
were challenged in the

      High Court in earlier proceedings and this challenge was repelled. Further, since

      Rule 4 uses the expression ‘may’, on that basis it was also argued that this rule

      gives discretion to the Assessing Officer. That argument was also repelled in

      Telco case. This position in law has attained finality.
At this stage, it would be

      useful to refer to the judgment in
State of U.P. & Ors. v. Sukhpal Singh Bal6
wherein this Court held:
"15. ...A penalty may be the subject-matter of a breach of statutory duty
            or it may be the subject-matter of a complaint. In ordinary parlance, the
            proceedings may cover penalties for avoidance of civil liabilities which
            do not constitute offences against the State. This distinction is
            responsible for any enactment intended to protect public revenue...”
6           (2005) 7 SCC 615
17
30)     It is clear that under the Bihar Act, as per
Section 23
, penalties levied for

    breach of statutory duty for non-payment of tax.
31)     In view of the aforesaid specific legal provisions, judgment in the case of

    Hindustan Steel Ltd. referred to by the appellants will not be applicable in the

    instant case. It is also to be borne in mind that while upholding the validity of
Section 23
of the Act in Telco, insofar as penalty is concerned, the Court had set

    aside the same on the ground that before imposing the penalty, no show cause

    notice was issued. Permission was given to the tax authorities to take fresh

    decision after giving the show cause notice. It is an admitted case that show

    cause notices were issued and after hearing the appellants, the penalty was

    imposed.    Taking into consideration all these aspects, the High Court in the

    impugned judgment dated July 22, 2003 in the case of M/s. R.K. Automotives

    & Ors. (Civil Appeal Nos. 8-12 of 2004) has repelled the challenge against

    imposition of penalty. We agree with the aforesaid conclusion.
32)     As a result, all these appeals are dismissed.
.............................................J.
                                                                                (A.K. SIKRI)



                                                    .............................................J.
                                                                               (M.R. SHAH)
NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 14, 2018