[Cites
11
, Cited by
5
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Prahami Press vs Vinedale Distilleries Ltd. on 23 October, 1997
Equivalent citations: 1998(1)ALD687
ORDER
1. The question for determination is whether further proceedings should be stayed in view of the orders passed by B.I.F.R on 24-9-1991 for framing the scheme for rehabilitation of the respondent-Company ?
2. The petitioner-Company has filed an application under
Sections 433(e)
,
434(l)(a)
and
439(1)(c)
of the Companies Act, 1956, for winding up the respondent-Company on the ground that the respondent-Company is

indebted to the petitioner-Company to the extent of Rs.5,45,677/- as per the statement of accounts of the petitioner-company with the respondent for the periods of 1992-93, 1993-94 and 1994-95. The last payment which was made by the respondent Company of Rs.60,00/- was in the month of November, 1994, leaving a balance as on 11-12-1995 to the extent of the aforesaid amount of Rs.5,45,677/- and by adding interest on that amount upto 15-1-1997, the total is Rs.7,78,431/-.
3.     Heard the learned Counsel of both sides.
4. Notice before admission was given to the respondent-Company. In answer to the show cause notice, the respondent-Company filed its counter and denied the claim of the petitioner-company. It has also been mentioned in the counter that the respondent-Company is under B.I.F.R, rehabilitation scheme and, therefore, the petitioner-Company, which is aware of all these proceedings, cannot take action against it under the law. After filing the counter, no representation was made on behalf of the respondent-Company. Therefore, by docket order dated 29-7-1997, the petition was admitted on taking the view that prima facie case has been made out by the petitioner-Company. However, the advertisement has been deferred by three weeks. On the next date of hearing, that is on 19-8-1997, representation was made on behalf of the respondent-Company and time was taken to file the package of the B.I.F.R. Subsequently on 17-9-1997 some documents were filed on behalf of the respondent-Company.
5.     It is urged on behalf of the
respondent-Company that in Case No.70/89, the B.I.F.R had drawn proceedings and had sanctioned rehabilitation scheme and, therefore, further proceedings in this case are liable to be stayed. Reliance has been placed on the case of
Tata Davy Ltd. v. State of Orissa and others
,  and on the case of
Asian Bearings and Tools Corporation v. Coastal Chemicals Ltd.
, .
6. On the other hand, it has been urged on behalf of the petitioner-Company that it had supplied goods on credit subsequent to the scheme framed by the B.I.F.R on 24-9-1991 and, therefore, proceedings in this case should not be stayed.
7.
In the case of
Deputy Commercial Tax Officer and others v. Corromandal Pharmaceuticals and others
, , it is held that:
"The language of
Section 22
of the Act is certainly wide. But, in the totality of the circumstances, the safeguard is only against the impediment, that is likely to be caused in the implementation of the scheme. If that be so, only the liability or amounts covered by the scheme will be taken in, by
Section 22
of the Act. So, we are of the view that though the language of
Section 22
of the Act is of wide import regarding suspension of legal proceedings from the moment an inquiry is started, till after the implementation of the scheme or the disposal of an appeal under
Section 25
of the act, it will be reasonable to hold that the bar or embargo envisaged in
Section 22(1)
of the Act can apply only to such of those dues reckoned or included in the sanctioned scheme. Such amounts like sales tax, etc., which the sick industrial company is enabled to collect after the dateof the sanctioned scheme legitimately belonging to the Reveue cannot beand could not have been intended to be covered within
Section 22
of the Act Any other construction will be unreasonable and unfair and will lead to a slate of affairs enabling the sick industrial unit to collect amounts due to the revenue and withhold it definitely and unreasonably. Such a construction which is unfair, unreasonable and against spirit of the statute in a business sense, should be avoided." (Underlining is mine)
8.
In the case of
Deputy Commercial Tax Officer
(supra), the scheme was sanctioned on 19-11-1990 and the sales tax dues under order passed on 3-1-1994 and in

1995 long after the sanction of the scheme were to be recovered.
The Apex Court, under these circumstances, held that the collected sales tax is payable to the Revenue without permission of the B.I. F.R.
9. This case has been relied on in the case of Tata Davy Lid. (supra).
In the case of
Tata Davy Ltd
(supra), the appellant, that is Tata Davy Ltd was in arrears of sales tax under the
Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947
for the years 1983-84, 1984-85 and that Company was declared sick company within the meaning of the
Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985
(for short 'the Central Act') on 13-12-1989 and, therefore, it was observed in this case that the respondent-State cannot recover the aforementioned arrears of sales tax from the appellant without seeking the consent of the B.I.F.R. in this behalf.
But, in this case, the proposition of law
laid down in
the case of
Deputy Commercial Tax Officer
(supra) has been reiterated that such amounts like sales tax etc., which the sick industrial company is enabled to collect after the date of the sanctioned scheme legitimately belonging to the Revenue cannot and could not have been intended to be covered within
Section 22
of the Act.
10. The position of law emerges from the aforementioned authorities, in short, is that in case a sick company incurs debt subsequent to the scheme framed by B.I.F.R. for rehabilitation, no permission is required by B.I.F.R for taking action against the debtor company including the application for winding up.
11. For the foregoing reasons, in the winding up case, proceedings cannot be stayed because debts had been incurred by the respondent-Company subsequent to the scheme framed by B.I.F.R. for rehabilitation of the respondent-Company.