[Cites
4
, Cited by
83
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Punjab vs M/S. Geeta Iron & Brass Works Ltd on 14 October, 1977
Equivalent citations: 1978 AIR 1608, 1979 SCR (1) 746, AIR 1978 SUPREME COURT 1608, 1978 (1) SCC 68, 1978 (1) SCWR 139, 1978 KER LT 37, 1977 U J (SC) 793, 1978 (1) SCR 746
Author:
V.R. Krishnaiyer
Bench:
V.R. Krishnaiyer
,
Jaswant Singh
PETITIONER:
STATE OF PUNJAB

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
M/s.  GEETA IRON & BRASS WORKS LTD.

DATE OF JUDGMENT14/10/1977

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
SINGH, JASWANT

CITATION:
 1978 AIR 1608		  1979 SCR  (1) 746
 1978 SCC  (1)	68


ACT:
Arbitration Act
1940 (Act IV of 1940),	Section 34-Power  to
stay legal proceedings where there is an agreement-Scope  of
S. 34
.
Constitution  of  India,  Article  136-Interference  against
interlocutory orders refusing stay of proceedings
u/s. 34
of
the Arbitration Act.
Civil Procedure Code (Act V of 1908). s. 80-Scope of.



HEADNOTE:
The  respondent/plaintiff issued a notice
u/s. 80
C.P.C.  to
the  appellant/	 defendant for referring certain  claims  to
Arbitration as per the contract.  There being no response, a
suit  was filed under the
Arbitration Act
and summons  taken
out  to	 the Chief Secretary.  In the ex  parte	 proceedings
taken, on the refusal of the summons issued, the  Government
later  applied for staying of the proceeding
u/s.  34
.	 The
Subordinate  Judge  declined to stay  the  proceedings.	  In
appeal, the High Court refused to interfere against the said
order.'
Dismissing the special leave petition, the Court,
HELD : (1) A statutory notice of the proposed action
u/s. 80
C.P.C.	is intended to alert the State to negotiate  a	just
settlement  or	at  least  have the  courtesy  to  tell	 the
potential  outsider why the claim is being resisted.   As  a
matter	of  law, mere silence on the part of  the  defendant
when a notice u/s. 80, C. P. C. is sent to him may not more,
disentitle  him to move
u/s. 34
of the Arbitration  Act	 and
seek stay. [747 E, G]
(2)  Where parties have, by contract, agreed to refer  their
disputes  to  arbitration,  the	 courts	 should	 as  far  as
possible  proceed to give an opportunity for  resolution  of
disputes   by	arbitration   rather than   by	 judicial
adjudication.	Even  so.  there is  a	residual  discretion
vested in the court to stay or not to stay having regard  to
the totality of circumstances.	One weighty factor obviously
to  find out whether the party who invokes  the	 arbitration
clause	has  expressed his readiness to rely on	 it  at	 the
earliest stage.
In  the instant case there is no gross error justifying	 the
grant of leave since an opportunity for settling the dispute
through arbitration was thrown away by sheer inaction by the
appellant.[747- C-D]
Observation :
	      Government   must	 be  made   accountable	  by
	      Parliamentary   social  audit   for   wasteful
	      litigative   expenditure	inflicted   on	 the
	      community by inaction.  A litigative policy of
	      the State involves settlement of	Governmental
	      dispute	with   citizens	 in   a	  sense	  of
	      conciliation  rather  than  a  fighting  mood.
	      Indeed,  it should be a directive on the	part
	      of  the  State to empower its law	 officer  to
	      take  steps  to compose disputes	rather	than
	      continue	them in court.	Litigation in  which
	      Governments are involved adds to the case load
	      accumulation  in	courts for  which  there  is
	      public criticism. [747 F-H, 748 A]
[The Court expressed its hope that a more responsive  spirit
will  be brought to bear upon governmental litigation so  as
to avoid waste of public money and promote expeditious	work
in courts of cases which deserve to be attended to.]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION	:  Special  Leave   Petition
(Civil), No. 1781 of 1977.
747
From  the Judgment and Order dated 30-3-1976 of the  Gujarat
High Court in Appeal No. 9 of 1976.
Hardev	Singh,	R.  S.	Sodhi  and  O.	P.  Sharma  for	 the
Petitioner.
ORDER
KRISHNA	 IYER,	J. This special leave to  appeal  is  sought
against	 a  discretionary order passed	by  the	 Subordinate
Judge  declining  to  stay  a  suit  under  s.	34  of	 the
Arbitration  Act
.  This order was challenged in	 appeal	 and
the High Court, after an exhaustive consideration, felt that
the exercise of discretion was not so improper as to deserve
interference.
Shri Hardev Singh is-right to the limited extent that  where
parties	 have by contract agreed to refer their disputes  to
arbitration the courts should as far as possible proceed  to
give   an   opportunity	 for  resolution  of   disputes	  by
arbitration rather than by judicial adjudication.  Even	 so,
there  is a residual discretion vested in the court to	stay
or   not   to  stay  having  regard  to	 the   totality	  of
circumstances.	 One weighty factor obvious is to  find	 out
whether	 the  party who invokes the arbitration	 closely  as
expressed his readiness to rely on it at the earliest stage.
We are not investigating the merits of the matter under
Art.
136
but  are  satisfied  that	there  is  no  gross   error
justifying grant of leave.  We make it clear however that as
a  matter of law mere silence on the part of  the  defendant
when  a	 notice under
s. 80
C.P.C. is sent to him  may	not,
without	 more, disentitle him to move under
s. 34
and	seek
stay.	In the present case, other circumstances  have	also
been pressed into service by the Court.
While dismissing the special leave petition for the  reasons
mentioned  above,  we  would  like  to	emphasize  that	 the
deserved   defeat   of	the  State  in	the   courts   below
demonstrates  the gross indifference of	 the  administration
towards litigative diligence.  In the present case a  notice
under
s. 80
C.P.C. was sent. No response.  A suit was filed
and  summons taken out to the Chief  Secretary.	  Shockingly
enough, the summons was refused.  An ex parte proceeding was
taken when the lethargic Government woke up.
We   like  to  emphasize  that	Governments  must  be	made
accountable  by	 Parliamentary	social	audit  for  wasteful
litigative   expenditure  inflicted  on	 the  community	  by
inaction.   A statutory notice of the proposed action  under
S.  80
C.P.C. is intended to alert the State to negotiate  a
just  settlement or at least have the courtesy to  tell	 the
potential outsider why the claim is being resisted.  Now  S.
80  has become a ritual because the administration is  often
unresponsive  and  hardly  lives  up  to  the	Parliament's
expectation  in	 continuing s. 80 in the  Code	despite	 the
Central	 Law Commission's recommendations for its  deletion.
An opportunity for settling the dispute through	 arbitration
was thrown away by sheer inaction.  A litigative policy	 for
the State involves settlement of Governmental disputes	with
citizens  in  a	 sense	of conciliation	 rather	 than  in  a
fighting mood.	Indeed, it should be a directive on
11-951SCI/77
748
the  part  of the State to empower its law officer  to	take
steps  to  compose  disputes rather than  continue  them  in
court.	 We  are  constrained  to  make	 these	observations
because	 much  of the litigation in  which  Governments	 are
involved  adds to the case load accumulation in	 courts	 for
which  there  is  public criticism.  We	 hope  that  a	more
responsive spirit will be brought to bear upon	governmental
litigation so as to avoid waste of public money and  promote
expeditious  work  in courts of cases which  deserve  to  be
attended to.  Dismissed.
S.R.		       Special leave petition dismissed.
749