[Cites
5
, Cited by
27
]
Supreme Court of India
Vanguard Rolling Shuttersand Steel ... vs Commissioner Of Sales Tax, U.P on 8 March, 1977
Equivalent citations: 1977 AIR 1505, 1977 SCR (3) 165, AIR 1977 SUPREME COURT 1505, 1977 2 SCC 250, 1977 TAX. L. R. 1951, 1977 2 SCWR 114, 1977 9 LAWYER 178, 1977 SCC (TAX) 272, 1977 UPTC 284, (1977) 3 S C R 115, 1977 2 SCJ 168, 1977 U J (SC) 271, 1977 3 SCR 165, 39 STC 372
Author:
Syed Murtaza Fazalali
Bench:
Syed Murtaza Fazalali
,
P.N. Bhagwati
PETITIONER:
VANGUARD ROLLING SHUTTERSAND STEEL WORKS LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
COMMISSIONER OF SALES TAX, U.P.

DATE OF JUDGMENT08/03/1977

BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
BHAGWATI, P.N.

CITATION:
 1977 AIR 1505		  1977 SCR  (3) 165
 1977 SCC  (2) 250
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1978 SC1747	 (7)


ACT:
	      Sales  Tax--Contract  for sale of material  and  works
	contract--Tests	 for distinguishing.



HEADNOTE:
		The  assessee. who was a manufacturer of iron  shut-
	ters,  fabricates   the different parts ,and components	 and
	fits  them into shutters.   The shutters are   prepared	 ac-
	cording	 to  the specific requirements of the  customer	 and
	fixed in the customer's premises.   Though the masonary work
	connected  with the fitting of the shutters was done by	 the
	customer, it was done according to the contractor's instruc-
	tions.	  The contract was complete after the shutters	were
	taken  to  the premises of the customer and affixed  to	 the
	building;  and	 when  fitted into the	walls  the  shutters
	become	permanently  embedded into   the wall  and  are	 not
	detachable.    The price charged by the contractor from	 the
	customer  was a lumpsum and did not show a break up, of	 the
	materials  used	 or fabricated or the cost  of	services  or
	labour.
	The  assessee claimed that the contract being a	 works	con-
	tract the  proceeds from such contracts are not exigible  to
	tax.   But this plea was rejected by the Sales Tax  Officer.
	The assessee's appeal was rejected by the Assistant  Commis-
	sioner (judicial).  The Judge (Revisions)  Sales-Tax  upheld
	the assesee's contention.  On reference the High Court	held
	that  the contract was not a works contract but	 a  contract
	for the supply of goods simpliciter.
	Allowing the assessee's appeal,
	    HELD  .  The contract in the present case  was  a  works
	contract and  the transaction was not exigible to tax.	 The
	High  Court  was in error in holding that the  assessee	 was
	liable	to  pay	 tax on the sale proceeds  of  the  contract
	[171E]
	    (1) The question whether a contract can be said to be  a
	works contract has to depend on the facts of each case.	  It
	is  difficult to lay down any rule of universal	 application
	but  some of the important tests evolved by this Court	are:
	[168 H]
	    (i) Where the contract was primarily a contract for	 the
	supply of materials at a price agreed to between the parties
	for  the materials so supplied and the work or service	ren-
	dered  is incidental to the execution of the contract.	 the
	contract is one for sale of materials and the sale  proceeds
	would be exigible to sales-tax. [169 A-B]
	    (ii)  Where the contract is primarily for work  and	 la-
	bour,  and materials are supplied in execution of such	con-
	tract, there is no contract for sale of materials but it  is
	a works contract.   The circumstance that the materials have
	no separate identity as a commercial article and it is	only
	by bestowing work and labour upon them, that is, by affixing
	them  to the building would be prima facie indicative  of  a
	works  contract.   Where certain materials  are	 not  merely
	supplied but fixed to an immovable property so as to  become
	a  permanent fixture and an accretion to the said  property,
	the contract' prima facie would be a works contract. [169 C]
	    In	the  instant case the transaction was  a  composite,
	consolidated contract which was one and indivisible compris-
	ing  labour and services executed for a lumpsum.   The	con-
	tract could be completed when materials with various  compo-
	nent  parts  had  been taken to the site,  fitted  into	 one
	another	 and  then finally fixed into a frame  so  that	 the
	fixture became permanent and a, part of
	166
	the  premises.	 This  operation could not be,	said  to  be
	merely incidential to the contract, but was fundamental part
	of the contract itself. [168 F & 170 A]
	    (2) It is not correct to say that the contract could not
	be  a works contract because the price was paid	 in  advance
	and the title passed to the customer as soon as the shutters
	were packed and despatched to the site.	  Advance payment of
	the  price was a term meant for the convenience of the	par-
	ties	as the contractor did not want to take any risk	 for
	delayed payment; the contract would be completed only  after
	the  shutters were finally assembled at the site  and  fixed
	according  to  specifications,	which  was  essentially	 the
	responsibility of the contractor. [170 D]
	    State of Rajasthan v. Man Industrial Corporation Ltd. 24
	S.T C. 349, 355 and State of Rajasthan v. Nanu Ram 26 S.T.C.
	268 followed.
	    State of Madras v. Richardson and Cruddas Ltd. 21 S.T.C.
	245 (S.C.) and Commissioner of Sales Tax. M.P. v. Purshottam
	Premji 25 S.T.C. 38 referred to.
	    M/s	 T.V. Sundram lyengar & Sons v. The State of  Madras
	35 S.T.C. 24-[19751 2 S.C.R. 372 distinguished.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 106 of 1976.
	    (Appeal  by Special Leave from the Judgement  and  Order
	dated  30.9.1975 of the Allahabad High Court in	 S.T.R.	 No.
	698/70)
	    S.C.  Manchanda, Mrs. Urrnila  Kapoor, Y.  D. Jain	 and
	Miss Kamlesh Bansal, for the appellant.
G.N. Dikshit and O.P. Rana, for the respondent.
	The Judgment  of the Court was delivered by
	    FAZAL ALI, J.--This is an appeal by special leave by the
	assessee  who  was a contractor dealing	 in  fabrication  of
	Vanguard  rolling  shutters and steel works.   The  assessee
	manufactures iron shutters according to specifications given
	by  the	 parties and fixes the same at the premises  of	 the
	customers.   In the  assessment year  1965-66  the  assessee
	received  an aggregate sum of Rs. 1,08,633-08 in the  execu-
	tion  of  such contracts.  This amount was  claimed  by	 the
	assessee as not being liable to sales tax during the assess-
	ment  year 1965-66 on the ground that the  same	 represented
	the  proceeds  of work	contracts.  The	 Sales	Tax  Officer
	rejected.the plea of the assessee. and the Assistant Commis-
	sioner	(Judicial) on appeal also affirmed the order of	 the
	Sales Tax Officer.  But the plea of the assessee appears  to
	have found favour with the Judge (Revisions) Sales Tax	 who
	decided	 that  the  amount was not exigible  to	 sales	tax,
	because	  the  contracts in question  were  work  contracts.
	Thereafter at the instance of the Commissioner, the Revising
	Authority  made a reference to the High Court  and  referred
	the following question of law for its opinion:
.LM15
			    "Whether under the circumstances of	 the
		      case  and under the terms of the contract	 the
		      supply  of shutters and iron gates  worth	 Rs.
		      1,08,633-08  was	sale  or  amounted  to	work
		      contract ?"
.LM0
	The  High Court, after hearing the parties  and	 considering
	the materials on the record, came to the conclusion that the
	contract entered into
167
by the appellant was not a work contract but a contract	 for
	the  supply  of	 goods simpliciter and	the  assessee,	was,
	therefore, liable to pay tax.  The question referred to	 the
	High Court was answered accordingly.
		The  assessee's case was that having regard  to	 the
	circumstances of the present case, the terms and  conditions
	of  the	 contract  and the nature of the work  done  by	 the
	appellant  the contract in question was out and out  a	work
	contract  and not a contract for supply of goods or  materi-
	als.   In order to decide this question it may be  necessary
	first to give the salient features of the  contract  between
	the  parties.  A specimen of the contract has been filed  by
	the  assessee as Annexure 'A' in the Paper Book the relevant
	portions of which may be extracted thus:
			"Please	 erect	at our	premises  ......Nos.
		      of .....Nos. of  following dimension  against'
		      the  contract  price of Rs.......
1.  Full payment against delivery  prior  to
		      despatch	or documents by Bank.  It is clearly
		      understood that there will be no such thing as
		      to make payment after fixing.
2.  Material will be carried to the side  of
		      work at cost of the party.  Our responsibility
		      ceases when the same leaves our premises.
3.	x	    x		 x
4.  We do not hold ourselves	 responsible
		      for any structural damage or dispute with	 the
		      landlord.	 Masonary work done by the party  at
		      his cost according to. our instructions.
5.	 x	    x		x
6. No responsibilities for non-delivery or
		      late   despatch  of goods due  to	 any  reason
		      beyond our control."
It  would  appear from the terms extracted above,  that	 the
	assessee  was required under the contract to  fabricate	 the
	rolling	 shutters in the first instance, .to bring  them  to
	the site and thereafter to erect the saine at the  premises.
	In an application given to the Assistant Commissioner (Judi-
	cial),	which  is  Annexure 'C' of the Paper  Book,  by	 the
	assessee he explains the various steps which the  contractor
	had  to	 take in order to fix the rolling  shutters  to	 the
	factory	 premises of the owner.	 First the  different  parts
	and components of the  rolling shutters are fabricated.	  It
	is only when the various component parts are fitted into one
	that  they constitute the rolling shutter as one  unit,	 and
	taken  separately they have no separate existence.   It	 was
	further explained that the component parts do not constitute
	a rolling shutter unless they are affixed to and erected  in
	the building in position and in the required manner. It	 was
	further	 alleged that the contract was not concluded  merely
	by delivery of fabricated materials but	 was completed	only
	after  the same were taken to the site and  finally  erected
	and  affixed to the site of the building.  In order  to	 fix
	them
	12---240SCI/77
168
to the premises certain masonary work had to be done by	 the
	owner  and  that too according to the  instructions  of	 the
	contractor.   It  was also averred that in erection  of	 the
	shutters some parts were permanently embedded into the walls
	and lintals and they become permanent fixtures which are not
	detachable.  The  allegations made  in Annexure 'C' have not
	been  controverted  by	the State either in  this  Court  or
	before	the  High  Court.  Moreover,  the  Indian   Standard
	Specification  Book for Metal Rolling Shutters	and  Rolling
	Grills the particulars of the fittings of rolling  shutters,
	whose  authenticity has not been doubted by counsel for	 the
	parties,  clearly  shows that rolling  shutters	 consist  of
	curtains,  lock	 plates,  guide	 channels,  bracket  plates,
	rollers,  hood	covers, gears, worms, fixing  bolts,  safety
	devices,  anchoring  rods, central hasp	 and  staple.	Each
	guide  channel	has to be provided with a minimum  of  three
	fixing	cleats	or supports for attachment to the  walls  or
	column by means of bolts or screws.  The guide channels	 are
	further attached to the jambs, plumb either in the  overlap-
	ping  fashion,	projecting fashion or embedded	in  grooves,
	depending  on  the method of fixing.  All  these  operations
	take  place  at	 the site after despatch  of  the  component
	parts  of the rolling  shutter. Hood covers are fixed  in  a
	neat manner and supported at the top at suitable  intervals.
	This  also  has to be done at the site.	 Item  11.1  of	 the
	specifications	shows that the rolling shutter	curtain	 and
	bottom lock plate are interlocked together and rolled in one
	piece,	but  the other parts like  guide  channels,  bracket
	plates, rollers etc., are despatched separately.  Item	12.1
	shows  that  all  the rolling shutters are  erected  by	 the
	manufacturer  or his authorized representative in   a  sound
	manner,	 so  as to afford trouble-free and  easy  operation,
	long life and neat appearance.	Even after erection is done,
	grease	is  applied to the springs and on the sides  of	 the
	guide  channels.  Thus the process involved in the  fabrica-
	tion  of  a  rolling shutter and its actual  fixing  to	 the
	premises  at the site is a continuous one and  is  completed
	only  when  erection is completed in every way.	  The  price
	charged by the contractor from the owner of the premises  is
	one  lumpsum  without at all specifying as to what  part  is
	meant for the materials used or fabricated and what part for
	the  services  or labour put in by the contractor.   It	 is,
	therefore, clear that in the facts and circumstances of	 the
	present case, the transaction  is a  composite	consolidated
	contract which is one and indivisible comprising labour	 and
	services executed for a lumpsum.  It is also clear that	 the
	materials are not merely supplied to the owner so as to pass
	as chattel simpliciter, but are actually fixed to an .immov-
	able property and after the same are fixed and erected	they
	become	a permanent fixture so as to become an accretion  to
	the  immovable property.  In  these circumstances, the	con-
	clusion	 is inescapable that the present contract cannot  be
	said  to be a pure and simple sale of goods or materials  as
	chattels but is a work contract.  It is well settled that  a
	work  contract	is a contract for construction	of  bridges,
	buildings  etc.,  and in for a lumpsum. The question  as  to
	under what circumstances a contract can be said to be a work
	contract  is not free from difficulty and has to  depend  on
	the  facts  of each case.  It is difficult to lay  down	 any
	rule  of  universal application, but there  are.  some	well
	recognized  tests  which are laid down by decided  cases  of
	this Court which afford
169
guidelines  for	 determining  as to whether  a	contract  in
	question  is  a work contract or a contract  for  supply  of
	goods. One of the important tests is to find out whether the
	contract is primarily a contract for supply of materials  at
	a  price agreed to between the parties for the materials  so
	supplied  and the work or service rendered is incidental  to
	the  execution of the contract.	 If so, the contract is	 one
	for sale of materials and the sale proceeds would be  exigi-
	ble  to sales tax. On the other hand where the	contract  is
	primarily  a contract for work and labour and materials	 are
	supplied in execution of such contract, there is no contract
	for sale of materials but it is a work contract. The circum-
	stance	that  the materials have no separate identity  as  a
	commercial  article  and it is only by	bestowing  work	 and
	labour	upon  them, as for example by affixing them  to	 the
	building  in  case   of window-leaves or  wooden  doors	 and
	windows	 that  they acquire commercial	identity,  would  be
	prima  facie indicative of a  work  contract. So also  where
	certain	 materials are not merely supplied but fixed  to  an
	immovable property so as to become a permanent fixure and an
	accretion  to the said property, the  contract	prima  facie
	would  be work contract.  This is exactly what has  happened
	in the	present case.
In
State  of Rajasthan v.	Man  Industrial	 Corporation
	Ltd.
(1),  after discussing the entire case law on  the	sub-
	ject, this Court'observed as follows:
"The  test in each case is whether	 the
		      object of the party sought to be taxed is that
		      the  chattel  as chattel passes to  the  other
		      party and the services rendered in  connection
		      with  the	 installation are under	 a  separate
		      contract or are incidental to the execution of
		      the contract of sale."
Although the aforesaid case appears to us to be on all fours
	with  the facts of the present case, the High  Court  merely
	noticed	 the  decision, but did not try to apply it  to	 the
	facts  of the present case.
In
Man  Industrial	 Corporation
	Ltd
's case (supra) the contract was to prepare window-leaves
	according to specifications and fix them to the building. It
	was  held that fixing the window leaves to the building	 was
	not  incidental or subsidiary to the sale but  an  essential
	term  of the contract, because the contract became  complete
	only after the windows were fixed as stipulated in the	con-
	tract.	 Similarly in the instant case, the  contract  could
	not be completed merely by sending the materials at the site
	but  would be completed only after erection of the  shutters
	Had  been made and the shutters fixed to the premises so  as
	to become an accretion to the premises.
Mr.	 Dikshit appearing for the State submitted  that  in
	the  present case the contract was merely for the supply  of
	shutters in one unit after being fabricated by the  contrac-
	tor  and the price was paid  for the shutters, the  question
	of fixing the shutters at the site was not an integral	part
	of  the	 contract but was only incidental to the  supply  of
	materials  and, therefore, the contract was not a work	con-
	tract.	We are, however, unable to agree with  this  conten-
	tion,  because as
	(1) 24 S.T.C. 349, 355.
170
discussed  above,  the	materials  were	 sent  with  various
	component  parts which had to be taken at the  site,  fitted
	into one another and then finally fixed into a frame so that
	the  fixture  became permanent and a part of  the  premises.
	The  operation	to be done at the site as  required  by	 the
	instructions  in the Standard Book could not be said  to  be
	merely incidental to the contract but was a fundamental part
	of  the	 contract itself.
In our  opinion,  therefore,	 the
	decision  in
Man Industrial Corporation Ltd
's  case  (supra)
	fully covers the facts of the present case.
It	was  further argued by Mr. Dikshit  learned  counsel
	appearing  for the State that it will appear from the  terms
	of  the contract that the price of the goods had to be	paid
	in advance before delivery of the same to the customer which
	shows that the title to the shutters passed to the  customer
	as  soon as the shutters were packed and despatched  to	 the
	site  and the price paid and therefore the contract  in	 the
	instant case could not be a work contract.  It is not possi-
	ble  to accept this contention, because the advance  payment
	of the entire price was a term meant for the convenience  of
	the parties as the contractor did not want to take any	risk
	for  delayed payment of goods, but  the contract  would	  be
	completed  only after  the 'shutters  were  fully  assembled
	at the site and fixed according to the specifications  which
	was  essentially the responsibility of the  contractor.
In
Richardson' and Cruddas Ltd. v. State of Madras
(1) there was
	a similar recital in the contract for full  price to be paid
	in  advance and	 still	the Madras High Court held that	 the
	contract  was a work contract.
The decision of	 the  Madras
	High  Court  was approved by this Court	 in
Man  Industrial
	Corporation Ltd
's case (Supra) and affirmed by this Court in
	Stale of Madras v. Richardson and Cruddas Ltd.(2)  For these
	reasons	 the contention put forward by Mr. Dikshit  on	this
	score is overruled.
In	a later case of this Court in
State of Rajasthan  v.
	Nanu Ram
(3) tenders were invited by the Chief Engineer	from
	the contractors for supplying and fixing of wooden door	 and
	windows,  sashas together with frames and painting  them  in
	the police lines building and  for supplying and fixing	 the
	wooden	chowkhats and this was held to be a  work  contract.
	The  decision  in  Man Industrial  Corporation	 Ltd's	case
	(supra)	 was followed by  this	Court
in that  case
.
Again
	in
Commissioner of Sales Tax, M.P. v. Purshottam  Premji
(4)
	this  Court  indicated the essential  difference  between  a
	contract  for work and services and a contract for  sale  of
	goods and observed as follows:
"The  primary difference between a	con-
		      tract  for work or service and a contract	 for
		      sale  of goods is that in the former there  is
		      in  the  person performing work  or  rendering
		      service no property in the thing produced as a
		      whole   ....   In the case of a  contract	 for
		      sale, the thing produced as a whole has  indi-
		      vidual  existence as the sole property of	 the
		      party  who  produced it, at some	time  before
		      delivery, and the property (1) 16 S.T.C. 827.
		       (2) 21 S.T.C. 245 (S.C.).
(3) 26 S.T.C. 268.
(4) 26 S.T.C. 38.
171
therein passes only under the contract  relat-
		      ing thereto to the other party for price."
The High Court placed great reliance on the decision  in
	M/s
T.V. Sundram Iyengar & Sons v. The State of  Madras
(1).
	In that case what had happened was that the contractor built
	bus  bodies and fitted the same to the chassis	provided  by
	the  customers and charged the price for building  the	body
	and  fitting the same to the chassis.  It was held  by	this
	Court that the contract was completed only when the complete
	bus with the body fitted to the chassis was delivered to the
	customer and, therefore, the supply of body being one single
	unit  constituted  a sale of goods.  That  case	 is  clearly
	distinguishable	 from  the facts and  circumstances  of	 the
	present	 case.	In the first place the supply  of  materials
	and  completion of the contract was indisputably in  respect
	of  movable property, no immovable property was at  all	 in-
	volved	at  any stage in the process of	 completion  of	 the
	contract. The bus-body built by the contractor was  moveable
	property manufactured by the contractor and had merely to be
	fitted	to  the chassis' which was  also  movable  property.
	Secondly,  the bodies constructed and fitted to the  chassis
	were  easily detachable.  In the instant case, the  shutters
	were fabricated and fixed to an immovable property so as  to
	become a permanent fixture and they were also not   detacha-
	ble.  The High Court failed to have noticed these  important
	features  which distinguish the aforesaid decision from	 the
	facts of the present case.
We	are of the considered opinion that the present	case
	is  clearly covered by the two decisions of this  Court	 re-
	ferred to in
Man Industrial Corporation Ltd
's case and
Nenu
	Ram
's  case (supra), and applying the same we hold that	 the
	contract  in  the present case was a work contract  and	 the
	transaction  was, therefore, not eligible to tax.  The	High
	Court  was in error in holding that the assessee was  liable
	to pay tax ,on the sale proceeds of the contract.
	    We, therefore, allow this appeal, set aside the order of
	the High Court and restore the order of the Revising Author-
	ity and hold that the assessee was not liable to pay  sales-
	tax.   The appellant will be entilled to his costs  through-
	out.
P.B.R.				   Appeal allowed.
172