[Cites
5
, Cited by
12
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs Orient Engg. & Commercial Co. Ltd. & Anr on 7 October, 1977
Equivalent citations: 1977 AIR 2445, 1978 SCR (1) 622, AIR 1977 SUPREME COURT 2445, 1978 (1) SCC 10, 1978 (1) SCR 632, 1977 3 ALL LR 702, 1978 2 SCJ 83, 1978 HINDULR 57, 1977 U J (SC) 695
Author:
V.R. Krishnaiyer
Bench:
V.R. Krishnaiyer
,
Jaswant Singh
,
D.A. Desai
PETITIONER:
UNION OF INDIA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
ORIENT ENGG. & COMMERCIAL CO.  LTD. & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT07/10/1977

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
SINGH, JASWANT
DESAI, D.A.

CITATION:
 1977 AIR 2445		  1978 SCR  (1) 622
 1978 SCC  (1)	10


ACT:
Witness-Summoning  of a witness-Arbitrator or  other  quasi-
judicial  authority,  whether  covered	by  s.	121  of	 the
Evidence Act
-Duty of the Court before issuing summons  under
Order  XLVI Rule 3,
C.P.C
. read with
s. 121
of the  Evidence
Act when parties present a list of witnesses to be summoned.



HEADNOTE:
Respondent  No. 1 filed, under Order XVI Rules 1 and 2	read
with  s.  151,
C.P.C
., a list of witnesses  to	be  summoned
including  the	Arbitrator  who made an award  in  a  matter
between	 the  appellant	 and  the  respondent  No.  1.	 The
Registrar  of the High Court in the routine  course  granted
summons without satisfying himself as to the sufficiency  of
cause  to summon the arbitrator as required under Order	 XVI
Rule 3,
C.P.C
. An objection petition
u/s. 151
, C.P.C.  filed
before	the  learned  Judge of the High	 Court	against	 the
orders of the Registrar was dismissed.
Allowing the appeal, the Court,
HELD : (1) It is not right that every one who is included in
the  witness  list is automatically summoned, but  the	true
rule  is  that	if  grounds are made  out  for	summoning  a
witness, he will be called.  The court must realise that its
process	  should  be  used  sparingly  and   after   careful
deliberation  if the arbitrator should be brought  into	 the
witness box.  If a party has a case of mala fides and  makes
out  prima  facie that it is not a frivolous charge  or	 has
other  reasonably  relevant matters to be brought  out,	 the
court  may,  in given circumstances, exercise its  power  to
summon even an arbitrator because nobody is beyond the reach
of truth or trial by court. [634 A-B, C-D]
(2)Courts should bear in mind the reason behind
s. 121
of
the  Evidence  Act  when  invited to  issue  summons  to  an
arbitrator.  It will be very embarrassing and in many  cases
objectionable if every quasi-judicial authority or  tribunal
were  put to the necessity of getting into the	witness	 box
and  testify as to what weighed in his mind in reaching	 his
verdict.   The slightest attempt to get to the materials  of
his decision, to get back to, his mind and to examine him as
to why and how he arrived at a particular decision should be
immediately  and ruthlessly excluded as unreasonable.	When
an arbitrator has given an award, if grounds justifying	 his
being  called as a witness are affirmatively made  out,	 the
court may exercise its powers-otherwise not.
In  the	 instant  case	the court  has	not  approached	 the
question from the proper perspective and on the materials on
record, there is no justification for the examination of the
arbitrator. [633 C-D, H]
Khub  Lal  v. Bishambhar Sahai A.I.R.  1925  Allahabad	103,
approved.
[The  Court left open to the High Court	 to  issue-necessary
Process	 on  a	fresh application stating why  he  wants  to
examine the arbitrator, if and when made by the respondent.]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 1296 of1977.
Appeal by Special Leave from the Judgment and Orderdated
25-1-77	 of the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi in  T.	 No.
2253of 1976 in Suit No. 459-A of 1974.
Soli J. Sorabji, Addl.	Solicitor General E. C. Agarwala and
Girish Chandra for the Appellant.
633
Bakshi Shivcharan Singh and H. S. Marwah for Respondent	 No.
1
The Order of the Court was delivered by
KRISHNA IYER, J.-We live and learn from counsel's  arguments
each day and in this case we were asked to unlearn.
Counsel	 for the appellant has objected, in this appeal,  to
the  examination,  as a witness, of an	arbitrator  who	 has
given  his award on a dispute between the appellant and	 the
1st respondent.	 His contention is that, on broad  principle
and  public  policy,  it is highly obnoxious  to  summon  an
arbitrator  or other adjudicating body to give	evidence  in
vindication of his award.  This is a wholesome principle as-
is  evident  from
s. 121
of the Indian Evidence	 Act.	That
provision  states that no Judge or Magistrate shall,  except
upon  the  special  order  of some  court  to  which  he  is
subordinate  be compelled to answer any questions as to	 his
own  conduct  in  court as such Judge or  Magistrate  or  as
anything which came to his knowledge in court as such  Judge
or Magistrate, but he may be examined as toother   matters
which  occurred in his presence whilst he was so acting.  Of
course,	 this--section does not apply proprio vigore to	 the
situationpresent here.	But it is certainly proper for	the
court to bear in mindthe  reason behind this  rule  when
invited to issue summons to an arbitrator.  Indeed, it	will
be a very embarrassing and, in many cases, objectionable  if
every  quasi-judicial authority or tribunal were put to	 the
necessity of greeting into the witness box and testify as to
what weighed in his mind in reaching his verdict.  We  agree
with  the  observations	 of Walsh, A.C.J.  in
Khub  Lal  v.
Bishambhar Sahai
(1) where the learned Judge has pointed	 out
that  the slightest attempt to get to the materials  of	 his
decision,, to get back to his mind and to examine him as  to
why  and how he arrived at a particular decision  should  be
immediately and ruthlessly excluded as undesirable.
In  this case, a list of witnesses was furnished by the	 1st
respondent  :and  the Registrar of the High  Court,  in	 the
routine course, granted summons perhaps not adverting as  to
why  the  arbitrator himself was being summoned.   That	 was
more  or less mechanical is evident from the fact  that	 the
reason	given  for  citing the	arbitrator  is	the  omnibus
purpose	 of proving the case of the party-not  the  specific
ground to be made out.	We should expect application of	 the
mind  of  the  Registrar  to  the  particular  facts  to  be
established by a witness before the coercive process of	 the
court  is  used.  It is seen that the learned  Judge  before
whom objection was taken under
s. 151
C.P.C. to the  summons
to the arbitrator ,dismissed the petition on the score	that
he  saw	 no ground to refuse to summon the arbitrator  as  a
witness.   The	approach  should have been the	other  way
round.	 When an arbitrator has given an award,	 if  grounds
justifying  his being called as a witness are  affirmatively
made  out, the court may exercise its power, otherwise	not.
It  is	not  right that every one,.who is  included  in	 the
witness list is automatically summoned; but the true rule is
that,  if  grounds are made out for summoning a	 witness  be
will  be called; not if the demand is belated, vexatious  or
frivolous.   Thus  the	court also has	not  approached	 the
question from the proper
(1)A.I.R. 1925 All. 103.
634
perspective.	If  arbitrators	 are.  summoned	  mindlessly
whenever  applications	for  setting  aside  the  award	 are
enquired into, there will be few to undertake the job.	 The
same  principle	 holds	good  even  if	the  prayer  is	 for
modification or for remission of the award.  The short point
is  that the court must realise that its process  should  be
used  sparingly.  and  after careful  deliberation,  if	 the
arbitrator  should be brought into the witness box.   In  no
case can he be summoned merely to show how he arrived at the
conclusions he did.  In the present case, we have been	told
that  the arbitrator had gone wrong in his  calculation	 and
this had to be extracted from his mouth by being examined or
cross-examined.	 We do not think that every Munsif and every
Judge,	every  Commissioner  and, every	 arbitrator  has  to
undergo a cross-examination before his judgment or award can
be  upheld  by	the appellate court,  How  vicious  such  an
approach would be is apparent on the slightest reflection.
Of course, if a party has a case of mala fides and makes out
prima  facie that it is not a frivolous charge or has  other
reasonably  relevant  matters to be brought  out  the  court
may.,  in given circumstances, exercise its power to  summon
even  an arbitrator, because nobody is beyond the  reach  of
truth or trial by Court.  In the present case, after  having
heard  counsel on both sides, we are not satisfied  that  on
the   present  material	 there	is  justification  for	 the
examination  of the arbitrator.	 We therefore set aside	 the
order.
However,  we make it clear that if the court  is  convinced,
after hearing the respondent on a fresh application  stating
why  he want to examine the arbitrator, it is still open  to
it  to issue the necessary process.  Such a step must  be  a
deliberate  step  and  not a routine  summons.	 With  these
observations,  we allow the appeal.  There will be no  order
as to costs.
Appeal allowed.,
635