[Cites
13
, Cited by
60
]
Supreme Court of India
Dharmendra Kumar vs Usha Kumar on 19 August, 1977
Equivalent citations: 1977 AIR 2218, 1978 SCR (1) 315, AIR 1977 SUPREME COURT 2218, 1977 2 SCJ 471, 1977 3 ALL LR 490, 1977 4 SCC 12, 1977 MATLR 160, 1978 (1) SCR 315, 1977 U J (SC) 568, 1977 HINDULR 605, 1978 REV LR 146, ILR 1977 2 KANT 1207
Author:
A.C. Gupta
Bench:
A.C. Gupta
,
Syed Murtaza Fazalali
PETITIONER:
DHARMENDRA KUMAR

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
USHA KUMAR

DATE OF JUDGMENT19/08/1977

BENCH:
GUPTA, A.C.
BENCH:
GUPTA, A.C.
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA

CITATION:
 1977 AIR 2218		  1978 SCR  (1) 315
 1977 SCC  (4)	12
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1984 SC1562	 (5)


ACT:
Hindu  Marriage	 Act
1955-
Section   13(1A)(ii)
.-23(1)(a)-If
divorce	 can  be  obtained for	absence	 of  restitution  of
conjugal rights after decree for restitution is granted by a
person	who  refuses  to  have	restitution-Whether  such  a
conduct amounts to a wrong within the meaning of
sec. 23 (1)
(a)
of the Act.



HEADNOTE:
The respondent-wife was granted a decree for restitution  of
conjugal  rights  on  her application under
s.	9
of  Hindu
Marriage Act, 1955 by Additional Senior Sub-Judge, Delhi, on
27th  August  1973.  On 28th October  1975,  the  respondent
presented a petition under
s. 13(1A) (ii)
of the Act in	 the
Court of Additional District Judge, Delhi for dissolution of
the  marriage  by a decree of divorce-stating  therein	that
there bad been no restitution of conjugal rights between the
parties	 after the passing of the decree for restitution  of
conjugal  rights.   The appellant-husband,  in	his  written
statement  admitted  that there had been no  restitution  of
conjugal  rights, between the parties after the	 passing  of
the  decree in earlier proceedings, but stated that he	made
attempts  to comply with the decree dated 27th August 77  by
writing	 several registered letters inviting the  respondent
to  live  with	him to which, according	 to  him  she  never
replied.   The husband contended that she herself  prevented
the restitution of conjugal rights and was making a  capital
out of her own wrong which she was not entitled to do.
HELD : No circumstance has been alleged in the instant	case
from  which it could be said that the respondent was  trying
to  take advantage of her own wrong.
Section 13(1A)(ii)
of
Hindu Marriage Act 1955 allows either party to a marriage to
present	 a  petition for dissolution of the  marriage  by  a
decree	of  divorce  on the ground that there  has  been  no
restitution of conjugal rights as between the parties to the
marriage  for the period specified, in the  provision  after
the  passing  of  the decree  for  restitution	of  conjugal
rights.	  Sub-section (1A) was introduced in
section  13
by
section	 2
of Hindu Marriage (Amendment) Act 1964.
Section
13
as it stood before the 1964 amendment permitted only	 the
spouse	who  had  obtained the	decree	for  restitution  of
conjugal rights to apply for relief by way of divorce.	 The
party against whom the decree was passe(, was not given that
right.	The relief which is available to the spouse  against
whom  a decree for restitution of conjugal rights  has	been
passed	cannot reasonably be denied to the one who does	 not
insist	on compliance with the decree passed in his  or	 her
favour.	  In order to be a "wrong" within the meaning of  s.
23(1)(a) the conduct alleged has to be something more than a
mere disinclination to agree to an offer of reunion, it must
be misconduct serious enough to justify denial of the relief
to  which  the husband or the wife  is	otherwise  entitled.
Mere  non-compliance with a decree for restitution does	 not
constitute  wrong  within the meaning of
section  23(1)(a)
.
[317D-G]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 949 of 1977.
Appeal	by Special Leave from the Judgment and	Order  dated
19-10-1976  of	the Delhi High Court in F.A.0., No.  170  of
1976.
Naunit	Lal,  R. K. Baweja and Miss Lalita  Kohli,  for	 the
Appellant.
S.   L.	 Watel,	 C.  R. Somasekharan, R.  Watel	 and  M.  S.
Ganesh, for the Respondent.
The following Judgment of the Court was delivered by
GUPTA,	J.-On  her application made under
section 9
of	 the
Hindu  Marriage	 Act,  1955, the respondent  was  granted  a
decree for restitution of conjugal rights by the  Additional
Senior Sub-Judge, Delhi on
316
August 27, 1973.  A little over two years after that  decree
was  passed,  on October 28, 1975 she presented	 a  petition
under
section 13
( IA) (ii) of the Act in the Court of	 the
Additional District Judge, Delhi, for the dissolution of the
marriage by a decree of divorce.
Section 13 (IA) (ii)
as it
stood at the material time reads :
"Either	party	to   a	 marriage,   whether
	      solemnized before or after the commencement of
	      this Act, may also present a petition for	 the
	      dissolution  of  the marriage by a  decree  of
	      divorce on the ground-
(i)		     x			   x
	      x
(ii)  that  there has been no  restitution  of
	      conjugal rights as between the parties to	 the
	      marriage for a period of two years or  upwards
	      after the passing of a decree for	 restitution
	      of  conjugal rights in a proceeding  to  which
	      they were parties.
The provision was amended in 1976 reducing the period of two
years to one year, but this amendment is not relevant to the
present controversy.  In the petition under section 1 3 (IA)
(ii)   she-we  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  her   as	 the
petitioner-stated  that	 there had been 'no  restitution  of
conjugal  rights between the parties to the  marriage  after
the passing of the decree for restitution of conjugal rights
and  that  there was no other legal ground  why	 the  relief
prayed	for  should  not  be  granted.	 Her  husband,	 the
appellant before us, in his written statement admitted	that
there had been no restitution of conjugal rights between the
parties after the passing of the decree in the earlier	pro-
ceeding,  but stated that he made attempts "to	comply	with
the  decree (for restitution of conjugal rights) by  writing
several	  registered   letters	to   the   petitioner"	 and
"otherwise"  inviting her to live with him.   He  complained
that the petitioner "refused to receive some of the  letters
and  never  replied  to	 those	which  she  received",	 and
according  to him the petitioner "has herself prevented	 the
restitution of conjugal rights she prayed for and now  seeks
to  make  a capital out of her own  wrong".   The  objection
taken  in  the	written statement  is  apparently  based  on
section	 2
3
(1 ) (a) of the Act.  The  relevant  part  of
section 2
3 (1) (a)
states :
Decree in proceedings.
"23.  (1)	 In any proceeding under  this	Act,
	      whether  defended	 or  not, if  the  court  is
	      satisfied that-
(a)   any	 of the grounds for granting  relief
	      exists  and the petitioner........ is  not  in
	      any  way	taking advantage of his or  her	 own
	      wrong  or disability for the purpose  of	such
	      relief...... "
On  the  pleadings  the  following  issue	 was
raised as issue No. 1
"Whether	the  petitioner is not	in  any	 way
	      taking  advantage	 of her own  wrong  for	 the
	      reasons given in the written statement ?"
317
Subsequently  the following  additional  issue
	      was also framed
"Whether the objection covered by issue No.  1
is open to the respondent under the law ?"
This additional issue was heard as a preliminary issue.	 The
Additional  District  Judge, Delhi, who	 heard	the  matter,
relying	 on  a Full Bench decision of the Delhi	 High  Court
reported  in  I.L.R. (1971) 1 Delhi 6, (
Ram  Kali  v.  Gopal
Dass
),	and  a later decision of a learned single  Judge  of
that  court  reported in I.L.R. (1076) 1 Delhi	725,  (
Gajna
Devi  v. Purshotam Giri
) held that no such circumstance	 has
been alleged in the instant case from which it could be said
that the petitioner was trying to take advantage of her	 own
wrong  and, therefore, the objection covered by issue No.  1
was not available to the respondent The Additional  District
Judge  accordingly  allowed  the petition  and	granted	 the
petitioner  a  decree of divorce as prayed for.	  An  appeal
from  this  decision  taken by	the  husband  was  summarily
dismissed  by the Delhi High Court.  In the  present  appeal
the husband questions the validity of the decree of  divorce
granted in favour of the petitioner.
Section 13 (IA) (ii)
of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955  allows
either	party  to a marriage to present a petition  for	 the
dissolution  of the marriage by a decree of divorce  on	 the
ground that there has been no restitution of conjugal rights
as  between  the  parties to the  marriage  for	 the  period
specified  in the provision after the passing of the  decree
for  restitution of conjugal rights.  Sub-section  (IA)	 was
introduced in
section 13
by section 2 of the Hindu  Marriage
(Amendment) Act, 1964 (44 of 1964).
Section 13
as it  stood
before the 1964 amendment permitted only the spouse who	 had
obtained  the decree for restitution of conjugal  rights  to
apply  for relief by way of divorce; the party against	whom
the decree was passed was not given that right.	 The grounds
for granting relief under
section 1
3
) including sub-section
(IA)  however  continue to be subject to the  provisions  of
section	 23
of the Act.  We have quoted above the  part  of
section	 23
relevant  for  the	 present  purpose.   It	  is
contended  by the appellant that the allegation made in	 his
written statement that the conduct of the petitioner in	 not
responding  to his invitations to live with him	 meant	that
she  was trying to take advantage of her own wrong  for	 the
purpose	 of  relief  under
section 1
3
(1  A)  (ii)  On	 the
admitted  facts, the petitioner was undoubtedly entitled  to
ask for a decree of divorce.  Would the allegation, if true,
that she did not respond to her husband's invitation to come
and  live with him disentitle her to the relief ? We do	 not
find it possible to hold that it would.	 In Ram Kali's	case
(supra) a Full Bench of the Delhi High Court held that	mere
non-compliance	with  the decree for  restitution  does	 not
constitute  a  wrong within the meaning of
section 2
3	 (1)
(a).   Relving on and explaining this decision in the  later
case of
Gajna Devi v. Purshotam Giri
(supra) a learned Judge
of the same High Court observed
	      "
Section 23
existed in the statute book  prior
	      to  the insertion of
section 13(1A)
......	 Had
	      Parliament  intended  that a  party  which  is
	      guilty of a matrimonial offence and against
318
which  a	decree for  judicial  separation  or
	      restitution   of	conjugal  rights  had	been
	      passed, was in view of
section 23
of the	Act,
	      not entitled to obtain divorce, then it  would
	      have inserted an exception to
section 13
(1 A)
	      and  with	 such exception,  the  provision  of
section  13(1A)
would practically	 become	 re-
	      dundant  as the guilty party could never	reap
	      benefit	of  obtaining  divorce,	 while	 the
	      innocent party was entitled to obtain it	even
	      under  the  statute  as  it  was	before	 the
	      amendment.
Section 23
of the Act,  therefore,
	      cannot  be construed so as to make the  effect
	      of  amendment of the law by insertion of	sec-
	      tion 13(1A) nugatory.
advantage	 of his or her own wrong"  occurring
	      in clause(a) of
section 23(1)
of the Act	does
	      not apply to taking advantage of the statutory
	      right to obtain dissolution of marriage  which
	      has  been conferred on him by
section  13(1A)
.
	      In  such	a  case,  a  party  is	not   taking
	      advantage	 of his own wrong, but of the  legal
	      right  following	upon of the passing  of	 the
	      decree  and  the	failure of  the	 parties  to
	      comply with the decree............"
In our opinion the law has been stated correctly in
Ram Kali
v.  Gopal  Das
(
supra) and Gajna  Devi	 v.  Purshotam	Giri
(supra).   Therefore,  it would not be	very  reasonable  to
think  that  the  relief which is available  to	 the  spouse
against	 whom  a  decree for restitution  has  been  passed,
should	be  denied  to	the  one  who  does  not  insist  on
compliance with the decree passed in his or her favour.	  In
order  to be a 'wrong' within the meaning of
section 23	 (1)
(a) the conduct alleged has to be something more than a mere
disinclination	to agree to an offer of reunion, it must  be
misconduct serious enough to justify denial of the relief to
which the husband or the wife is otherwise entitled.
In  the	 case  before us the only  allegation  made  in	 the
written statement is that the petitioner refused to  receive
or reply to the letters written by the appellant and did not
respond to his other attempts to make her agree to Eve	with
him.   This  allegation, even if true, does  not  amount  to
misconduct grave enough to disentitle the petitioner to	 the
relief she has asked for.  The appeal is therefore dismissed
but without any order as to costs.
P.H.P.
Appeal dismissed.
319