[Cites
7
, Cited by
20
]
Supreme Court of India
Ranchhoddas Chhaganlal vs Devaji Supadu Dorik And Ors on 17 January, 1977
Equivalent citations: 1977 AIR 1517, 1977 SCC (3) 584, AIR 1977 SUPREME COURT 1517, 1977 3 SCC 584 1977 2 SCR 621, 1977 2 SCR 621, 1977 2 SCR 621 1977 3 SCC 584, 1977 3 SCC 584
Author:
A.N.  Ray
Bench:
A.N.  Ray
,
M. Hameedullah Beg
,
Jaswant Singh
PETITIONER:
RANCHHODDAS CHHAGANLAL

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DEVAJI SUPADU DORIK AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT17/01/1977

BENCH:
RAY, A.N. (CJ)
BENCH:
RAY, A.N. (CJ)
BEG, M. HAMEEDULLAH
SINGH, JASWANT

CITATION:
 1977 AIR 1517		  1977 SCC  (3) 584


ACT:
Transfer  of Property Act, 1882
--
Sec.  53A
--Doctrine  of
	part  performance-Whether  transferee should  be  ready	 and
	willing	  to  perform--
Indian  Penal  Code
--Finding  without
	issue-- Not sustainable--Cross objection--If judgment can be
	challenged by respondent without filing cross objection.
Article	133
of     Constitution--Practice	 and
	procedure--Objection	about	validity   of	 grant	  of
	certificate--To be raised at what stage.



HEADNOTE:
	    The	 appellant  agreed to sell certain land to  the	 re-
	spondents by an agreement for sale entered into between	 the
	parties for Rs. 17,000/-.  The respondent was put in posses-
	sion  pursuant to the said agreement after  Rs.	 12,000/were
	paid.  He failed to pay the balance of Rs. 5,000/- in  spite
	of  demand by the appellant  The appellant filed a suit	 for
	possession of the land and, in the alternative, for a decree
	for Rs. 5,000/- with interest.
	    The	 respondent contended that the agreed price was	 Rs.
	12,000/-  which	 was already paid and that,  therefore,	 Rs.
	5,000/- were not payable.  The respondent contended that  if
	the court came to the conclusion that Rs. 17,000/- was	 the
	agreed	price .then the Court should take into account	cer-
	tain amount which was already paid by the respondent.
	    The Trial Court decreed the appellant's suit for posses-
	sion  and came to the conclusion that the agreed  price	 was
	Rs. 17,000/-.  The High	 Court	in  an appeal confirmed	 the
	finding of the Trial Court that	 the  agreed  price  was Rs.
	17.000/-.   The High Court, however, granted the  decree  of
	Rs.  5,000/with interest but refused the prayer for  posses-
	sion.
	Allowing the appeal,
	    HELD: (1) The respondent was never ready and willing  to
	perform	 the agreement as alleged by the appellant.  One  of
	the  ingredients  of part performance under
s.	53A
of	 the
	Transfer  of.
Property Act
is that the transferee has  taken
	possession  in	part performance of the	 contract.   In	 the
	present	  case.	 there	was no performance in  part  by	 the
	respondent  of the contract between the parties.   The	doc-
	trine of part performance is a defence. It is generally	 not
	a  sword but a shield.	The act of part performance must  be
	such as not only to be referable to a contract such as	that
	alleged	 but to be referable to no other title
Section	 53A
requires a positive act of readiness and. willingness on the
	part of the transferee to perform the agreement.  [624 A-E]
	    (2)	 The  High  Court wrongly found that  there  was  an
	extension  of the performance of the contract by  one  year.
	There  was  no issue  raised  on  that point.	It  is	well
	settled that there should be specific issues on questions of
	fact. The contention that the appellant could not put an end
	to  the	 contract if there was failure on the  part  of	 the
	respondent   to	 perform  the  agreement  fallacious.	[624
	F-G]
	    (3)	 It was not open to the respondent to challenge	 the
	finding	 of  the High Court that the agreement was  for	 Rs.
	17000/-.  The respondent can certainly support the  judgment
	on  any	 ground	 which is open to him  under  'the  impugned
	judgment.   The respondent did not file any  Cross-objection
	on the finding in the judgment of High Court about the price
	of  the	 agreement.  It	 is  therefore, not open to  him  to
	challenge the finding.	[623 G-H]
	622
	    (4)	 The contention of the respondent  that	 certificate
	was  not  competent because the value all along had not been
	over Rs. 20,000/- cannot be allowed to be taken at the	late
	stage.	If the respondent had taken this point	at  the time
	when  the matter was heard in the High Court  the  appellant
	could  have satisfied the High Court.  Such a plea was	not'
	raised even in the statement o! case.  [623 D-F]
	    State of Assam and lint. etc. v. Basanta Kumar Dass etc.
	etc.  [1973] SC.R. 158, followed.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 945 of 1972.
	    (From  the Judgment and Decree dated 15-10-1969  of	 the
	Bombay High Court in First Appeal No. 420/63).
	    V.M.  Tarkunde, P.H. Parekh and Miss Man]u Jetlay,	 for
	the appellant.
Sharad Manohar and Suresh Sethi, for the respondents.
	The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
	      RAY,  C.J.   This appeal is by  certificate  from	 the
	judgment  dated 15 October 1969 of the Bombay High Court  in
	First Appeal No. 420 of 1963.
The	 trial	court  by its judgment dated  24  June	1963
	decreed the suit in favour of the appellant.  The High Court
	reversed the judgment of the trial court.
The	 pre-eminent question in this appeal is whether	 the
	respondent has been ready and willing to perform the  agree-
	ment  entered  into  with the appellant.  The  case  of	 the
	appellant  is that there was an oral agreement for  sale  of
	property  consisting  of agricultural  land  admeasuring  23
	acres approximately for a sum of Rs. 17000/-.  The  respond-
	ent  from  time to time paid Rs. 12000/- to  the  appellant.
	The respondent was also in possession of the property.	 The
	appellant called upon the respondent to pay the full  amount
	of  purchase  price. The respondent failed to. do  so.	 The
	plaintiff,  on respondent's refusal to perform	the'  agree-
	ment, flied the suit.
In	the suit the reliefs claimed were possession of	 the
	property  and in the alternative a decree for  Rs.  10,500/-
	consisting of the principal sum of Rs. 5000/- as the balance
	amount	of purchase price and interest thereon amounting  to
	Rs. 5500/-.
The	 principal defence was that the agreement  for	sate
	was  only for Rs. 12000/-. and that the respondent paid	 the
	amount	 in  full. The respondent characterised the suit  as
	'mean  effort to recover illegally the additional  price  of
	the  ostensible	 Rs. 5000/-'.  The respondent  also  alleged
	that if the Court decided that the price of the property was
	agreed	to  be Rs. 17000/-, then the  respondent  would	 ask
	the  Court to take into account the sum of Rs. 12000/-	paid
	by him and also the sum of Rs. 1500/- paid by him from	time
	to time thereafter.
623
At the trial one of the issues was whether the appellant
	proved	that  the respondent entered into a  'Sauda'  on  24
	January	 1952  with the appellant's father to  purchase	 for
	Rs.7000/-  the properties mentioned in Schedule 'A'  to	 the
	plaint.	  The  other issues  were  the	defendant-respondent
	proved	that the properties were agreed to be purchased	 for
	Rs.2000/-.   A corollary to the issue raised in the  written
	statement was whether defendant proved the circumstances  in
	which  it  was made to appear that the 'Sauda' was  for	 Rs.
	17000/-.   In  short the defendant alleged   fraud   against
	the   appellant.  The charge is that the  appellant  changed
	the  figure to Rs. 17000/-.  The trial court held in  favour
	of the appellant and rejected the defence of the respondent.
	Counsel	 for the respondent contended that the suit  of	 the
	appellant was not maintainable.	 It was said that the appel-
	lant  was  not competent to maintain the suit by  reason  of
	provisions  contained  in
sections 39
and
55
of	 the  Indian
	Contract Act.  The gist of the contention is that the appel-
	lant  could  not  put an end to the contract  if  there	 was
	failure on part of the respondent to perform the  agreement.
	The submission is fallacious.  The case of the appellant has
	always	been  that  the respondent refused  to	perform	 the
	agreement. The appellant all along asserted that the  agree-
	ment was that the property was agreed to be sold only for  a
	sum  of Rs. 17000/-.  The respondent refused to Perform	 the
	agreement. The suit therefore was competent and valid.
	 Another  contention was raised by the respondent  that	 the
	certificate  was not competent because the value  all  along
	has  not been over Rs. 20000/-.	 This Court has held in	 the
	decision in State of Assam  and Anr. Etc. v. Basanta   Kumar
	Dass Etc. Etc.	reported  in  1973 ' (3) S.C.R. 158 at	page
	168 that the objection to valuation cannot be allowed to  be
	taken  at this late stage.  But the graver objection to	 the
	respondent not being allowed to challenge the certificate is
	that if the respondent had taken this point at the time when
	the  matter was heard in the High Court the appellant  could
	have  satisfied the High Court or the appellant	 would	have
	failed.	 This Court in any event, if a certificate had	been
	granted	 on a challenge being made, would have been in	pos-
	session of facts and the judgment of the High Court on	that
	question.  That is the main reason why the respondent should
	not  be allowed to challenge the certificate at this  stage.
	The respondent has also not raised such a plea in the state-
	ment of case.
The	 remaining question is one of substance and  is	 the
	real  issue. It is whether the agreement has been performed.
	Counsel	  for  the respondent submitted that it was open  to
	the respondent to contend that the finding of the High Court
	that   the   agreement was  for Rs. 17000/-  should  not  be
	accepted.   Counsel  for  the appellant	 rightly  challenged
	the  competency	 of such an objection.	The  respondent	 can
	certainly  support the judgment 0 many ground which is	open
	to  him under impugned judgment.  The judgment is  that	 the
	agreement  was between the parties, and that the sale  price
	was  Rs.17000/-.   The	respondent did not  file  any  cross
	objection  on  the finding in judgment on that point.  It is
	therefore  not	open  to the respondent	 to  challenge	that
	finding.
624
The	 principal hurdle in the way of the  respondent	  is
	that   the  respondent has never been ready and	 willing  to
	perform	 the  agreement, as alleged by the  appellant.	 The
	respondent  alleged that the consideration for purchase	 was
	Rs. 12000/-.  The respondent has never been ready and  will-
	ing to perform the agreement alleged by the appellant.	 The
	respondent relied on the doctrine of part-performance.	 One
	of the limbs of part performance is that the transferee	 has
	in the part performance of the contract taken possession  of
	the property.	The most important consideration here is the
	contract. The true principle of the operation of the acts of
	part performance seems to require that the acts in  question
	must  be referred to some contract and must be	referred  to
	the  alleged  one;  that they prove the	 existence  of	some
	contract, and are consistent with the contract alleged.	 The
	doctrine  of part performance is a defence.  It is  a  sword
	and  not a shield.  It is a right to protect his  possession
	against	 any challenge to it by the transferor	contrary  to
	the  terms of the contract.  The appellant is right  in	 the
	contention  that there was never any performance in part  by
	the respondent of the contract between the parties.
	    In	Fry on Specific Performance, Sixth Edition, at	page
	276 it is stated 'that "the acts of part performance must be
	such as not only to be referable to a contract such as	that
	alleged, but to be referable to no other title; and that the
	acts  relied upon as part performance must be  unequivocally
	and in their own nature referable to some such agreement  as
	that alleged".
The	 High Court found that the respondent  performed  in
	part  the agreement alleged by the appellant.  It  has	been
	said by the appellant that the High Court should have appre-
	ciated	 that	Section	  53-A requires a  positive  act  of
	readiness  and	willingness on part  of	 the  transferee  to
	perform	 the agreement.	 In the present case the  respondent
	who  was the transferee under the agreement did not  perform
	his  part of the contract from 1952 till 1963 that is  after
	the  judgment was pronounced by the trial court.   The	High
	Court  wrongly	found  that there was an  extension  of	 the
	performance  of	 contract by one year.	There was  no  issue
	raised on that point.  It is well settled that there  should
	be  specific issues on-questions of fact.  Parties did'	 not
	go to trial on that question and there the High Court was in
	error  in  holding that there was an extension of  time	 for
	performance of' the contract.  It is therefore erroneous  to
	say  as	 the  High Court did that the  respondent  can	take
	advantage of the period between 1953-54.
Some attempt was made by counsel for the respondent that
	there  was an admission by the appellant's father  that	 the
	purchase  price was Rs. 12000/-.  This contention cannot  be
	accepted in view of the finding of the. High Court that	 the
	purchase price was Rs. 17000/-.
One of the questions in the High Court was there  should
	be  no award of interest on the sum of Rs. 5000/- which	 had
	been  paid. The High Court rightly allowed interest  at	 the
	rate of 6 per cent per annum.  We are told the amount of Rs.
	5000/- has been deposited in the High Court.
625
For	 the  foregoing reasons we are	satisfied  that	 the
	decree	passed by the trial court was correct and  the	High
	Court was in error in reversing the decree.  The High  Court
	should not have reversed the decree particularly when it was
	found  that  the respondent failed first in  regard  to	 the
	agreement alleged by  the defendant  and  second  in  allow-
	ing  the decree in favour of the respondent on the  plea  of
	part  performance of a contract Which was never	 pleaded  by
	the defendant/ respondent and was not a contract upon  which
	there could be any  performance in part.
The appeal is therefore accepted.  The Judgment of	 the
	High Court is set aside.  The judgment of the trial court is
	restored. Parties will pay and bear their own costs in	this
	Court and the High Court.
The  respondent  will be at liberty  to  withdraw	 Rs.
	5000/- deposited in the High Court.
P.H.P.
	Appeal allowed.
626