[Cites
6
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
Prabhat Kiran Maithani & Ors vs Union Of India & Anr on 3 February, 1977
Equivalent citations: 1977 AIR 1553, 1977 SCR (2) 911, AIR 1977 SUPREME COURT 1553, 1977 2 SCC 365, 1977 LAB. I. C. 1031, 1977 2 LABLN 44, 1977 2 SCR 911, 1977 U J (SC) 192, 1977 (1) SERVLR 486
Author:
M. Hameedullah  Beg
Bench:
M. Hameedullah  Beg
,
P.S. Kailasam
PETITIONER:
PRABHAT KIRAN MAITHANI & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT03/02/1977

BENCH:
BEG, M. HAMEEDULLAH (CJ)
BENCH:
BEG, M. HAMEEDULLAH (CJ)
KAILASAM, P.S.

CITATION:
 1977 AIR 1553		  1977 SCR  (2) 911
 1977 SCC  (2) 365
 CITATOR INFO :
 RF	    1992 SC1203	 (11)


ACT:
	    Pay Scales and revised pay scales of computers shown  as
	identical  in the Second Pay Commission Report--Right to  be
	equated	 as Research Assistants Grade 11 both in status	 and
	in pay is entirely within the sphere of the function of	 the
	Pay  Commission--Effect of the Report of the Third Pay	Com-
	mission.
	    Constitution of India, 1950--
Article 32
can be  resorted
	to only for the enforcement of Fundamental  Rights--Equation
	of posts is not a duty which the court under
Art. 32
or	 the
	High Court under
Art. 226
was competent to carry out.



HEADNOTE:
	    In the 1959 Second Pay Commission Report, the pay scales
	and  the revised pay scales of the Computers were  shown  as
	identical  with	 that of the Research Assistants  Grade	 II,
	even  though the 'two posts were shown as separate  classes.
	The  Third Pay Commission Report, however, showed  that	 the
	Computers not only belonged to a separate class of their own
	but  received less pay than Research Assistants'  Grade	 II.
	The  petitioners  assailed this view under
Art.	 32
of	 the
	Constitution  as  violative of
Articles 14
and
16
of	 the
	Constitution on the ground that they had a Fundamental Right
	to  be equated both in status as well as in Day to  that  of
	Research Assistants, Grade II.
	Dismissing the petition the Court.
	    HELD:   (1)	 Equation of posts and equation of  pay	 are
	matters	 entirely within the sphere of the function  of	 the
	Pay  Commission.   These are questions	entirely  unfit	 for
	determination upon a petition for a writ for the enforcement
	of  Fundamental	 Rights.  It  requires,	 firstly,   formula-
	tion   of  correct criteria for	 each  classification.	and,
	secondly. the application of these criteria to facts  relat-
	ing to the functions and the qualifications for each  class.
	The Pay Commission had done this in the instant case  elabo-
	rately,. [912 F, 913 B-C]
	    (2)	 The Court, under Art. 32. neither has wider  powers
	nor  can do it with greater facility than a High Court	can-
	not,  when exercising its writ issuing	jurisdiction.	This
	Court had already laid down that equation of posts is not  a
	duty  which  the High Court was competent to  carry  out  in
	proceedings under
Art. 226.
[913 D]
	Union  of  India v. G.R. Prabhavalkar & Co. [1973]  (3)	 SCR
	714, referred
	    (3)	 The  question,	 whether there is or  there  is	 not
	enough material on record in a particular case to  establish
	the basis of a particular discrimination is one of fact	 for
	the  determination  of which no hard and fast rules  can  be
	laid  down.  A discrimination which involves the  invocation
	of
Art. 14
is not necessarily covered by
Art. 16.
In	 the
	instant case, even the material relied upon by the petition-
	ers shows the Computers and Research Assistants Grade II are
	classified separately, and, therefore, the validity of	that
	classification	cannot be displaced by the kind of  evidence
	relied on.  Until that classification is shown to be  unjus-
	tified, no question of violating
Article 16
can arise.
	[913 G-H, 914 A]
	    Purshottam Lal and Ors. v. Union of India & Anr.  [1973]
	(1) SCC 651 held inapplicable.



JUDGMENT:
ORIGINAL JURISDICTION: Writ Petition No. 43 of 1976.
	S.C. Agarwal for the Petitioners.
912
L.N. Sinha, Sol Genl. and B. Datta for Respondents.
	The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
	    BEG,  C.J.--The petitioners before us are  employees  of
	the Forest Research Institute and Colleges Dehra Dun in	 the
	posts  designated  as Computers.   Their grievance  is	that
	they should be	treated as Research Assistants Grade II	 and
	given the same scale of pay and other conditions of  service
	as  are	 applicable to Research Assistants  Grade  II.	 The
	respondents, Union of India and the President of the  Forest
	Research Institute deny that the petitioners are entitled to
	be treated as Research Assistants Grade II.  The petitioners
	rely upon certain alleged admissions on behalf of the  oppo-
	site parties, on certain classifications of Computers in the
	past, prior to the recommendations the Third Pay  Commission
	1973 as well as on the last mentioned report of the  Central
	Pay  Commission.  Furthermore, learned counsel	has  invited
	our  attention	to the case of
Purshottam Lal and  Ors.	 Vs.
	Union of India and another
[1973  (1)  S.C.C. 651] whereupon
	a Writ Petition by Computers, they were shown as having been
	given  identical scales of pay with the Research  Assistants
	Grade  II.   This decision however, does not deal  with	 any
	controversy as to the correct classification of computers in
	comparison  with Research Assistants Grade II.	All we	need
	say  is	 that this case deals with the	position  under	 the
	Report	of 1959 of' the Second Pay Commission which  has  no
	bearing on the position which follows from the Report of the
	Third Pay Commission of 1973.  Moreover, it is evident	that
	even at that time Research Assistants Grade II and  Computer
	were shown as separate classes even though their pay  scales
	and  the revised pay scales were shown as  identical.	Thus
	the  claim of the petitioners is that this Court should	 not
	only  include  the Computers  amongst	Research  Assistants
	Grade  II, which is not borne out even from  the  Report  of
	the  Second Pay Commission, but go further and equate  their
	pays, so that. even though they belong to different classes,
	their scales of pay may be identical.  We are afraid this is
	a  matter which lay entirely within the sphere of the  func-
	tions of the Pay Commission. This Court cannot satisfactori-
	ly  decide such disputed questions on the salender  material
	on  which the learned counsel for the petitioner  relies  in
	order  to  displace what appears to us to be,  prima  facie,
	the  effect  of the Report of the Third	 Pay  Commission  of
	1973.
This report shows that Computers not only belong  to
	a  separate class  of their own but received less  pay	than
	Research Assistants of Grade II.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner's tried to get out of
	the report of the Third Pay Commission contained in  Chapter
	XVII  relating to the Economists and Statisticians,  wherein
	Computers  are mentioned and dealt with in paragraphs 32  to
	34, by asserting that their case should be covered by either
	Chapter XV, which deals with "Scientific Services" (specifi-
	cally  mentioned  therein) or Chapter  XXI,  concerned	with
	Ministry of Agriculture, where the Forest Research Institute
	and  Colleges are mentioned in paragraphs 58  onwards.	  It
	seems to us to be erroneous to attempt to place Computers in
	Chapter XV, which deals with specified "Scientific Services"
where Computers	 are not mentioned, or in Chapter XXI, which
	also does not mention Corn-
913
puters	at all.	  Learned Counsel for the petitioners  tried
	to  take advantage of the fact that paragraphs dealing	with
	the Forest Research Institute in Chapter XXI do not  mention
	Computers.    It  does not follow from this  that  Computers
	necessarily belong to the  class into which the	 petitioners
	want  to get in without showing what the criteria and  func-
	tions of persons entitled to be treated as Research  Assist-
	ants  of Grade II are as compared with the  Computers	who,
	prima facie belong to another class of workers dealing	with
	statistics even though they may be in some way assisting  in
	research  or  three may be some common	functions.   Indeed,
	everyone working in a research institute could, in some way,
	be  said to be assisting in research.  We think	 that  these
	are questions entirely unfit for determination upon a  peti-
	tion  for a Writ for the enforcement of fundamental  rights.
	It  requires: firstly, formulation of correct criteria	 for
	each classification; and, secondly, the application of these
	criteria  to facts relating to the functions and  qualifica-
	tions  for  each  class. The Pay Commission  had  done	this
	elaborately.
The learned Solicitor General has invited our  attention
	to  the case of
Union of India v. G.R. Prabhavalkar  &	Ors.
reported in 1973 (3) S.C.R. 714, where this Court held	that
	equation  of  posts is not a duty which the High  Court	 was
	competent to carry out in proceedings under
Article 226.
We
	do  not	 think that we have wider powers or that we  can  do
	with greater facility what a High Court cannot when exercis-
	ing its writ issuing jurisdiction.
The	 learned  counsel for the petitioners has  tried  to
	take  us  at some length into the material on which  he	 as-
	sails the view taken by the opposite parties.  We are unable
	to  agree  that, on the material placed before	us,  we	 can
	accept the petitioners' interpretation of facts to which our
	attention was drawn.  We are unable to consider other  mate-
	rial  also to which our attention was attempted to be  drawn
	because,  on the basis of the materials shown to us, we	 are
	satisfied that such matters are not fit for determination by
	us on the kind of material sought to be placed before us.
	    Finally,  learned  counsel for the	petitioners  pleaded
	that we may permit him to raise this matter before an Admin-
	istrative or Service Tribunal if and when one is  constitut-
	ed.   It is not necessary for us to give him any  permission
	to do that. We may however observe that the petitioners	 are
	at  liberty to pursue other remedies, including those  which
	may  be available to them if any such Tribunal is set up  in
	future.	 We want to make it clear that the question  whether
	there  is  or there is not enough material on  record  in  a
	particular  case  to  establish the basis  of  a  particular
	discrimination is one of fact for the determination of which
	no  hard and fast rules can, be laid down. Moreover, a	dis-
	crimination, which involves the invocation of
Article 14
, is
	not  necessary covered by
Article 16.
We do not propose  to
	discuss	 here  the differences between
Articles 14
and
16
,
	because	 we  think that, even the material  relied  upon  on
	behalf of the petitioners before us shows that Computers and
	Research  Assistants Grade   II are  classified	 separately.
	The validity of that classification cannot,
914
we  think, be displaced by the kind of evidence relied	upon
	on  behalf of the petitioners.	And, until that	 classifica-
	tion  is shown to  be unjustified, no question of  violating
Article 16
can arise.  We, therefore, leave the	 petitioners
	to other means of redress if they still feel aggrieved.
	    The	 result	 is that we dismiss the Writ  Petition,	 but
	make no order as to costs.
S.R.					      Petition	dis-
	missed.
915