[Cites
4
, Cited by
90
]
Supreme Court of India
Bhagabandas Agarwalla vs Bhagwandas Kanu & Ors on 25 February, 1977
Equivalent citations: 1977 AIR 1120, 1977 SCR (3) 75, AIR 1977 SUPREME COURT 1120, 1977 2 SCC 646, 1977 3 SCR 75, 1977 2 SCJ 43, 1977 RENCR 754, 1977 ALL RENT CAS 167, 1977 U J (SC) 194, 1977 RENCJ 572, 1977 RENTLR 770
Author:
P.N. Bhagwati
Bench:
P.N. Bhagwati
,
Syed Murtaza Fazalali
PETITIONER:
BHAGABANDAS AGARWALLA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
BHAGWANDAS KANU & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT25/02/1977

BENCH:
BHAGWATI, P.N.
BENCH:
BHAGWATI, P.N.
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA

CITATION:
 1977 AIR 1120		  1977 SCR  (3)	 75
 1977 SCC  (2) 646


ACT:
Transfer  of Property Act
,
S. 106
, Notice  to  quit,
	whether should be construed in a hyper-critical manner.



HEADNOTE:
		The  appellant filed a suit for evicting his  tenant
	Bhagwandas  Kanu  etc. after giving them a notice  to  quit.
	The Trial Court dismissed the suit but on appeal, the  First
	Appellate  Court  passed a decree for eviction	against	 the
	respondents.In	second	appeal before the  High	 Court,	 the
	respondents assailed the validity of the notice to quit,  on
	the ground that it did not conform with the requirements  of
	s.  106	 of the
Transfer of Property Act
.   The	 High  Court
	allowed	 the appeal holding that the notice to quit did	 not
	clearly	 terminate  the tenancy on the	expiration  of	the,
	month of the tenancy, and was invalid.
		Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court,
		HELD:  A  notice to quit must be  construed  ut	 res
	magis  valeat quam pereat. It must not be read in  a  hyper-
	critical manner, nor must its interpretation be affected  by
	pedagogic pendantism or over refined subtlety, but it should
	be construed in a common sense, way.  The notice to qui	 re-
	quired the respondents to vacate "within the month of  Octo-
	ber  1962", otherwise they would be treated  as	 trespassers
	from 1st November, 1962.  This makes the  intention  of	 the
	authors	 of the notice clear that they were terminating	 the
	tenancy	  only	 with effect from the end of  the  month  of
	October	 1962 and not with effect from any earlier point  of
	time during the currency of that month.	 [76 D, F, 77-E]
	Sidebotham v. Holland (1895) 1 Q.B. 378; Harihar Banerji  v.
	Ramsashi Roy 45 I.A. 222, applied.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 2080 of 1968.
	Appeal by Special Leave from the Judgment  and	Order  dated
	11-4-68	 of  the  Assam and Nagaland High  Court  in  Second
	Appeal No. 98/65.
G.L. Sanghi and K.J. John for the Appellant.
	S.K. Nandy and G.S. Chatterjee for the Respondent.
	The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
	BHAGWATI,  J., This appeal by special leave raises  a  short
	question relating to the validity of a notice to quit  given
	by the appellant terminating the tenancy of the respondents.
	The  appellant,	 as  landlord, filed  a	 suit  for  eviction
	against the respondents as tenants, after giving a notice to
	quit dated 25th September, 1962.  The Trial Court  dismissed
	the  suit but on appeal, the First Appellate Court  reversed
	the judgment of the Trial Court and passed a decree of evic-
	tion  against the respondents.	The respondents preferred  a
	second appeal to the High Court and the only question debat-
	ed  before the High Court was in regard to the	validity  of
	the  notice  to quit.  There were two grounds on  which	 the
	notice to quit was assailed as invalid.	 The first is  imma-
	terial	since the decision of the High Court  negativing  it
	has not been challenged before us on behalf of the  respond-
	ents.  The second was
76
that  the notice to quit was invalid as it was not  in	con-
	formity with the requirements of
section 106
of the Transfer
	of Property Act. That section says that in the absence of  a
	contract or local law or usage to the contrary, a lease from
	month  to month shall be terminable, "on the part of  either
	lessor or lessee, by fifteen days' notice expiring with	 the
	end  of	 a month of the tenancy".  The argument of  the	 re-
	spondents before the High Court was that the notice to	quit
	did not expire with the end of the month of the tenancy	 and
	was hence invalid.  This argument found favour with the High
	Court and it held that the notice to quit was not clear	 and
	unambiguous and was "open to doubt as to the date of  deter-
	mination  of the tenancy" and did not terminate the  tenancy
	on  the	 expiration  of the month of the  tenancy  and	was,
	therefore, invalid and in this view it dismissed the suit of
	the  appellant.	  The  appellant  thereupon  preferred	 the
	present appeal with special leave obtained from this Court.
	    The only question which arises for determination in this
	appeal is whether the notice to quit given by the  appellant
	to  the respondents was invalid as not being  in  conformity
	with  the  requirements of
section 106
of 'the
Transfer  of
	Property  Act
.	The notice to quit, so far as material,	 was
	in the following terms:
"You are hereby informed by this notice
		      that  you will vacate the said house  for	 our
		      possession  within the month of  October	1962
		      otherwise	 you will be treated as	 trespassers
		      from  1st	 November  in respect  of  the	said
		      house."
The  tenancy was admittedly a monthly tenancy and hence	 the
	notice	to quit could not be said to be valid under
section
	106
of the Transfer of Property Act unless it expired	with
	the end. of the month of the tenancy.  The view taken by the
	High Court was that since by  the notice to quit the  appel-
	lant  called  upon the respondents to. vacate  the  premises
	"within the month of October 1962" and not on the expiration
	of that month, the notice to quit was not in accordance with
	law  and  did not operate to determine the  tenancy  of	 the
	respondents.  The question is whether this view taken by the
	High Court can be sustained.
Now,  it  is settled law that a notice to quit  must  be
	construed   not	 with a desire to find faults in  it,  which
	would  render it defective, but it must be construed ut	 res
	magis  valeat  quam pereat.  "The validity of  a  notice  to
	quit",	as  pointed  out by Lord Justice  Lindley,  L.J.  in
	Sidebotham  v. Holland(1), "ought not to turn on the  split-
	ting  of a straw". It must not be read in  a  hyper-critical
	manner, nor must its interpretation be affected by pedagogic
	pendantism or overrefined subtlety, but it must be construed
	in  a  commonsense  way.
See
Harihar  Banerji	v.  Ramsashi
	Roy
(2).	  The  notice to quit in the present  case  must  be
	judged for its validity in the light of this well recognised
	principle of interpretation.
It is indisputable that under
section 106
of the  Trans-
	fer of
Property Act
the notice to quit must expire with	 the
	end  of the month of the tenancy or in other words, it	must
	terminate the tenancy with effect
	(1) [1895] 1 Q.B. 378. (2) 45 I.A. 222.
77
from  the  expiration of the month of the  tenancy.   If  it
	terminates the tenancy with effect from an earlier date,  it
	would  be  clearly invalid. Now,' here the  notice  to	quit
	required the respondents to vacate the premises "within	 the
	month of October 1962" and intimated to them that  otherwise
	they would be "treated as trespassers from 1 st November" in
	respect	 of  the  premises.  The question is:  what  is	 the
	meaning and effect of the words "within the month of October
	1962" in the context in which they are used in the notice to
	quit ?	Do these words mean that the tenancy of the respond-
	ents was sought to be terminated at a date earlier than	 the
	expiration  of the month of October 1962 and they  were	 re-
	quired	to vacate the premises before such expiration ?	  We
	do  not	 think so.  When the notice to	quit  required	 the
	respondents   to vacate "within the month of October  1962";
	what  it meant was that the respondents could vacate at	 any
	time within the month of October 1962 but not later than the
	expiration  of that month.  The last moment up to which	 the
	respondents could, according to the notice to quit, lawfully
	continue  to  remain in possession of the premises  was	 the
	mid-night of 31st October, 1962.  We fail to see any differ-
	ence between  a notice asking a tenant to vacate "within the
	month of October 1962"	and  a notice requiring a tenant  to
	vacate	latest	by the mid-night of  3 l st  October,  1962,
	because	 in  both  cases, the tenant would  be	entitled  to
	occupy	the premises up to the expiration of  31st  October,
	1962 but not beyond it.	 This position would seem to  follow
	logically  and incontestably, as a matter of  plain  natural
	construction, from the use of the words "within the month of
	October 1962" without any thing more, but here it is  placed
	beyond doubt or controversy by the notice to quit proceeding
	to  add that otherwise the respondents would be	 treated  as
	trespassers from 1st November, 1962.  This makes the  inten-
	tion of the authors of the notice clear that they are termi-
	nating	the  tenancy only with effect from the	end  of	 the
	month  of October 1962 and not with effect from any  earlier
	point  of time during the currency of that  month.  If	 the
	respondents  do not vacate the premises within the month  of
	October 1962, they would be treated as trespassers from	 1st
	November, 1962 and not from any earlier date, clearly imply-
	ing  that they would lawfully continue as tenants up to	 the
	expiration  of the month of October 1962. The  tenancy	was,
	therefore, sought to be determined on the expiration of	 the
	month of October 1962 and not earlier and the notice to quit
	expired with the end of the month of tenancy as required  by
section 106
of the Transfer of Property Act.  It was in	 the
	circumstances  a valid notice which  effectively  determined
	the  tenancy  of the respondents with effect from  the	mid-
	night of 31st October, 1962.
We accordingly allow the appeal, set aside the order  of
	the  High Court and restore the decree for  eviction  passed
	against the respondents. Since the respondents have been  in
	possession  of the premises for a long time, it is but	fair
	that  they  should have some reasonable time to	 vacate	 the
	premises.   Hence  we direct that the  decree  for  eviction
	shall  not be executable against the respondents up to	31st
	October, 1977 on condition that the respondents continue  to
	pay to the appellant regularly from month to month an amount
	equivalent to the monthly rent as and by way of compensation
	for  use and occupation of the permises.  There will  be  no
	order as to costs throughout.
M.R.		Appeal allowed.
78