[Cites
3
, Cited by
8
]
Supreme Court of India
Town Municipal Council vs Urmilla Kothari on 20 January, 1977
Equivalent citations: 1977 AIR 873, 1977 SCR (2) 660, AIR 1977 SUPREME COURT 873, 1977 TAX. L. R. 1858, 1977 (1) SCJ 474, 1977 2 SCR 660, 1977 (1) KANTLJ 214, 1977 MCC 1, (1977)1 S C C 687, 1977 U J (SC) 146, ILR 1977 1 KANT 611
Author:
Jaswant Singh
Bench:
Jaswant Singh
,
A.N.  Ray
,
M. Hameedullah Beg
PETITIONER:
TOWN MUNICIPAL COUNCIL

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
URMILLA KOTHARI

DATE OF JUDGMENT20/01/1977

BENCH:
SINGH, JASWANT
BENCH:
SINGH, JASWANT
RAY, A.N. (CJ)
BEG, M. HAMEEDULLAH

CITATION:
 1977 AIR  873		  1977 SCR  (2) 660
 1977 SCC  (1) 687


ACT:
Karnataka Municipalities Act, 1964
--
Sec.  124-
-Karnataka
	Municipalities Taxation Rules, 1965--Rule 26--Trucks passing
	on  the	 highways within  municipal  limits--Whether  octroi
	payable--Meaning  of "brought into" and "immediate  exporta-
	tion".



HEADNOTE:
	    The	 respondent is a transporter.  The respondent  lifts
	the  iron  ore	in his trucks from Hubli  Railway  yard	 and
	carries	 it to Karwar and Belekeri harbours. The  trucks  of
	the respondent have to pass in the course of transit through
	:he  limits  of various Town Municipalities situate  on	 the
	highway	  of  which  the appellant happens to be  one.	 The
	respondent  does not unload or re-load the iron ore  at	 any
	intermediary point or stop.  The appellant passed a  resolu-
	tion in purported exercise of
s. 124
of the Karnataka Munic-
	ipalities  Act,	 1964 read with rule 26	 of  the.  Karnataka
	Municipalities	Taxation Rules, 1965, imposing a fee of	 Re.
	1/-  per trip of each truck.  The respondent filed  a	writ
	petition  challenging  the  levy of the	 fee.	The  learned
	single Judge of the High  Court dismissed the writ petition.
	The Division Bench, however, allowed the appeal.
	Dismissing the appeal by certificate,
	    HELD: The present case is not covered by "any article or
	animal brought into the municipal limits for the purpose  of
	immediate exportation" mentioned in
s. 124
.  "Brought  into"
	and "immediate exportation" do not  comprehend within  their
	sweep the continuous process of transit of goods by vehicles
	which  merely  use the State High Way  passing	through	 the
	areas which lie within the municipal limits.  In the instant
	case, the iron ore is carried in the trucks of the  respond-
	ent which merely pass through the areas which lie within the
	municipal  limits  and is not unloaded and reloaded  at	 any
	place within the municipal areas.  The continuity or contin-
	uous process of the carriage of iron ore is not in any	way,
	in fact, broken within the municipal limits. The  respondent
	cannot be said either to bring in or export the iron ore  as
	contemplated  by
s. 124
of the Act read with Rule 26 of	 the
	Rules  and, as such, is not liable to pay octroi or what  is
	styled as supervision fee.  A contrary interpretation  would
	make  rail borne goods passing through the  Railway  Station
	within the limits of the municipality liable to the  imposi-
	tion of the fee on their arrival at the Railway Station	 and
	departure therefrom which could not be the intention of	 the
	Legislature.  [662 G-H, 664 B, G-H, 665 A-B]
	    The Central India Spinning and Weaving  and	 Manufactur-
	ing  Company Limited, the Empire Mills, Nagpur v. The Munic-
	ipal Committee, Nagpur [1958] SCR 1102=AIR 1958 SC 352, fol-
	lowed.
	    Brown  v. State of Maryland (1827) 12 Wheat 419, 442;  6
	L.  Ed.	 678, 686 and Wilson v. Robertson 24  L.J.Q.B.	185,
	quoted with approval.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal	  No.	1386
	of 1976.
From the Judgment and Order dated 21-9-76 of the  Karna-
	taka High Court in W.A. No. 150 of 1976.
H.B.  Datar, Sanjeev Aggarwal and R.B. Datar for the  Appel-
	lant.
S.T. Desat, S.K. Mehta, K.R. Nagara]a and P.N. Puri	 for
	Respondent.
661
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
	   JASWANT  SINGH, J.  This appeal by certificate  which  is
	directed against the judgment and order dated September	 21,
	1976, of the High Court of Karnataka at Bangalore  reversing
	the judgment and order dated March 3, 1976 of a Single Judge
	of that Court dismissing writ petition No.6945 of 1975 filed
	by the respondent involves a substantial question of law  of
	general	 public importance relating to the validity  of	 the
	levy  of what is styled as 'supervision fee'  under
section
	124
of the Karnataka Municipalities Act, 1964	(hereinafter
	referred to as 'the Act') read with rule 26 of the Karnataka
	Municipalities Taxation Rules, 1965 (herinafter referred  to
	as 'the Rules').
The	facts of the case lie in a short compass and may  be
	stated as follows:-
Iron ore which is extracted from its mine heads in Hospet
	Taluka is brought over and stocked in Hubli Railyard by	 the
	Mysore	Minerals Limited which is a Government	undertaking.
	Having taken up the contract of transhipment of the iron ore
	from  Hubli  Railyard to Karwar and Belekeri  harbours,	 the
	Mysore Minerals Limited has sublet the same to the West	 End
	Minerals  and  Exports Private Limited.	 The latter  has  in
	turn  entrusted	 the execution of the contract to.  the	 re-
	spondent  which is engaged in transport business.  The	iron
	ore  is accordingly lifted by the respondent in	 its  trucks
	from  Hubli  Railyard  and carried to  Karwar  and  Belekeri
	harbours.   The trucks of the respondent carrying  the	iron
	ore  'have  (en route) to pass. in the	course	 of  transit
	through the limits of various town municipalities situate on
	the  highway of which the appellant happens to be  one,	 but
	they do not unload and reload the iron ore at any intermedi-
	ary point or stop.
The appellant, on the basis of a resolution passed by it
	on  January 25, 1975, and approved by the  State  Government
	levies the aforesaid fee of Re. 1/- per truck under
section
	124
of the Act read with rule 26 of the Rules.	 The  trucks
	of the respondent using the State highway within the munici-
pal  limits of Kalghatgi, District Dharwar  are	 accordingly
	made to pay the fee for each of their trips.
	    Feeling  that  the	fee realised by	 the  appellant	 was
	invalid,  the respondent filed a writ petition,	 being	writ
	petition  No.. 6945 of 1975 in the High Court  of  Karnataka
	challenging the levy of the fee and seeking the issuance  of
	a writ of mandamus restraining the appellant from  realising
	the said fee.
A  Single  Judge  of the High Court upheld	the  fee  in
	question  and dismissed the writ petition holding  that	 the
	expression   'importer',  'place of import'  and  'place  of
	export'	 as used in
section 124
(1 ) of the Act are  compre-
	hensive	 enough to describe a person who merely	 brings	 the
	goods within the municipal limits for immediate	 exportation
	and  the respondent who answered that description was  bound
	to  pay the fee.  Aggrieved by this judgment and order,	 the
	respondent took the matter in appeal to a Division Bench  of
	the High Court which allowed the appeal and issued the	writ
	prayed for by the respondent  by its
662
judgment and order dated September 21, 1976.  It is  against
	this; judgment and order that the present appeal is  direct-
	ed.
At	the hearing of the appeal, counsel  have  reiterated
	the  contentions urged on behalf of the parties in the	High
	Court.
The	 sole  question that arises  for  determination	  in
	this  appeal relates to the validity of the aforesaid  levy.
	For a proper detemination of this question, it is  necessary
	to  advert  to
section 124
of the Act and rule	 26  of	 the
	Rules.
"
Section 124
: Non-liability for octroi and
		      refund of	 octroi	 ongoods in transit.--
(1) Any article or animal brought into the
		      municipal limits for the purpose of  immediate
		      exportation may at the option of the  importer
		      not to be subjected to levy of octroi if	such
		      article or animal be conveyed direct from	 the
		      place of import to the place of export by such
		      routes,  within  such  time,  and	 under	such
		      supervision  as the municipal council  may  by
		      resolution determine..  For purposes of	this
		      subsection  the  municipal  council  shall  on
		      payment of the prescribed fees issue  promptly
		      the necessary transport permits.
			  (2)  When any article in respect of  which
		      octroi  has  been paid is	 exported  from	 the
		      municipal	 limitS,  in the same  condition  in
		      which  it	 was brought into or  received	from
		      beyond  the  municipal limits, the  amount  of
		      octroi  paid Shall, subject to such  rules  as
		      may be prescribed, be refunded."
"Rule 26: ... In case the person  bringing
		      the   goods wishes to transport the  goods  at
		      once beyond the limits of the municipality  he
		      shall  do so only after obtaining a  transport
		      permit  in  Form IV, on payment of  a  fee  of
		      rupees  two  for each lorry and rupee  one  in
		      other  cases in the case of a  city  municipal
		      council and rupee one for each	  lorry	 and
		      fifty  paise in other cases in the case  of  a
		      town  municipal council."
The	 opening words of
section 124
of the Act  viz.	"any
	article or animal brought into the municipal limits for	 the
	purpose	 of  immediate exportation" on the  construction  of
	which the up-shot of  the  case, depends are very important.
	They  imply  processes of 'importing  into'  and  'exporting
	from'  the  municipal  limits of goods or  animals  and	 are
	indicative  of	an element of repose and rest of  the  goods
	within	the municipal limits.  As rightly held by the  Divi-
	sion Bench of the High Court, the expressions 'brought into'
	and  'immediate exportation' do not comprehend within  their
	sweep the continuous process of	 transit of goods, by  vehi-
	cles  which merely use the State  highways  passing  through
	the  areas which lie within the municipal limits.   In	the.
	instant	 case, the iron ore is carried in the trucks of	 the
	respondent   which merely pass through the areas  which	 lie
	within the municipal  limits and is not unloaded and reload-
	ed at any place within the  municipal
663
area.	As  such, the important element of repose  and	rest
	which  the words 'brought into the municipal limits for	 the
	purpose	 of  immediate exportation' imply is absent  in	 the
	instant case.
In The Central India Spinning and Weaving  and  Manufac-
	turing	Company	 Limited, The Empire Mills,  Nagpur  v.	 The
	Municipal Committee, Nagpur(1), this Court while  discussing
	the meaning  of	 the expression 'a terminal tax on goods  or
	animals	 imported  into	 or exported from the limits of	 the
	municipality'	occurring  in  section 66(1)(0) of the	C.P.
	and  Berar  Municipalities Act, 1922, held  that  the  goods
	which  were  in transit and were merely carried	 across	 the
	limits of the municipality were not liable to terminal	tax.
	The following observations made therein which have an impor-
	tant  bearing  on the decision. of the	present	 appeal	 are
	worth quoting :--
"The efficacy of the relative	 contentions
		      of  the parties requires the determination  of
		      the  construction to be placed on	 the  really
		      important	 words of which are "terminal  tax",
		      "imported	 into  or exported  from"  and	"the
		      limits  of the Municipality".   In  construing
		      these  words of the statute if there  are	 two
		      possible interpretations then effect is to  be
		      given to the one that favours the citizen	 and
		      not   the	 one  that  imposes  a	 burden	  on
		      him.  .....Lexico-logically  they	 (the  words
		      'import' and "export;) do not have any  refer-
		      ence to goods in 'transit' a word derived from
		      transit  bearing a meaning similar  to  trans-
		      port,  i.e.  to. go  across.   The  dictionary
		      meaning of the words 'import' and 'export'  is
		      not restricted to their derivative meaning but
		      bear other connotations also  .....  The	word
		      "transit", in the Oxford Dictionary means	 the
		      action   or  fact	 of  passing	across	  or
		      through; passage or journey from one place  or
		      point  to another; the passage or carriage  of
		      persons or goods from one place to another; it
		      also  means to pass across or  through  (some-
		      thing) to traverse, to cross.  Even  according
		      to the ordinary meaning of the words which  is
		      relied  upon by the  respondent,	goods  which
		      are in transit or are being  transported	 can
		      hardly  be  called  goods	 "imported  into  or
		      exported	from" because they are neither being
		      exported	nor imported  but are  merely  goods
		      carried across a particular stretch of  terri-
tory  or	across a particular  area  with	 the
		      object   of  being transported to their  ulti-
		      mate'  destination which in the  instant	case
		      was  Nagpur  .....  By giving to	 the   words
		      "imported into or exported from" their deriva-
		      tive  meaning  without any -reference  to	 the
		      ordinary connotation of these. words  as .used
		      in the commercial sense, the decided cases  in
		      India  have ascribed too general a meaning  to
		      these   words   which  it	 -appears  from	 the
		      setting, context and history of the clause was
		      not intended.  The effect of the	construction
		      of  "import" . or "export" in the	 manner	 in-
		      sisted  upon  by	the  respondent	 would	make
		      rail-borne  goods	 passing through  a  railway
		      station  within the limits of  a	Municipality
		      liable to the imposition of the tax .on  their
		      arrival at the  railway  station	or
		      [1958] S.C.R. 1102=A.I.R. 1958 S.C. 352:
664
departure	 therefrom or both which  would	 not
		      only result in
		      inordinate  delays  and unbearable  burden  on
		      trade  both inter State and intra State. It is
		      hardly likely that that was, the intention  of
		      the  Legislature.	  Such	 an   interpretation
		      would  lead to absurdity which has   according
		      to   the	rules  of  interpretation,   to	  be
		      avoided."
The	 enunciation of law in the above case  fully  covers
	the  present case.  In the present case also, the  iron	 ore
	which  is  in transit from Railyard at Hubli to	 Karwar	 and
	Belekeri  harbours  can	 hardly	 be characterised  as  goods
	brought	 into  or  exported from the   municipal  limits  of
	Kalghatgi because they are neither imported into nor  export
	ed from any point within the municipal limits but are merely
	carried across a particular stretch of territory or across a
	particular area with the object of being transported to	 its
	ultimate  destination.	 In Brown v. State  of	Maryland(1),
	Chief Justice Marshall dealing with the word!  'importation'
	said as follows :--
"The	practice of most commercial  nations
		      conforms	to this idea.  Duties, according  to
		      that  practice, are charged on those  articles
		      only  which are intended for sale or  consump-
		      tion  in the country.  Thus sea-stores,  goods
		      imported	and re-exported in the same  vessel,
		      goods  landed  and carried over land  for	 the
		      purpose of being re-exported from	 some  other
		      port,  goods forced in by stress	of  weather,
		      and landed, but not for sale are exempted from
		      the  payment  of duties. The whole  course  of
		      legislation  on the subject shows that in	 the
		      opinion of the legislature the right to.	sell
		      is connected with the payment of the duties."
In	Wilson	v. Robertson(2) where
section 33
of  The  48
	Geo.  3, c. civ. imposed a duty on all goods "imported	into
	or  exported  from Berwick Harbour", and the harbour extend-
	ed  from Berwick Bridge down the Tweed to the sea,  but	 not
	above  the bridge and goods were brought up the river  in  a
	seagoing vessel which, having first used the Harbour Commis-
	sioners'  rings and posts in order to moor the vessel  while
	lowering  the masts, passed through Berwick Bridge  and	 un-
	loaded her cargo about 200 yards above the bridge and beyond
	the limits of the harbour; it was held that these goods were
	not "imported into"' the harbour and as such liable to duty.
	    Bearing  in mind the above authoritative enunciation  of
	law, we are' of opinion that as the continuity or continuous
	process	 of  the carriage of iron ore is not in any  way  in
	fact  broken within the municipal limits of  Kalghatgi,	 the
	respondent  cannot be said either to bring in or export	 the
	iron ore as contemplated by
section 124
of the Act read with
	rule  26 of the Rules and as such is not liable to  pay	 the
	octroi	or what is styled as 'supervision fee'.	 A  contrary
	interpretation would  make rail borne goods passing  through
	the Railway Stations within the
	(1) 1827 12 Wheat 419=442=6 L. Ed. 678, 686.
	(2) 24 L.J.QB. 185.
665
limits	of the municipality liable to the imposition of	 the
	fee  on their arrival at these Railway Stations and   depar-
	ture   therefrom   which could not be the intention  of	 the
	Legislature.   The  High  Court	 was,  therefore,  perfectly
	justified in allowing the appeal and issuing the writ sought
	for.
In the result, the appeal fails and is hereby  dismissed
	but in the circumstances of the case without any order as to
	costs.
P.H.P.
						Appeal dismissed.
666