[Cites
4
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
Sukhdev Singh & Ors vs Gram Sabha Bari Khad & Ors on 28 January, 1977
Equivalent citations: 1977 AIR 1003, 1977 SCR (2) 862, AIR 1977 SUPREME COURT 1003, 1977 2 SCR 862, 1977 U J (SC) 175, 1977 2 SCC 518
Author:
P.N. Shingal
Bench:
P.N. Shingal
,
P.K. Goswami
PETITIONER:
SUKHDEV SINGH & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
GRAM SABHA BARI KHAD & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT28/01/1977

BENCH:
SHINGAL, P.N.
BENCH:
SHINGAL, P.N.
GOSWAMI, P.K.

CITATION:
 1977 AIR 1003		  1977 SCR  (2) 862
 1977 SCC  (2) 518


ACT:
Punjab  Village Common Lands (Regulation) Act
1961,
S.
	2(g)
proviso (iv), application to land under possession of
	owners.



HEADNOTE:
	    The	 appellants filed a suit for a declaration that	 the
	suit land inherited by them was not "shamlat deh" within the
	meaning	 of
section 2(g)
of the Punjab Village	Common	Land
	(Regulation)  Act, 1961, because it was excluded  by  virtue
	of  proviso  (iv) to the clause.  They	contended  that	 the
	revenue	 records describing the land as "shamlat  deh"	also
	stated it to be "in possession of the owners", showing	that
	it  was not used as "shamlat deh", and furthermore, that  it
	had  been  partly purchased and partly received as  gift  by
	their  ancestor before 26th January, 1950, and thereby	came
	within	the scope of
s. 2(g)
proviso (iv) of the  Act.	 The
	appellants  failed  before the Trial Court, Court  of  first
	appeal, and the High Court in second appeal.
	Dismissing the appeal by special leave, the Court,
	    HELD:  (1) The fact that in 1914-15 it was	recorded  in
	the 'jamabandi' as "shamlat deh", shows that that particular
	character  of the land was recognised even so far back,	 and
	it  could not detract from that nature of  the	land  merely
	because it was further stated in the 'jamabandi' that it was
	in the possession of the owners "as per respective shares in
	khewat".  [863 F-G]
	    (2)	 Proviso (iv) requires that in order to be  excluded
	from  the  category of "shamlat deh", the land	should	have
	been  acquired	by purchase or in exchange  for	 proprietary
	land from a co-sharer in the "shamlat deh", which is not  so
	in the case of the appellants.	[863 G]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 527 of 1975.
	    Appeal  by	Special Leave from the	Judgment  and  Order
	dated  the  6-9-74 of the Punjab and Haryana High  Court  in
	R.S.A. No. 933 of 1970.
K.L.  Gosain,  N.N. Goswamy and Arvind Minocha  for	 the
	Appellant.
Gokal  Chand Mittal, J.D. Jain, Arun Jain and (Miss)  K.
	Miglani for Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
	    SHINGHAL, J.--The plaintiffs who have been	unsuccessful
	in   the trial court, the court first appeal, and  the	High
	Court  in   second appeal, have filed the-present appeal  by
	special	 leave.	  They raised their suit for  a	 declaration
	that  the  suit land continued to be in their  ownership  in
	spite  of the provisions of the
Punjab Village Common  Lands
	(Regulation)  Act,  1961
,  hereinafter referred	 to  as	 the
	Act. They pleaded that the land had been purchased by  their
	ancestor  Udham	 Singh, who rounded the village,  from	Raja
	Sansar	Chand  of Dholwaha, some time before 1884, and	that
	some other land	  was
863
gifted	to him by one Smt. Dhani.   They claimed  that	what
	they  had  thus acquired was not "shamlat  deh"	 within	 the
	meaning of clause (g) of section 2 of the Act because it was
	excluded  by  virtue of	  subclause (iv) of the	 proviso  to
-the  clause.	That  contention  has  been  negatived	 all
	through, and the short question for decision is whether	 any
	interference is called for with that view.
	    It	has  not been disputed before us that  the  land  in
	question   was described in the revenue records as  "shamlat
	deh", and  -' excluded "ahadi deh."   That has in fact	been
	amply  proved by the 'jamabandi' of the year  1914-15  which
	has  been  produced  by the plaintiffs	themselves  and	 its
	genuineness  has not been controverted before us.  As  such,
	by virtue of the definition of "shamlat deh" in Clause	 (g)
	of
section 2
, the suit land fall within the  definition  of
	"shamlat deh". The question remains whether it was  excluded
	from  that  definition by virtue of sub-clause (iv)  of	 the
	proviso to clause (g) which reads as follows .--
"(iv)  having  been acquired before  the	26th
		      January,	1950, by a person by purchase or  in
		      exchange for proprietary land from a co-sharer
		      in  the  shamilat deh is so  recorded  in	 the
		      jamabandi or is supported by a valid deed;"
It has been argued by counsel for the appellants that as
	the  suit  land was recorded in the aforesaid  Jamabandi  as
	"village  shamilat", in possession of the owners, it  should
	be  held  that	the land was   not used	 as  "shamlat  deh."
	Counsel has argued further that as   the land was  purchased
	by the plaintiffs' ancestor Udham Singh who, had founded the
	village,  from	Raja  Sansar Chand, and a part	of  it	 was
	received by way of gift from Smt.  Dhani, before January 26,
	1950,  and it was so recorded in the 'jamabandi',  the	suit
	land  was excluded from the definition of "shamlat  deh"  by
	virtue	of  the aforesaid subclause (iv')  of  the  proviso.
	The  argument is however untenable because of  two  reasons.
	Firstly,  the  entry  in the 'jamabandi'  of  1914-15  which
	recorded  that	the land was in possession  of	the  owners,
	was quite innocuous, because it was made for the reason that
	it  was	  in nobody else's possession.	The fact  that	even
	then  it  was recorded in the 'jamabandi' as  "shamlat	deh"
shows that that particular character of the land was  recog-
	nised even as far back as 1914-15, and it could not  detract
	from  that nature of the land merely because it was  further
	stated	in the 'Jamabandi' that it was in the possession  of
	the owners "as per respective shares in khewat".   Secondly,
	the  aforesaid sub-clause (iv) requires that in order to  be
	excluded  from	  the category of "shamlat  deh",  the	land
	should	have  been acquired by purchase or in  exchange	 for
	proprietary land from a co-sharer in the "shamlat deh."	  It
	is not in controversy before us, and is not even the case of
	the  appellants,  that the suit	 land was  acquired by	pur-
	chase  or  in exchange for  proprietary land from  any	 co-
	sharer	in  the "shamlat deh."	Then there is  the   further
	fact  that  the appellants have not been able to prove	that
	the suit land was recorded
864
in the 'Jamabandi' as having been so acquired; and they have
	not  been  able to produce any valid deed  of  purchase	 .or
	exchange from any such co-sharer.   We are therefore  unable
	to think that the view taken in the impugned Judgment of the
	High Court requires reconsideration.
The appeal fails and is dismissed with costs.
M.R.				       Appeal dismissed.
865