[Cites
11
, Cited by
7
]
Supreme Court of India
National Textile Corporation And ... vs State Of Maharashtra And Others on 12 April, 1977
Equivalent citations: 1977 AIR 1566, 1977 SCR (3) 525
Author:
A.C. Gupta
Bench:
A.C. Gupta
,
P.S. Kailasam
PETITIONER:
NATIONAL TEXTILE CORPORATION AND ANOTHER

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND OTHERS

DATE OF JUDGMENT12/04/1977

BENCH:
GUPTA, A.C.
BENCH:
GUPTA, A.C.
KAILASAM, P.S.

CITATION:
 1977 AIR 1566		  1977 SCR  (3) 525
 1977 SCC  (3)	 4


ACT:
Sick Textile   Undertakings  (Nationalisation)	Act,
	1974
--Incumbrance-Meaning of--Notification issued under
Land
	Acquisition Act
--If an incumbrance.



HEADNOTE:
	    The state Government issued two notifications under	 ss.
	4  and	6  of the
Land Acquisition Act
seeking	 to  acquire
	certain	 land belonging to a textile mill. When the  Letters
	Patent	Appeal of the 'Textile mill was pending	 before	 the
	High Court the mill was taken over by the Central Government
	and  later  the appellant was substituted for  the  original
	appellant.
	    By	virtue	of  s. 3 of the
Sick  Textile	Undertakings
	(Nationalisation)  Act,	 1974
the management of	 every	sick
	textile mill vested absolutely in the Central Government and
	later  in the appellant.
Section 4(2)
of the  Act  provides
	that  all  property which vested in the	 Central  Government
	shall,	by  force of such vesting, be freed  and  discharged
	from trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and all other
	incumbrances affecting it and any attachment, injunction  or
	decree	or  order of any court restricting the use  of	such
	property  in any manner shall be deemed to have	 been  with-
	drawn.	 The  appellants'  contention  that  by	 reason	  of
	ss.4(2)the  two	 notifications must be held to	have  become
	ineffective  because the section provides that all  property
	vested	in  the Central Government shall be  free  from	 all
	incumbrances affecting it was rejected by the High Court.
	Dismissing the appeal to this Court,
	HELD : The High Court was right in its view that the notifi-
	cations	 issued	   under ss 4 and 6 of the
Land	 Acquisition
	Act
were not incumbrances and could   not be held  to	have
	become	inoperative  on the land  vesting  in  the   Central
	Government. [528 B]
	      1.The  term "incumbrance" has not been defined in	 the
	Act,   The  dictionary	meaning given to  incumbrance  is  a
	claim,	lien or liability attached to property.	  An  incum-
	brance	in  this sense has to be a liability  "attached	  to
	property".   a burden or liability that runs with the  land.
	The notifications issued under the
Land Acquisition Act
are
	not a burden or liability attached to the property.[528 B]
	    2.	"Incumbrance" in the context of
s. 4(2)
means	some
	burden or liability attached to the property ,like mortgage,
	charge,	 lien  etc.  That this is so would appear  from	 the
	words  'all other incumbrances affecting it".	Having	said
	that  the vesting will be free from trust etc.,	 sub-s.	 (2)
	goes   on  to  add  that  "any	attachment.  injunction	  or
	decree	....  shall be deemed to be withdrawn" upon vesting.
	If  "incumbrance" meant any kind of fetter, any	 attachment,
	injunction or decree or order restricting use of the proper-
	ty  would  be included in "all other  incumbrances"  and  it
	would have been quite unnecessary to mention them  separate-
	ly.   This means that fetters on the property  like  attach-
	ment, injunction or decree or order of any court restricting
	the use of the property which are deemed to have been  with-
	drawn  upon. the property vesting in the Central  Government
	are  not really incumbrances within the meaning of the	word
	as  used in
s.4(2)
[528 E-G]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No.  309  of
	1976.
Appeal  by	Special Leave from the	Judgment  and  Order
	dated  the  22nd January, 1975 of the Bombay High  Court  in
	Appeal No. 106 of 1969 in Misc. Petition No. 320 of 1964.
	7-502 SCI/77
526
I. N. Shroff and H.S. Parihar for the Appellants.
	   M.N. Shroff for Respondents 1 and 2.
V.P. Ram an, Addl. Sol. Genl, K.J. John and	Shri  Narain
	for Respondent No. 3.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
	    GUPTA, J.  Ahmedabad Jupiter Spinning Weaving and  Manu-
	facturing  Company Limited was the owner of 5900 Sq. yds  of
	land  forming  part of its mill premises at Lower  Parel  in
	Bombay	which  was sought to be acquired by the	 Maharashtra
	Government  for	 a municipal  school.	Notifications  under
sections  4
and
6
were issued on June 19, 1961 and  May	 29,
	1964  respectively.   The company filed a  petition  in	 the
	Bombay High Court challenging the validity of the  notifica-
	tions on several grounds.  A single Judge of the High  Court
	having	dismissed the writ petition on August 11,  1969	 the
	company	 preferred  a. letters patent  appeal.	 During	 the
	pendency   of  the  appeal,  the management of	the  company
	was taken over by the Central Government on October 8,	1972
	under  the
Industries (Development  and  Regulation)	Act,
	1951
.	On September 21, 1974 an ordinance called  the	Sick
	Textile	  Undertakings	(Nationalisation)  Ordinance,	1974
	was .promulgated by virtue of which the textile	 undertaking
	of the company the 'management of which had been taken	over
	by the Central Government, vested absolutely in the  Central
	Government  with effect from the "appointed day", which	 was
	April 1, 1974, and immediately thereafter stood	 transferred
	and  vested in the National Textile Corporation.  The  Ordi-
	nance  was later replaced by the
Sick  Textile	Undertakings
	(Nationalisation) Act, 1974
(hereinafter referred to as Sick
	Textile	 Act).
Sections 3
and
4
of the Act are as follows:
Acquisition	 of  rights   of  owners  in	respect	  of
	sick  textile undertakings.
"3.	(1  ) On the  appointed	 day   every
		      sick textile   taking and the right title	 and
		      interest	 of the owner in relation  to  every
		      such  sick  textile undertakings	shall  stand
		      transferred to, and shall vest absolutely	 in,
		      the Central Government.
(2) Every sick textile undertaking which
		      stands  vested  in the Central  Government  by
		      virtue of sub-Section (1 ) shall,	 immediately
		      after it has so vested, stand transferred	 to,
		      and  vested in, the National Textile  Corpora-
tion.
General effect of vesting
4.	(1  ) The sick	textile	 undertaking
		      referred	to in
section 2
shall be  deemed  to
		      include  all  assets,   rights,	 leaseholds,
		      powers,  authorities and privileges  and	 all
		      property,	 movable  and  immovable,  including
		      lands,  buildings,  workshops, stores, instru-
		      ments, machinery and equipment, cash balances,
		      cash  on hand, reserve funds, investments	 and
		      book debts and all other rights and  interests
		      in,  or arising out of, such property as	were
		      immediately before  the  appointed
527
day  in  the ownership, possession,  power  or
		      control	of  the owner of  the  sick  textile
		      undertaking,   whether   within	or   outside
		      India,  and all books of	account,   registers
		      and   all other documents of  whatever  nature
		      relating	thereto	 and shall also be deemed to
		      include the liabilities and obligations speci-
		      fied in sub-section (2) of
section 5
.
(2) All property as aforesaid which have
		      vested  in the Central Government under	sub-
		      section (1)  of
section 3
shall, by force  of
		      such vesting, be freed and discharged from any
		      trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien	 and
		      all  other incumbrances affecting it, and	 any
		      attachment,  injunction or decree or order  of
		      any court restricting the use of such property
		      in  any manner shall be deemed to	 have	been
		      withdrawn."
The other sub-sections of
section 4
are not relevant for the
	present purpose.
The	 National  Textile Corporation applied to  the	High
	Court for being substituted in place of the original  appel-
	lant in the letters patent appeal which was pending and	 the
	application was	 allowed.  The main contention on behalf  of
	the  substituted appellant in  the High Court was  that	 the
	two notifications under
sections 4
and
6
of  the Land Acqui-
	sition Act must be held to have	 become	 ineffective in view
	of  section  4(2)  of the Sick Textile	Act  which  provides
	that-all  property  which vests in  the	 Central  Government
	under
section	3(1)
does so free  from  all  "incumbrances
	affecting it."	The  High. Court dismissed the appeal  hold-
	ing that the notifications under  the
Land Acquisition	 Act
were not incumbrances within the meaning of  section 4(2) of
	the  Sick Textile Act.	In the appeal before us	 filed	with
	special leave obtained from this Court, the National Textile
	Corporation  questions the correctness of the view taken  by
	the High Court.
Thus  the only question for determination in the  appeal
	is whether the notifications issued under the Land  Acquisi-
	tion Act are incumbrances within the meaning of the word  as
	used in
section 4
(2} of the Sick Textile Act.
Section 3
and
	the first two sub-sections of section 4 of the Sick  Textile
	Act  are the  only  provisions	relevant  in  this  context.
Section	 3
provides  that on  the appointed  day every sick
	textile	 undertaking shall vest absolutely in	the  Central
	Government, and then in the National  Textile	Corporation.
	Subsection  (1 ) of
section 4
states that  the	undertakings
	vesting	 in the Central Government under
section 3
shall  be
	deemed	to include all assets, rights and interests  in	 the
	ownership,  possession	or  control of the  owners  of	such
	undertakings  immediately  before the  appointed  day.	Sub-
	section (2) of
section 4
provides that all property  vesting
	in  the Central Government under
section 3
shall, "by  force
	of  such  vesting, be freed and discharged from	 any  trust,
	obligation,  mortgage,	charge, lien and  all  other  incum-
	brances	 affecting  it, and any	 attachment,  injunction  or
	decree	or order of any court restricting the use   of	such
	property  in any manner shall be deemed to have	 been  with-
	drawn".
Counsel for the appellant argues that sub-section (2) of
section 4
is intended to vest the sick textile	undertakings
	in the Central Govern-
528
ment  free  from all fetters, and the  notifications  issued
	under  the
Land  Acquisition Act
which had  the  effect  of
	freezing  the price of the land were fetters falling in	 the
	category  of "other incumbrances" mentioned in section	4(2)
	of  the	 Sick Textile Act.  The term 'incumbrance'  has	 not
	been  defined in the Act.  In Wharton's Law  lexicon  incum-
	brance	is  described as being a claim, lien  or  liability,
	attached to property. This is the sense in which the term is
	ordinarily used.  An incumbrance in this sense' has to be  a
	liability  "attached to property",  it must be a  burden  or
	liability  that	 runs with the land, as the High  Court	 has
	held.	But a notification issued by the  Government   under
	the
Land Acquisition Act
is not a burden Or liability	that
	is  attached  to the property.	The sovereign right  of	 the
	State  to take	proceedings for the acquisition of any	land
	for  public purpose is similar to its right to impose a	 tax
	on the land which is  paramount to  the	 ownership over	 the
	land  and outside  it".	  [see
The Collector of Bombay	  v.
	Nusserwanji  Rattanji Mistri & others
[1955] 1 SCR 1311	 (at
	1323).	Under sub-section (2) of
section 4
of the Sick	Tex-
	tile  Act  all	property which have vested  in	the  Central
	Government under
section 3 (1)
shall be freed and discharged
	from  any trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and	 all
	other  incumbrances  affecting it,   and   any	 attachment,
	injunction  or decree or order of any court restricting	 the
	use of such property shall be deemed to have been withdrawn.
	Counsel	 for the respondent. State of  Maharashtra,  submits
	that  the term incumbrance should take colour from the	dif-
	ferent	kinds of burden on  the	 land specified	 in
section
	4(2)
preceding the words all other incumbrances"it is argued
	that  incumbrance in the context means' Some burden  or	 li-
	ability	 that  is attached to the property  ,like  mortgage,
	charge,	 lien  That this is so would also appear  from	what
	follows	 the  words "all other incumbrances  affecting	it".
	Having	said  that  the	 vesting will be  free	from  trust,
	obligation,  mortgage, charge,	lien  and  all other  incum-
	brances	 affecting it. sub-section (2) goes on to  add	that
	"any attachment. injunction or decree or order of any  court
	restricting the use of such property in any manner shall  be
	deemed to have been withdrawn" upon vesting.  If the  appel-
	lant's	 construction  of  the provision were  correct,	 and
	incumbrance  meant any kind of fetter, any  attachment,	 in-
	junction  or  decree or order restricting the use   of	 the
	property  would be included in "all other incumbrances"	 and
	it  would have been quite unnecessary to mention them  sepa-
	rately.	  This makes it clear that fetters on  the  property
	like  attachment,   injunction	or decree or  order  of	 any
	court  restricting the use of the property which are  deemed
	to  have  been withdrawn upon the property  vesting  in	 the
	Central	 Government are not really incumbrances	 within	 the
	meaning of the word as used in sub-section (2) of
section 4
.
	We  therefore agree with the High Court that  the  notifica-
	tions issued under
sections 4
and
6
of the Land Acquisition
	Act  are not incumbrances and cannot be held to have  become
	inoperative on the land in question vesting  in the  Central
	Government.
The appeal is dismissed but in the circumstances of the case
	without any order as to cost.
P. B.R.					   Appeal dismissed.
529