[Cites
16
, Cited by
15
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of U.P vs Smt. Sarjoo Devi & Ors on 27 July, 1977
Equivalent citations: 1977 AIR 2196, 1978 SCR (1) 181, AIR 1977 SUPREME COURT 2196, 1977 4 SCC 2, 1977 3 ALL LR 447, 1977 ALL WC 565, 1978 (1) SCR 181, 1977 U J (SC) 512, 1978 (1) SCWR 378, 1978 REVDEC 210, 1977 2 SCJ 475 (2)
Author:
Jaswant Singh
Bench:
Jaswant Singh
,
P.K. Goswami
PETITIONER:
STATE OF U.P.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SMT.  SARJOO DEVI & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT27/07/1977

BENCH:
SINGH, JASWANT
BENCH:
SINGH, JASWANT
GOSWAMI, P.K.

CITATION:
 1977 AIR 2196		  1978 SCR  (1) 181
 1977 SCC  (4)	 2


ACT:
U.P. Zamindari Abolition & Land Reforms Act, 1950
-ss. 3(14),
212  and 212A-Scope of-Land settled on the  respondent	with
hereditary tenancy rights-Sabhapati of Gaon claimed the land
to be common pasture land-No evidence to show the land to be
pasture land-Sub Divisional Officer ordered ejectment of the
tenant-Legality of the order.
Words and phrases-"Held" meaning of.



HEADNOTE:
Under  section	3  of the, U.P. Land  Utilisation  Act,	 the
Collector  served a notice on two intermediaries  under	 the
U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950
, calling
upon them either to cultivate the land belonging to them  or
to  let it out to other persons for cultivation.   Thereupon
in  1950  the  land was settled on  respondent	No.  1	with
hereditary  tenancy  rights.  In 1954,	a  notification	 was
issued	under  the
Indian Forest Act,  1927
declaring	that
certain	 lands,	 including  the land in	 dispute,  would  be
constituted  as reserve forest.	 Respondent No. 1  preferred
her  claim  before the Forest Settlement  Officer.   In	 the
meantime  respondent  No. 5, Sabbapati of  the	Gaon  Samaj,
filed  an  application	before	the  Sub-Divisional  Officer
claiming  that the land was customary pasture land and	that
respondent  No. 1, who had encroached upon the land,  should
be   ejected.	 That  application  having   been   granted,
respondent  No.	 1 filed a suit against	 the  appellant	 and
others	for a declaration that the Sub-Divisional  Officer's
order  was null and void and was not binding on her  because
she was the Sirdar in possession of the land.
The  trial Court held that the suit land was never  recorded
in  the	 revenue  papers as customary pasture  land  but  as
'Parti'	 land fit for cultivation and declared the order  of
the  Sub-Divisional  Officer  to  be  null  and	 void.	 The
District  Court and the High Court upheld the order  of	 the
trial Court.
In  appeal before this Court, it was contended that (i)	 the
trial  court  was wrong in holding that	 the  Sub-Divisional
Officer's  order was null and void; (ii) the impugned  order
was  final and (iii) the land not having been ever  occupied
for the purpose connected with agriculture respondent No.  1
could not be said to be a hereditary tenant.
Dismissing the appeal,
HELD  : (1) (a) The Courts below were right in holding	that
the  land in question was not customary common pasture	land
nor  it ever been used as customary pasture land or  pasture
land in any year.  The Sub-Divisional Officer acted  without
jurisdiction  and  the impugned order  was  wholly  illegal,
ineffective, null and void and not binding on respondent No.
1. [186 B]
(b)  A	conjoint reading of the provisions of
ss. 212-A
and
212
of the 1950 Act would show that the Chairman, member  or
society	 of  a committee referred to in
s. 121
can  make  an
application to the Collector for ejectment of a person	only
if  the	 land  of  which  he is	 in  possession	 is  of	 the
description  specified	in
s. 212
, that is, (i)	 if  it	 was
recorded  as  customary	 pasture land or (ii) if  it  was  a
customary common pasture land.	The evidence adduced in	 the
case does not at all show that the suit land was recorded as
customary pasture land nor does it show that it was in	fact
customary common pasture land.	On the contrary the relevant
revenue records showed that the/ land in question was "Parti
fit for cultivation." [185 H]
(2)The Sub-Divisional Officer's order cannot be held to be
final  and  the suit of respondent No. 1  to  establish	 her
right  was clearly maintainable.  The impugned order  passed
under
s. 212-A
is not final and it is open to the party
182
against whom the order of ejectment was passed to  institute
a  suit	 to establish the right claimed by it.	It  is	only
when the suit instituted by the person sought to be  ejected
fails  that the order of the, ejectment becomes	 conclusive.
[186 G]
(3)(a) This Court in Budhan Singh & Anr. v. Nabi Bux &	Anr.
[1970]	2 S.C.R. 10, interpreted the word "held" in
s. 9
of
the 1950 Act as meaning possession by "legal title". [187 E]
(b)A  perusal of the definition of the word 'land' in  the
Act would show that it is not necessary for the land to fall
within	the  purview  of this definition, that	it  must  be
actually  under	 cultivation  or be  occupied  for  purposes
connected   with  agriculture.	 The  requirement   of	 the
definition is amply satisfied if the land is either- held or
occupied for purposes connected with agriculture.  The	word
"held" in the definition is of wide import. [187 A]
In  the instant case, it has been concurrently found by	 the
Courts	below on the basis of evidence adduced in  the	case
that the land in question was let out to respondent No. 1 by
the  intermediaries in May 1950 for growing crops; that	 she
brought	 a  substantial portion thereof	 under	cultivation,
paid  rent to the intermediaries, had been regularly  paying
revenue	 to  the State and that she had all  along  lawfully
continued  to  hold the land" for  purposes  connected	with
agriculture.  From the appellant's own revenue record it  is
clear  that  respondent	 No. 1 was holding  the	 land  as  a
hereditary tenant on the date immediately preceding the-date
of vesting.  She has, therefore, fulfilled all the requisite
conditions  and become a sirdar of the land on the  date  of
vesting under
S. 19
of the Act.	 L187 E-F]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal  No.  2334  of
1968.
Appeal by Special Leave from the, Judgment and Order  dated
5-2-1968  of the Allahabad High Court in Second	 Appeal	 No.
3257 of 1960.
G. N. Dikshit, and O. P. Rana for the Appellant.
Fauidar	 Rao, Jagdish Misra and U. D. Prasad for  Respondent
No. 1.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
JASWANT	 SINGH,	 J. This appeal by special  leave  which  is
directed  against the judgment and decree dated February  5,
1968 of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad  affirming
the  decisions	of the District Judge and the  Civil  Judge,
Basti,	dated  May 20, 1960 and July 27,  1959	respectively
decreeing  the	suit instituted by respondent No.  1  herein
under sub-section (7) of
section 212A
of the U.P.  Zamindari
Abolition  and	Land Reforms Act, 1950 (U.P. Act  No.  1  of
1951)  (hereinafter referred to as 'the U.P. Z.A.  and	L.R.
Act'), which came into force on January 26, 195 1, arises in
the following circumstances:
The  land in dispute measuring 142 bighas, 1 biswas  and  18
dhurs situate in village Baudhara, Tappa Menhdawal,  Pargana
Maghar East, Tehsil Khalilabad, District Basti, belonged  in
1950  A.D. to Girdhar Das and Purshottam Das,  Zamindars  of
Gorakhpur  City,  who became intermediaries under  the	U.P.
Z.A.  and  L.R. Act.  Finding that the said land  was  lying
uncultivated, the Collector, Gorakhpur, served the aforesaid
Zamindars  with	 a notice under
section 3
of-the  U.P.	Land
Utilisation  Act calling upon them either to  cultivate	 the
land themselves or to let out the same to other persons	 for
cultivation.  The said Zamindars thereupon settled the	land
in May 1950 (1357 Fasli) with respondent No. 1 by  executing
'pattas'   in  her.  favour  for  growing  crops  i.e.	 for
cultivation and conferred hereditary tenancy rights on	her.
On May 1, 1954, a notification under
section 4
of the Indian
183
Forest	Act,  1927
was published in  the  U.P.	 Gazette  in
respect of 342 acres of land of village-, Baudhara including
the  land in question declaring that it had been decided  to
constitute  the	 said land as a reserved forest.   This	 was
followed  in  June, 1954 by a proclamation  as	required  by
section	 6
of the Forest Act.	Respondent No.	1  thereupon
preferred her claim in respect of her rights to the land  in
question before the, Forest Settlement Officer.	 On  January
22, 1955, when the said claim preferred by respondent No.  1
was  still pending, Ram Naresh Tewari, father of  respondent
No.  5,	 describing  himself as	 Sabhapati  of	Gaon  Samaj,
Baraipur,  filed  an  application  purporting  to  be  under
section	 212A
, (1) of the U.P. Z.A and L.R. Act	 before	 the
Sub Divisional Officer, Khalilabad (who was empowered by the
State Government to discharge the functions of a  Collector)
for ejectment from the land in question of respondent No.  1
on  the ground that it was a customary common  pasture	land
and  as such had vested in the Gaon Samaj and that the	said
respondent had encroached upon the same.  By his order dated
August	16,  1955, the Sub Divisional  Officer,	 Khalilabad,
allowed	 the aforesaid application of Ram Naresh Tewari	 and
ordered	  the	ejectment  of  respondent   No.	  1.   After
unsuccessfully trying by means of a review petition to	have
the aforesaid order of her ejectment quashed, respondent No.
1  filed  the aforesaid suit, being suit No. 7 of  1956,  on
February 15, 1960 under sub-section (7) of section 212-A  of
the  U.P. Z.A. and L.R. Act against the State of  U.P.,	 the
appellant  herein,  and	 four others  including	 Ram  Naresh
Tewari, the father of respondent No. 5, for declaration that
the  aforesaid order passed by the Sub	Divisional  Officer,
Khalilabad, was illegal, ineffective, null and void and	 was
not binding on her  and that she was a sirdar in  possession
of the land in question. She   also   prayed   for    a
perpetual   injunction	restraining  the   defendants	from
interfering  with her possession and enjoyment of the  land.
The  case  as set up by respondent No. 1 was  that  in	1357
Fasli  (1950  A.D.),  the zamindars viz.   Girdhar  Das	 and
Purshottam  Das	 who  were  in possession  of  the  land  in
question duly executed pattas conferring hereditary  tenancy
rights	in  the land in her favour; that  the  said  tenancy
rights were confirmed by virtue of the decrees passed by the
competent  revenue  courts  in suits brought  by  her  under
sections 59 ,and 61 of the U.P. Tenancy Act, 1939 (U.P.	 Act
No.  XVII of 1939) (hereinafter referred to as 'the
U.P.  T.
Act
);  that  on the notified date viz.	July  1,  1952,	 she
became a sirdar of the land in question under section 19  of
the  U.P.  Z.A. and L.R. Act; that since  1357	Fasli  (1950
A.D.)  she  had been in actual possession of  the  land	 and
using it for agricultural purposes or for purposes connected
with agriculture and had been appropriating its produce	 and
regularly  paying rent to the aforesaid zamindars and  since
July  1, 1952, she had been continuously paying	 revenue  to
the State Government; that as the land in question could not
and  did not vest in the Gaon Samaj, neither the Gaon  Samaj
nor  Ram Naresh Tewari had any right to make an	 application
under  section 212-A (1) of the U,P.  Z.A. and L.R. Act	 and
that  the  land not having been a common pasture land  or  a
customary  common  pasture land before or  after  August  8,
1946, but having been in exclusive possession and  ownership
of the aforesaid zamindars till the execution by them of the
aforesaid pattas and after their execution in her  exclusive
possession,  it	 was  not land of  the	nature	which  could
legitimately  be said to fall within the purview of
section
212
of the
184
U.P. Z.A. and L.R. Act and that the proceedings taken by the
Sub, Divisional Officer, Khalilabad, under section 212-A  of
the U.P. Z.A. and L.R. Act were illegal, null and void.	 The
appellant herein alone contested the suit.  The rest of	 the
defendants having chosen to remain absent despite service of
summons,  the  case proceeded ex-parte against.	 them.	 The
appellant pleaded inter alia that as the land had never been
in  the actual possession of the aforesaid zamindars  before
or  after the enforcement of the U.P. Z.A. and L.R. Act,  it
vested	in  the State Government; that the land	 had  always
remained a customary pastureland of public utility in  which
no  tenancy  or	 other	right  could  be  conferred  by	 the
zamindars  in  favour of respondent No. 1; that	 the  trans-
action of lease relied upon by respondent No. 1 was  invalid
and unenforceable; that the suit land legally vested in	 the
Gaon  Samaj  and  that the impugned  ejectment	order  dated
August	16,  1955  passed by  the  Sub	Divisional  Officer,
Khalilabad  was	 binding on respondent No. 1  and  the	suit
brought by her was not maintainable.
On a consideration of the oral and documentary evidence, the
trial  court came to the conclusion that the suit  land	 was
never  recorded in the revenue papers as  customary  pasture
land but was recorded in the Khatoni relating to 1357  Fasli
(1950 A.D.) as "Parti land fit for cultivation"; that  there
was  also  no  evidence to support  the	 contention  of	 the
appellant that the suit land was used in any year as  common
pastures  land or as pasture land; that even  the  appellant
had  to concede that some 10 or, 12 bigha of the  suit	land
had been brought under cultivation by respondent No. 1; that
the  suit land had been let out to respondent No. 1  in	 May
1950  when she became a hereditary tenant of the same;	that
the suit land not being a customary pasture land, the  order
dated August 16, 1955 passed by the Sub-Divisional  Officer,
Khalilabad was illegal, null and void and was not binding on
the  plaintiff.	 The trial court further held that the	oral
and  documentary  evidence  adduced  by	 respondent  No.   1
established that she had been recorded in the revenue papers
as hereditary tenant of the land; that respondent No. 1	 had
also been held by the competent revenue courts in suits Nos.
1178 of 1950, 780 of 1950 and 285 of 1952 filed by her under
sections  59
and
61
of the U.P. T. Act as hereditary  tenant
and that she had become sirdar of the suit land on the	date
of  vesting.   With these findings, the Civil  Judge,  Basti
decreed the suit with costs in favour of respondent No. 1 by
his  judgment and decree dated July 27, 1959.  Aggrieved  by
this  Judgment	and  decree, the State of U.P.	went  up  in
appeal to the District Judge, Basti, who by his judgment and
decree	dated May 20, 1960 affirmed the	 aforesaid  judgment
and  decree of the trial court holding inter alia  that	 the
suit  land  had	 been let out to respondent No.	 1  for	 the
purpose	 of growing crops; that in revenue papers  (Exhibits
1,  7 and 8) which relate to the years 1358, 1359  and	1362
Faslis,	 she had been recorded as hereditary tenant  of	 the
suit  land  and she became, sirdar thereof on  the  date  of
vesting	 viz.	July 1, 1952.  On further appeal,  the	High
Court  by  its judgment dated February 5, 1968,	 upheld	 the
aforesaid  judgments and decrees of the trial court and	 the
District  Judge,  Basti.  It is against	 this  judgment	 and
decree that the State of U.P. had come up in appeal to	this
Court.
185
Appearing  on behalf of the appellant, Mr. Dixit  has  urged
that the material on the record did not warrant the findings
of  the	 courts below that the suit land not  being  of	 the
nature contemplated by section 212 of the U.P. Z.A. and L.R.
Act,  the  aforesaid  order passed  by	the  Sub  Divisional
Officer,  Khalilabad,  was null and void.   He	has  further
contended  that the impugned order was final and  conclusive
and the suit out of which the present appeal has arisen	 was
not  maintainable.  He has lastly submitted that it is-	 the
definition  of "land" as contained in section 3(14)  of	 the
U.P. Z.A. and L.R. Act and not the one contained in
section
3(1)
of the U.P. T. Act which is relevant for the purpose of
the  instant  case and that the land not  having  been	ever
occupied   for	the  purpose  connected	 with	agriculture,
respondent No. 1 could not be said to be a hereditary tenant
thereof and the courts below have erred in declaring her  as
sirdar thereof.	 We shall consider these points seriatim.
Point  No. 1 :-For a proper determination of this point,  it
is  necessary to refer to section 212-A(1) of the U.P.	Z.A.
and  L.R. Act under which the aforesaid application  by	 Ram
Naresh	Tewari, father of Sheo Ram Tewan, respondent  No.  5
herein	purported to be made as also to section 212  of	 the
same Act which is alluded to in section 212-A(1) :
"212-A(1).     Without   prejudice   to	 the
	      provisions  of  section  212,  the   Chairman,
	      member  or society of a committee referred  to
	      in  section 121, may, make an  application  to
	      the Collector for ejectment from the land of a
	      person in possession of a land referred to  in
	      section 212.
(7)Where	an order for ejectment	has  been
	      passed  under this section, the party  against
	      whom the order has been passed, may institute.
	      a	 suit to establish the right claimed by	 it,
	      but  subject to the results of such  suit
	      the order passed under sub-section (4) or	 (6)
	      shall be conclusive."
"212.   Ejectment	 of  persons  from  land  of
	      public utility.  Any person who, on or after
	      the  eighth  day	of  August  1946  has	been
	      admitted	as a tenure or grove holder  of,  or
	      being  an intermediary has brought  under	 his
	      own  cultivation or has planted a grove  upon,
	      land  which was recorded as or  was  customary
	      common  pasture  land,  cremation	 or   burial
	      ground,  tank pond path way or Khalian,  shall
	      be  liable notwithstanding anything  contained
	      in section 199, on the suit of the Gaon  Sabha
	      to ejectment from the land, on payment of such
	      compensation as may be prescribed."
A  conjoint reading of the provisions of these two  sections
would  show  that  the	Chairman, member  or  society  of  a
committee referred to in section 121 can make an application
to the Collector for ejectment of a person only if the	land
of which he is in possession is of the description specified
in  section  212 i.e. (1) if it was  recorded  as  customary
pasture	 land  or (2) if it was a customary  common  pasture
land.  The evidence adduced in the case does not at all show
that  the suit land was recorded as customary  pasture	land
nor does it show that it was in fact
186
customary  common  pasture  land.   On	the  contrary,	 the
appellant's  own  record  clearly  negatives  its-case.	  In
Exhibits 2 and 45 which are copies of settlement Khatoni  of
1323  Fasli,  the land in question is  clearly	recorded  as
'Parti' with long thatching grass.  Again in Khatoni of 1357
Fasli  (1950 A.D.), the land is recorded as "Parti  tit	 for
cultivation".	The courts below were, therefore,  perfectly
right  in holding that there is no evidence to	support	 the
appellant's contention that the land in question was  either
recorded  as customary common pasture land or had ever	been
used as customary pasture land or pasture land in any  year.
Manifestly therefore, the Sub Divisional Officer, Khalilabad
acted without jurisdiction and the impugned order passed  by
him  directing	the ejectment of the respondent	 No.  1	 was
wholly	illegal, ineffective, null and void and not  it	 all
binding on respondent No. 1.
Point  No. 2 :-The second point urged by Mr, Dixit  is	also
devoid	of substance.  Even a cursory glance at	 sub-section
(7)  of	 section  212-A	 of  the  U.P.	Z.A.  and  L.R.	 Act
reproduced above is enough to show that the order passed  by
the Sub Divisional Officer, Khalilabad, under section  212-A
is  not final and it is open to the party against  whom	 the
order  of  ejectment  is  passed  to  institute	 a  suit  to
establish the right claimed by it.  It is only when the suit
instituted by the person sought to be ejected fails that the
order of ejectment becomes conclusive.	The aforesaid  order
passed	by  the Sub Divisional Officer,	 Khalilabad  cannot,
therefore,  be	held to, be final and the  suit	 brought  by
respondent  No.	 1  to	establish  her	right  was   clearly
maintainable.
Point No. 3 :-For a decision of this point, it is  essential
to refer to sections 3(14) and 19 of the U.P. Z.A. and	L.R.
Act, which read as follows :
"3  (14).	 Land (except in sections  109,	 143
	      and  144	and Chapter VII means land  held  or
	      occupied	  for	purposes   connected
	      with  agriculture,  horticulture	or animal
	      husbandry	 which	includes  pisciculture	 and
	      poultry farming."
1 9. All land held or deemed to have been held
	      on the data immediately preceding the date  of
	      vesting by any person as
(i) (ii) (iii) (iv)      hereditary tenant
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
	      (iX)
	      shall,  have in cases provided for  in  clause
(d)  of  sub-section  (1) of
section  18
,  be
	      deemed  to be settled by the State  Government
	      with  such  person who shall, subject  to	 the
	      provisions of this Act, be entitled except  as
	      provided in sub-section (2) of
section 18
,  to
	      take   or	 retain,  possession  as  a   sirdar
	      thereof.."
187
A  bare	 perusal  of the definition of	the  word  "land  as
contained  in  section 3(14) of the U.P. Z.A. and  L.R.	 Act
which  is  reproduced  above  would  show  that	 it  is	 not
necessary  for the land to fall within the purview  of	this
definition  that  it must be actually under  cultivation  or
occupied  for  purposes	 connected  with  agriculture.	 The
requirement  of	 the definition is, in	our  opinion,  amply
satisfied  if  the  land  is either  held  or  occupied	 for
purposes  connected  with  agriculture.	  The  world  "held"
occurring  in the above definition, which is a pa. pple.  of
the  word  "hold"  is of wide  import.	 In  the  Unabridged
Edition	 of  "The  Random House Dictionary  of	the  English
Language",  the	 word "hold" has been inter alia  stated  to
mean  "to have the ownership or use of; keep as one's  own."
In  'The  Dictionary of English Law' by	 Earl  Jowitt  (1959
Edition),  the word "hold" has been interpreted	 as  meaning
"to have as tenant".
In  Stroud's  Judicial	Dictionary  (Fourth  Edition),	 the
distinction  between holding and occupation is sought to  be
brought	 out  by  quoting  the	following  observations	  by
Littledale, J. in R. v. Ditcheat(1).
"There  is  a material  difference  between  a
	      holding and an occupation.  A person may hold,
	      though  he  does not occupy.  A  tenant  is  a
	      person  who  holds  of another;  he  does	 not
	      necessarily occupy.
In  Webster's  New  Twentieth  Century	Dictionary   (Second
Edition),  it  is stated that in legal	parlance,  the	word
"held"	means  to possess by 'legal titled'.   Relying	upon
this connotation, this Court in
Budhan Singh & Anr. v.	Nabi
Bux & Anr.
(2), interpreted the word "held" in section. 9  of
the  U.P. Z.A. and L.R. Act as meaning possession  by  legal
title.
In  the instant case, it has been concurrently found by	 the
courts	below on the basis of evidence adduced in  the	case
that the land in question was let out to respondent No. 1 by
the  aforesaid intermediaries in May, 1950 (1357 Fasli)	 for
growing	 crops;	 that  she  brought  a	substantial  portion
thereof	 under	cultivation, paid rent to  Girdhar  Das	 and
Purshottam  Das	 in 1951 and 1952 against  proper  receipts;
that she has been regularly paying revenue to the  appellant
and  that she has all along lawfully continued to  hold	 the
land  for purposes connected with agriculture.	It  is	also
established  from  the appellant's own revenue	record	that
respondent No. 1 was holding the land as a hereditary tenant
on  the	 date  immediately preceding the  date	of  vesting.
There  is, therefore, no manner of doubt that she  fulfilled
all the requisite conditions and became a sirdar of the land
on the date of vesting under section 19 of the U.P. Z.A. and
L.R. Act.
All	the contentions raised by counsel for the  appellant,
therefore, fail.
For  the foregoing reasons, we find no force in this  appeal
which  is  dismissed.	The appellant  shall  pay  costs  of
respondent No. 1 as directed in court's order dated November
12, 19 8.
P.B.R.				  Appeal dismissed.
(1)  9 B & c 108.
(2)  [1970] 2 S.C.R. 10.
188