[Cites
10
, Cited by
20
]
Supreme Court of India
Kalumiya Karimmiya vs State Of Gujarat And Ors on 14 January, 1977
Equivalent citations: 1977 AIR 497, 1977 SCR (2) 606, AIR 1977 SUPREME COURT 497, 1977 (1) SCC 715, 1977 SCJ 345, 1977 2 SCR 606, 18 GUJLR 479, 1977 U J (SC) 153
Author:
P.K. Goswami
Bench:
P.K. Goswami
,
P.N. Shingal
PETITIONER:
KALUMIYA KARIMMIYA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF GUJARAT AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT14/01/1977

BENCH:
GOSWAMI, P.K.
BENCH:
GOSWAMI, P.K.
SHINGAL, P.N.

CITATION:
 1977 AIR  497		  1977 SCR  (2) 606
 1977 SCC  (1) 715


ACT:
Land  Acquisition Act
1894--Secs. 4, 5A,   6--Reasonable
	opportunity   in  inquiry under sec.  5A--Whether  collector
	bound to give copy  of	the  report submitted to  Government
	to  the owner of land--Effect of not giving the	 copy--Delay
	between
sec.  4
&
6
notifications  --Effect   of--What	  is
	unreasonable delay--Vagueness of
s. 4
notification.



HEADNOTE:
	    A notification was issued under
section 4(1)
of the Land
	Acquisition  Act,  1894 on 7.6.1966 intending to  acquire  a
	total area of 13,900 sq. yds of land including 474 sq. yards
	of the appellant's land in Surat  City.	 After	 considering
	the  objections under s. 5A a notification under
section  6
was issued on 13.1.1969.   The appellant filed a writ  peti-
	tion  in the High Court challenging the	 said  notifications
	which  was  summarily dismissed.  The High  Court,  however,
	granted	 a  certificate under
Art. 133(1) (b)
& (c)  of	 the
	Constitution on the question of vires of
sections 4
, 5A	 and
6
of the said Act.
	Appellant contended:
	    (1) In spite of the appellant's request for furnishing a
	copy  of the report under s. 5A the Collector did  not	give
	him  a	copy and, therefore, he did not	 have  adequate	 and
	proper hearing under s. 5A.
	    (2)	 There was considerable delay between the  notifica-
	tion under
sections 4
and
6
.
	(3)  Notification  under
s. 4
does not	contain	 the  public
	purpose as the requirement for "fire station".	The  notifi-
	cation	 merely mentions" station workshop and parking	pur-
	pose."
	Dismissing the appeal,
	    HELD:  (1) Ordinarily there should be no  difficulty  in
	furnishing  a copy of the report under s. 5A to an  objector
	when  he  asks for the same.  However, it is not  a  correct
	proposition  that hearing under s. 5A is invalid because  of
	failure to furnish a copy of the report at the conclusion of
	the proceeding under the said Act,  [608 F-G]
	    (2)	 A second hearing by the State Government after	 the
	report	is  furnished  by the Collector	 is  not  necessary.
	[608-H]
	    Abdul Husein Tayabali & Ors. v. State of Gujarat &	Ors.
	[1968] (1) SCR 597, followed.
	    (3)	 Since	other  dags of land  belonging	to  numerous
	persons were the subject matter of acquisition and individu-
	al objections had to be heard there was no inordinate  delay
	in  making the
section 6
notification.	Even  the  appellant
	has not submitted before the High Court a copy of his  writ-
	ten objection.	Nor has the same been produced in this Court
	with the result that one  does	not know how much delay	 was
	caused	by the appellant himself. The delay in	the  present
	case  is  about 2-1/2 years and there is not  even  a  clear
	statement  of  the appellant about delay to be	attributable
	to the Government.  [609 B-D]
	    (4)	 Submission that
s. 4
notification does not  contain
	the  public purpose is made on the basis of the copy of	 the
	notification  annexed in the paper book. Even in the  state-
	ment  of case the appellant has not raised  this  objection.
	On
	607
	the  other  hand it was conceded that the purpose  was	fire
	station,   workshop and parking place and the objection	 was
	that  the  appellant's 1 and was     not suitable  for	con-
	struction of fire station. [609E-F]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal  No.  2731	of
	1972.
(From  the	Judgment and Order dated 20-11-1970  of	 the
	Gujarat High Court in Special Appeal No.. 1247/70).
	Vimal Dave and Miss Kailash Mehta, for the appellant.
	D.V. Patel and M.N. Shroff, for respondent No. 1.
	L.N.  Sinha,  Sol. Genl and Girish Chandra,  for  respondent
	No.2.
K.C.  Vakharia, P.H. Parekh and Miss Manju Jetley,  for	 re-
	spondent No. 3.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
	    GOSWAMI,  J.--This appeal by certificate  under
Article
	132 (1)(b)
and (c) of the Constitution is from the  judgment
	of  the Gujarat High Court.  The certificate was granted  on
	October 21, 1972,  before coming into force of the Constitu-
	tion
(Thirtieth Amendment)  Act, 1972
.
Mr.	 Dave, learned counsel for the appellant,  does	 not
	press before us the challenge to the validity of
sections 4
,
5A
and
6
of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
	    We	will  now state the facts as will  appear  from	 the
	statement  of case filed on behalf of the appellant.
	  A  notification was issued under
section 4(1)
of the	Land
	Acquisition  Act,  1894 (briefly the Act) on June  7,  1966,
	intending  to acquire a total area of 13900 sq. yds of	land
	including   474 sq. yds. of the appellant's land in Ward  No
	11 of Surat City included in City Survey Nos. 2365 and 2366.
	We are informed that only the appellant in raising objection
	to the. acquisition and the plan has not yet been implement-
	ed  on	account of the pending	litigation.   The  appellant
	submitted  his objections under
section 5A(1)
of the Act  to
	the  Collector who gave him a hearing under sub-section	 (2)
	of  section 5A.	 In due course the Collector  submitted	 his
	report	to the State Government and after  consideration  of
	the same the Government issued a declaration under
section 6
on  January  15,  1969 that the land was  required  for	 the
	public	purpose noted in the preliminary notification  under
section 4
.
608
The  appellant	in  para 3 of the statement  of	 case  while
	referring to the notification under
section 4(1)
of the	 Act
	averred as follows :--
"It	 was stated in the said notice	that
		      the  suit lands were likely to be	 needed	 for
		      fire station, workshop and parking purpose  of
		      the Surat Municipality as indicated in Govern-
		      ment Notification dated 7-6-1966".
In para 4 of the said statement it was averted "that the
	appellant contested the notice by raising an objection	that
	the   respondent No. 3--the Corporation--was not in need  of
	the  suit land	for  the purpose of the fire station,  etc."
	After  the  declaration	 under
section 6
of  the  Act,	 .as
	stated	earlier,  a notice under
section 9
of  the  Act	 was
	served	on the appellant but he did not submit	any   claims
	with regard to compensation under that section.	 On  Septem-
	ber  22,  1970,	 the appellant filed  an  application  under
Article	 226
of  the Constitution before the High Court  of
	Gujarat	 challenging the aforesaid notifications  under	 the
	Act.   The  High Court by its order of	November  30,  1970,
	rejected  the  petition.  The High Court,  however,  by	 its
	order  of  October  21, 1972,  granted	 certificate   under
Article	 133(1)(b)
and (c) of the Constitution on the  ques-
	tion  of vires of
sections 4
, 5A and
6
of the Land  Acquisi-
	tion Act.
Mr. Dave confines his submissions before us only to, the
	following points, which we will deal with seriatim:
First,  that  in spite of the  appellant's	request	 for
	furnishing   a copy of the report under section 5A the	Col-
	lector	did not grant him a copy.  He complains	 that  there
	was no	proper	and  adequate heating under
section 5A(2)
of
	the Act.  According to the learned counsel a proper  hearing
	would  include	furnishing of a copy of	  the  report  under
	section	 5A.  We are unable to accept this  submission.	 Al-
	though,	 ordinarily, there should be no difficulty in	fur-
	nishing	 a copy of the report under section 5A to an  objec-
	tor,  when   he	  asks for! the same, it is  not  a  correct
	proposition that bearing under section 5A is invalid because
	of failure to furnish a copy of the report at the conclusion
	of  the	 hearing under the said section.  Unless  there	 are
	weighty	 reasons,  a  report in public	enquiry	 like  this,
	should	 be  available to the persons who take part  in	 the
	enquiry.   But failure' to furnish a copy of the  report  of
	such an enquiry cannot	vitiate the enquiry if it is  other-
	wise  not  open to any valid  objection.   Apart  from	this
	solitary  ground, our attention has not been drawn  to	 any
	infirmity  in the hearing under section 5A.  We are,  there-
	fore  unable to hold that the said enquiry under section  5A
	was invalid.
The matter would have been different if a second enquiry
	were  essential	 under the law at the stage when  the  State
	Government  was considering the report under section 5A	 for
	issuing	 its   declaration under
section 6
of the  Act.	  We
	are, however, clearly of  opinion that there is no reason to
	hold that a second hearing by the  State Government at	that
	stage is necessary under section 6 of the Act,
609
(See
Abdul  Husein Tayabali & Ors. v. State  of  Gujarat  &
	Ors.
(1)	 Since that is the position in law, failure to	fur-
	nish a copy,  of  the report under section 8A is  innocuous.
	The  matter,  again, may be different if there is  a  proper
	allegation  of	 mala fide  against  the  Collector  or	 the
	State Government.  There is no such allegation in this case.
	The  first submission of the learned counsel is,  therefore,
	devoid of substance.
The	 learned counsel next contends that there was	con-
	siderable  delay  between the notification under
section  4
which was issued on June 7, 1966, and the declaration  under
section 6
made on January 13, 1969.  Since numerous dags  of
	land  belonging	 to  a number of persons  were	the  subject
	matter	of acquisition and individual objections had to.  be
	heard, we do not think that there has  been  any  inordinate
	delay in making the notification.   Even. the  appellant has
	not  submitted before the High Court a copy of	his  written
	objection  nor	is the same produced before us	to  indicate
	when  his objections were actually filed and whether he	 was
	not also responsible for some delay in the conclusion of the
	enquiry.   The delay in this case  is only about 21/2  years
	and, as we have said, there is not even a clear statement of
	the  responsibility for delay which may	 be attributable  to
	the Government.	 The second submission of the learned  coun-
	sel is also of no avail.
Mr.	 Dave  lastly submits that  the	 notification  under
section 4
did not contain the public purpose as the require-
	ment  for  "fire station". The notification,  says  counsel,
	mentioned   station,  workshop	and parking purpose.  He  is
	able to make this submission from a copy of the notification
	in  the	 Paper Book at page 20 (Ex. A).	 We   are,  however,
	unable	to agree with counsel that the	notification   under
section	 4
did not in fact contain the purpose as fire	sta-
	tion.  Even in the statement of case of the appellant  which
	we have set out earlier, no objection was ever taken against
	the  so-called vague description of the requirement  in	 the
	notification.  On the other hand, it was conceded,  therein,
	that  the  purpose was fire station,  workshop	and  parking
	purpose and the objection was that the appellant's land	 was
	not  "suited for the construction of fire  station".   There
	is, therefore, no substance in this submission.
	    This Court rather liberally grants prayers for  dispens-
	ing   with statement of case when such requests are made  by
	parties.  Indeed, the form in vogue, in which statements  of
	case  are  submitted in this Court,  has  perhaps   outlived
	its   practical	 utility in  hearings before this Court.  If
	anything,  besides  being  expensive,  it  causes  delay  in
	making appeals ready for hearing.
We,	 however, feel, instead of the usual  statements  of
	case  by both the parties, a very succinct statement of case
	and a list  of dates submitted by the appellant alone.	with
	material  facts necessary for deciding the questions of	 law
	together with the findings of  fact
	(1) [1968] 1 S.C.R. 597.
610
of	 the  court  below and pinpointing  the	 only  legal
	issues	to  be raised in this Court will be of advantage  in
	expeditious disposal of appeals before this Court.
	For  once, on occasion, we are able to; say that the  state-
	ment of case in this appeal is of use to us in visiting	 the
	appellant with	the forfeiture of his right to make his last
	submission with regard to  the vagueness or ambiguity of the
	purpose mentioned in the notification under
section 4
of the
	Act.
All the submissions having failed, the appeal is  dismissed.
	Having	regard to the fact that there was a  certificate  by
	the High Court, we will make no order as to costs.
	P.H.P.
						Appeal dismissed.
611