[Cites
6
, Cited by
17
]
Supreme Court of India
Sh. Bileshwar Khand Udyog ... vs State Of Gujarat And Anr on 28 January, 1992
Equivalent citations: 1992 AIR 872, 1992 SCR (1) 391, AIR 1992 SUPREME COURT 872, 1992 (2) SCC 42, 1992 AIR SCW 554, (1992) 1 JT 597 (SC), (1992) 1 SCR 391 (SC), (1992) 2 MAHLR 273, (1992) 108 TAXATION 300
Author:
R.M.  Sahai
Bench:
R.M.  Sahai
,
S.  Mohan
PETITIONER:
SH. BILESHWAR KHAND UDYOG KHEDUTSAHAKARI MANDALI LTD

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF GUJARAT AND ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT28/01/1992

BENCH:
SAHAI, R.M. (J)
BENCH:
SAHAI, R.M. (J)
MOHAN, S. (J)

CITATION:
 1992 AIR  872		  1992 SCR  (1) 391
 1992 SCC  (2)	42	  JT 1992 (1)	597
 1992 SCALE  (1)194


ACT:
		Constitution of India, 1950:
Article 245
and 246/VII Schedule-List II Entries 26 and
27/List III Entry 33:
     Legislative  Competence of State-Section 58A of  Bombay
Prohibition Act-Enactment of-Whether within the	 legislative
competence.
Bombay Prohibition Act
:
Section  58A
-Whether within the legislative  competence
of State-Constitutional validity of



HEADNOTE:
     Rule  2  of  the  Bombay  Prohibition  (Manufacture  of
Spirit)	  (Gujarat)  Rules,  1963,  framed  by	 the   State
Government in exercise of powers conferred under
Section 58A
of  the Bombay Prohibition Act, dealt with grant of  licence
for  working  of distillery for the manufacture	 of  spirit.
One of the conditions for grant of licence was that the cost
of  maintenance	 of  staff,  viz.  payment  of	salary	 and
allowances,  was  to  be  paid	to  the	 Government  by	 the
licensees.   This  was challenged by the appellant  and	 the
High  Court upheld the levy as being within the	 legislative
competence of the State.
     Aggrieved against the High Court's order, the appellant
has preferred the present appeal.
     The  appellants  contended	 that  since  the  judgement
appealed  against proceeded on privilege theory,  it  cannot
withstand the principle laid down in Synthetic &  Chemicals,
case;  and  that levy as a fee under Entry 8 of list  II  of
Seventh Schedule or excise duty under Entry 51 is  different
than  the cost of supervision charged under
Section  58A
of
the Bombay Prohibition Act.
     Dismissing the appeal, this Court,
						       392
     HELD: 1.1 Even though the power to levy tax or duty  on
industrial alcohol is vested in the Central Government,	 the
State  was till left with power to lay down  regulations  to
ensure	 that  non-potable  alcohol,  that  is,	  industrial
alcohol,  was  not diverted and misused	 as  substitute	 for
potable alcohol.  This is enough to justify a provision like
58
A of the Bombay Prohibition Act
. [394 D]
     1.2  Principle of occupied field precluded	 State	from
trenching on any power which was already covered by  Central
legislation.  But in absence of any provision in
Industries
(Development  & Regulation) Act
touching upon regulation  or
ensuring that industrial alcohol was not divered, the  State
was competent to legislate on it under Entry 33 list III  of
VII Schedule. [394 F-G]
     1.3  Trade and commerce and supply and distribution  of
goods  are exclusive state subject under entries 26  and  27
of List II of VII Schedule. But both are subject to entry 33
of  List III.  What is covered in entry 33 is excluded	from
List  II.  And the power to legislate in respect of what  is
covered	 by List  III is enjoyed both by Central  and  State
legislatures  subject  to
Article 246
of  the  Constitution.
Since
section 58A
can be traced to regulatory power of	 the
State  exercisable under entry 33 of List III the  challenge
to its validity is liable to fail.  Thus, Section 58A of the
Bomaby Prohibition Act is valid and is not violative of	 any
constitutional provision. [395 B-C].
     1.4   It  cannot be said that no cost  for	 supervision
could  be  demanded unless the power to	 issue	licence	 for
production was found to exist in State. [395 d]
     Synthetics	 & Chemicals Ltd. & Ors., v. State of U.P  &
Ors. [1990] 1 SCC 109, followed.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 503  of
1974.
From the Judgement and order dated 29/30.8.1973 of	 the
Gujarat	 High Court in Special Civil Application No. 129  of
1973.
Joseph Vellapally and D.N. Mishra for the Appellants.
     R.N.  Sachthey, Anip Sachthey and Ms.  Rashmi  Dhariwal
for the Respondents.
393
The Judgement of the Court was delivered by
     R.M.  SAHAI, J.  Validity of demand, under
Section	 58A
of  the	 Bombay Prohibition Act, for maintenance  of  excise
staff  for  supervision	 of the	 manufacture  of  industrial
alcohol	 was assailed on lack of legiislative competence  of
the State.
Section 58A
is extracted below:
"58A:	The  State  Government	may  by	 general  or
	 special order direct that the manufacture,  import,
	 export,  transport, storage, sale,  purchase,	use,
	 collection   or  cultivation  of  any	 intoxitant,
	 denatured  spirituous	preparations,  hemp,   Mowra
	 flowers, or molasses shall be under the supervision
	 of such Prohibition  and Excise or Police Staff  as
	 it  may  deem proper to appoint, and that the	cost
	 of  such staff shall be paid to the State Govt.  by
	 person	   manufacturing,   importing,	  exporting,
	 transporting, storing, selling, purchasing,  using,
	 collecting or cultivating the intoxicant, denatured
	 spirituous  preparation,  hemp,  Mowra	 flowers  or
	 molasses:
"Provided that the State Government may exempt	 any
	 class	of persons or institutions from	 paying	 the
	 whole or any part of the cost of such staff".
Rule  2 of Bombay Prohibition (Manufacture	 of  Spirit)
(Gujarat) Rules,  1963,	 framed	 by  the  State	 of  Gujarat
empowered the director to grant a licence for working of the
distillery  for	 the manufacture of  the  spirit.  Condition
Nos.2 and 3 of the licence issued provided for employment of
excise	 staff	 for  supervision  of  the   operations	  of
manufacture and storage of spirit as well as for payment  of
salary	and  allowances to staff so posted.  Attack was	 not
on  power to supervise or even the right to post  staff	 for
supervision  but  on demand of cost of maintenance  of	such
personnel. Levy was upheld, by the High Court, as fee  under
entry 8 of List II of the VIIth Schedule read with entry  66
of  the same list.
In
Synthetics & Chemicals Ltd. & Ors.  v.
State of U.P. & Ors.
, [1990] 1 SCC 109 a Constitution  Bench
after exhaustively reviewing the constitutional entries	 and
various	 decisions held that industrial alcohol being  unfit
for  human consumption as no levy on it could be made  by  a
State  either under Entry 51 or Entry 8 of List II of  VIIth
Schedule.  Nor such levy  could be justified  on doctrine of
privilege  or police power. Therefore it was urged that	 the
order  of  High	 Court was liable to be set  aside  and	 the
provision was liable to be struck down as ultra vires.
Such  understanding of the judgement is not  warranted.
The Constitu-
394
tion  Bench  while distinguishing between potable  and	non-
potable alcohol and holding that the State had no  privilege
in it upheld the power of State to regulate and ensure	that
non-potable alcohol was not diverted and misued.
According to  learned counsel since
the entire judgment
of  the High Court proceeded on privilege theory  it  cannot
withstand the principle
laid down in
Synthetic &  Chemical's
case.	Levy  as  a fee under Entry 8 of List  II  of  VIIth
Schedule  or excise duty under Entry 51 are  different	than
cost  of supervision charged under
Section 58A
.	 The  former
has  to stand the test of levy being in accordance with	 law
on  power  derived from one of the  constitutional  entries.
Since  Synthetic & Chemical
's case finally brought down	 the
curtain in respect of industrial alcohol by taking it out of
the  purview  of either Entry 8 or 51 of List  II  of  VIIth
Schedule  of  the  competency  of the  State  to  frame	 any
legislation  to	 levy any tax or duty is excluded.   But  by
that a provision enacted by the State for supervision  which
is  squarely covered under Entry 33 of the  concurrent	list
which  deals with production, supply and distribution  which
includes  regulation  cannot  be  assailed.
The  Bench  in
Synthetic  & Chemical
's case made it clear that even  though
the power to levy tax or duty  on industrial alcohol  vested
in  the	 Central Government the State was  still  left	with
power  to  lay down regulations to ensure  that	 non-potable
alcohol,that  is, industrial alcohol, was not  diverted	 and
misused	 as substitute for potable alcohol.  This is  enough
to  justify  a provision like 58A. In paragraph	 88  of	 the
decision  it  was  observed that in  respect  of  industrial
alcohol the States were not authorised to impose the  impost
as  they have purported to do
in that case
but that did	 not
effect any imposition of fee where there were  circumstances
to establish that there was quid pro quo for the fee nor  it
will   affect  any  regulatory	measure.   This	  completely
demolishes the argument on behalf of appellant.
Principle	of  occupied  field  precluded	State	from
trenching on any power which was already covered by  central
legislation.  But in absence of any provision in
Industries
(Development  & Regulation) Act
touching upon regulation  or
ensuring  that industrial alcohol was not diverted the state
was  competent to legislate on it under Entry 3 List III  of
VIIth Schedule which is extracted below,
	 "33.	Trade and Commerce in, and the	 production,
	 supply and distribution of-
(a) The products of any industry where the  control
	 of such industry by Union is declared by Parliament
	 by Law to be
395
expedient  in	the public  interest,  and  imported
	 goods of the same kind as such products.
(b)..............................
(c)..............................
(d)..............................
(e)..............................
Trade and commerce and supply and distribution of goods
are  exclusive state subjects under entry 26 and 27 of	List
II  of VIIth Schedule.	But both are subject to entry 33  of
List  III.  That is what is covered in entry 33 is  excluded
from  list  II.	 And the power	to legislate in	 respect  of
what  is covered by list III is enjoyed both by Central	 and
State subject to
Article 246
of the Constitution. Since	 58A
can  be traced to regulatory power of the State	 exercisable
under  entry  33 the challenge to its validity is liable  to
fail.	It could not therefore be successfully claimed	that
it  was	 violative of any constitutional  provision  or	 the
section	 was  invalid in view of the ratio  in
Synthetic  &
Chemicals
' case.
Failing on the principal submission the learned counsel
urged that no cost for supervision could be demanded  unless
the power to issue licence for production was found to exist
in State.  Reliance was placed on observations in  Synthetic
&  Chemical's	case.	Since  it  stands  answered  by	 the
constitution   Bench itself it is unnecessary to  dilate  on
it.  Suffice it is to extract the following observation,
	 "The position with regard to the control of alcohol
	 industry  has	undergone material  and	 significant
	 change after the amendement of 1956 to the
IDR Act
.
	 After	the amendment, the State is left  with	only
	 the  following	 powers to legislate in	 respect  of
	 alcohol:
(a)....................................
(b)  It  may  lay down regulations to	ensure	that
	 non-potable alcohol is not diverted and misued as a
	 substitute for potable alcohol.
(c)....................................
(d)  However,	in  case  State	 is  rendering	 any
	 service,  as distinct from its claim  of  so-called
	 grant	of  privilege, it may charge fees  based  on
	 quid pro quo".
Feeble  attempt  was made to challenge absence  of	 any
quid pro quo.  But no serious effort was made in High  Court
is clear from following observation.:
396
"If  any quid pro quo is to be established  between
	 the  quantum of the levy and the services  rendered
	 it must be established between	 the actual cost  of
	 supervision paid by a manufacturer or a businessman
	 and the quantum of profits made by him by  lawfully
	 carrying   on	his  business  into   a	  prohibited
	 commodity.  We have no	 doubt in our mind that	 the
	 annual	 payment of a few thousand rupees by way  of
	 cost  of  supervision under
Section 58A
brings  to
	 each of the three petitioners profits which must be
	 quite disproportionate in size. We need not go into
	 the details of this aspect because it has not	been
	 contended  before us that if the levy under
Section
	 58A
is  held to be a fee, there is  no  sufficient
	 quid pro quo between the quantum of the impost	 and
	 the  services	rendered  to  the  manufacturer	  or
	 businessman."
In the result, this appeal fails and is dismissed	with
costs.
G.N.					Appeal dismissed.
397