[Cites
8
, Cited by
19
]
Supreme Court of India
Mangalbhai And Ors vs Dr. Radhyshyam S/O Parischandra ... on 17 July, 1992
Equivalent citations: 1992 SCR (3) 537, 1992 SCC (3) 448, AIR 1993 SUPREME COURT 806, 1992 (3) SCC 448, 1992 AIR SCW 3212, 1992 SCFBRC 277, 1994 BOMRC 26, (1992) 4 JT 208 (SC), 1993 HRR 73, (1992) 3 SCR 537 (SC), 1992 (2) UJ (SC) 322, (1993) MAH LJ 567, (1993) 1 MAHLR 318, (1992) 2 RENCJ 192, (1992) 2 RENCR 308, (1992) RENTLR 264, (1992) 3 SCJ 21, (1992) 2 ALL RENTCAS 365, (1993) 1 BOM CR 2
Author:
N.M.  Kasliwal
Bench:
N.M.  Kasliwal
,
K. Ramaswamy
PETITIONER:
MANGALBHAI AND ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DR. RADHYSHYAM S/O PARISCHANDRA AGARWAL

DATE OF JUDGMENT17/07/1992

BENCH:
KASLIWAL, N.M. (J)
BENCH:
KASLIWAL, N.M. (J)
RAMASWAMY, K.

CITATION:
 1992 SCR  (3) 537	  1992 SCC  (3) 448
 JT 1992 (4)   208	  1992 SCALE  (2)36


ACT:
     C.P.  and	Berar  Letting of Houses  and  Rent  Control
Order, 1949 :
     Clause   13(3)(ii)-Tenant-Eviction	 of-On	 ground	  of
habitual  default in payment of rent-Landlord to prove	that
tenant	had  been  `habitually in  arrears  with  rent'-Word
`habitually'-Meaning  of-Whether includes bona fide  payment
on demand-Notice for eviction-Validity of.
     Clause 13(3)(vi)-Bona fide need of landlord-High  Court
remanding case for examination of actual need for  residence
and clinic/dispensary-Justification of.
     Practice and Procedure :
     Petition filed under
Articles 226
and 227-Single  Judge
examining  matter on merit and setting aside  lower  courts'
order-Totality	of facts and circumstances indicating  order
under Article 226-Letters Patent Appeal-Maintainability of.



HEADNOTE:
     The respondent-landlord, a doctor by profession,  filed
an  application	 under	Section 13 of  the  C.P.  and  Berar
Letting of Houses and Rent Control Order, 1949, against	 the
appellants-  tenants for permission to serve with notice  of
ejectment,  on	grounds	 of bona fide need  of	entire	suit
premises and habitual default in payment of rent.  The	Rent
Controller  dismissed the application.	The Resident  Deputy
Collector   also   dismissed   the   respondent's    appeal.
Thereafter, the respondent filed a writ petition before	 the
High  Court under
Articles 226
and
227
of the  Constitution.
A   Singh  Judge  held	that  the  tenants   were   habitual
defaulters,  and that the landlord had established his	bona
fide need, but remanded the case to the Rent Controller	 for
determining the extent of the need of the respondent for his
residence  and clinic/dispensary and also for examining	 the
respondent's  case  to reconstruct the house,  after  giving
full  opportunity to the parties to amend the pleadings	 and
lead evidence.
						       538
     Aggrieved,	 the  tenants/appellants  filed	 a   Letters
Patent	 Appeal before the Division Bench of the High  Court
which dismissed the same on the ground that since the  order
passed	by  the Singh Judge was under
Article  227
,  Letters
Patent Appeal against it was not maintainable.
     In	 the appeals, by special leave, before	this  Court,
against the orders of both the Single Judge and the Division
Bench, on behalf of the tenants/appellants it was  contended
that   though	the   writ  petition  was   filed   by	 the
respondent/landlord  under
Articles  226
and
227
of	 the
Constitution,  in substance it was a petition under
Article
226
,  that  the relief prayed for was the  quashing  of	 the
order  of the courts below and that the entire tenor of	 the
order of the Single Judge clearly showed that he was dealing
with  a	 petition  under
Article  226
and,  therefore,	 the
Division Bench was not correct in holding that no appeal was
maintainable against the order of the Single Judge and	that
he   had  passed  the  order  under
Article  227
of	 the
Constitution.
     Disposing of the appeal, this Court,
     HELD  1.1 Both the petition filed in the case  and	 the
order  of the Single Judge were in substance  under
Article
226
of the Constitution, and the instant case clearly  falls
within	the  ambit of
Article 226
of the  Constitution.	 The
Single	Judge  nowhere	mentioned  in  the  Judgment   under
challenge  that he was exercising the powers  under
Article
227
of	 the  Constitution. The Single	Judge  examined	 the
matter	on  merit  and	set aside  the	order  of  the	Rent
Controller as well as the Resident Deputy Collector, on	 the
question  of habitual defaulter as well as on the ground  of
bona  fide  need.  Thus, in the totality of  the  facts	 and
circumstances  of the pleadings of the parties in  the	writ
petition  and  the Judgment of the Single  Judge  leaves  no
manner	of doubt that it was an order passed  under
Article
226
of the Constitution and, therefore, the  Letter  Patent
Appeal was maintainable. [542D-E, 543 G-H, 544A]
     1.2 In view of the fact the litigation is going on	 for
nearly	a  decade and also that even the  Single  Judge	 had
remanded the case to the Rent Controller, it would be proper
for  this  Court, in the interest of justice,  to  hear	 the
appeal on merits against the Single Judge's Judgment. [544B]
     Umaji Keshao & Ors. v. Smt. Radhikabai and Anr,  [1986]
1 SCR 731, relied on.
						       539
     Sushilabai	 Laxminarayan Mudliyar & Ors. v.  Nihalchand
Waghajibhai  Shaha & Ors., 1989 Maharashtra Law	 Journal  p.
695, referred to.
     2.1  Clause 13(3)(ii) of the C.P. and Berar Letting  of
Houses	and Rent Control Order, 1949 provides that in  order
to seek permission to serve with notice of ejectment on	 the
ground	of default in payment of rent, it must be proved  by
the landlord that the tenant was "habitually in arrears with
the  rent".  The  Legislature  has  clearly  used  the	word
"habitually"  in  respect  of delaying the  payment  of	 the
arrears	 of  rent, and not to cover a case of a	 tenant	 who
bona  fidely  paid the rent on demand from the side  of	 the
landlord or as and when his munim came to collect the  rent.
[544D-G]
     2.2  In  the  instant case, there	was  an	 established
practice  to  pay rent to the landlord's munim who  used  to
come to collect the same as per his convenience. There was no
alternate arrangement for payment of rent. The tenants	were
even paying the rent in advance, and such tenants cannot  be
considered  as	habitually  in	arrears	 with  the  rent  as
contemplated  under  clause 13(3) (ii) of the  Rent  Control
Order. If such is the practice and course of conduct adopted
for  receipt  of  rent for a number of	years,	the  tenants
cannot	be  taken  by surprise by at once  resorting  to  an
application    under	clause	 13(3)	 (ii)	 that	 the
tenants/appellants  were  habitual defaulters. Thus,  it  is
proved	beyond	any  manner of doubt that  the	parties	 had
adopted the practice of payment of rent in lump sum and	 not
month by month and which continued from 1.1.1972 to the date
of  filing  the	 application under clause  13  of  the	Rent
Control	 Order.	 Admittedly,  even on  the  date  of  filing
application,  there were no arrears of rent due against	 the
appellants. [544G-H, 545A-C]
     2.3 In these circumstances, both the Rent Controller as
well as the Resident Deputy Collector were right in  holding
that the tenant/appellants cannot be considered as `habitual
defaulters'  in the payment of rent. The Singh Judge of	 the
High  Court was totally wrong in ignoring the past  practice
between the parties and in taking the view that the  tenancy
being month to month the tenants were bound to pay the	rent
at  the	 close of the tenancy month in the  absence  of	 any
other contract to the contrary. It is nowhere established by
the respondent/landlord that  rent was not paid to the Munim
even when he had gone to collect the same. The notice  given
can be considered as a warning for the first time to pay the
rent every month and it cannot be held that even  thereafter
the appellants were
						       540
making	belated	 payment of rent, inasmuch as  the  petition
itself	was  filed  before  the	 Rent  Controller  a   month
thereafter. [545D-F]
     Rashik  Lal and Others v. Shah Gokuldas, [1989]  1	 SCC
542, relied on.
     3.	 As  regards  the question of bona  fide  need,	 the
Single	Judge was perfectly right in holding that  not	only
the  landlord/respondent had proved that the  suit  property
came  in  his share in partition, but the tenants  had	also
atorned in favour of the landlord/respondent by paying	rent
to him for a long number of years. There is nothing wrong in
the  direction	of  the Single Judge,  after  recording	 the
finding	 of bona fide need, to remand the case to  the	Rent
Controller for recording a finding on the extent of need  of
the    landlord/respondent    for    his    residence	 and
clinic/dispensary  and	also for examining the case  of	 the
landlord   to	reconstruct  the  house,  by   giving	full
opportunities  to  the parties in respect  of  amending	 the
pleading as well as leading evidence. [546F-H, 547A]
     4.	 In  the circumstances, the finding  of	 the  Single
Judge  in respect of habitual default as contemplated  under
clause 13(3)(ii) of the Rent Control Order, is set aside but
the finding on the question of bona fide need and the  order
of remand, is maintained. [547C]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal Nos.  2588-
89 of 1992.
From  the	Judgments and Orders  dated  11.12.1987	 and
23.10.1989  of	the Bombay High Court in Writ  Petition	 No.
1356/1986 and Letters Patent Appeal No. 109 of 1989.
U.R.  Lalit,  Dr.	N.M.  Ghatate,	Anand  Prasad,	S.V.
Deshpande and Ms. Priya Shrivastava for the Appellants.
G.L.  Sanghi, Dhruv Mehta, S.K. Metha and Aman  Vachher
for the Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     KASLIWAL, J. Special Leave granted.
Dr.  Radhyshyam, the respondent, filed  an	 application
under Section
541
13 of the C.P. and Berar Letting of Houses and Rent  Control
Order,	1949 (hereinafter referred to as "The  Rent  Control
Order") against the appellants for permission to serve	with
notice	of ejectment. The application was based	 on  several
grounds, but the eviction was pressed in the High Court only
on  the	 ground of need of the entire house  for  bona	fide
occupation and habitual default in the payment of rent.	 The
matter was argued only on the aforesaid two grounds,  before
us  also. The Deputy Collector and Rent Controller,  Gondia,
decided	 all the grounds against the landlord and  dismissed
the  application by his order dated 13.9.1985. The  Resident
Deputy	Collector,  Bhandara dismissed the appeal  by  order
dated  31.3.1986 Dr. Radhyshyam, the landlord, then filed  a
writ petition No. 1356 of 1986 under
Articles 226
to 227  of
the  Constitution  of India before the	Bombay	High  Court.
Learned	 Single	 Judge held that the tenants  were  habitual
defaulters,  and that the landlord had established his	bona
fide  need. The Learned Single Judge however took  the	view
that  it  would	 be proper to remand the case  to  the	Rent
Controller  for	 determining the extent of the need  of	 the
petitioner (respondent in this appeal) for his residence and
clinic/dispensary  and	also for examining the case  of	 the
petitioner  to re-construct the house. Learned Single  Judge
of  the	 High Court also directed that full  opportunity  be
given  to  the	parties	 to amend  the	pleadings  and	lead
evidence  and thereafter to pass such suitable orders  under
clauses	 13(3)	(vi) & (vii) of the Rent  Control  Order  in
accordance  with law. The Learned Single Judge by his  order
dated 11.12.1987 remanded the matter to the Rent  Controller
with the above directions.
The  tenants/appellants aggrieved against the  Judgment
of  the	 Learned Single Judge filed a Letters Patent  Appeal
before	the Division Bench of the High Court.  The  Division
Bench by order dated 23.10.1989 dismissed the appeal  taking
the view that in truth and substance the order was passed by
the Learned Single Judge under
Art. 227
of the	Constitution
against	 which Letters Patent Appeal was  not  maintainable.
The tenants have come in appeal by grant of special leave in
S.L.P. No. 3484 of 1991 against the Judgment of the  Learned
Single	Judge of the High Court dated 11.12.1987 and  S.L.P.
No. 2980 of 1990 against the Judgment of the Division  Bench
of the High Court dated 23.10.1989.
It	 was contended on behalf of  the  tenants/appellants
that  the  Writ Petition No. 1356 of 1986 was filed  by	 the
respondent/landlord  under
Articles  226
and
227
of	 the
Constitution. In the relief prayed in the writ
542
petition  it  was  clearly mentioned that  the	order  dated
13.9.1985  passed  by the Rent Controller, Gondia,  and	 the
orders	dated  31.3.1986  passed  by  the  Resident   Deputy
Collector,  Bhandara be quashed and set aside by a  suitable
writ,  order  or  direction. It was submitted  that  in	 the
heading of the petition it was clearly stated that it was  a
petition under
Articles 226
and
227
of the Constitution.  It
was  further argued that even though
Art. 227
was  mentioned
in  the	 writ petition but in substance it  was	 a  petition
under
Art.  226
and the entire tenor of the  order  of	 the
Learned Single Judge clearly showed that it was dealing with
a  petition under
Art. 226.
It was thus contended  that	 the
Learned Division Bench was no correct in taking the view hat
no appeal was maintainable against the order of the  Learned
Single	Judge and in holding that the Learned  Single  Judge
had passed the order under
Art. 227
of the Constitution.  It
was also submitted that the Division Bench of the High Court
wrongly placed reliance on a Full Bench decision of the High
Court	in
Sushilabai	Laxminarayan  Mudliyar	&  Ors.	  v.
Nihalchand  Waghajibhai Shaha & Ors.
, (1989 Maharashtra	 Law
Journal p. 695)
     After  a perusal of the contents of the  writ  petition
filed  before the High Court as well as the Judgment of	 the
Learned	 Single Judge, we are clearly of the view that	both
the petition filed in the case and the order of the  Learned
Single	Judge  were in substance under
Article	226
of	 the
Constitution.
The Full Bench of the Bombay High  Court	 has
wrongly drawn the deductions from the case of this Court  in
Umaji  Keshao  Meshram & Ors. v. Smt. Radhikabai  and  Anr.
,
[1986]	1 SCR 731.
Where petitions are filed under
Articles
226
and
227
of the Constitution, this Court in
Umaji  Keshao
Meshram
's case observed as under:-
"Petitions  are at times filed both under
Articles
	 226
and
227
of the Constitution. The case of
Hari
	 Vishnu	 Kamath	 v. Syed Ahmed Ishaque	and  others
,
	 [1955] 1 S.C.R. 1104, before this Court was of such
	 a type. Rule 18 provides that where such  petitions
	 are  filed  against  orders  of  the  tribunals  or
	 authorities specified in Rule 18 of Chapter XVII of
	 the  Appellate	 Side Rules or	against	 decrees  or
	 orders of courts specified in that Rule, they shall
	 be heard and finally disposed of by a Single Judge.
	 The  question is whether an appeal would  lie	from
	 the decision of the Single Judge in such a case. In
	 our  opinion,	where the facts justify a  party  in
	 filing an application either
543
under
Article 226
and
227
of the Constitution,	 and
	 the  party  chooses to file his  application  under
	 both  these  Articles, in fairness and	 justice  to
	 such  party and in order not to deprive him of	 the
	 valuable  right of appeal the Court ought to  treat
	 the  application as being made under
Article	226
,
	 and  if in deciding the matter, in the final  order
	 the  Court  gives ancillary  directions  which	 may
	 pertain  to
Article 227
, this ought not to be	held
	 to  deprive  a party of the right of  appeal  under
	 clause	  13   of  the	Letter	Patent	 where	 the
	 substantial part of the order sought to be appealed
	 against  is  under
Article 226.
Such was  the	view
	 taken	by the Allahabad High Court in	Aidal  Singh
	 and others A.I.R. 1957 all.
414 F.B and the  Punjab
	 High Court in
Raj Kishan Jain v. Tulsi Dass, A.I.R.
1959  Punj.
291  and
Barham  Dutt  and  others  v.
	 Peoples  Co-operative Transport Society  Ltd.,	 New
	 Delhi	and others
, A.I.R. 1961 Punj. 24 and we	 are
	 in agreement with it".
Applying	the  correct
laid  down  in
Umaji   Keshao
Meshram
's  case and perusing the writ petition filed in	 the
present	 case  as well as the order passed  by	the  Learned
Single	Judge  we are clearly of the view that	the  present
case  clearly falls within the ambit of
Article 226
of	 the
Constitution.
In
Umaji Keshao Meshram
's case it was  clearly
held that :
"Where	 the  fact  justify a  party  in  filing  an
	 application either under
Article 226
or 227 of	 the
	 Constitution,	and  the party chooses to  file	 his
	 application under both these Articles, in  fairness
	 and  justice  to  such party and in  order  not  to
	 deprive  him  of the valuable right of	 appeal	 the
	 Court ought to treat the application as being	made
	 under
Article 226".
The Learned Single Judge in his impugned Judgment dated
11.12.1987  nowhere  mentioned that he	was  exercising	 the
powers	under
Art.  227
of the	 Constitution.	The  Learned
Single Judge examined the matter on merit and set aside	 the
orders of the Rent Controller as well as the Resident Deputy
Collector  on the ground that the aforesaid  Judgments	were
perverse.  The findings of the Rent Controller and  Resident
Deputy Collector were set aside on the question of  habitual
defaulter  as well as on the ground of bona fide need.	Thus
in the totality of the facts and circumstances of the  case,
the pleadings of the parties in the writ petition and
544
the Judgment of the Learned Single Judge leaves no manner of
doubt  that  it was an order passed under
Art.	226
of	 the
Constitution  and  in that view of the	matter	the  letters
Patent Appeal was maintainable before the High Court.  After
taking	the aforesaid view one course open was to set  aside
the order of the Division Bench and to remand the matter for
being  disposed	 of on merits by the Division Bench  of	 the
High  Court.  However,	taking in view the  fact  that	this
litigation is going on for nearly a decade and also the fact
that  even  the Learned Single Judge in his  impugned  order
dated	11.12.1987  had	 remanded  the	case  to  the	Rent
Controller,  we	 considered  it proper in  the	interest  of
justice to hear the appeal on merits against the Judgment of
the Learned Single Judge. We have heard learned counsel	 for
the parties at length on the merits of the case.
As already mentioned above all the grounds for eviction
taken by the respondent/landlord were decided against him by
the   Rent  Controller	as  well  as  the  Resident   Deputy
Controller.  In the writ petition before the Learned  Single
Judge  the arguments were restricted to clause	13(3)(ii)  &
(vi)  only.  It may be noted that the provision	 as  regards
default	 in  the  payment of rent  is  contained  in  clause
13(3)(ii)  of the Rent Control order which provides that  in
order  to seek permission to serve with notice of  ejectment
on  this ground it must be proved by the landlord  that	 the
tenant was "habitually in arrears with the rent".  According
to  the respondent/landlord himself the rents from  1.1.1972
till  the filing of the application under clause 13  of	 the
Rent  Control  Order  on 24.9.1981  the	 rent  was  accepted
without	 any  demur  even when the same	 was  paid  late  by
several months. A perusal of the statement of rents paid and
received by the respondent clearly that at several occasions
the  rent was even paid in advance and at least	 after	1978
the payment of rent was never late for more than two  months
at any occasion. The contention of the appellants is that it
was  neither  their   intention nor to call it	a  habit  of
remaining  in arrears of rent. The Legislature	has  clearly
used  the  word	 "habitually" in  respect  of  delaying	 the
payment of the arrears of rent and not to cover a case of  a
tenants	 who  bona fidely paid the rent on demand  from	 the
side  of  the  landlord or as and when	his  munim  came  to
collect	 the  rent  as was done in  the	 present  case.	 The
tenant	 in  the present case were even paying the  rent  in
advance and such tenants cannot be considered as  habitually
in  arrears  with  the rent  as	 contemplated  under  clause
13(3)(ii)of the Rent Control order. if such is the  practice
and   course  of conduct adopted for receipt of rent  for  a
number of years, the tenants cannot be taken by
545
surprise by at once resorting to an application under clause
13(3)(ii)   that   the	tenants/appellants   were   habitual
defaulters. In the present case the landlord/respondent	 had
served	a notice on 21.8.1981 that he wanted the rent to  be
paid  every month before the due date and filed the  present
petition on 24.9.1981. The tenants also sent a reply to such
notice	on  29.8.1981  and refuted  the	 allegation  of	 any
default	 in the payment of rent and took the plea  that	 the
landlord's  munim  used	 to collect the rent  and  later  on
passed the receipts. There was no alternate arrangement	 for
payment	 of rent. There was an established practice  to	 pay
rent  to Raghuji Munim who used to come to collect the	same
as per his convenience. Thus it is proved beyond any  manner
of  doubt  that	 the parties had   adopted the	practice  of
payment of rent in lumpsum and not month by month and  which
continued  from 1.1.1972 to the date of filing	the  present
application under clause 13 of the Rent Control Order.
Admittedly, even on the date of filing such application
there were no arrears of rent due against the appellants and
in  these circumstances both the Rent Controller as well  as
the Resident Deputy Collector were right in holding that the
tenant/appellants   cannot   be	  considered   as   habitual
defaulters  in the payment of rent. Learned Single Judge  of
the  High  Court  was totally wrong  in	 ignoring  the	past
practice between the parties and in taking the view that the
tenancy	 being month to month the tenants were bound to	 pay
the rent at the close of the tenancy month in the absence of
any   other  contract  to  the	contrary.  It	is   nowhere
established  by	 the respondent landlord that rent  was	 not
paid  to Raghuji Munim even when he had gone to collect	 the
same.  The  notice  was	 given on  21.8.1981  which  can  be
considered  as a warning for the first time to pay the	rent
every  month and it cannot be held that even thereafter	 the
appellants  were making belated payment of rent, in as	much
as  the	 present petition itself was filed before  the	Rent
controller on 24.9.1981.
This  Court in
Rashik Lal And Others v. Shah  Gokuldas
,
[1989]	1 SCC 542 a took similar view while considering	 the
similar	 provisions of the Rent Control Order. In
the  above
case
it was observed as under :
"We  do not see any reason for holding that  unless
	 the rent was paid and accepted at a fixed period or
	 interval,   no	 such  implied	agreement   can	  be
	 inferred.  In the S.P. Deshmukh case the  rent	 had
	 been paid at the varying interval of 3 or 4 months.
	 The
546
crucial  test	appears	 to be the  conduct  of	 the
	 landlord  in receiving the rent offered  belatedly.
	 If  he receives the same under a protest and  warns
	 the tenant to be regular in payment in the  future,
	 he  cannot be assumed to have agreed to a  modified
	 agreement  in this regard. But if he,	without	 any
	 objection  and without letting the tenant know	 his
	 thought  process,  continues  to  receive  rent  at
	 intervals  of several months, he cannot be  allowed
	 to  spring  a surprise on the	tenant	by  suddenly
	 starting  a proceeding for eviction. Having  lulled
	 the  tenant  in  the belief that  things  were	 all
	 right,	 the landlord was under a duty to serve	 him
	 with  a  notice demanding regular  payment,  if  he
	 wished	 to insist upon it. In the case	 before	  us
	 there was no objection whatsoever, raised on behalf
	 of  the landlord against the delayed payments.	 We,
	 therefore,  hold that the High Court was not  right
	 in  reversing	the concurrent finding	of  the	 two
	 Courts below".
The  ration of the above decision fully applies to	 the
facts of the case before us.
As	 regards the question of bona fide need the  Learned
Single	Judge  has given detailed reason  that	the  finding
recorded  by  the Rent Controller and  the  Resident  Deputy
Collector   was	 perverse  and	the  evidence  led  by	 the
landlord/respondent cannot be overruled or ignored merely on
the ground that the witnesses were related or interested  in
the  respondent.  Learned  Single Judge was  also  right  in
observing  that	 the  Rent  Controller	and  the   Appellant
Authority went wrong in holding that the respondent/landlord
had  failed to establish the ownership of the suit  premises
and  on this count the ground for bona fide need must  fail.
The  Learned  Single Judge of the High Court  was  perfectly
right  in holding that not only the landlord/respondent	 had
proved that the suit property came in his share in partition
but   the  tenants  had	 also  atorned	in  favour  of	 the
landlord/respondent by paying rent to him for a long  number
of  years before the filing of the present application.	 The
Learned	 Single	 Judge in this regard  after  recording	 the
finding	 of bona fide need has already given a direction  to
remand	the  case  to the Rent Controller  for	recording  a
finding	 for the extent of need of  the	 landlord/respondent
for  his  residence  and  clinic/dispensary  and  also	 for
examining  the	case of the landlord  to  re-con-struct	 the
house by giving full opportunities to the parties in respect
of
547
amending  the pleadings as well as leading evidence.  We  do
not   find anything wrong in such direction and	 uphold	 the
same.
As a result of the above discussion we allow the appeal
arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No. 2980 of 1990 and set aside
the  Judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court  dated
23.10.1989.  However, we do not consider it just and  proper
to  remand the case to the Division Bench of the High  Court
for  fresh decision for reasons already recorded above.	 The
appeal	arising	 out of S.L.P. (Civil) No. 3484 of  1991  is
allowed in part, the Judgment of the Learned Single Judge of
the High Court dated 11.12.1987 is set aside with regard  to
the  finding in respect of habitual default as	contemplated
under  clause  13(3)(ii) of the Rent Control  order  and  we
uphold and maintain the finding on the question of bona fide
need and the order of remand. In the facts and circumstances
of  the	 case the parties to bear their own  costs  in	this
Court.
N.P.V.				  Appeals disposed of.
548