[Cites
12
, Cited by
9
]
Supreme Court of India
Ashok Singh vs Assistant Controller Of Estate ... on 12 May, 1992
Equivalent citations: 1992 AIR 1756, 1992 SCR (3) 190, AIR 1992 SUPREME COURT 1756, 1992 (3) SCC 169, 1992 AIR SCW 1960, 1992 TAX. L. R. 881, 1992 (2) UPTC 1023, (1992) 4 JT 147 (SC), 1992 (4) JT 147, (1992) 59 ELT 507, (1992) 3 SCR 190 (SC), 1992 UPTC 2 1023, (1992) 62 TAXMAN 501, 1992 (2) UJ (SC) 474, (1993) 1 CALLT 1, (1992) 2 MAHLR 811, (1992) 2 SCJ 347, (1992) 108 TAXATION 353, (1992) 2 CIVLJ 808, (1992) 104 CURTAXREP 330
Author:
S.  Mohan
Bench:
S.  Mohan
,
G.N.  Ray
PETITIONER:
ASHOK SINGH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
ASSISTANT CONTROLLER OF ESTATE DUTY.CALCUTTA AND OTHERS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT12/05/1992

BENCH:
MOHAN, S. (J)
BENCH:
MOHAN, S. (J)
RAY, G.N. (J)

CITATION:
 1992 AIR 1756		  1992 SCR  (3) 190
 1992 SCC  (3) 169	  JT 1992 (4)	147
 1992 SCALE  (1)1126


ACT:
Estate Duty Act, 1953
:
     Sections  53-A,
56(2)
,
58
,
59
and 73A-Estate  Duty-Levy
of-Proceedings	not  commenced within five  years  from	 the
death  of estate owner-Application for grant  of  succession
certificate  made  by  the deceased's  son  after  attaining
majority-Whether  proceedings  debarred-Whether	  succession
certificate  could be denied on ground of non-production  of
certificate from Controller-"Proceedings for the levy of any
duty"-Whether includes proceedings for assessment.
     Interpretation  of Statues-Plain  meaning to  be  given
effect to.
     Words and Phrases-World 'levy'-Meaning of.
     Legal Maxims-Quai Hearet in Litera Haeret in Cortice.



HEADNOTE:
     The  appellant's father died intestate  leaving  behind
the  appellant and his brother.	 Since they were  minors  at
that time their maternal uncle was appointed as guardian  by
the City Civil Court.  The guardian never filed the  account
of the property or the return as required under
Sections  53
or 56 of the
Estate Duty Act, 1953
in respect of the  estate
of the appellant's father within five years from the date of
his death.
     On attaining majority, the appellant as Karta,  applied
to  the	 City  Civil Court for the  grant  of  a  succession
certificate  in	 respect  of  the  estate  of  his   father.
However,  during the proceeding, it was pointed out  that  a
certificate  from Estate Duty Authority was necessary  under
Section 56(2)
of the Act.
     On behalf of the appellant it was urged that in view of
Section 73A
of the Act, the time to commence any proceedings
for levy of estate duty
						       191
had  become barred inasmuch as five years had  expired	from
the date of the death of his father.  Hence, the question of
production of certificate under
Section 56(2)
did not arise.
     The  Chief Judge of the City Civil Court held  that  he
could  not  go	into this  question  since  the	 authorities
constituted under the Act alone could decide this.
     Thereafter,  the  appellant filed the return  with	 the
Assistant  Controller  of Estate Duty.	 the  appellant	 was
served	with  a	 notice under
Section 58(2)
,  along  with  a
questionnaire	with  the  first  respondent-the   Assistant
Controller   of	 Estate	 Duty.	 Despite   the	 appellant's
objection that no proceedings could be initiated in view  of
the statutory bar under Section 73A, inasmuch as the  period
of  five  years had expired from the date  of  his  father's
death,	the  appellant was called upon	to  furnish  certain
particulars.	Under  these  circumstances  the   appellant
challenged  before  the High Court the notice  issued  under
Section	 58(2)
of the Act, along with the questionnaire	 and
the  proceedings.  A Single Judge cancelled  the  notice  in
question.
     On	 appeal by the first respondent, the Division  Bench
held that Section 73A did not do away with the liability  of
an  accountable person for payment of duty; it	only  barred
the initiation of proceedings for levy of duty.	  Therefore,
if  the	 liability  remained but proceedings  could  not  be
initiated,  there was no question of full payment  of  duty.
As  such  it could not be stated in the certificate  by	 the
Controller  that  there	 was no claim of  estate  duty	from
accountable person; and, accordingly, the bar of  limitation
was  not applicable to cases as provided under	Section	 73A
where  application was made for grant of  representation  or
succession   certificate  and  the  account  or	  the	copy
application  was  delivered to the  Controller	as  required
under
Section 56
.
     In	 the  appeal  before this Court, on  behalf  of	 the
appellant  it was contended that the construction placed  by
the  Division Bench was totally incorrect; Section  73A	 was
comprehensive  in its scope in so far it threw	a  statutory
bar preventing the authority from commencing any  proceeding
after  the  expiry of five years; and would take  within  it
Section 56
also; that the High Court was not correct in	 its
view   that  no	 grant	of  representation   of	  succession
certificate  could be made after the expiry of	five  years;
that
Section 56
would have to be so read as to bring about a
harmonious
						    192
construction  between Section 73A and
Section 56
;  and	that
strict	literal interpretation would defeat the	 object	 and
purpose of the statutory bar under Section 73A.
     Allowing the appeal, this Court,
     HELD  : 1.1 The language of
Section 73A
of	 the  Estate
Duty  Act,  1953  is unambiguous.   This  section  throws  a
statutory  bar and is comprehensive in nature. In so far  as
it  says  "no  proceeding under this Act",  that  means	 any
proceedings  whatever  in  relation  to	 levy  can  ever  be
commenced  after  five	years.	The  world  "levy"  used  in
Section 73A embraces within it the process of assesment	 and
also  the imposition of tax.  Therefore, it is certain	that
even a proceeding for assessment cannot be taken after	five
years.
     Padampat  Singhania and others v. Controller of  Estate
Duty, Kanpur, 122 ITR 162 at 163, relied on.
     Controller	 of Estate Duty v. Bbola Dutt, 130  ITR	 468
approved.
     P.C. Saxena v. The State, 104 ITR 106, distinguished.
     Block's  Law  Dictionary  (fifth  edition)	 page	816,
referred to.
     1.2.  No doubt, both under sub-section (1), clause	 (b)
and sub-section (2), the language used in "no order shall be
made  upon his application".  To require in a case  of	this
character, the production of certificate from the Controller
would amount to the insistence of an impossible compliance.
     1.3  The  Division	 Bench of the  High  Court  was	 not
correct	 in holding that Section 73A was only applicable  to
proceedings  initiated	under
Section  59
.   Merely  because
Section 59
says "subject to section 73A" that does not	mean
a  statutory  bar  under  Section 73A  is  lifted.   On	 the
contrary, Section 53A reinforces the rigour of Section	73A.
The  words "commencement of any proceedings under  the	Act"
are  comprehensive  enough to include
Section  59
as  well.
Equally, it was not correct in holding that the	 application
of  73A	 to  cases coming under
Section 56
would  make	 the
latter Section unsustainable.  That will be only placing  in
literal	  interpretation   of
Section	56
regardless	  of
situation.
     1.4  If,  therefore,  the	object	of  Section  73A  is
unambiguous to bar the
						       193
commencement of any proceeding for levy after the period  of
five  years in the case of first assessment, the  rigour  of
the Section cannot be diluted, by introducing a construction
not warranted in the situation.	 If it was the intention  of
the  Parliament to provide exceptional cases making  Section
73-A  inapplicable  to such cases nothing  would  have	been
easier	than  to  have so  expressed.	The  language  under
Section 73A is imperative.  It admits of no doubt that there
cannot	be two limitations (i) in a case where the  assessee
files  a  belated  return,  and (ii) in	 a  case  where	 the
assessee  seeks	 a succession certificate.  In such  a	case
where  the  assessee,  as  in  the  instant  case,  seeks  a
certificate from the Controller, all that the Controller has
to say is that no such certificate could be issued since  in
view  of  the  statutory bar under  Section  73A.   In	this
context,
Section 56
will have to be given meaning and  life.
He  who	 clings to the letter of the law clings ot  the	 dry
bone; that would be against the spirit of the Act.
     Herbert Broom Legal Maxims, pp. 466-67.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 2107 of
1980.
From  the	Judgment and Order dated  16.3.1979  of	 the
Calcutta High Court in Appeal No. 348 of 1973.
Shanker Ghosh and P.K. Mukharjee for the Appellant.
     B.B.  Ahuja, Ms. A. Subhashini and Manoj Arora for	 the
Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     MOHAN J. This appeal by certificate is directed against
the judgment and order of the Calcutta High Court dated 16th
March 1979 in Appleal No. 348 of 1973.
The  facts	 are that on 6th February,  1967  one  Ganga
Singh,	governed  by Mitakshara School of  Hindu  Law,	died
intestate.   He left two sons, the appellant and  one  Binod
Singh.	 The wife of Ganga Singh had pre-deceased  him.	  As
the  appellant	and Binod Singh were minor at  the  time  of
death  of  Ganga Singh the maternal uncle of  the  appellant
moved an application in the City Civil Court at Calcutta  in
March 1967 for the appointment of guardian of the  appellant
and his brother.  Accordingly, he was appointed
194
as  the guardian.  When the paternal uncle of the  appellant
and his brother appealed against the order, the	 appointment
was  confirmed.	  However,  the	 guardian  was	directed  to
continue till the appellant attained majority.
On 7th December, 1970 the appellant attained  majority.
As karta he applied to the City Civil Court at Calcutta	 for
the  grant  of a succession certificate in  respect  of	 the
estate	of Ganga Singh.	 It appears that the guardian  never
filed the account of the property or the return as  required
under
Section	53
or	56  of the
Estate  Duty  Act,	1953
(hereinafter referred to as the Act).  The appellant being a
minor  did  not	 know about this.  The	result	is  that  no
account	 had  been  filed by any person in  respect  of	 the
estate of Ganga Singh within five years from the date of his
death.
In the proceedings before City Civil Court the grant of
succession certificate it was pointed out that a certificate
from Estate Duty Authority was necessary under
Section 56(2)
of the Act.  It was urged on behalf of the appellant that in
view  of
Section 73A
of the Act the time  to  commence	 any
proceedings  for  levy	of estate  duty	 had  become  barred
inasmuch  as  five years had expired from the  date  of	 the
death of Ganga Singh.  Hence, the question of production  of
certificate under
Section 56(2)
would not arise.
By an order dated July 25, 1972 the learned Chief Judge
of the City Civil Court held that he could not go into	this
question  since	 the authorities constituted under  the	 Act
alone could decide this.  Since the appellant was advised to
file  an account to the Estate Duty Authority, he filed	 the
return on 18th August, 1972 with the Assistant Controller of
Estate	Duty.	As  per the return  the	 estate	 was  valued
approximately at Rs.52,000.  The appellant was served with a
notice under
Section 58(2)
along with a questionnaire by the
first  respondent, the Assistant Controller of Estate  Duty,
fixing	the date for hearing.  On the said date	 of  hearing
the  appellant	contended  that	 no  proceedings  could	  be
initiated  in view of the statutory bar under  Section	73A,
inasmuch  as the period of five years had expired  from	 the
date  of  the death of Ganga Singh.  Hence,  no	 proceedings
could be commenced.  In spite of these objections, the first
respondent adjourned the case calling upon the appellant  to
furnish certain particulars. It is under these circumstances
the notice dated 4th of September, 1972 issued under
Section
58(2)
of  the	Act  along  with  a  questionnaire  and	 the
proceedings  were challenged the High Court of	Calcutta  by
way of a writ petition in Matter
195
No.  417 of 1972.  The learned Single Judge making the	rule
absolute  held that the impugned notice under
Section  58(2)
of the Estate Duty Act, 1953, dated 4th September, 1972	 was
cancelled by a writ of mandamus.
Aggrieved	by the said order, the first respondent took
up  the matter in appeal. The Division Bench considered	 the
scope of Section 73A vis-a-vis
Section 56
and concluded that
Section	 73A  does  not do away with  the  liability  of  an
accountable  person for payment of duty.  It only  bars	 the
initiation  of proceedings for levy of duty.  Therefore,  if
the  liability remains but proceedings cannot be  initiated,
there  is  no question of full payment of duty.	 In  such  a
case,  it  cannot  be  stated  in  the	certificate  by	 the
Controller  that  there	 is no claim  of  estate  duty	from
accountable  person.  Accordingly, the bar of limitation  is
not applicable to cases as provided under Section 73A  where
application   is  made	for  grant  of	 representation	  or
succession   certificate  and  the  account  or	  the	copy
application is delivered to the Controller as required under
Section 56
.  Thus, this appeal by special leave.
Mr.  S. Ghosh, learned counsel for the appellant  would
urge  that the construction placed by the Division Bench  is
totally	 incorrect.   Section 73A is  comprehensive  in	 its
scope in so far as it throws a statutory bar preventing	 the
authority from commencing any proceeding after the expiry of
five  years.  Having regard to the use of words "under	this
Act"  that will take within it
Section 56
also.	 If  in	 any
case of this character the appellant is required to  produce
a  certificate from the Controller it will be requiring	 him
to do the impossible.
In respect of his submission he would
place reliance on the ruling of the Allahabad High Court  in
Controller  of	Estate Duty v. Bhola Dutt
,  (130  ITR  468).
That  was  a  case  when the proceeding	 was  sought  to  be
commenced on the basis of a return filed by the	 accountable
person	voluntarily after five years.  The High	 Court	held
that the Assistant Controller had no jurisdiction because of
the expiry of the limitation.  It is that ratio which has to
be adopted in this case.
If	 the  interpretation  placed by the  High  Court  is
accepted it would amount to putting a premium on the  laches
of the authority and enabling it to do something  indirectly
which it cannot do even directly.
The   view	 of  the  High	Court  that  no	  grant	  of
representation	or succession certificate can be made  after
the  expiry of five year, cannot be supported.
Section  56
will have to be read as to bring about a har-
196
monious construction between Section 73A and
Section 56
.  No
doubt  if there is no original assessment,  reassessment  is
impossible but on the score the statutory bar under  Section
73A  cannot  be	 lifted.  If, as held  by  the	High  Court,
Section	 73A is made inapplicable where application is	made
for  the grant of representation or  succession	 certificate
and  the  account or copy application is  delivered  to	 the
Controller  as required by
Section 56
it will be  conferring
an   additional	 power	on  Controller	which  is   not	  in
contemplation	under	the   Act.    The   strict   literal
interpretation	will  defeat the object and purpose  of	 the
statutory  bar	under  Section	73a.   In  support  of	 the
submission  reliance is placed on Herbert Broom's  Selection
of  Legal  Maxims : QUI HAERET IN LITERA HAERET	 IN  CORTICE
(Page 466).
In opposition to this, Mr. B.B. Ahuja, learned  counsel
for the Revenue, comments the acceptance of the view of	 the
Division  Bench	 of  the High Court.   When
Section  56
is
mandatory  in  character  the requirement  of  that  Section
Cannot be dispensed with even by Court.	 The party who seeks
a succession certificate or representation in Civil Court is
bound  to  fulfil  the	statutory  conditions  without	 any
exception, is exactly the view taken by the Delhi High Court
in P.C. Saxena v. The State, (104ITR 106).
Section  73A used the word "levy".	 As to what  exactly
is  mentioned  by levy under the Act could  be	gathered  by
Padampat  Singhania and other v. Controller of estate  Duty,
Kanpur, (122 ITR 162 at 163).  Therefore, there is no  merit
in the plea.
We shall now proceed to consider the relative merits of
the respective submissions.  Section 73A reads as follows:
"73A.	 No proceedings for the levy of	 any  estate
	 duty under this Act shall be commenced-
(a)  in the case of a first assessment,  after	 the
	 expiration of five years from the date of death  of
	 the  deceased in respect of whose  property  estate
	 duty became payable; and
(b)  in  the  case of a  re-assessment,  after	 the
	 expiration   of  three	 years	from  the  date	  of
	 assessment  of such property to estate	 duty  under
	 this Act."
A	careful reading of the above Section  discloses	 the
following :
197
(i) For the levy of any estate duty
(ii) Under this Act
(iii) No proceedings shall be commenced.
We	 are concerned, in this case, only with clause	(a).
Therefore,  the	 fourth	 qualification	will  be  after	 the
expiration  of	five  years from the date of  death  of	 the
deceased.    The  language,  in	 our  considered  view,	  is
unambiguous.   This  section throws a statutory bar  and  is
comprehensive  in  nature.   In	 so  far  as  it   says	 "no
proceeding  under  this	 Act"  that  means  any	  proceeding
whatever  in  relation to levy can ever be  commenced  after
five  years.   The  word "levy" in  Black's  Law  Dictionary
(fifth edition) at page 816 is stated thus :
"Levy,	 v. To assess; raise; execute;	exact;	tax;
	 collect;  gather;  take up; seize.  Thus,  to	levy
	 (assess,  exact, raise, or collect) a tax; to	levy
	 (raise or set up) a nuisance; to levy (acknowledge)
	 a  fine;  to  levy (inaugurate)  war;	to  levy  an
	 execution, i.e., to levy or collect a sum of  money
	 on an execution."
As a matter of fact, in Padampat Singhania (supra)	 the
meaning	 of  this word under this very Act came to  be	laid
down which is extracted as under:
"The  word  "levy"  has  been	interpreted  by	 the
	 Supreme Court in the case of
Assistant Collector of
	 Central  Excise  v. National Tobacco Co.  of  India
	 Ltd.
, AIR 1972 SC 2563, as embracing within it	 the
	 process  of assessment and also the  imposition  of
	 tax."
Therefore,	 even a proceeding for assessment cannot  be
taken after five years.	 That much is certain.	Now, we come
to  the	 decisions  cited on behalf of	the  appellant.	  In
Controller  of	Estate Duty v. Bhola Dutt, (130 ITR  468  at
470) the following passage is found:
"This	provision lays down a clear and	 categorical
	 bar to the commencement of assessment	proceedings.
	 They  cannot be commenced after the expiry of	five
	 years from the date of death of the deceased.
198
Under	 the  E.D. Act, the  assessment	 proceedings
	 commence   with  the  filing  of  the	 return	  as
	 prescribed  by
s. 53(3)
of the Act and,  under	 it,
	 the return could validly be filed within six months
	 of the date of death or within such further time as
	 may  be  extended by the  Asst.  Controller.	That
	 provision obviously is not applicable to the  facts
	 of  the  present  case.  Under
s.  56
of  the	 Act
	 another   method  of  commencement  of	  assessment
	 proceedings  is  by the  Controller  requiring	 the
	 accountable  person to file the  requisite  return.
	 Yet  another method of commencement  of  assessment
	 proceedings is prescribed by
s.58
of the Act.	Sub-
	 section (4) of
s.58
provides that in any case where
	 no  account has been delivered as required by
s.53
or
s.56
, or the person accountable fails to  comply
	 with  the terms of the notice served  under  sub-s.
	 (2),  the Controller shall make the  assessment  to
	 the  best of his judgment and determine the  amount
	 payable   as  estate  duty.   In   this   provision
	 assessment  proceedings could be commenced  by	 the
	 Controller  in	 case the requisite return  has	 not
	 been  filed by the accountable person.	 But to	 all
	 these	 modes	 of   commencement   of	  assessment
	 proceeding  s.73A  is	applicable.   Ex  hypothesis
	 assessment   proceedings  under  either  of   these
	 provisions could not validly be commenced after the
	 expiry	 of the period of limitation  prescribed  by
	 s.73
A	of  the	 Act
.  Here,  the  proceedings	were
	 sought	 to be commenced on the basis of the  return
	 filed	by  the accountable person  voluntarily	 but
	 after	the expiry of the prescribed period of	five
	 years.	 In view of s.73A, the Asst.  controller had
	 no jurisdiction to commence the proceedings even on
	 the basis of such a voluntary return.
Our attention was invited to
s.56
of the	Act.
	 It is true that
s.56
does not prescribe any  period
	 of   limitation,   but	 it   applies	in   limited
	 circumstances.	 Sub-section (1) of
s.56
applies  to
	 a  case where the executor of the deceased wants  a
	 representation	 certificate.	Then  alone  he	  is
	 required  to file an account of the  properties  of
	 the  deceased to the Controller.  Under  sub-s.(2),
	 the  accountable  person is required to  produce  a
	 certificate from the Controller that the  requisite
	 estate	 duty  has  been  paid	in  respect  of	 the
	 property  for	which a	 succession  certificate  is
	 applied for.  Proceedings under
s.56
commence	when
	 some one
199
desires  to have a representation certificate or  a
	 succession  certificate,  not	otherwise.   In	 the
	 present  case,	 none  of the  two  situations	have
	 occurred.   We	 are,  therefore,  clear  that	 the
	 assessment   proceedings  were	 invalid  and	were
	 rightly quashed by the Tribunal."
We	 think the High Court is right in its  approach.  In
opposition  to this, what is relied on is the case  in	P.C.
Saxena (supra).	 It is sufficient to extract the head-note.
"In 1966 the appellant applied in the court of	 the
	 Subordinate   Judge  for  grant  of  a	  succession
	 certificate to realise various debts and securities
	 of  the deceased who had died on October 28,  1959.
	 The  Subordinate  Judge allowed the  petitions	 and
	 ordered grant of the succession certificate subject
	 to the production of a certificate of clearance  in
	 respect  of estate duty under
section 56(2)
of	 the
	 Estate	 Duty  Act, 1953.  The	appellant  thereupon
	 applied  for  exemption  from	complying  with	 the
	 condition   for   production	of   the   clearance
	 certificate in respect of estate duty claiming that
	 in  view of
Section 73A
of the Act  no	 proceedings
	 could	be commenced for levy of estate duty on	 the
	 estate	 of  the deceased after the expiry  of	five
	 years	from the date of his death. The	 Subordinate
	 Judge	rejected the application for exemption.	  On
	 appeal to the High Court :
Held,  dismissing	 the appeal,  (i)  that	 the
	 civil	court  did not possess any  jurisdiction  or
	 discretion  to	 waive the condition  under
section
	 56(2)
of the Act which was precedent to the  grant
	 of representation or succession certificate;
(ii) that the bar imposed by
Section 73A
of the Act
	 could	not  be	 claimed by a  party  who  sought  a
	 succession certificate and applied to a civil court
	 for   grant   of   representation   or	  succession
	 certificate   and  he	was  bound  to	fulfil	 the
	 statutory conditions, without any exception, before
	 obtaining the certificate."
We are of the view that this is only an  authority	 for
the  proposition that the civil court does not	possess	 any
jurisdiction or discretion to waive the condition to produce
the certificate from the Controller which is a precedent  to
the grant of representation or succession certificate.
200
Now, we come to
Section 56
.  That is extracted below:
"56.	(1)  In	 all  cases in	which  a  grant	  of
	 representation is applied for-
(a) the executor of the deceased shall, to the
	 best  of  his knowledge and belief, specify  in  an
	 appropriate  account  annexed to the  affidavit  of
	 valuation filed in court under section 19-I of	 the
	 Court-Fees  Act, 1870, all the property in  respect
	 of  which estate duty is payable upon the death  of
	 the  deceased	and  shall deliver  a  copy  of	 the
	 affidavit with the account to the controller, and
(b)  no order entitling the applicant to the  grant
	 of   representation   shall  be   made	  upon	 his
	 application  until  he has  delivered	the  account
	 prescribed  in	 clause	 (a)  and  has	produced   a
	 certificate  from the Controller under	 sub-section
	 (2)  of  section 57 or section 67 that	 the  estate
	 duty payable in respect of the property included in
	 the account has been or will be paid, or that	none
	 is due, as the case may be.
(2)  In all cases in which a grant of a  succession
	 certificate   is  applied  for,  a  copy   of	 the
	 application shall be furnished by the applicant  to
	 the Controller and no order entitling the applicant
	 to  the grant of such a certificate shall  be	made
	 upon  his  application	 until	he  has	 produced  a
	 certificate  from the Controller under	 sub-section
	 (2)  of
section 57
or
section 67
that	 the  estate
	 duty  payable in respect of the property  mentioned
	 in  the  application has been or will be  paid,  or
	 that none is due, as the case may be."
No doubt, both under sub-section (1) clause (b) of sub-
section	 (2)  the language used is "no order shall  be	made
upon  his  application".   To  require in  a  case  of	this
character   the	 production  of	 a  certificate	  from	 the
Controller  would amount to the insistence of an  impossible
compliance.
The  view	of the Division Bench of the High  Court  is
unacceptable  to us when it holds that Section 73A  is	only
applicable  to	proceedings  initiated	under
Section	 59
.
Merely because
Section 59
says "subject to section 73A" that
does not mean a statutory bar under Section 73A is lifted.
201
On  the	 contrary,  Section 53A	 reinforces  the  rigour  of
Section	 73A.  The words "commencement	of  any	 proceedings
under  the Act" as we stated above are comprehensive  enough
to include
Section 59
as well.
Equally,  the finding that the application	 of  Section
73A  to cases coming under
Section 56
would make the  latter
Section	 unsustainable	is not correct.	 That will  be	only
placing a literal interpretation of
Section 56
regardless of
situation.   In	 this  connection,  we	may  usefully  quote
Herbert Broom's Legal Maxims (Pages 466-67) :
"QUI  HAERET IN LITERA HAERET IN CORTICE (Co.	Litt
	 283b.)-
He   who   considers  merely  the  letter   of	  an
	 instruments goes skindeep into its meaning.
	 The   law  of	England	 respects  the	effect	 and
	 substance  of the matter, and not every  nicety  of
	 form  or circumstance.	 "The reason and  spirit  of
	 cases	make law, and not the letter  of  particular
	 precedents".	Hence  it is , as  we  have  already
	 seen,	 a   general   rule   connected	  with	 the
	 interpretation	 of deeds and  written	instruments,
	 that,	where the intention is clear, too  minute  a
	 stress should not be laid on the strict and precise
	 signification of words.  For instance, by the grant
	 of  a	remainder,  a  reversion  may  pass,  and  a
	 converso; and if a lessee covenant to leave all the
	 timber	 which was growing on the land when he	took
	 it  down, but leaves it there; for this,  though  a
	 literal  performance of the covenant, would  defeat
	 its intent."
"In interpreting an Act of Parliament, likewise, it
	 is not always a true line of construction to decide
	 according  to	the strict letter of the  Act;	but,
	 subject to the remarks already made, the Courts may
	 consider  what is its fair meaning, and expound  it
	 differently  from the letter, in order to  preserve
	 the  intent.	The  meaning  of  particular  words,
	 indeed,   in	statutes,  as  well  as	  in   other
	 instruments, is to be found not so much in a strict
	 etymological  propriety  of language, nor  even  in
	 popular use, as in the subject or occasion on which
	 they  are used, and the object that is intended  to
	 be attained."
202
If,  therefore, the object of Section 73A is unmbiguous
to bar the commencement of any proceeding for levy after the
period of five years in the case of first assessment, we  do
not  think  we	can dilute the rigour  of  Section  73A	  by
introducing  a construction not warranted in the  situation.
If  it	was  the  intention of	the  Parliament	 to  provide
exceptional  cases making Section 73A inapplicable  to	such
cases  nothing	would  have  been easier  than	to  have  so
expressed.   The language under Section 73A  is	 imperative.
It  admits of no doubt that there cannot be two	 limitations
(i) in a case where the assessee files a belated return	 and
(ii)  in  a  case where the  applicant	seeks  a  succession
certificate.   In such a case where the assessee, as in	 the
instant	 case, seeks a certificate from the Controller,	 all
that the Controller has to say is, that no such	 certificate
could  be  issued since in view of the statutory  bar  under
Section	 73A.  In this context,
Section 56
will have  to  be
given meaning and life.	 He who clings to the letter of	 the
law clings to the dry bone; that would be against the spirit
of the Act.
In the result, we set aside the impugned judgment.	 The
appeal	will  stand  allowed.  However, there  shall  be  no
orders as to costs.
N.P.V.					 Appeal allowed.
203