[Cites
4
, Cited by
20
]
Supreme Court of India
Rajangam, Secretary,District Beedi ... vs State Of Tamil Nadu And Ors on 19 November, 1992
Equivalent citations: 1991 SCR, SUPL. (2) 357 1992 SCC (1) 221
Author:
Rangnath  Misra
Bench:
Rangnath  Misra
,
Yogeshwar Dayal
PETITIONER:
RAJANGAM, SECRETARY,DISTRICT BEEDI WORKERS' UNION AND ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF TAMIL NADU AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT19/11/1992

BENCH:
MISRA, RANGNATH (CJ)
BENCH:
MISRA, RANGNATH (CJ)
YOGESHWAR DAYAL (J)

CITATION:
 1991 SCR  Supl. (2) 357  1992 SCC  (1) 221
 JT 1991 (5)   299	  1991 SCALE  (2)1043


ACT:
Beedi  &  Cigar	 Workers ('Conditions  of  Employment  ,Act,
1966/Rules, 1968:
    Improper/non-implementation	 of in	the  State  of Tamil
Nadu--Employment  of child labour--Prohibition	of--Contract
labour system--Prevalence of--Whether  indispensable--Formu-
lation of Schemes .for proper implementation  of the  provi-
sions for welfare of workers--Directions issued.
Child Labour Abolition Act, 1986.
    Manufacture of beedi and cigar---Health hazard---Employ-
ment  of child labour--Abolition of---Directions issued	 for
strict implementation.
Beedi Workers Cess Act, 1976
/
Beedi Workers Welfare Fund Act,
1976
.'
In the nature of beneficial provisions--Implementation o fin
the true spirit----Insurance ,Schem for	 workers--Directions
issued.



HEADNOTE:
    These  petitions relate to child employment,  prevalence
of  contract  labour system and	 the  non-implementation  of
Beedi  and  Cigar Workers (Conditions  of  Employment)	Act,
1966
.  This Court considered the petitions and	appointed  a
Trust  viz.,  Society for Community Organisation  Trust	 for
conducting appropriate investigation and to submit a report.
The Trust submitted its report, which was then circulated to
the Respondent State Government and the beedi manufacturers.
On  the direction of this Court for formulating	 a   scheme,
two  Schemes cameto be formulated, one by the State  Govern-
ment  and the other by the petitioners. This Court  directed
that
    the terms should be settled for one Scheme to be accept-
ed  by	the Court, and given time to the Union of  India  to
respond	 to  the same. Union of India filed  certain  objec-
tions.
    Rejecting the objections and disposing of the petitions,
this Court,
358
       HELD: 1.1  The Beedi and Cigar Workers (Condition  of
Employment)  Rules, 1968 should be strictly implemented	 and
once  that is done the evil of not furnishing the  books  to
the home workers would be eradicated. [361 D, E]
      2.   An establishment of the Regional  Provident	Fund
Commissioner  with full equipment for the purpose of  imple-
mentation  of the Statute should be located within the	area
and  the  Regional provident Fund Commissioner	should	have
directions  to enforce the Act in all aspects.	This  estab-
lishment  should start functioning within three months	from
now. [361 E, F]
      3.   The	labour	laws as also the
Beedi	  and  Cigar
Workers	 (Conditions of Employment) Act
should	be  strictly
enforced  so that the workers get their legitimate dues	 and
the conditions of employment improve. [361 F-G]
4.   Tobacco manufacturing has indeed health hazards.  Child
labour	in this trade should therefore be prohibited as	 far
as possible and employment of child labour should be stopped
either	immediately or in a phased manner to be	 decided  by
the State Government but within a period not exceeding three
years from now.The provisions of Child Labour Abolition Act,
1986 should be strictly implemented. [361 G, 11]
      5.  The Union Government is directed to look into	 the
aspect	whether contract labour system is  indispensable  in
this trade and take its final decision one way or the  other
within six months from now. [362-A]
      6.  Beedi trade is a flourishing one and	exploitation
of  labour is rampant in this trade. A	governmental  labour
establishment  should he located in the area with full	com-
plement to answer the requiretenants of the matter. [362-F]
7.   Sincc Beedi manufacturing process is carried more	out-
side the factory than within, the system of maintaining	 the
registers  as a regulating  practice has  become  necessary.
Great care should, there-
	      fore be taken to ensure the maintenance of the
register  system  as the bulk of the employees	outside	 the
factories can be regulated through the record maintained  in
the registers. [362-C]
8.
The Beedi Workers Welfare Cess Act, 1976
and the Beedi
359
Workers	 Welfare  Fund Act, 1976
which	 contain  beneficial
provision should be implemented in the true spirit and since
they are legislations of the Central Government, the machin-
ery of the Central Government should be made operational  in
the area. [362-D]
    9.	It should be ensured that pass hooks are  maintained
in the names of actual workers. [362-E]
    10. The Welfare Fund should be properly administered and
in  the	 case  of death of  workman  appropriate  assistance
should be extended out of the Fund quickly. [362 E, F]
    11.	 In view of the health hazard involved in the  manu-
facturing  process,  every  worker  including  children,  if
employed should be insured for a minimum amount of Rs.50,000
and  the  premium  should be paid by the  employer  and	 the
incidence should not be passed on to the workman. [362-F]
    12. The implementation of the scheme within the State in
an  effective  manner would require to be supervised  by  an
independent external agency. The Tamil Nadu State Legal	 Aid
JUDGMENT:
three  year  period of such supervision would meet  the	 re-
quirement  and at the end of such period the scheme  is	 ex-
pected to become effectively operative. The Tamil Nadu Board
may  undertake the supervision from January 1992, and it  is
directed  that	the State Government and the said  Board  to
coordinate  the	 implementation.The Secretary of  the  Tamil
Nadu  Board who would be mainly in-charge of the  field	 job
shall be paid by the State Government a sum of Rs.1,500	 per
month  from  January 1992, as an allowance to  meet  out  of
pocket expenses for the period he does the work as Secretary
of the Board. [362 G, H, 363-A]



&
ORIGINAL  JURISDICTION:	 Writ Petition (Civil) No.  1262  of
1987
WITH
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 13064 of 1983.
(Under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India).
Har Dev Singh and R.K. Agnihotri for the Petitioners.
    Raju   Ramachandran,   R.Mohan,  Ms	  Shanta   Vasudeva,
P.K.Manohar, K.Swamy, Ms.A.Subhashini and R.C.Kohli for	 the
respondents.
360
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     RANGANATH	MISRA, CJ. A letter petition  received	from
the District Beedi Worker's Union, Tirunelveli in the  State
of Tamil Nadu was treated as an application under
Article 32
of  the	 Constitution and  notice was  ordered	intially  to
three factories referred to in the said letter	and later to
other  beedi  manufacturing units within the State.  In	 the
letter,	 complaint  was made about manipulation	 of  records
regarding  employees,  non-payment of appropriate  dues	 for
work  taken,  failure  to implement the	 provisions  of	 the
labour	laws,  prevalence  of contract	labour	system	etc.
There  is  a connected petition also relating  to  the	same
subject	 matter	 with different ancillary  reliefs  covering
employment of child labour and the non-implementation of the
Beedi  and  Cigar Workers (Conditions  of  Employment)	Act,
1956
. We have considered it appropriate to deal with both
the applications together.
This Court by an Order dated 24th October, 1989 appointed  a
social organisation by name 'Society for Community Organisa-
tion	       Trust	       (SOCCO)		  ganisation
for  making  appropriate investigation	and   circuated	 the
State to the court. After the Report was received an	were
given time to file their respones  Tamil Nadu and the  manu-
facturers were given time to file their response by  way  of
affidavits.  This Court then directed that a  scheme  should
be  formulated	for   for consideration of the	Court.	This
court	made an Order  on 24th July, 1991 to  the  following
effect.
"We  gather from the submissions  made  at
	      the bar that in the meantime some exercise has
	      been undertaken for the purpose of  finalising
	      the Scheme. Initially the state of Tamil	Nadu
	      has  taken the lead but later Union  of  India
	      has also go interested and meeting on a bigger
	      ,scale  for  the	purpose	 of  finalising	 the
	      Scheme is being arranged. The attorney General
	      is present in
	      Court  today.  We have also suggested  to	 him
	      that he may par-
ticipate in the proceedings to help the  schem
	      to be finalised as quickly as possible."
Then  came two Schemes, one by the petitioners and the other
by  the	 State of r Thamil Nadu. By order dated	 October  8,
1991, the Court directedon -the basis of consent of  counsel
that  at  a conference the terms should be settled  for	 one
Scheme to be adopted by the Court. On 10 th October,   1991,
on  the	 representation of the parties, the Court  made	 the
following Order:
"Pursuant	 to our earlier direction,  the	 em-
	      ployers,	employees and the  State  Government
	      through their representatives met
361
and have sorted out, some of the	differences.
	      Matters  which are agreed to by all.  and	 as-
	      pects which are not agred to by the  employers
	      have been seperately shown. A copy of this may
	      be served on   counsel for the Union of  India
	      present  in  the court today and he  is  given
	      three  weeks' time to indicate the  responses.
	      The appropriate Ministry of the Government  of
	      india to respond to the relevant aspects."
Pursuant to this Order, the Under Secretary  in the   Minis-
try of Labour of the Union Government has filed an affidavit
which we have  examined.
The objection which	 have. been especially refered to in
the  affidavit	 of  the Central Government  do	 not  really
surive	 after	the matter  is heard inasmuch as  these	 are
questions  with which the union Government in not  concerned
and Under the constitutional scheme they relate to the power
of  the	 State	Government. w,e would like'  to	 dispose  of
these petitions with the following directions taken from the
scheme	as  formulated	by the	petitioners  and  the  State
Government,
1.  The Beedi and Cigar Workers	 (Conditions
	      of  Employment) Rules 1969 should be  strictly
	      implemented ,and once that is done the evil of
	      not  furnishing the books to the home  workers
	      would be eradicated.
2. An establishment of the Regional Provident
	      Fund Commissioner with full 'equipment for the
	      purpopose	 of implementation of  the   Statute
	      should  be  located within the  area  and	 the
	      Regional	Provident Fund	commissioner  should
	      have directionS to enforce the
		      Act in all aspects. This establishment
	      should  start functioning within three  months
	      from now.
3.  The	labour laws as also  the
Beedi	 and
	      Cigar Workers (Conditions	  of Employment) Act
should   be  strictly enforced  so  that	 the
	      workers
	      get  their legitimate dues and the  conditions
	      of employment improve.
4.  Tobacco manufacturing has  indeed  health
	      hazards.	Child  labour in this  grade  should
	      theirfore	  be prohibited as far	as  possible
	      and  employment  of  child  labour  should  be
	      stopped  either  immediately or  in  a  phased
	      manner to be decided by the State	 GovernmeAts
	      Out within a perioed not exceeding three years
	      from  now.  The  provisions  of  Child  Labour
	      Abolition Act, 1986 should be strictly  imple-
	      mented.
362
5. Contract labour system, it is alleged, is
	      indispensable this trade. The Union Government
	      is  directed  look  into this  aspect  of	 the
	      matter and take its final decision one way  or
	      the other within six months from now.
6. Beedi trade is a flourishmg one.  Exploi-
	      tation  of labour is rampant in this trade.  A
	      governmental  labour establishment  should  be
	      located  in the area with full  complement  to
	      answer the requirements of the matter.
7.  Since  beedi  manufacturing	 process  is
	      carried more outside the factory than  within,
	      the  system of maintaining the registers as  a
	      regulating  practice  has	 become	  necessary.
	      Great  care  should, therefore,  be  taken  to
	      ensure the maintenance of the register  system
	      as  the  bulk  of the  employees	outside	 the
	      factories	 can be regulated only	through	 the
	      record maintained in the registers.
8.
The Beedi Workers Welfare Cess Act,	1976
and  the
Beedi Workers Welfare Fund Act,	1976
which contain beneficial provisions should  be
	      implemented in the true spirit and since	they
	      are  legislations of the	Central	 Government,
	      the machinery of the Central Government should
	      be made operational in the area.
9.  Grievance  has been made  that  the	pass
	      books  are  not  maintained in  the  names  of
	      actual workers. This should be ensured.
10.  The  Welfare Fund	should	be  properly
	      administered after and in the case of death of
	      a	 workman  appropriate assistance  should  be
	      extended out of the Fund quickly.
11. In view of the health hazard involved in
	      the  manufacturing process, every	 worker	 in-
	      cluding  children,  if  employed,	 should	  be
	      insured for a minimum amount of Rs.50,000	 and
	      the premium should be paid by the employer and
	      the  incidence should not be passed on to	 the
	      workman.
We are of the view that the implementation of the scheme
within the state in an effective manner would require to  be
supervised by an independent external agency. The Tamil Nadu
State  Legal Aid & Advice Board can be entrusted  with	this
responsibility. A three year period of such supervision,  in
our  opinion, would meet the requirement and at the  end  of
such  period  the scheme is expected to	 become	 effectively
operative.  We, therefore, require the Tamil Nadu  Board  to
undertake the super.
363
vision	from  January,	1992 and we direct  the	 Tamil	Nadu
Government and the said Board to coordinate the	 implementa-
tion.  The Secretary of the Tamil Nadu Board Mr.  Raja,	 who
would  be mainly in-charge of the field job shall be paid  a
sum  of Rs. 1,500 (fifteen) per month from January 1992,  as
an  allowance  to meet out of pocket expenses by  the  State
Government  for the period he does the work as Secretary  of
the Board.
We dispose of these cases with the directions  indicated
above  and hope and trust that the authorities as  also	 the
employers  and	the  employees would try  to  implement	 the
directions in true spirit. Liberty to apply.
G.N.						   Petitions
disposed of.
364