[Cites
7
, Cited by
448
]
Supreme Court of India
Ramesh Hiranand Kundanmal vs Municipal Corporation Of Greater ... on 4 March, 1992
Equivalent citations: 1992 SCR (2) 1, 1992 SCC (2) 524, 1992 AIR SCW 846, 1992 (2) SCC 524, (1992) 1 CURCC 594, (1992) 2 ALL WC 1134, (1992) 1 LS 15, (1992) 2 RRR 224, (1992) 2 SCJ 149, 1992 UJ(SC) 2 181, (1992) 1 CURLJ(CCR) 541, 1992 HRR 403, (1992) 2 MAD LW 720, (1992) 2 MAHLR 395, (1992) 1 RENCR 644, 1992 ALL CJ 2 888, (1992) 2 CIVLJ 51, (1992) 2 ALL RENTCAS 57, 1992 SCFBRC 223, (1992) CIVILCOURTC 125, (1992) 2 SCR 1 (SC), (1992) 2 JT 116 (SC), (1993) CIVILCOURTC 125, (1992) 3 BOM CR 110
Author:
M.  Fathima Beevi
Bench:
M.  Fathima Beevi
,
S.C.  Agrawal
PETITIONER:
RAMESH HIRANAND KUNDANMAL

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF GREATER BOMBAY AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT04/03/1992

BENCH:
FATHIMA BEEVI, M. (J)
BENCH:
FATHIMA BEEVI, M. (J)
AGRAWAL, S.C. (J)

CITATION:
 1992 SCR  (2)	 1	  1992 SCC  (2) 524
 JT 1992 (2)   116	  1992 SCALE  (1)530


ACT:
     Civil Procedure Code, 1908 :
     Order I, Rule 10-Impleadment of party by Court to a suit
as   necessary	party-Necessary	 to  proper  party-Who	 is-
Distinction between necessary and proper party-Suit filed by
a  plaintiff,  in  possession of service  station  under  an
agreement,  with  lessee  thereof  challenging	validity  of
notice	issued by Municipal Corporation, for demolition	  of
structures   raised  by	 plaintiff  as	 unauthorised-Lessee
seeking	 impleadment  as additional defendant  as  necessary
party- Whether Court could direct plaintiff to add lessee as
defendant  in suit-Whether Court has discretion to direct  a
plaintiff,  though dominus litis, to implead a person  as  a
necessary party.
     Words  and Phrases : Necessary or proper  party-Meaning
of.



HEADNOTE:
     Under  a  Dealership Agreement, the  appellant  was  in
possession of a service station erected on the land held  by
the  second respondent- the Hindustan petroleum	 Corporation
limited,  as  lessee.  The service station  consisted  of  a
petrol pump in the ground floor and a structure with an open
terrace	 for  parking of vehicles.   The  first	 respondent,
Municipal Corporation issued notice under
section 351
of the
Municipal Corporation Act to the appellant for demolition of
two  chattels on  the terrace on the ground that these	were
unauthorised constructions.
     The  appellant instituted a suit before the City  Civil
Court,	challenging  the  validity of  the  notice  and	 for
injunction  restraining	 the  Municipal	  Corporation	from
demolishing  the structures.  The Court granted	 an  interim
injunction.
     Thereafter,  on  an  application filed  by	 the  second
respondent  for being impleaded as additional  defendant  in
the  suit on the ground that it had materials to  show	that
the constructions were unauthorised, and it was a  necessary
party to the litigation, the court directed the appellant to
						    2
add the second respondent as defendant and amend the  plaint
suitably   rejecting  the appellant's  contention  that	 the
second respondent was neither a necessary nor a proper party
to be impleaded in the suit.  The appellant's writ  petition
challenging  the aforesaid order was dismissed by  the	High
Court.
     In the appeal, by special leave, before this Court,  on
behalf of the appellant-plaintiff it was contended that	 the
appellant-plaintiff was dominus litis and, therefore,  could
not  be forced to join the second respondent Corporation  as
defendant, that second respondent was neither a necessary no
a  proper  party  to the suit and had  no  interest  in	 the
subject-matter	of the litigation and its presence  was	 not
required to adjudicate upon the issue involved in  the	suit
or  for	 the purpose of deciding the real matter and on	 the
contrary, its addition would enlarge the issue in the  suit,
and  that  the Court could not direct  addition	 of  parties
against	 the  wishes  of the plaintiff,	 who  could  not  be
compelled  to proceed against a person against whom  he	 did
not  claim any relief.
     On	 behalf of the respondent it was contended that	 the
second	respondent  had	 a right to be	heard  in  the	suit
inasmuch  as  the respondent  was the lessee,  who  was	 not
answerable for the illegal actions of the appellant.
     Allowing the appeal, this Court,
     HELD  : 1.1 Plaintiff is no doubt dominus litis and  is
not  bound  to sue every possible  adverse claimant  in	 the
same  suit.  He may choose to implead only those persons  as
defendants  against whom he wishes to proceed.	 However,the
Court  may  at	any stage of the  suit	direct	addition  of
parties.  A party can be joined as defendant even though the
plaintiff  does	 not think that he has any cause  of  action
against him.  The question of impleadment of a party has  to
be decided on the touch stone of
Order 1 Rule 10 of the Code
of   Civil  Procedure
,1908,  which  provides  that  only   a
necessary  or a proper party may be added.  In the light  of
the  clear  language of the Rule, it cannot be said  that  a
person cannot be added as defendant even in a case where his
presence  is  necessary to enable the Court  to	 decide	 the
matter effectively. [6E-F, 7A-D]
     1.2 A necessary party is one without whom no order	 can
be made effectively. A proper party is one in whose  absence
an  effective  order  can  be made  but	 whose	presence  is
necessary for a complete and final decision
						       3
on the question involved in the proceeding.  The addition of
parties is generally not a question of initial	jurisdiction
of  the Court but of a judicial discretion which has  to  be
exercised  in view of all the facts and circumstances  of  a
particular case. [7A-B]
     1.3  The  Court  is empowered to join  a  person  whose
presence is necessary for the prescribed purpose and  cannot
under  the  Rule  direct  the addition	of  a  person  whose
presence  is  not  necessary  for   that  purpose.   If	 the
intervener  has	 a  cause of action  against  the  plaintiff
relating  to the subject-matter of the existing action,	 the
Court has power to join the intervener so as to give  effect
to  the	 primary  object of the order,	which  is  to  avoid
multiplicity of actions. [7E-F]
     1.4  A clear distinction has been drawn  between  suits
relating  to property and those in which the  subject-matter
of  litigation is a declaration as regards status  or  legal
character.   In	 the former category, the  rule	 of  present
interest  as distinguished from the Commercial	interest  is
required  to  be  shown before a person may be	added  as  a
party. [9E]
     1.5 It cannot be said that the main object of the	rule
is  to	prevent	 multiplicity  of  actions  though  it	 may
incidentally  have  that effect.  But that appears to  be  a
desirable  consequence	of  the rule rather  than  its	main
objective.   The  person  to be joined	must  be  one  whose
presence  is  necessary as a party.  What makes a  person  a
necessary party is not merely that he has relevant  evidence
to  give on some of the questions involved that	 would	only
make  him a necessary witness-and not merely that he has  an
interest  in the correct solution of some question  involved
and has thought of  relevant arguments to advance.  The only
reason which makes it necessary to make a person a party  to
an  action is that he should be bound by the result  of	 the
action	and the question to be settled therefore, must be  a
question  in  the  action which	 cannot	 be  effectully	 and
completely settled unless he is a party.  The line has	been
drawn on a wider construction of the rule between the direct
interest or the legal interest and commercial interest.	  It
is,  therefore,	 necessary that person must be	directly  or
legally interested in the action in the answer, i.e., he can
say  that  the litigation may lead to a	 result	 which	will
affect him legally, that is, by curtailing his legal rights.
it is difficult to say that the rule contemplates joining as
a  defendant a person whose only object is to prosecute	 his
own cause of action. [9F-H, 10A-B]
						    4
     Razia Begum v. Anwar Begum, [1959] SCR 1111, relied on.
     Amon  v. Raphael Tuck & Sons Ltd., (1956) 1   All	E.R.
273  and Dollfus Mieg et Compagnie S.A. v. Bank of  England,
(1950) 2 All E.R. 611, referred to.
     2.1 In the instant case, the courts below	have assumed
that  the subject-matter of the litigation is the  structure
erected	 by the respondent or, in other words,	the  service
station	 which has been allowed to be operated upon  by	 the
appellant-plaintiff  under  the	 terms	of  the	  dealership
agreement.  The notice does not relate to that structure but
is  in	relation  to the two chattels stated  to  have	been
erected	  by  the  appellant  unauthorisedly.	The   second
respondent  has	 no  interest  in  these  chattels,and	 the
demolition  of the same in pursuance to the notice is not  a
matter	which  affects the legal rights of  the	 respondent.
[11G-H, 12A]
     National	Textile	  Workers'  Union,  etc.   v.	P.R.
Ramakrishnan and Ors., [1983] 1 SCR 922, distinguished.
     2.2  It  is  true that being lessee  of  the  premises,
second	respondent Corporation has an answer for the  action
proposed  by  the  first  respondent-Municipal	 Corporation
against	 the appellant but for the purpose of  granting	 the
relief	sought	for  by	 the  appellant	 by  examining	 the
justification	of  the	 notice	 issued	 by  the   Municipal
Corporation,  it is not necessary for the Court to  consider
that answer. Hence the presence of the respondent cannot  be
considered  as	necessary for the purpose  of  enabling	 the
Court  to  effectually and completely  adjudicate  upon	 and
settle	all  the  question  involved  in  the  suit.	 The
appellant  is  proceeded against by the	  first	 respondent-
Corporation  for  the  alleged action in  violation  of	 the
municipal  laws.   The grievance of  the  second  respondent
against the appellant,if any, could only be for violation of
the  agreement	and that is based on a	different  cause  of
action.	  The consolidation of these two in the same suit in
neither contemplated nor permissible. [10F-H, 11A]
     2.3  The  courts below failed to note that	 the  second
respondent  has no direct interest in the subject-matter  of
the  litigation	 and the addition of  the  respondent  would
result in causing serious prejudice to the appellant and the
substitution or the addition of a new cause of action  would
only widen the issue which is required to be adjudicated and
settled.   By the joining of the party would  embarrass	 the
appellant-plaintiff and issues
						5
not germane to the suit would be required to be raised.	 The
mere  fact  that  a fresh litigation can be  avoided  is  no
ground	to  invoke the power under the Rule in	such  cases.
[12B-C]
     National	 Textile    Worker's	Union,	  etc.v.P.R.
Ramakrishnan and Ors., [1983] 1 SCR 922, distinguished.
     2.4   Therefore,  the  courts  below  were	  wrong	  in
concluding  that the second respondent was a necessary or  a
proper	party  to  be  added as	 a  defendant  in  the	suit
instituted by the appellant.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 3570 of
1991.
From  the	Order dated 13.10.1989 of  the	Bombay	High
Court in Writ Petition No. 4229 of 1989.
K.	 Parasaran, Joquium Reis and Kailash Vasdev for	 the
Appellants.
D.N. Mishra (for J.B.D. & CO.) and M.S. Ganesh for	 the
Respondents.
The Judgement of the Court was delivered by
     FATHIMA  BEEVI, J. We have to consider in	this  appeal
the question whether the second respondent is a necessary or
proper party to be joined as defendant under
Order 1 Rule 10
of  the Code of Civil Procedure
, in the	 suit instituted  by
the appellant against the first respondent.
Under  the dealership Agreement of 1974, the  appellant
is in possession of the service station erected on the	land
held   by  the	second	respondent  herein,  the   Hindustan
Petroleum  Corporation	Limited	 as  lessee.   The   service
station consists of a petrol pump in the ground floor and  a
structure with an open terrace for parking of vehicles.	 The
first  respondent,  the	 Municipal  Corporation	 of  Greater
Bombay issued notice dated 5.8.1988 under
section 351
of the
Municipal Corporation Act to the appellant for demolition of
two  chattles on the terrace on the ground that	 these	were
unauthorised  constructions.  The appellant  instituted	 the
suit  No. 6181 of 1988 before the City Civil Court,  Bombay,
challenging  the validity of the notice and  for  injunction
restraining  the Municipal Corporation from demolishing	 the
structures, Interim injunction was granted by the court.
6
On	 9.9.1988, the second respondent applied  for  being
impleaded as additional defendant in the suit on the  ground
that they have	materials to show that the constructions are
unauthorised,	and  they  are	necessary  parties  to	 the
litigation. The Court by order dated 22.8.1989 directed	 the
appellant  to  add the second respondent  as  defendant	 and
amend  the plaint suitably rejecting the contentions of	 the
appellant that the second respondent was neither a necessary
nor  a	proper	party  to be  impleaded	 in  the  suit.	 The
appellant filed writ petition No. 4229 of 1989 under
Article
227
of the Constitution of India in the High Court of Bombay
challenging the correctness of the order. The High Court  by
the  impugned  judgment dismissed the  writ  petition.	This
appeal by special leave is directed against the judgement of
the High Court dated 13.10.1989.
Three  grounds have been urged by the  learned  counsel
for  the appellant against the sustainability of the  order.
The  plaintiff was dominus  litis and, therefore, cannot  be
forced	to  join  the second respondent	 as  defendant.	 The
second respondent is neither a necessary nor a proper  party
to  the suit. The addition of the respondent  would  enlarge
the  issue in the suit. Reliance was placed on the  decision
of  this  Court in
Razia Begum v. Anwar	 Begum
,	 [1959]	 SCR
1111.
It was argued that the Court cannot direct addition  of
parties	 against the wishes of the plaintiff who  cannot  be
compelled  to proceed against a person against whom he	does
not  claim any relief. Plaintiff is no doubt  dominus  litis
and  is not bound to sue every possible adverse claimant  in
the  same suit. He may choose to implead only those  persons
as defendants against whom he wishes to proceed though under
Order  I Rule 3, to avoid multiplicity of suit and  needless
expenses,  all persons against whom the right to  relief  is
alleged to exist may be joined as defendants.  However,	 the
Court  may  at	any stage of the  suit	direct	addition  of
parties. A party can  be joined as defendent even though the
plaintiff   does not think that he has any cause  of  action
against	 him. Rule 10 specifically provides that it is	open
to  the	 Court to add at any stage of the suit	a  necessary
party  or  a person whose presence before the Court  may  be
necessary  in order to enable the Court to  effectually	 and
completely  adjudicate	upon and settle	 all  the  questions
involved in the suit.
Sub-rule(2)  of Rule 10 gives a wide discretion to	 the
Court  to  meet every case of defect of parties and  is	 not
affected by the inaction of the
7
plaintiff  to  bring the necessary parties  on	record.	 The
question of impleadment of a party has to be decided on	 the
touch  stone of Order I Rule 10 which provides that  only  a
necessary or a proper party may be added. A necessary  party
is  one	 without whom no order can be  made  effectively.  A
proper party is one in whose absence an effective order	 can
be  made but whose presence is necessary for a complete	 and
final  decision on the question involved in the	 proceeding.
The  addition  of  parties is generally not  a	question  of
initial	 jurisdiction  of  the	Court  but  of	a   judicial
discretion  which  has to be exercised in view	of  all	 the
facts and circumstances of a particular case.
The  respondents do not seriously dispute the  position
that  the second respondent is not a necessary party to	 the
suit  in the sense that without their presence an  effective
order cannot be passed. However, they support the view	that
respondent  No.	 2  is	a proper  party	 whose	presence  is
necessary for a complete adjudication on the controversy. In
the light of the clear language of the Rule, it is not	open
to the appellant to contend that a person cannot be added as
defendant even in a case where his presence is necessary  to
enable the Court to decide the matter effectively.
The  case really turns on the true construction of	 the
Rule in particular  the meaning of the words "whose presence
before	the  Court may be necessary in order to	 enable	 the
Court  effectually  and completely to  adjudicate  upon	 and
settle all the questions involved in the suit." The Court is
empowered  to join a person whose presence is necessary	 for
the prescribed purpose and cannot under the Rule direct	 the
addition  of  a person whose presence is not  necessary	 for
that  purpose.	If  the intervener has	a  cause  of  action
against the plaintiff relating to the subject-matter of	 the
existing  action, the Court has power to join intervener  so
as  to give effect to the primary object of the order  which
is to avoid multiplicity of actions.
In the present case, the subject-matter of the  dispute
between	 the  appellant	 and the  first	 respondent  is	 the
demolition of the unauthorised construction in pursuance  to
the  notice under section 351 of the Bombay  Municipal	Act.
The  second  respondent, the lessee, in	 possession  of	 the
service	 station  asserts  that the appellant  has  made  an
unauthorised  construction and the second respondent  is  in
possession  of material evidence to that effect.  No  notice
has been issued to the second respondent by the
8
Municipal  Corporation and no case of any collusion  between
the  appellant and the Municipal Corporation is alleged.  On
the  other  hand, it is the case of the appellant  that	 the
second	respondent is instrumental in the initiation of	 the
proceedings   by  the  Municipal  Corporation  against	 the
appellant  and	the present application	 is  for  collateral
purposes.  In  the  light of such averments, it	 has  to  be
considered  whether the second respondent is a necessary  or
proper party in the present action.
The  power	 of the Court to add parties under  Order  I
Rule 10,
C.P.C
, came up for consideration before this  Court
in
Razia Begum
(supra). In that case it was pointed out that
the Courts in India have not treated the matter of  addition
of   parties  as  raising  any	question  of   the   initial
jurisdiction of the Court and that it is firmly	 established
as  a  result  of judicial decisions that in  order  that  a
person	may be added as a party to a suit, he should have  a
direct	interest  in the subject-matter	 of  the  litigation
whether it be the questions relating to movable or immovable
property.
In	 that case the appellant instituted a  case  against
the  third respondent inter alia for a declaration that	 she
was  his lawfully married wife. The third  respondent  filed
his  written statement admitting the claim but on  the	same
date  respondents 1 and 2 made an application under Order  I
Rule  10(2)
of C.P.C
., for being impleaded in the  suit  as
defendants  on the grounds that they were  respectively	 the
wife  and  son of the third respondent and  that  they	were
interested in denying the appellant's status as wife and the
status	of children as the legitimate children of the  third
respondent;  that the suit was the result of  the  collusion
between	 the appellant and the third respondent and that  if
the  appellant	was declared to be lawfully  wedded  to	 the
third respondent, the rights and interests of respondents  I
and  2	in  the	 estate of the	third  respondent  would  be
affected.   The	 application  was  contested  by  both	 the
appellant and the third respondent. The trial court  allowed
the  application  and the order was confirmed  by  the	High
Court  in its revisional jurisdicyion . The question in	 the
appeal before this Court was whether the lower court did not
exceed their powers in directing the addition of respondents
1 and 2 as parties defendants in the action.
Sinha,  J.	 speaking  for	the  majority  said  that  a
declaratory judgment in respect of a disputed status will be
binding not only upon parties actually before the Court	 but
also  upon persons claiming through them  respectively.	 The
Court laid down the law that in a  suit relating to property
in order
9
that  a	 person may be added as a party, he  should  have  a
direct interest as distinguished from a commercial  interest
in the subject-matter of the litigation. Where the  subject-
matter of a litigation is a declaration as regards status or
a  legal character, the rule of presence of direct  interest
may be relaxed in a suitable case where the Court is of	 the
opinion	 that by adding that party it would be in  a  better
position  effectually and completely to adjudicate upon	 the
controversy. In cases covered by the statutory provisions of
sections 42
and
43
of the Specific Relief Act, the Court  is
not  bound  to grant the declaration prayed for	 on  a	mere
admission  of the claim by the defendant. If the  Court	 has
reasons	 to  insist  upon  a  clear  proof  apart  from	 the
admission,  the	 result	 of  a	declaratory  decree  on	 the
question  of  status such as the controversy  in  that	suit
affects	 not only the parties actually before the Court	 but
generation  to come and in view of that	 consideration,	 the
rule of present interest as evolved by case law relating  to
disputes  about	 property does not apply  with	full  force.
Applying  the  proposition enunciated to the  facts  of	 the
case, the Court came to the conclusion that the courts below
did  not  exceed their power in directing  the	addition  of
respondents 1 and 2 as parties defendants in the action	 nor
it could be said that the exercise of the discretion was not
bound.
A	clear  distinction  has	 been  drawn  between  suits
relating  to property and those in which the  subject-matter
of  litigation is a declaration as regards status  or  legal
character.  In	the  former category, the  rule	 of  present
interest  as distinguished from the commercial	interest  is
required  to  be  shown before a person may be	added  as  a
party.
It	 cannot be said that the main object of the rule  is
to   prevent   multiplicity  of	 actions   though   it	 may
incidentally  have  that effect. But that appears  to  be  a
desirable  consequence	of  the rule rather  than  its	main
objectives.  The  person  to be joined	must  be  one  whose
presence  is  necessary as a party. What makes	a  person  a
necessary party is not merely that he has relevant  evidence
to  give on some of the questions involved; that would	only
make  him a necessary witness. It is not merely that he	 has
an  interest  in  the correct  solution	 of  some  questions
involved  and has thought or relevant arguments to  advance.
The only reason which makes it necessary to make a person  a
party to an action is that he should be bound by the  result
of  the	 action and the question to be	settled,  therefore,
must   be  a  question	in  the	  action  which	 cannot	  be
effectually and completely settled unless he is a party. The
line has been drawn on wider construction of
10
the  rule between the direct interest or the legal  interest
and  commercial interest. It is, therefore,  necessary	that
the  person  must be directly or legally interested  in	 the
action	in the answer, i.e., he can say that the  litigation
may  lead to a result which will affect him legally that  is
by curtailing his legal rights. It is difficult to say	that
the rule contemplates joining as a defendant a person  whose
only object is to prosecute his own cause of action. Similar
provision  was	considered in Amon v. Raphael  Tuck  &	Sons
Ltd.,  (1956)  1  All E.R. 273, wherein	 after	quoting	 the
observations of Wynn-Parry, J. in Dollfus Mieg et  Compagnie
S.A  v. Bank of England,(1950) 2 All E.R.611, that the	true
test  lies  not	 so  much in an analysis  of  what  are	 the
constituents  of the applicants' rights, but rather in	what
would  be the result on the subject-matter of the action  if
those rights could be established, Devlin, J. has stated:-
"The test is `May the order for which the plaintiff
	 is  asking  directly affect the intervener  in	 the
	 enjoyment of his legal rights."
It	 has been strenuously contended before us  that	 the
    second respondent has no interest  in the subject-matter
    of the litigation and the presence of the respondent  is
    not	 required to adjudicate upon the issue	involved  in
    the suit or for the purpose of deciding the real  matter
    involved.  It is pointed out that the subject-matter  in
    the	  suit	is  the	 notice	 issued	 by  the   Municipal
    Corporation to the appellant and the issue is whether it
    is justified or not. The Hindustan Petroleum Corporation
    Limited  is	 interested  in	 supporting  the   Municipal
    Corporation and sustaining the action taken against	 the
    appellant.	But  that  does	 not  amount  to  any  legal
    interest  in  the subject-matter in the sense  that	 the
    order,  if	any, either in favour of  the  appellant  or
    against   the  appellant   would  be  binding  on	this
    respondent.	 It  is	 true  that  being  lessee  of	 the
    premises,  the Hindustan Petroleum	corporation  Limited
    has	 an answer for the action proposed by the  Municipal
    Corporation	 against the appellant, but for the  purpose
    of	granting the relief sought for by the  appellant  by
    examining  the justification of the notice issued by the
    Municipal Corporation, it is not necessary for the Court
    to consider that answer. If that be so, the presence  of
    the respondent cannot be considered as necessary for the
    purpose  of	 enabling  the	Court  to  effectually	 and
    completely adjudicate upon and settle all the  questions
    involved in the suit. The appellant is preeceded against
    by	the municipal Corporation for the alleged action  in
    violation of the municipal laws. The grievance of the
11
respondent against the appellant, if any, could only  be
    for	 violation of the agreement and that is based  on  a
    different  cause of action. The consolidation  of  these
    two	 in  the  same	suit  is  neither  contemplated	 nor
    permissible.
The  learned counsel for the respondent on a  reference
    to	the broad principles laid down in
National  Textiles
    v.	P.R.Ramakrishnan
, [1983] 1 SCR 922, maintained	that
    the	 second	 respondent has a right to be heard  in	 the
    suit  filed	 by  the  appellant  against  the  Municipal
    Corporation inasmuch as the respondent is the lessee who
    is	not  answerable	 for  the  illegal  action  of	 the
    appellant. It was held
in that case
that the workers  of
    a  company are entitled to appear at the hearing of	 the
    winding up petition whether to support or oppose it. The
    court considered wider public interest involved and said
    that  in  winding  up  of  a  company  or  changing	 its
    management,	 the Court must take into consideration	 not
    only  the  interest of the shareholders,  creditors	 but
    also  amongst other things the interest of	the  workers
    and	 that the workers must have an opportunity of  being
    heard  for	projecting and safeguarding  their  interest
    before  a  winding up order is made by the	Court.	That
    principal	has  no application in	a  civil  litigation
    where  licensee  questions	the  action  of	 the   legal
    authority  and  the	 lessee	 would	not be	affected  in
    whatever way the decision is rendered.
The City Civil Judge in para 32 of the order said	that
    the	 Hindustan  Petroleum Corporation  Limited  are	 the
    lessees of the plot as also the premises, the  plaintiff
    is	merely	their dealer; they have a right,  title	 and
    interest  in  the suit premises and the  applicants	 are
    proper  and necessary parties as they have	interest  in
    the subject-matter of the litigation and their  presence
    will  be necessary and proper to effectively  adjudicate
    upon and  determine the cause of action in the suit. The
    High  Court also in confirming the order said  that	 the
    notice  which is challenged is in respect  of  structure
    which   belongs  to	 the  second  respondent   and	 the
    respondent's   presence  is	 necessary   for   effective
    adjudication.
The  courts below have assumed that the  subject-matter
    of	the  litigation	 is the	 structure  erected  by	 the
    respondent	or in other words the service station  which
    has	 been allowed  to be operated upon by the  plaintiff
    under the terms of dealership agreement. The notice does
    not	 relate to that structure but is in relation to	 the
    two chattels stated to have been erected by the  present
    appellant  unauthorisedly.	According to  the  appellant
    these  chattels/structures are moveables on	 wheels	 and
    plates where servicing
12
page
    and/or repairs are done and used for storing  implements
    of the mechanics. The second respondent has no  interest
    in	these  chattels and the demolition of  the  same  in
    pursuance  to the notice is not a matter  which  affects
    the	 legal rights of the respondent.  The courts  below,
    therefore, failed to note that the second respondent has
    no	 direct	 interest  in  the  subject-matter  of	 the
    litigation	and  the addition of  the  respondent  would
    result in causing serious prejudice to the appellant and
    the	 substitution  or  the addition of a  new  cause  of
    action  would only widen the issue which is required  to
    be	adjudicated and settled. By the joining of the party
    would embarrass the plaintiff and issues not germane  to
    the	 suit would be required to be raised. The mere	fact
    that  a fresh litigation can be avoided is no ground  to
    invoke the power under the Rule in such cases.
     We	 are, therefore, of the view that the  courts  below
    were wrong in concluding that the second respondent is a
    necessary  or a proper party to be added as a  defendant
    in the present suit instituted by the appellant.
     We	 according  allow  the	appeal	and  set  aside	 the
    impugned judgment. No order as to costs.
N.V.P.					  Appeal allowed.
13