[Cites
8
, Cited by
164
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Maharashtra vs Vikas Sahebrao Roundale And Ors on 11 August, 1992
Equivalent citations: 1992 AIR 1926, 1992 SCR (3) 792, AIR 1992 SUPREME COURT 1926, 1992 (4) SCC 435, 1992 AIR SCW 2182, (1992) 5 JT 175 (SC), (1992) 3 SCR 792 (SC), 1992 (3) SCR 792, 1992 (5) JT 175, 1992 (2) UJ (SC) 680, 1992 UJ(SC) 2 680, 1993 (1) UPLBEC 534, 1993 (1) APLJ 1, (1993) 1 UPLBEC 534, (1992) 2 ANDHWR 37, (1993) 1 MAHLR 144, (1992) 5 SERVLR 74, (1993) 1 BOM CR 437
Author:
K. Ramaswamy
Bench:
K. Ramaswamy
,
N.M.  Kasliwal
,
G.N.  Ray
PETITIONER:
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
VIKAS SAHEBRAO ROUNDALE AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT11/08/1992

BENCH:
RAMASWAMY, K.
BENCH:
RAMASWAMY, K.
KASLIWAL, N.M. (J)
RAY, G.N. (J)

CITATION:
 1992 AIR 1926		  1992 SCR  (3) 792
 1992 SCC  (4) 435	  JT 1992 (5)	175
 1992 SCALE  (2)163


ACT:
     Article  226-III  equipped	 under staffed	unrecognised
educational  institutions-Students admitted to D.Ed.  course
in   unrecognised  institution-Held  High  Court   committed
manifest  error	 in exercising prerogative power  to  permit
appearance for examination.



HEADNOTE:
     In	 the instant case the respondents were	admitted  to
D.Ed.  Course  by  an  unrecognised  Vidhyalaya,  when	 the
examinations  were  to commence from April  18th  1991,	 the
management  finding  it difficult to have them sit  for	 the
examination  encouraged the respondents to tap the doors  of
the High Court of Bombay at Nagpur Bench to seek  directions
to  permit them to appear in the examination to be  held  on
18th April, 1991.  The Division Bench directed the appellant
i.e., the State of Maharashtra to permit the respondents  to
sit  in the examination for the first year  commencing	from
April 18, 1991 and after their passing the examination,	 the
passed candidates should be allocated seats in a  recognised
institution  to prosecute their further courses.   Assailing
the  legality  thereof this appeal has been  filed  in	this
court.
     Granting Special leave, the Court
     HELD:  That this court has judicially noticed  mushroom
growth	of  ill	 equipped  and	under  staffed	unrecognised
institutions  in  Andhra  Pradesh,  Bihar,  Tamil  Nadu	 and
Maharashtra States inparticular, though other states too are
of no exception.  Obviously the field of education is  found
to  be	fertile, perennial and profitable  business  venture
with  least capital outlay and the instant case is one	such
from the State of Maharashtra. [794F-G]
     That  the	appellants have rightly contested  that	 the
directions  issued  by the High Court runs  counter  to	 the
statute	 and in virtue directing the authorities to  disobey
the law which is impermissible. [796 B]
     Considering  the cases decided by this Court  regarding
private in-
						  793
stitutions  unauthorisedly established and the	request	 for
the permission to appear in examinations or accommodate them
elsewhere  to enable them to prosecute further	studies	 had
been negatived by this court in the under mentioned  cases:-
[796C]
     N.M.  Nageshwaramma v. State of Andhra Pradesh &  Anr.,
[1986]	Suppl.	S.C.C.	166 = A.I.R. 1986  S.C.	 1188;	A.P.
Christians  Medical Educational Society, etc. v.  Government
of Andhra Pradesh & Anr., [1986] 2 S.C.C. 667 = A.I.R.	1986
S.C.  1490;  All Bihar Christian Schools Association &	Anr.
v. State of Bihar & Ors., [1988] 2 S.C.R. 49; State of Tamil
Nadu  &	 Ors. v. St. Joseph Teachers  Training	Institute  &
Anr.,  J.T.  [1991) 2 S.C. 343 and  Students  of  Dattatraya
Adhyapak Vidhyalaya v. State of Maharashtra & Ors.,  (S.L.P.
(C) No. 2067 of 1991 decided on 19.2.91).
     This  Court has held that the courts giving  directions
to  relieve harships of the students has resulted  in  total
indiscipline in the field of regulation.  While in the	case
of  Andhra  Kesari Education Society v. Director  of  School
Education  &  Ors., [1988] Supp. 3 S.C.R. 893 on  which	 the
respondents  have relied upon, this Court issued  directions
in special circumstances and therefore cannot be taken as  a
precedent in particular in the light of the law laid down by
this court in its various judgments. [797A-D]
     Further  even
Article  51A
enjoins  every	 citizen  by
clause	(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism,	 the
spirit	of  enquiry  and  reform;  clause  (i)	enjoins	  as
fundamental duty to strive towards excellence in all spheres
of  individual	and collective activity so that	 the  nation
constantly  rises higher and higher.  Thus clause (a) 8	 (f)
intend to value and preserve rich heritage of our  composite
culture	 are  some  of the basic values	 which	the  budding
students  need	to  be	inculcated  and	 imbibed  in   their
formative periods to take deep roots at maturity.  Even	 the
teacher	 needs	not only the training at the  inception	 but
also  periodical  orientations in this behalf  so  that	 the
children  would reap the rich benefit thereof.	So  the	 ill
equipped and ill housed institutions with substandard  staff
therein	  are	counter	 productive   and   detrimental	  to
inculcating   spirit  of  enquiry  and	excellence  to	 the
students.  To disregard statutory compliance would amount to
letting loose of innocent and unwary children.	Even in	 the
proceeding  of a recent seminar held in Delhi it is  clearly
demonstrated  as an admission by teachers that they are	 not
properly  trained to meet the growing needs of the  society.
The qualitative training in the training Colleges or School
						  794
would  inspire and motivate them into action to the  benefit
of the students.  For equipping such training all facilities
and   equipments  in  training	colleges  or   schools	 are
absolutely necessary and institutions bereft thereof have no
place  to  exist  nor entitled	to  recognition.   Thus	 the
compliance  of the statutory requirements is insisted  upon.
Any slackening the standard and judicial fiat to control the
mode  of education and examining system are  detrimental  to
the efficient management of the education.  Thus  directions
to  the appellants to disobey the law is subversive  of	 the
rule  of Law, a breeding ground for corruption	and  feeding
source	 for  indiscipline.   The  High	  Court	  therefore,
committed   manifest  error  in	 law,  in   exercising	 the
prerogative  power  conferred  under
Article  226
of	 the
Constitution,	directing  the	appellants  to	permit	 the
students to appear in the examination.
					       [797E-798F]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 2932 of
1992.
From  the	Judgment  and Order dated  8.4.1991  of	 the
Bombay High Court in Writ Petition No. 2450 of 1990.
S.K.  Dholakia  S.M.  Jadhav and A.S.  Bhasme  for	 the
Appellant.
R.B. Masodkar and K.L. Taneja for the Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     K. RAMASWAMY, J. Special leave granted.
This  court judicially noticed mushroom growth  of	 ill
equipped   and	 under-staffed	 unrecognised	 educational
institutions   in  Andhra  Pradesh,  Bihar,  Tamilnadu	 and
Maharashtra  States and other states too are no	 exceptions.
Obviously  the	field of education is found to	be  fertile,
perennial and profitable business venture with least capital
outlay.	 This case is one such from the State of Maharashtra.
It	 would appear that individuals or societies  without
complying   with  the  statutory   requirements,   establish
educational or training institutions ill equipped to  impart
education and have the students admitted, in some  instances
despite	 warnings by the State Govt. and in  some  instances
without	 knowledge  of the concerned State  Govt,  but	with
connivance at lower levels.
795
In this case the respondents in all 129, were  admitted
to   D.Ed.   course  by	 unrecognised	Yashomati   Adhyapak
Vidhyalaya,    Warthi,	 District   Bhandara.	 When	 the
examinations  were  to	commence from April  18,  1991,	 the
management  finding  it difficult to have them sit  for	 the
examination, obviously encouraged the respondents to tap the
doors of the High Court of Bombay at Nagpur Bench who sought
direction to permit them to appear in the examination to  be
held  on  that	day.  The Division Bench  allowed  the	Writ
Petition  No. 2450 of 1990 by order dated April	 8,1991	 and
directed  the appellant to permit the respondents to sit  in
the examination for the first year commencing from April 18,
1991  and  after their passing the examination,	 the  passed
candidates  should be allocated in a recognised	 institution
to prosecute their further courses.  Assailing the  legality
thereof this appeal has been filed.
Sri  Dholakia,  the  learned  senior  counsel  for	 the
appellants,  contended	that  the  respondents	having	 had
admission in an unauthorised college, have no right to	seek
writ of mandamus or direction from the court to permit	them
to  sit	 for the examination or to accommodate them  in	 the
recognised  institutions to pursue a further study.   It  is
also  contended that the direction issued by the High  Court
runs  counter  to the statute and in  virtue  directing	 the
authorities  to disobey the law which is impermissible.	  We
find force in the contention.
In
N.M.  Nageshwaramma v. State of  Andhra  Pradesh  &
Anr.
,  [1986] (Supp) SCC 166 = AIR 1986 SC 1188	 this  court
held   that   the   private   institutions    unauthorisedly
established were invariably ill housed, ill staffed and	 ill
equipped.   If the Govt. is directed to permit the  students
admitted   into	 those	institutions,  to  appear   in	 the
examination,   we  will	 practically  be   encouraging	 and
condoning  the establishment of	 unauthorised  institutions.
It  is	not appropriate that the jurisdiction of  the  court
either under
Art. 32
or
Art. 226
of the Constitution  should
be  frittered  away for such a purpose.	 So the	 request  to
permit the students who had training in unrecognised schools
was deprecated by this court.
In A.P. Christians Medical Educational Society, etc. v.
Govt. of Andhra Pradesh & Anr., [1986] 2 SCC 667 = AIR	1986
SC  1490  when fervent request with all	 persuasion  by	 the
Senior	counsel, Sri K.K. Venugopal, to permit the  students
admitted  in  unrecognised and unauthorised  institution  to
pursue balance course was made, this court noted thus:
796
"We do not think that we can possibly accede to the
	 request   made	 on  behalf  of	 the  students	 any
	 direction  of	the nature sought for  would  be  in
	 clear	transgression  of  the	provisions  of	 the
	 University   Act   and	 the  regulations   of	 the
	 University.   We  cannot  by our  fiat	 direct	 the
	 University to disobey the statute to which it	owes
	 its  existence	 and  the regulations  made  by	 the
	 University itself.  We cannot imagine anything more
	 destructive of the rule of law than a direction  by
	 the court to disobey the laws."
The  request  to permit the students to appear  in	 the
examination and to accommodate them elsewhere to enable them
to prosecute further study was negatived by this court.
In	 all
Bihar Christian Schools Association &  Anr.  v.
State of Bihar & Ors.
, [1988] 2 SCR 49, this court, when the
ill  equipped and mismanaged schools were taken over  by  an
Act whose validity was challenged on the anvil of
Art. 30
of
the  constitution, held that even the minority	institutions
are  subject to statutory regulations and establishment	 and
maintenance of such an educational institution should be  in
conformity  with  the statute and the state is	entitled  to
regulate  the establishment of the educational	institutions
and  the  admission  of the students  in  those	 educational
institutions.  It was held that the educational institutions
of the minorities have no right to mal-administration.	 Any
rule  or  direction  issued by the  Govt.  to  prevent	mal-
administration would be valid.
In
State to Tamil Nadu & Ors. v. St.  Joseph  Teachers
Training  Institute  & Anr., JT
(1991) 2 S.C. 343  the	High
Court of Madras while dismissing the writ petitions filed by
unauthorised  educational  institution,	 gave  direction  to
admit  the  students for the examination.  This	 court	held
that  the  direction of admitting students  of	unauthorised
educational  institutions  and thus  seeking  direction	 for
permitting  the	 students to appear at the  examination	 has
been  looked with disfavour by this court. It was held	that
since the students of unrecognised institutions were legally
not  entitled to appear at the examination conducted by	 the
education  department of the Govt., the High Court acted  in
violation of law in granting permission to such students for
appearing at the public examination.  Accordingly the appeal
was allowed and the direction issued was set aside.
In Students of Dattatraya Adhyapak Vidhyalaya v.  State
of  Maharashtra & Ors., S.L.P. (C) No. 2067 of 1991  decided
on 19.2.91 this
797
court held thus:
"We are coming across cases of this type very often
	 where	allegations are made that innocent  students
	 are admitted into unrecognised schools and are made
	 to   suffer.	 Some  Courts  out   of	  compassion
	 occasionally interfere to relieve the harships.  We
	 find  that  the result of this situation  is  total
	 indiscipline in the field of regulation."
In
Andhra	 Kesari Educational Society v.	Director  of
School Education & Ors.
, [1988] Supp. 3 SCR 893 relied	upon
by  the	 counsel for the respondents, no  doubt	 this  court
directed  the Govt. to consider whether the students in	 the
appellant's  college  have undergone the  necessary  B.	 Ed.
course	and  has  permitted them to appear  in	the  ensuing
examination  and publish their results.	 In that case  there
was a long drawn history of the recognition of the institute
and  that  the	direction was issued by this  court  in	 the
special	 circumstances	therein.  Therefore,  it  cannot  be
taken as a precedent, in particular, in the light of the law
laid down by
this court as stated supra.
Article  51A
enjoins every citizen by  clause  (h)  to
develop	 the  scientific  temper, humanism,  the  spirit  of
inquiry and reform and clause (j) enjoins as the fundamental
duty  to  strive  towards  excellence  in  all	spheres	  of
individual  and	 collective  activity  so  that	 the  nation
constantly   rises  to	higher	levels	of   endeavour	 and
achievement;  (a)  respect  of national	 flag  and  national
anthem;	 (e)  to  promote  harmony  and	 spirit	 of   common
brotherhood  amongst  all  the	Indian	people	transcending
religious, linguistic and regional or sectional	 diversities
to renounce practice derogatory to the dignity of woman; (f)
to  value  and	preserve  rich	heritage  of  our  composite
culture,  etc. are some of the basic duties with  which	 the
budding	 students need to be inculcated and  imbibed.	They
should	be sowed in the receptive minds in  their  formative
periods	 so  that  they take deep roots	 at  maturity.	 The
teacher	 needs, not only the training at the inception,	 but
also  periodical  orientations in this behalf  so  that	 the
children  would	 reap  the rich benefit	 thereof.   The	 ill
equipped and ill housed institutions and sub-standard  staff
therein	  are	counter	 productive   and   detrimental	  to
inculcating   spirit  of  enquiry  and	excellence  to	 the
students.   The	 disregard  to	statutory  compliance  would
amount	to letting loose of innocence and  unwary  children.
The proceedings of the recent seminar held in Delhi, as
798
published  by  the Times of India dated	 4th  August,  1992,
would  demonstrate the admission by the teachers  that	they
are  not properly trained to cope up with the growing  needs
of  the society and are unsuited to the duties they have  to
shoulder in imparting teaching to the children.	 The teacher
plays  pivotal	role in moulding the career,  character	 and
moral  fibres  and aptitude for	 educational  excellence  in
impressive  young  children.   The  formal  education  needs
proper	equipping by the teachers to meet the challenges  of
the  day  to  impart lessons with latest  technics   to	 the
students  on  secular, scientific and rational	outlook.   A
well  equipped	teacher	 could bring the  needed  skill	 and
intellectual capabilities to the students in their pursuits.
The teacher is adorned as Gurudevobhava, next after parents,
as  he is a Principal instrument to awakening the  child  to
the cultural ethos, intellectual excellence and	 discipline.
The  teachers,	therefore, must keep abreast  ever  changing
technics,  the needs of the society and to cope up with	 the
psychological  approach to the aptitudes of the children  to
perform	 that  pivotal role.  In short teachers need  to  be
endowed	 and  energised with needed potential to  serve	 the
needs  of  the	society.  The qualitative  training  in	 the
training colleges or schools would inspire and motivate them
into  action to the benefit of the students.  For  equipping
such  trainee  students	 in  a	school	or  a  college,	 all
facilities  and	 equipments  are  absolutely  necessary	 and
institutions  bereft  thereof  have no place  to  exist	 nor
entitled  to recognition.  In that behalf compliance of	 the
statutory  requirements	 is insisted upon.   Slackening	 the
standard and judicial fiat to control the mode of  education
and  examining	system	are  detrimental  to  the  efficient
management   of	 the  education.   The	directions  to	 the
appellants  to disobey the law is subversive of the rule  of
law, a breeding ground for corruption and feeding source for
indiscipline.  The High Court, therefore, committed manifest
error in law, in exercising its prerogative power  conferred
under Art 226 of the Constitution, directing the  appellants
to permit the students to appear for the examination etc.
     It is now conceded across the Bar that pursuant to	 the
impugned  direction, out of 129 students that  appeared	 for
examination,  only one student had passed which tells a	 sad
story  of the quality of the training given to them and	 the
passed	student	 was  accommodated  in	another	  recognised
institution.  His admission would remain undisturbed.  It is
also  contended by the State that the findings of  the	High
Court  that  the  eligibility  of  the	respondents  was  in
compliance with G.R. dated October
799
26,  1990 and the letter of the Dy. Officer, Jila  Parishad,
Bhandara  dated Feb. 25, 1991 are contrary to the facts	 and
are  not properly appreciated by the High Court.   There  is
force  in the contention, but on the facts in this case,  it
is  not necessary to decide the same and it is for the	High
Court  in  a proper case to consider the same  properly	 and
deal with the matter in accordance with law.
The   appeal  is  accordingly  allowed,  but   in	 the
circumstances with no order as to costs.
S.B.					     Appeal allowed.
800