[Cites
5
, Cited by
155
]
Supreme Court of India
Ashwani Kumar Dhingra vs State Of Punjab on 6 March, 1992
Equivalent citations: 1992 AIR 974, 1992 SCR (2) 39, AIR 1992 SUPREME COURT 974, 1992 (2) SCC 592, 1992 AIR SCW 819, 1992 (1) UJ (SC) 780, (1992) 2 SCR 39 (SC), (1992) 2 APLJ 5.1, (1992) 2 JT 353 (SC), 1992 (2) ALL CJ 822, 1992 (2) JT 353, (1992) 1 LANDLR 582, (1992) 2 MAHLR 852, (1992) 2 RRR 139, (1992) 2 SCJ 135, (1992) 6 LACC 439, (1992) 1 CURCC 587, (1992) 1 CURLJ(CCR) 594
Author:
Yogeshwar Dayal
Bench:
Yogeshwar Dayal
,
N.M.  Kasliwal
PETITIONER:
ASHWANI KUMAR DHINGRA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF PUNJAB

DATE OF JUDGMENT06/03/1992

BENCH:
YOGESHWAR DAYAL (J)
BENCH:
YOGESHWAR DAYAL (J)
KASLIWAL, N.M. (J)

CITATION:
 1992 AIR  974		  1992 SCR  (2)	 39
 1992 SCC  (2) 592	  JT 1992 (2)	353
 1992 SCALE  (1)555


ACT:
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
:
     Ss.   4,  6,  12,	18-Land	  acquisition-Co-owners-Writ
petition by father and brother-No co-ownership	pleaded-High
Court  quashed	notification concerning	 the  two  litigants
only-Other  brother accepted compensation under protest	 and
sought	 reference  for	 enhancement  of   compensation-Writ
petition  by him after about 5 years seeking to	 quash	same
notification-Maintainability of.
     Award-Remedy  of reference-Whether compensation  to  be
accepted only under protest.
     Hindu Law:
     Coparcenary-Whether  can  be pleaded  between  brothers
only excluding father.
     Constitution of India:
Articles  136
,  226-Plea-Not raised in  writ  petition-
Whether can be entertained in appeal.



HEADNOTE:
     In a writ petition filed by the father and the  brother
of the appellant, a Notification dated 6.8.1973 issued under
ss. 4
and
6
of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 was quashed by
the High Court.	 The Letters Patent Appeal filed by the State
was  dismissed by the Division Bench of the High Court,	 but
it  restricted	to  quashing of	 the  notification  only  in
relation  to the land of the two respondents in that  appeal
i.e., the father and the brother of the appellant herein.
      The  appellant  was not a party in the  writ  petition
filed  by  his father and brother.  He	had  accepted  under
protest	 the  compensation  awarded  by	 the  Collector	  on
11.12.1973 and had filed applications for enhancement of
						       40
compensation before the competent court.
     In September, 1978, the appellant filed a writ petition
before the High Court seeking to quash the same Notification
dated 6.8.1973, and contended that Letters Patent Appeal was
wrongly decided inasmuch as the whole Notification, and	 not
part  of  it concerning the two	 respondents  therein  only,
ought to have been quashed.  The writ petition was heard and
dismissed  by the Division Bench which had  decided  Letters
Patent	Appeal.	 The appellant filed the appeal	 by  special
leave to this Court.
     It	 was contended on behalf of the appellant  that writ
petition  filed	 by his father and brother  must  have	been
deemed	to  have  been	filed on his  behalf  also  and	 the
decision   in  the  Letters  Patent  Appeal   quashing	 the
Notification  under
ss.4
and
6
of the Act "in so far  as  it
related	 to the respondents therein" included the  appellant
herein	  also.	    The	  appellant   also    claimed	 co-
ownership/coparcenary with his brother only.
     Dismissing the appeal, this Court,
     HELD:  1.1	 There	could  be  no  co-parcenary  in	 the
presence  of father between the brothers only  by  excluding
the  father.  No co-parcenary was pleaded by  the  appellant
with  his  father and brother.	The  only  co-owner-ship  or
coparcenary was claimed with his brother. [p44F-G]
     1.2  In writ petition or in the appeal before the	High
Court,	neither appellant's father nor his brother made	 any
representation that they were filing writ petition on behalf
of the appellant either express or by necessary implication.
That litigation by them was in their own right and they	 did
not plead and coparcenary with the appellant. [p44E-F]
     2.	 One co-owner may challenge the acquisition  whereas
the other co-owner may be satisfied with the acquisition and
ask for compensation and even for its enhancement; the other
brother may challenge the acquisition proceedings in his own
right;	merely	because one  brother  accepts  compensation,
other  brother is not estopped from challenging	 acquisition.
Similarly,  where one co-owner challenges  acquisition,	 his
rights	will not be affected merely because  other  co-owner
had  accepted acquisition and the  compensation.  [pp.44G-H,
45A]
     A.	 Viswanatha Pillai and others v.  Special  Tahsildar
for  Land  Acquisition	No. IV & Ors.,	AIR  1991  SC  1966,
distinguished.
						       41
     4.
Section  18
of the Land Acquisition Act,  makes  it
clear that person interested, in order to enable him to seek
the remedy of reference can do so only if he does not accept
the  Award.  In order to show that the person concerned	 had
not accepted the Award the claimants accept the compensation
only under protest because once the compensation is accepted
without protest the person concerned may lose his right to a
reference for various matters mentioned in
s.18
. [p.45D-F]
     5.	 The  writ  petition  by  the  appellant  was  filed
approximately  five  years after the  date  of	Notification
under
Sections 4
and
6
of the Land Acquisition Act and after
the award.  The appellant had not challenged the acquisition
of land all these years.  He accepted the compensation under
protest, not with a view to safeguard his right to challenge
the acquisition itself but to safeguard his right to require
the matter being referred by the Collector for determination
of the Court in relation to the matters mentioned in
Section
18
of the Land Acquisition Act.  It was not shown  that  he
withdrew  the compensation in pursuance of any order of	 any
Court to safeguard any other rights.  This was also not	 his
contention  before  the Division Bench dismissing  his	writ
petition.   Such a plea cannot be permitted in	the  instant
appeal. [p.45A-B, D, G-H]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 2977 of
1979.
From  the	Order  dated 11.9.1978	of  the	 Punjab	 and
Haryana High Court in C.W.P. No. 3771 of 1978.
G.L. Sanghi, S.K. Mehta, Nand Lal Dhingra, Dhruv  Mehta
and Aman Vachher for the Appellant.
A. S. Sohal and G.K. Bansal for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     YOGESHWAR	DAYAL, J. This is an appeal by Shri  Ashwani
Kumar  Dhingra, Advocate, Fazilka, against the	judgment  of
the Punjab and Haryan High Court dated 11th September,	1978
dismissing the writ petition (c.w.p. 3771 of 1978), filed by
him.  Before  considering the submissions on behalf  of	 the
appellant, it would be necessary to know a few facts.
42
It	 appears  that	Sh. Sudhir  Kumar  Dhingra  and	 his
father, Shri Nand Lal Dhingra, advocate had earlier filed  a
writ  petition	(C.W.No 3465 of 1973) against the  State  of
Punjab	for  quashing  Notification dated 6th  August,	1973
issued	under
Sections 4
and
6
of the Land  Acquisition	 Act
1894.  In this writ petition, the appellant herein was not a
party.	However, the learned Single judge of the High  Court
by  judgment  dated 19th November, 1976	 accepted  the	writ
petition and quashed the impugned notification issued  under
Section	 4
and
6
of the Land	Acquisition  Act  dated	 6th
August,	 1973.	The learned Judge in the said writ  petition
also  directed	that the petitioners in that  writ  petition
would  be  entitled to take possession of  the	property  on
depositing   compensation.   The  State	 of   Punjab   being
dissatisfied   filed  Letters  Patent  Appeal  against	 the
aforesaid  judgment of the learned Single Judge	 dated	19th
November, 1976.	 The Letters Patent Appeal (No. 14 of  1977)
came  up  for hearing before a Division Bench  of  the	High
Court on 9th August, 1978.  After hearing the Letters Patent
Appeal, the Division Bench dismissed the appeal but modified
the  order  of	the Single Judge to  the  extent  that	they
quashed the impugned Notification dated 6th August, 1973 "in
so  far	 as  they  relate to the  land	of  the	 respondents
therein."   The	 respondents therein were only	Shri  Sudhir
Kumar  Dhingra	and  his father,   Shri	 Nand  Lal  Dhingra,
advocate.
The  result of the said decision was that the  Division
Bench  restricted to quashing of the  impugned	Notification
only  in  relation  to the land of the	respondents  in	 the
Letters	 Patents Appeal the appellant herein,  Shri  Ashwani
Kumar  Dhingra	filed  a  writ	petition  on  or  about	 5th
September, 1978 for quashing the same Notification dated 6th
August,	 1973  issued  under
Sections 4
and
6
of  the	Land
Acquisition Act.
It	 also  appears	that in pursuance  of  the  impugned
Notification  under
Section 4
and
6
of the Land	 Acquisition
Act, the Collector had announced his award on 11th December,
1973  and  the	compensation awarded by	 the  Collector	 was
accepted by the petitioner, Shri Ashwani Kumar Dhingra under
protest and thereafter he filed application for	 enhancement
o  compensation	 before	 the  competent	 court.	  The	writ
petition filed by the present appellant came up for  hearing
before the same bench which had decided the earlier  Letters
Patent	Appeal No. 14 of 1977 and the Division Bench  passed
the following order:
43
"The	only contention raised before us is that  in
	 L.P.A.	 No. 14 of 1977, decided on August 9,  1978,
	 the  whole notification deserved to be quashed	 and
	 that  part  of	 the  notification  concerning	 the
	 respondents  in  that	case could  not	 legally  be
	 quashed.  In the circumstances of the case, we	 are
	 not agreeable with the learned counsel,  especially
	 when  relief was granted to the respondent in	that
	 letters   patent  appeal  on  the  basis   of	 the
	 concession  that  was	made by	 Mr.  Anand  Swarup,
	 Senior	  Advocate,  who  was  appearing   for	 the
	 respondents.  Moreover, no writ petition is legally
	 maintainable on the ground that a wrong  concession
	 was  made  in the letters patent appeal  which	 was
	 decided by us earlier, or that the decision in that
	 appeal was wrong.
No other point is urged before us.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition
	 fails and is dismissed in limine."
It is apparent from the aforesaid order of the Division
Bench  that  the  contention urged in support  of  the	writ
petition  on  behalf of the appellant was that	the  Letters
Patent	Appeal no. 14 of 1977 was wrongly decided.   Against
the  aforesaid decision dated 11th September,  1978  Special
Leave petition was filed which is the subject matter of	 the
present appeal.
Mr.  G.L. Sanghi, learned counsel for appellant  relied
on  the decision of this Court in A.Vishwanatha	 Pillai	 and
others r. Special Tahsildar for Land Acquisition No. IV	 and
others,	 AIR  1991  SC	1966 and  submitted  that  the	writ
petition No. 3465 of 1973 which was filed by none other than
his  brother and father, it must have been deemed  that	 the
said writ petition had been filed by his father and  brother
on behalf of the appellant also.  It appears to us that	 the
reliance by the appellant herein on the said decision is not
really	appropriate.   It  was	observed  in  the  aforesaid
decision of the Supreme Court at page 1969:
"When	one of the co-owners or coparaceners made  a
	 statement in his reference application that himself
	 and  his brothers are dissatisfied with  the  award
	 made by the Collector and that they are entitled to
	 higher compensation, it would be clear that he	 was
	 making	 a request, though not expressly  stated  so
	 but by
44
necessary implication that he was acting on  behalf
	 of  his  other co-owners or  coparaceners  and	 was
	 seeking  a reference on behalf of right, title	 and
	 interest  in  the acquired property  and  when	 the
	 reference was made in respect thereof under
Section
	 18
they   are   equally   entitled	to   receive
	 compensation pro rata as per their shares".
It is clear  from	the  aforesaid	observation  that  the
Supreme	 Court found on facts that one brother who  was	 the
co-owner  and  coparacener was acting on his own  behalf  as
well  as  on  behalf  of  other	 brothers  while  seeking  a
reference  for enhancement of compensation.   The   question
there  was  whether the reference application filed  by	 one
brother	 was  on  his  own behalf  or  on  behalf  of  other
coparaceners  as well. Mr. Sanghi relying on  the  aforesaid
judgment  submitted  before  us that  the  decision  of	 the
Division Bench dated 9th August, 1978 in the Letters  Patent
Appeal,	 when it quashed the Notifications under
Sections  4
and
6
of the Land Acquisition Act "in so far as it  related
to the respondents therein", included the appellant  therein
as well
     We	 are afraid that the decision of the  Supreme  Court
relied	upon has no application No. 3465 of 1973 or  Letters
Patent Appeal No. 14 of 1977 neither the appellant's  father
nor  his  brother  made any representation  that  they	were
filing	writ  petition	on behalf of  the  appellant  herein
either	express	 or by necessary implication.	The  earlier
litigation referred to by us was filed by Shri Sudhir  Kumar
Dhingra and Shri Nand Lal Dhingra (brother and father of the
appellant  respectively) in their own right only and not  on
behalf of the appellant herein.	 Father and brother had	 not
pleaded any coparacenary with the appellant herein.   Before
us  also no co-parcenary is being pleaded by  the  appellant
with   his  father  and	 brother.   Only  co-owner-ship	  or
coparcenary  was claimed with his brother Shri Sudhir  Kumar
Dhingra.   There could be no coparcenary in the presence  of
he father between the brothers only by excluding the father.
One co-owner may challenge the acquisition whereas the other
co-owner may be satisfied with the acquisition and  ask	 for
compensation and even for enhancement of compensation; other
brother may challenge the acquisition proceedings in his own
right; merely because one brother accepts compensation other
brother	  is  not  stopped  from  challenging	acquisition.
Similarly, where one
45
co-owner  challenges  acquisition, his rights  will  not  be
affected   merely  because  other  co-owner   had   accepted
acquisition and the compensation.
In	 the  Counter affidavit filed in this court,  it  is
pointed out that the writ petition out of which the  present
appeal	arises was filed approximately five years after	 the
date  of  Notification	under
Section 4
and
6
of  the	Land
Acquisition  Act and after the award and the  appellant	 had
not  challenged the acquisition of land all these years	 and
had, in fact, accepted the compensation under protest.	 Mr.
Sanghi then submitted that in the writ petition filed by the
father	and  brother also they were allowed by	order  dated
18th December, 1974 to withdraw the compensation payable  to
them without prejudice to their rights in the writ petition.
It will be noticed that the order dated 18the December, 1974
was passed during the pendency of the writ petition No. 3465
of 1973 and the petitioners in that writ petition  withdrew
the  amount of compensation after express permission of	 the
High Court so that their rights in the writ petition are not
prejudiced in any way.
The  acceptance of compensation under protest  was	 not
done by the appellant with a view to safeguard his right  to
challenge  the acquisition itself but to safeguard his right
to  require the matter being referred by the  Collector	 for
determination  of  the	Court in  relation  to	the  matters
mentioned in
Section 18
of the Land Acquisition Act.  It  is
clear  from  the  provisions  of
Section  18
of  the	Land
Acquisition  Act  that the person interested,  in  order  to
enable him to seek the remedy of reference can do so only if
he  does  not accept the Award.	 In order to show  that	 the
person	concerned had not accepted the Award  the  claimants
accept the compensation only under protest because once the
compensation  awarded in pursuance of the Award is  accepted
without protest the person concerned may lose his right of a
reference for various matters mentioned in
Section 18
of the
Land Acquisition Act.
It is clear in the present case that the appellant	 had
not  challenged the 'acquisition and it was not shown to  us
that he withdrew the compensation in pursuance of any  court
to  safeguard any other rights.	 It is also clear  from	 the
order  of  the learned Division Bench  dismissing  the	writ
petition, filed by the present appellant, of what contention
was  urged  by	him before them.  Learned  counsel  for	 the
appellant  submitted that this was not the contention  urged
by  him	 before the High Court.	 We are afraid such  a	plea
cannot be permitted in the present appeal when the order was
46
pronounced in the open court and the order was naturally  to
be  pronounced	on the submissions made before	the  learned
Division Bench.	 If the appellant had any such grievance, he
should have approached the Division Bench with such a plea.
Thus,  there  is  no  merit in the	 appeal	 and  it  is
dismissed.   Parties  are, however, left to bear  their	 own
costs of the present proceedings.
R.P.					    Appeal dismissed.
47