[Cites
7
, Cited by
281
]
Supreme Court of India
R.N. Gosain A vs Yashpal Dhir on 23 October, 1992
Equivalent citations: AIR 1993 SUPREME COURT 352, 1992 (4) SCC 683, 1992 AIR SCW 3337, 1992 ( ) JT (SUPP) 770, 1992 HRR 569, 1993 (1) REVLR 1, 1993 REVLR 1 1, (1993) CIVILCOURTC 197, (1993) 1 PUN LR 184, (1992) 2 RENCJ 582, (1993) 1 RENCR 156, (1992) 2 RENTLR 666, (1992) 3 SCJ 705, (1993) 1 ANDH LT 19, (1993) 1 APLJ 12, (1993) 1 ALL RENTCAS 1, 1993 (1) KLT SN 13 (SC)
Author:
S.C. Agrawal
Bench:
S.C. Agrawal
PETITIONER:
R.N. GOSAIN A

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
YASHPAL DHIR

DATE OF JUDGMENT23/10/1992

BENCH:
[K. JAYACHANDRA REDDY AND S.C. AGRAWAL, JJ.]




ACT:
Constitution  of   India,  1950-Article	  136-Special  leave
petition- Whether  entertainable, when	petitioner  (tenant)
avails protection from eviction on the basis of undertaking
East Punjab  Urban Rent	 Restriction Act,  1949
-
Section 13A
-
Eviction  of  tenant  High  Court's  order  Protection	from
eviction availed  by tenant  under  an	undertaking-Invoking
Supreme	 Court	 under
Article	  136
of  the	Constitution
assailing High Court's judgment-Legality of.



HEADNOTE:
A residential  house was  let out  to the petitioner by
the respondent.	 The respondent	 was initially	employed  as
Accounts  Officer   with  the	Finance	 Department  of	 the
Government. In	1969, he went on deputation with the Haryana
Agricultural University.  While he  was employed on the post
of Comptroller	in the	University he  retired from  service
with effect from February 28, 1991.
Claiming  to  be  a  "specified	 landlord"  within  the
meaning of
Section 2(hh)
of the  East	 Punjab	 Urban	Rent
Restriction Act,  1949,	 the  respondent  moved	 a  petition
seeking eviction  of the petitioner under
section 13A
of the
Act before the Rent Controller.
The petition  was dismissed  by the  Rent Controller on
the view  that the  respondent did not fall within the ambit
of the	definition of  "specified landlord", since he failed
to show	 that he was holding or had held an appointment in a
public service or post in connection with the affairs of the
Union or of the State.
The respondent	filed a	 revision petition  before  the
High Court  under
section  18-A(8)
of  the  Act,  which	 was
allowed by  the High  Court on	March, 1992.  The High Court
held that the respondent, at the time of his retirement from
the post  of Comptroller  in the  University, was holding an
appointment in	connection with the affairs of the State and
hence he  was a	 specified landlord  within the	 meaning  of
section 2(hh)
of the  Act and that the respondent had fully
satisfied the conditions as contained in
section 13-A
of the
Act and	 he was	 entitled to  recover the  possession of the
premises in  dispute from  the petitioner.  The	 High  Court
allowed one  month's time  for the  petitioner to vacate the
premises subject  to his  paying the  entire arrears of rent
within 15  days from  the date	of the	order and  filing an
undertaking that he would hand over the vacant possession of
the premises on the expiry of the aforesaid period.
On March  16, 1992,  the petitioner moved a petition in
the High  Court under
section 151
CPC seeking three months'
time to	 vacate the house and for waiving the requirement of
filing of  an  undertaking.  The  High	Court  rejected	 the
petition.
Thereafter, the	 petitioner  submitted	an  undertaking
dated March  20, 1992 before the Rent Controller wherein the
petitioner referred  to the direction contained in the order
of the High Court dated March 6, 1992.
On March  21, 1992,  the petitioner  filed the	special
leave petition under
Article 136
of the Constitution in this
Court and succeeded to get an order staying dispossession on
March 26, 1992.
In response  to the  notice issued on the Special Leave
Petition, the  respondent filed	 a counter-affidavit raising
an objection  that in  view of	the undertaking given by the
petitioner, the jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 136
of the Constitution could not be invoked.
The  respondent-landlord  submitted  that  in  view  of
petitioner-tenant's having  taken the  benefit of  direction
contained to  the order	 of the	 High Court allowing him one
month's time  to  vacate  the  premises	 on  his  filing  an
undertaking that  vacant possession of the premises would be
handed over  on the  expiry of	the period  and	 his  having
submitted a  written  undertaking  in  accordance  with	 the
direction, the	petitioner was precluded  from assailing the
judgment of  the High  Court by invoking the jurisdiction of
this Court under
Article 136
of the Constitution.
The petitioner-tenant  submitted that  he did  not take
any undue advantage by giving the undertaking; that prior to
the undertaking,  he had  moved an application for extension
of time	 before	 the  High  Court  wherein  he	had  clearly
indicated that	he intended to file a special leave petition
in this	 Court against	the order  of the  High Court  dated
March 6,  1992 and  that it was also expressly stated in the
undertaking filed  in the Court wherein it is mentioned that
the undertaking was subject to his right to file the special
leave petition in this Court against the order of eviction.
Dismissing the special leave petition, this Court,
HELD: 1.01  Law	 does  not  permit  a  person  to  both
approbate and  reprobate. This	principle is  based  on	 the
doctrine of  election which  postulates that  no  party	 can
accept and  reject the	same instrument.  [263-F]  1.02	 The
petitioner, having  given an undertaking in pursuance to the
directions given  by the  High Court  in the  judgment dated
March  6,  1992	 and  having  availed  the  protection	from
eviction on  the basis	of the	said undertaking,  cannot be
permitted to  invoke the  jurisdiction of  this Court  under
Article 136
of the Constitution and assail the said judgment
of the High Court. [264-H]
1.03 The  statement in	the undertaking,  that	it  was
subject to  the rights	of the	petitioner to  file  special
leave petition	in this Court against the order of eviction,
does not  have any  effect on the legal consequencew flowing
as a  result  of  the  filing  of  the	undertaking  by	 the
petitioner. [263-D]
Verschures Creameries  Ltd.  v.	 Hull  and  Netherlands
Steamship Co.  E Ltd.,	1921 (2) K.B. 608 at p. 612; Thacker
Hariram Motiram	 v. Balkrishan	Chatbrabhu Thacker  &  Ors.,
[1989] Supp.  2 SCC  655 and Vidhi Shanker v. Heera Lal 1987
Supp. SCC  200; Ramchandra  Jai Ram  Randive  v.  Chandanmal
Rupshand & Ors., [1987] Supp. SCC 254, referred to.
Halsbuly's Laws	 of England,  4th Edn.	Vol.  16,  para
1508, referred to.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Special  Leave  Petition
(C) No. 4325 of 1992.
From the  Judgment and  Order  dated  6.3.1992  of	 the
Punjab and  Haryana High Court in Civil Revision No. 2830 of
1991.
Dr. A.M. Singhvi and Ms. Kirti Misra for the Appellant.
     D.V. Sehgal,  S.M. Sarin, P.N. Puri, Ranbir Singh Yadav
and G.K. Bansal for the Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     S.C. AGRAWAL,  J. This  petition for  special leave  to
appeal arises  out of  proceedings for eviction initiated by
the respondent	(landlord) against  the petitioner  (tenant)
under
section  13A
of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction
Act, 1949 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act'), as amended
by Act No. 2 of 1985.
The  proceedings  relate  to  a  residential  house  in
Chandigarh which  was let  out	to  the	 petitioner  by	 the
respondent.  The   respondent  was   initially	employed  as
Accounts  Officer   with  the	Finance	 Department  of	 the
Government of  Haryana. In  1969, he went on deputation with
the Haryana   Agricultural  University (hereinafter referred
to as  `the University').  His services	 were transferred to
the University by the Government of Haryana with effect from
November 1,  1975, and	while he was employed on the post of
Comptroller in	the University	he retired from service with
effect from  February 28,  1991. Claiming to be a `specified
landlord' within  the meaning  of
section  2(hh)
of the Act,
the respondent	moved a	 petition seeking  eviction  of	 the
petitioner under
section 13A
of the  Act before  the	Rent
Controller, Chandigarh.	 The said  petition was dismissed by
the Rent  Controller by	 order dated  August 5,	 1991 on the
view that  the respondent  did not  fall within the ambit of
the definition	of `specified  landlord' since he had failed
to show	 that he was holding or has held an appointment in a
public service or post in connection with the affairs of the
Union or  of the  State. The  respondent  filed	 a  revision
petition before	 the High Court under
section 18-A(8)
of the
Act which  was allowed	by the	High Court by judgment dated
March 6,  1992. The  High Court held that the respondent, at
the time  of his  retirement from the post of Comptroller in
the University,	 was holding  an appointment  in  connection
with the  affairs of  the State	 and hence he is a specified
landlord within the meaning of
section 2(hh)
of the Act. The
High Court  further found  that	 the  respondent  had  fully
satisfied the conditions as contained in
section 13-A
of the
Act and	 he was	 entitled to  recover the  possession of the
premises  in  dispute  from  the  petitioner.  Allowing	 the
revision, the  High Court  set aside  the order	 of the Rent
Controller and accepted the petition filed by the respondent
under
section	 13-A
of  the	Act  for  ejectment  of	 the
petitioner. The High Court further directed as under:
"However, the respondent is allowed
     one month's time to
     vacate  the  premises  provided  he
     pays the  entire  arrears	of  rent
     within 15 days from today, and also
     files an undertaking with the Court
     of	 the   Rent  Controller	 to  the
     effect that  he shall hand over the
     vacant possession	of the	premises
     on the expiry of aforesaid period."
On March  16, 1992,  the petitioner moved a petition in
the high  Court	 under
section 151
CPC seeking three months,
time to	 vacate the house and for waiving the requirement of
filing of  an undertaking. The said petition was rejected by
the High  Court by  order dated	 March 18, 1992. Thereafter,
the petitioner submitted an undertaking dated March 20, 1992
before the  Rent Controller  wherein  the  petitioner  after
referring to  the direction  contained in  the order  of the
High  Court   dated  March   6,	 1992	gave  the  following
undertaking:
"That the	respondent hereby  gives
     undertaking that he will vacate the
     premises  and  shall  handover  the
     vacant possession	of the	premises
     on the  expiry of	one  month  from
     6.3.92  as per the order of Hon'ble
     High Court,  subject to  his rights
     for  filing   SLP	in  the	 Hon'ble
     Supreme Court  against the order of
     eviction.	 The	respondent   has
     already sent draft for the rent for
     the month	of  March  1992	 to  the
     petitioner and he is not in arrears
     of rent."
On March  21, 1992,  the petitioner  filed the  special
leave petition under
Article 136
of the Constitution in this
Court. On  the said  petition the following order was passed
on March 26, 1992:
"To come  up in  normal course.  In
     the meantime,  no dispossession  to
     be effected."
On April  9,  1992,  an  order  was
     passed in the following terms:
"Issue notice returnable within two
     weeks. In	the  meantime,	stay  of
     eviction to continue." .
In response  to the said notice, the respondent filed a
counter affidavit on April 18, 1992 wherein an objection has
been raised that in view of the undertaking given by him the
petitioner cannot  invoke the  jurisdiction  of	 this  Court
under
Article  136
of  the Constitution.   Shri D.V. Sehgal,
the learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent, has
submitted that	in view	 of his	 having taken the benefit of
direction contained  in the order of the High Court allowing
him one month's time to vacate the premises on his filing an
undertaking that he shall hand over vacant possession of the
premises on  the expiry	 of aforesaid period and his having-
submitted a  written undertaking in accordance with the said
direction, the	petitioner is  precluded from  assailing the
judgment of  the High  Court by invoking the jurisdiction of
this Court  under
Article  136
of  the	 Constitution.	Shri
Sehgal has  urged that	the fact  that	the  petitioner	 has
qualified his undertaking by using the words "subject to his
rights for  filing SLP	in the Hon'ble Supreme Court against
the order  of eviction"	 would not  alter the  position.
In
support of  his aforesaid  submission Shri Sehgal has placed
reliance on  the decisions  of this Court in
Thacker Hariram
Motiram v.  Balkrishan Chatbrabhu  Thacker  &  Ors.
,  [1989]
Supp.
2	 SCC 655;  Vidhi Shanker  v. Heera Lal, [1987] Supp.
SCC  200  and  Ramchandra  Jai	Ram  Randive  v.  Chandanmal
Rupchand & Ors., [1987] Supp. SCC 254.
Dr. A.M. Singhvi, the learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner, has,  however, laid	 stress on the fact that the
undertaking had	 to  be	 given	by  the	 petitioner  in	 the
peculiar circumstances	arising on  account  of	 this  Court
being closed  due to  vacations from March 16, 1992 to March
20, 1992.  Dr. Singhvi has submitted that the petitioner has
not taken  any undue  advantage by  giving  the	 undertaking
inasmuch as  before giving the under taking, he had moved an
application for	 extension of  time before  the	 High  Court
wherein he  had clearly indicated that he intended to file a
special leave  petition in  this Court	against the order of
the High  Court dated  March  6,  1992	and  this  was	also
expressly stated  in the  undertaking  filed  in  the  Court
wherein it  is mentioned  that the undertaking was subjected
to his	right to  file the  special leave  petition in	this
Court against  the order  of eviction. Dr. Singhvi has urged
that in	 view of  the aforesaid	 facts and circumstances the
decisions on  which reliance  has been placed by Shri Sehgal
would have no application to the present case.
In view  of the judgment of the High Court allowing the
petition  for	eviction  filed	  by  the   respondent,	 the
petitioner was	liable	to  be	evicted	 from  the  premises
forthwith. Under the direclions given by the High Court, the
petitioner could  continue in occupation of the premises for
a period  of one  month on his (i) paying the entire arrears
of rent	 within 15  days from the  date of the judgment; and
(ii) filing an undertaking with the court of Rent Controller
to the	effect that he shall hand over the vacant possession
of the	premises on  the expiry	 of the period of one month.
The petitioner	made an	 effort to  obtain extension of time
for vacating the premises without furnishing the undertaking
and he	filed a	 petition for  the purpose  before  the High
Court. The said petition was, however, dismissed by the High
Court. Having  failed in  his attempt to obtain extension of
time  for   vacating  the  premises  without  furnishing  an
undertaking the	 petitioner had two options open to him, (i)
to avail  the protection from eviction from the premises for
3a period of one month by tiling an undertaking as directed,
or (ii) not to avail the said protection and run the risk of
immediate eviction.  The petitioner  chose the first option.
In order  to avail  the protection  from eviction  from	 the
premises for  a period	of one	month he filed the requisite
undertaking in	the court  of the Rent Controller within the
period of  15 days  prescribed under  the directions  of the
High Court.  The statement  in the  undertaking that  it was
subject to  the rights	of the	petitioner to  file  special
leave petition	in this Court against the order of eviction,
does not,  in  our  view,  have	 any  effect  on  the  legal
consequences flowing  as a  result  of	the  filing  of	 the
undertaking  by	 the  petitioner.  By  furnishing  the	said
undertaking the	 petitioner elected  to avail the protection
from eviction  from the	 premises and  he enjoyed  the	said
protection till	 the passing  of the  order by this Court on
March 26,  1992, staying  dispossession of  the	 petitioner.
Having elected	to avail  the protection from eviction under
the order  dated March	6, 1992 passed by the High Court, by
filing the  requisite undertaking,  the petitioner cannot be
permitted to assail the said order.
Law does  not permit  a person  to both  approbate	 and
reprobate. This	 principle  is	based  on  the	doctrine  of
election which	postulates that	 no  party  can	 accept	 and
reject the  same instrument and that "a person cannot say at
one time that a transaction is valid any thereby obtain some
advantage,   to which  he could	 only  be  entitled  on	 the
footing that  it is valid, and then turn round and say it is
void for  the purpose  of securing  some  other	 advantage".
[See: Verschures  Creameries Ltd.  v. Hull  and	 Netherlands
Steamship Co.  Ltd., (1921)  2 R.B. 608, at p.612, Scrutton,
L.J]. According to Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th Edn.,Vol.
16, "after  taking an  advantage under an order (for example
for the	 payment of  costs) a  party may  be precluded	from
saying that it is invalid and asking to set it aside". (para
1508).
In
Thacker	 Hariram Motiram  v.  Balkrishan  Chatbrabhu
Thacker & Ors.
(supra), this Court was dealing with a similar
situation. The High (Court, while deciding the second appeal
in an eviction matter gave the appellant (tenant) one year's
time subject to his giving an undertaking within a period of
three weeks  stating that  vacant possession would be handed
over within  the  aforesaid  time.  The	 appellant  gave  an
undertaking in	accordance with	 the said  terms wherein  he
undertook that he would vacate and give vacant possession of
the suit  premises by  December 31, 1985, i.e., to say after
one year  if "by  that time  no stay  order from the Supreme
Court is  received as  I intend	 to file  an appeal  in	 the
Supreme Court".	 It was	 held  that  in	 view  of  the	said
undertaking the petitioner could not invoke the jurisdiction
of this	 Court under
Article 136
of the Constitution and he
should abide  by the  terms of	the undertaking,  and it was
observed
     "This  undertaking	  filed	 by  the
     appellant	in  our	 opinion  is  in
     clear  variation	with  the   oral
     undertaking given	to  the	 learned
     Judge which induced him to give one
     year's time.  a We	 do not	 wish to
     encourage this kind of practice for
     obtaining time  from the  court  on
     one plea  of filing the undertaking
     and taking	 the different stand, in
     applications under
Article 136
of
     the Constitution."
(p.655)
     Similarly in  Vidhi Shanker  v. Heera  Lal (supra)	 and
Ramchandra Jai	Ram Randive  v. Chandanmal  Rupchand &	Ors.
(supra), this  Court declined  to  exercise  its  discretion
under
Article  136
of  the Constitution	 in cases  where the
petitioner had	given an  undertaking in  the High Court and
had obtained  time to  vacate the  premises on	the basis of
such undertaking.
We are,  therefore, of the opinion that the petitioner,
having given  an undertaking  in pursuance to the directions
given by the High Court in the Judgment dated March 6, 1992,
and having availed the protection from eviction on the basis
of the	said undertaking,  cannot be permitted to invoke the
jurisdiction  of   this	 Court	under
Article	136
of	 the
Constitution and assail the said judgment of the High Court.
In that	 view of the matter, we do not consider it necessary
to deal	 with the submissions urged by Dr.  Singhvi that the
respondent, being  an employee of the University at the time
of his	retirement, was	 not a	'specified  landlord'  under
section 2(hh)
of the Act.
The special  leave petition  is, accordingly,  dismissed but
without any orders as to costs.
V.P.R.				    Petition dismissed.