[Cites
28
, Cited by
106
]
Supreme Court of India
Municipal Corporation Of Delhi Etc vs Children Book Trust Etc on 21 April, 1992
Equivalent citations: 1991 SCALE (2)491, AIR 1992 SUPREME COURT 1456, 1992 (3) SCC 390, 1992 AIR SCW 1537, 1992 (2) UJ (SC) 345, 1992 KERLJ(TAX) 309, (1992) 63 TAXMAN 385, (1992) 2 SCR 535 (SC), (1992) 3 JT 19 (SC), 1992 UJ(SC) 2 345, (1992) 47 DLT 424, (1992) 2 RENCR 81, (1992) 2 RRR 313, (1992) 2 SCJ 189, (1992) 109 TAXATION 142
PETITIONER:
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF DELHI ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
CHILDREN BOOK TRUST ETC.

DATE OF JUDGMENT21/04/1992

BENCH:
RANGNATHAN, S.
BENCH:
RANGNATHAN, S.
OJHA, N.D. (J)

CITATION:
 1991 SCALE  (2)491


ACT:
	 :
Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957
:
      :
Section 115(4)(a)
Proviso & Explanation, 115(5)	 and
(6)-Property  tax-Levy	and  assessment	 of-General  tax  in
respect	 of lands and buildings-Exemption-Grant	 of-To	land
and  buildings occupied and used by society for	 `charitable
purposes'-Conditions  to be fulfilled-`Charitable  purpose'-
Meaning	 of-Whether  includes  imparting   education-Society
`supported wholly or in part by voluntary contribution'-Test
for  determination-What are-Exemption of  tax-Not  available
`if  any  trade or business is carried on in  such  land  or
building'-Interpretation  of  expression-Part  of  land	 and
building-When becomes entitled to exemption.
Delhi School Education Act, 1973
:
Section 4
,
5
,
17(3)
and
18(3)
.
     Delhi   School  Education	Rules,	1973  :	 Rules	 50,
59(2)(g), 172, 173 and 177.
     Property Tax liability under municipal corporation of a
registered  society  running a	recognized  private  unaided
school-Conditions  to be fulfilled-society not found  to  be
supported   substantially  by  voluntary   contributions-Not
entitled to tax exemption.
     Words and Phrases : `charitable purpose'-Meaning of.



HEADNOTE:
     In Civil Appeal No 2805 of 1980 the Respondent, a Trust
registered under the
Societies' Registration Act
1960  owned
the property. From the year 1964-65, only a part of property
was subject to the General Tax in accordance with the provi-
sions  of the
Delhi Municipal Corporation Act
.For  the	said
year,  the  value  of  the  property  was  assessed  at	 Rs.
8,51,480.In the year 1970, the appellant-Municipal  Corpora-
tion  served a notice on the Trust proposing that the  rate-
able   value of the building should be revised. On  February
1,  1973 the Deputy Assessor and Collector passed  an  order
to  the	 effect that the ratable value of  the	property  be
revised and
						       536
enhanced to Rs.16,29,750. The Deputy Assessor and  Collector
held  that  the	 Respondent had not  proved  its  charitable
character,  and further the user of the property did not  go
to prove that the property was used for charitable  purposes
and that the same cannot be exempt from tax.
     Aggrieved	by  the aforesaid order, the Trust  filed  a
Writ Petition under
Articles 220
and
227
of the Constitution
and  contended	that the withdrawal of	exemption  from	 the
payment of General Tax previously enjoyed on portions of the
property was wrong, and that the case was covered by
Section
115 (4)
proviso of the
Delhi Municipal Corporation Act
which
provides  for exemption from the payment of General  Tax  if
exclusively  occupied and used by a society  for  charitable
purposes.
     A Single Judge allowed the Writ Petition, and held that
the Trust would be entitled to claim exemption from  payment
of  tax under
Section 115 (4)
for all the portions  occupied
by it except that which is occupied by the Press, viz.,	 the
basement  area of 11217 sq. ft . for which a monthly  rental
value has been assessed at Rs.14,021.25 and an area of	2000
sq.  ft.  on  the ground floor rear portion  for  which	 the
monthly	 rental value has been fixed at Rs.3,462.50. In	 the
result,	 the order of the Deputy Assessor and Collector	 was
quashed to that extent and the matter was remitted back for
disposal.
     Aggrieved,	 the  Corporation appealed  and	 a  Division
Bench  held  that  because of the  mandatory  provisions  of
Section 115(4)
no part of the premises in occupation of	 the
press  in the basement and the area of 2000 sq. ft.  in	 the
ground floor rear portion for which the monthly rental value
has been fixed at Rs.17,483.75 could be exempt from tax	 and
partly allowed the appeal of the Corporation.
     The  appellant society in C.A. No.228 of 1990  filed  a
suit and sought interim injunction, questioning the proposal
by  the Deputy Assessor and Collector assessing the  society
for  the  General Tax but the Senior Subjudge being  of	 the
view  that  the subject matter of the suit being Rs.5,32,683
the suit could not be entertained. Thereupon, the  appellant
withdrew  the  suit, and filed a writ petition in  the	High
Court  challenging the assessment order. The  writ  petition
was heard by a Division Bench which held that the  exemption
claimed	 by  the appellant was unavailable to it,  that	 the
case was not covered by
section 115(4)
of the Act and  find-
ing  no infirmity in the order of assessment  dismissed	 the
writ petition in limine.
						   537
     In	 the  appeals  to this Court, it  was  contended  on
behalf of the Municipal Corporation that
Section 115(4)
is a
peculiar  section which provides for relief to those  socie-
ties  or  bodies on charitable support either  fully  or  in
part, and that the proviso to the said Section distinguishes
itself from other enactments, in that the legislative intent
is to narrow down the clauses of exemption. To claim  exemp-
tion  it  must	be shown that the society  is  supported  by
voluntary  contribution. Where the activity of	the  society
generates  income  to  support itself  and,  therefore,	 the
society does not any longer depends on the voluntary contri-
bution, the exemption should certainly be made	unavailable,
It  was further contented that the Municipal General Tax  is
an  annual  tax, and that the question of  assessability  to
such tax or exemption will, therefore, have to be determined
each  year and that unless and until the  Society  satisfies
the assessing authorities that it fulfils the conditions for
exemption  in  respect of that particular  year,  it  cannot
claim exemption as a rule and, therefore, the facts in	each
case will have to be ascertained in each year. It was  shown
that the method adopted under the
Income Tax Act
in  respect
of  the assessment of societies under
Sections 11
and
13
of
the  said Act or even with regard to exempting donations  to
charitable societies under
Section 80(G)
was similar.
     On	 behalf of the Societies which owned  the  buildings
which  were  assessed  to tax, it was  contended,  that	 the
society owns a building, which houses the school  recognized
under the
Delhi School Education Act
1973 and the Rules made
thereunder, and, there fore, the issue is whether the build-
ing which houses the school is exempt from tax, and that the
test  to be applied under
Section 115(4)
are two in  princi-
ple,  viz.,  (i) society must be a charitable  society,	 and
(ii)  use must be for a charitable purpose, and it was	sub-
mitted that the proviso to
section 115(4)
does not lay	down
the  quantitative test in relation to voluntary contribution
but  only  qualitative test. It was further  contended	that
education  per	se is a charitable purpose  and,  therefore,
even   if   the	 school	 charges  a  fee,  that	  would	  be
irrelevant.The memorandum of objects and the bye-laws of the
society	 have to be seen, and if the object is a  charitable
one, that would be enough, it makes little difference as  to
how the funds are utilized, if the profits continue to	feed
the  charity, the mere occurrence of profits would  not	 de-
tract  from the charitable nature of the enterprise. It	 was
further	 contended that in construing the scope	 of
Section
115(4)
, the several provisions of the
Delhi School Education
Act
,  and the Delhi School Education Rules 1973 also have  a
great
						   538
bearing,  and that the proviso to
section 115(4)
prescribes
the qualitative test for identifying charitable societies.
     One   behalf   of	the  interveners  -   petitions	  in
W.P.No.1754  of	 1979 - the Court's attention was  drawn  to
Section 115(4)
and it was submitted that the exemption would
be  available  only if the lands or  buildings	or  portions
thereof	 should be in exclusive occupation and use and	such
user  must be by a society or body for charitable  purposes,
and  charitable purpose includes education, relief  of	poor
and medical relief and the society is supported wholly or in
part by voluntary contributions and applies its profits	 for
furtherance of and to promote the objects of the society and
that  it does not pay dividend or bonus to its	members.  It
was  also  contended that educations per se is	charity	 and
that the voluntary support talked of under the section	must
be qualitative in nature and not quantitative.
     On the questions:
     (i) Whether the society or body is occupying and  using
the  land and building for a charitable purpose	 within	 the
meaning of
section 115(4)
?
     (ii)  What is the meaning of the expression  `supported
wholly or in part by voluntary contribution ?'
     (iii)  Whether any trade or business is carried  on  in
the premises within the meaning of
section 115(5)
?
     Dismissing both the appeals, the Court,
     HELD: 1. (i) Every municipality is a local self-govern-
ment. Therefore, in order that it may sustain itself a power
of  taxation  has been delegated to  municipal	bodies.	 The
taxes  are  local  taxes for local needs.  Such	 taxes	must
obviously  differ  from one municipality to another.  It  is
impossible  for	 the  Legislature to pass  statute  for	 the
imposition of such taxes in local areas. In a democratic set
up the municipalities which need the proceeds of these taxes
for  their  own administration, it would be  but  proper  to
leave  to these municipalities the power to impose and	col-
lect taxes. [554 H-555 A]
     (ii)  The local authorities do not act  as	 Legislature
when they impose a tax but they do so as the agent of  State
Legislature. The powers and the
						       539
extent	of these powers must be found in the  statute  which
creates them with such powers. [555 B]
     (iii)  Local bodies being subordinate branches of	gov-
ernmental activities are democratic  institutions managed by
the representatives of the people. They function for  public
purpose. They bear the burden of government affairs in local
areas  as they are required to carry on	 local	self-govern-
ment. The  power of taxation is a necessary adjunct to their
other  powers.	There are various kinds	 of  taxes  provided
under each
Municipal Act
, the important	 being property tax.
[555 C]
      (iv)
The	 Delhi	Municipal Act
after  providing	 for
exemption  under
Section 115(4)
and (5)  categories  cases,
which will lose the exemption under sub-section (4).  Again,
sub-section  (6) clarifies that a part of a building in	 the
occupation of a society may not be entitled to exemption
though the other part is clearly exempt. [557 B]
      (v) `Charity' in its legal sense comprises four  prin-
cipal  divisions: trusts for the relief of  poverty,  trusts
for the advancement of education, trusts for the advancement
of religion and trusts for other purposes beneficial to	 the
community not falling under any of the preceding heads.	 The
underlying idea of charity is the involving of an element of
philanthropy  or something derived from pity, and  has	been
from early times the fundamental of the concept of  charity.
[561 D, F]
      Special  Commissioners of Income Tax v. Pemsel, 3	 Tax
Cases 53 at 96, referred to.
      (vi)  Thus, if education is run on  commercial  lines,
merely because it is a school, it does not mean it would  be
entitled to the exemption under
Section 115 (4)
of the	Act.
[562 B]
      (vii)  Where  the predominant object  is	to  subserve
charitable  purpose  and not to earn profit it	would  be  a
charitable purpose. [565 D]
     The  King v. The Commissioners for Special Purposes  of
the  Income  Tax(5 Tax Cases 408); The Abbey  Malvern  Wells
Ltd. v.Minister of Town and Country Planning, [1951] (2) All
England	 Law Reports 154 at 161; The Trustees of the  `Trib-
une' (1939 (VII) Income Tax Reports 415); All India Spinners
Association v.Commissioner of Income-Tax. Bombay (12  Income
Tax Reports 1944 482); Commissioner of Income-Tax, Bombay
						       540
City  v.Breach Candy Swimming Bath Trust, Bombay (27  Income
Tax  Reports  1955 279 at pages 288-289) and  Addl.  C.I.T.,
Gujarat v.Surat Art Silk Cloth Manufactures Association (121
Income	Tax  Reports 1980 Page 1 at Pages 11 and   24),	 re-
ferred to.
     (viii)  Merely  because education is  imparted  in	 the
school,	 that by itself, cannot be regarded as a  charitable
object.	 Today, education has acquired a wider	meaning.  If
education is imparted with a profit motive, to hold, in such
a case as charitable purpose, will not be correct [565 F]
     (ix) The rulings arising out of
Income-tax Act
may	 not
be  of great help because in the
Income-tax Act
`charitable
purpose' includes the relief of the poor, education, medical
relief	and the advancement of any other object	 or  general
public	utility.  The  advancement of any  other  object  of
general public utility is not found under the Delhi  Munici-
pal  Corporation  Act.	In other words,	 the  definition  is
narrower in scope. [565 G]
     2.(i)
The Delhi Municipal Corporation Act
of 1957 in so
far  as it grants an exemption under
Section 115(4)
makes  a
departure from the other statutes of similar kind.
Only	 the
Delhi  Municipal Corporation Act and Kerala Act
adopt	this
pattern	 of  exemption.	 Therefore, unlike  the	 other	Acts
relating to municipalities of the various other States,	 the
legislative  intent appears to be to narrow down the  nature
of exemption. [566 D-E]
     (ii)  It cannot be gainsaid that the Municipal  general
tax  is	 an annual tax. Therefore,  normally  speaking,	 the
liability for taxation must be determined with reference  to
each  year. In other words, the society	 claiming  exemption
will have to show that it fulfills the conditions or  exemp-
tion  each  year.  If it shows, for example,  that  for	 its
support	 it  has  to depend on, either wholly  or  in  part,
voluntary contributions, in that particular year, it may  be
exempt. But where in that year, for its support, it need not
depend	on  voluntary contributions at all or again  if	 the
society produces surplus income and excludes the  dependence
on  voluntary contributions, it may cease to be	 exempt.  Of
course,	 the word `support' will have to mean sustenance  of
maintenance. [566 F-G]
     (iii)  The	 reasonable  way of giving  effect  to	this
exemption, will be to take each case and assess for a period
of  five  years	 and find out whether the  society  or	body
depends	 on  voluntary	contributions.	Of  course,  at	 the
						       541
end  of each five year period the assessing authority  could
review the position. [566 H]
    (iv) The test must be whether the society could  survive
without receiving voluntary contributions,even though it may
have  some income by the activities of the society.The	word
`part' must mean an appreciable amount and not an insignifi-
cant  one.  The `part' in other words, must  be	 substantial
part.  What  is substantial would depend upon the  fact	 and
circumstances of each case. [567 B-C]
     (v)  The word `contribution' used in the  proviso	must
also  be given its due meaning. It cannot be  understood  as
donations.  If that be so, a voluntary	contribution  cannot
amount	to a compulsive donation. If the donor, in order  to
gain an advantage or benefit, if he apprehends that but	 for
the  contribution  some adverse	 consequence  would  follow,
makes a donation certainly it ceases to be voluntary.[567 D]
     (vi)  The test to be applied is not merely	 qualitative
but quantitative as well. [567 E]
     (vii)
Under the Delhi School Education Act
no provision
is  found  by which the school is made a  separate  juristic
entity. [569 D]
     The  school being a separate entity, premises  occupied
by  the	 school will belong to it and not  to  the  society.
Therefore,  the	 society  cannot claim to  be  in  exclusive
occupation  and	 use of the land and building  in  question.
[569 E]
     (viii)
Section  115(4)
of the Act covers	those  cases
where  a part of the land or building is used for  trade  or
business  or for getting rental income therefrom. That	part
undoubtedly will be subject to tax. Suppose, there is anoth-
er  portion  of the same lands or buildings where  trade  or
business is carried on and profits are made and are  applied
to charitable purposes then that portion shall, for purposes
of municipal taxation, be deemed to be a separate  property.
In  other  words, this part of the lands or  buildings	will
qualify	 for relief. But the other part will be	 subject  to
tax. The trade portion is subjected to tax. [572 C-D]
     3.	 Trade or business can be present in  both  sub-sec-
tions  (4)  and (5) of
section 115
. But, if the	 profits  or
income	of  trade  or business is devoted  to  a  charitable
purpose	 and  no  part	thereof	 is  distributed  among	 the
						       542
members	 as dividends or bonus, then that trade or  business
is  a  means to an end. It is charity. But, if	there  is  a
trade or business carried on in a land or building  and	 its
profits are not applied to a charitable	 purpose,sub-section
(6) says that part of the land or building where a trade  or
business  is carried on or from which rent is derived,	will
be subject to tax. [572 E-F]
     In	 the  instant case, though the society	running	 the
school	has  a charitable purpose, beyond that it  does	 not
strengthen  its case as it fails to answer the test that  it
is  supported wholly or in part by voluntary  contributions.
[572 G]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION :Civil Appeal No. 2805  of
1980.
From  the	 Judgment and Order dated  29.2.1980  of  the
Delhi High court in L.P.A. No. 102 of 1974
		AND
	Civil Appeal No. 228 of 1990.
From  the	Judgment and Order dt. 3-2-89 of  the  Delhi
High Court in C.W.P. No.263 of 1989
     B.Sen,  R.K. Maheshwari and Vineet Maheshwari  for	 the
Appellant  in C.A.No. 2805 of 1980 and Respondent   of	C.A.
No. 228 of 1990.
Harish  N. Salve, Anil Mallick, Vineet Kumar and  Vijay
Bhasin for the Appellant in C.A. 228 of 1990.
G.B.  Pai,	 Ms. Uma Mehta Jain for	 the  Respondent  in
C.A.2805 of 1980.
Harish  N. Salve, Rajiv Shakdhar, Ms Rita Bhalla,	S  S
Shroff for S.A.Shroff & Co. Dr. A.M. Singhvi and R.Sasiprab-
hu for a Interveners.
The  Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     MOHAN,  J. Both these appeals can be dealt	 with  under
common	judgment  since the scope of
Section  115(4)
Delhi
Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 (hereinafter referred to  as
the Act) alone arises. However it is necessary to state	 the
facts of each case separately.
543
CIVIL APPEAL NO 2805 OF 1980
     The  property known as Nehru House, NO 4  Bahadur	Shah
Zafar Marg, New Delhi is owned by respondent (Childern	Boot
Trust).	 It  is	 a society registered  under  the  Society's
Registration Act, 1960.
From  the	year  1964-65 only a part  of  property	 was
subject to the General Tax in accordance with the provisions
of the Act. For the said year the value of the property	 was
assessed  at Rs. 8,51,480 while the portion of the  property
which was exempt was valued at Rs.5,96,870.
In	 the  year 1970 the appellant-Corporation  served  a
notice on the respondent proposing that the ratable value of
the  building should be revised. On 1st February,  1973	 the
Deputy	Assessor and Collector of the  appellant-Corporation
passed an order to the effect that the ratable value of	 the
property  be  revised  and enhanced to	Rs.  16,29,750.	 The
Deputy	Assessor and Collector held that the respondent	 had
not  proved its charitable character. Further, the  user  of
the property did not go to prove that the property was	used
for  the  charitable purpose and the same cannot  be  exempt
from  tax.  Aggrieved by this order dated 1.2.1973,  a	writ
petition under
Articles 226
and
227
of the Constitution	 was
filed before the High Court of Delhi in C.W. No.318 of 1974.
The  claim of the respondent, who figured as the  petitioner
therein,  was  that  the withdrawal of	exemption  from	 the
payment of General Tax previously enjoyed on portions of the
property  was wrong. It was contended that the case  of	 the
Trust  was  covered by
Section 115(4)
proviso  of  the	Act;
proviso exempts buildings from the payment of General Tax if
exclusively  occupied and used by a society  for  charitable
purpose.  The  learned	Single	Judge  (Rajinder  Sachar,J.)
allowed	 the writ petition. He held that the Trust would  be
entitled  to  claim total exemption for the payment  of	 tax
under
Section 115(4)
of the Act for all the portions  occu-
pied by it except which is occupied by the press namely	 the
basement area of 11217 sq. ft.for which monthly rental value
has been assessed at Rs.14.021.25 and an area of 2000 sq. ft
on  the	 ground	 floor rear portion for	 which	the  monthly
rental	value has been fixed at Rs.3,462,50. Even from	this
rental	value the Trust was entitled to claim  exemption  in
the proportion of the income accruing to it from the  publi-
cation	of children books etc. In the result,  the  impugned
order  of the Deputy Assessor and Collector was	 quashed  to
the above extent and the
544
matter was remitted to him to dispose of in accordance	with
law  and in the light of the observations made in the  judg-
ment.
Aggrieved	by  the judgment L.P.A.No. 102 of  1974	 was
preferred by the appellant to the Division Bench of the said
Court. By a judgment and order dated 29th February, 1980  it
was held inter alia as under:-
"Suffice it is to say the `education' cannot be  under-
stood in the limited sense of teaching being given by  hold-
ing  classes or by delivery of lectures. The acquisition  of
information  or knowledge, from whatever source and  in	 any
manner	has to be regarded as education. The Library,  Dolls
Museum	and  holding  of exhibitions help  in  providing  an
opportunity  to acquire information and knowledge.  Premises
used  for such purposes would be regarded as being used	 for
education and thus for charitable purpose."
In	 this view the Division Bench held that, because  of
the  mandatory provisions of sub-section (5) of
Section	 115
no  part of the premises in occupation of the press  in	 the
basement  and the area of 2,000 sq. ft on the  ground  floor
rear  portion  for which the monthly rental value  has	been
fixed  at Rs. 17,483.75 could be exempt from tax. The  judg-
ment of the learned Single Judge in this regard could not be
sustained.  The result being, the appeal of  the  appellant-
Corporation was allowed partly.	 Under these  circumstances,
the Municipal Corporation of Delhi has come up in appeal. By
an  order  dated 26.11.80 special leave was  granted.  Hence
Civil Appeal No.2805 of 1980.
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 228 OF 1990
     The appellant-Society is registered under the
Society's
Registration  Act,  1860
. When there was a proposal  by	 the
Deputy Assessor and Collector to assess the Society for	 the
General	 Tax,  the appellant-Society claimed that it  was  a
Society for charitable purpose and, therefore, no tax  could
be  levied  on its building since the exemption	 under	sub-
section (4) of
Section 115
of the Act would be applicable to
it.  This  contention was rejected. The	 ultimate  order  of
assessment is of 4th of November, 1988 whereby the  respond-
ent imposed the property tax of Rs.5,32,683 by assessing the
rateable value.
545
The  appellant-Society filed a suit and sought  interim
injunction but the Senior Sub-Judge was of the view that the
subject-matter	of the suit being Rs.5,32,683 he  could	 not
entertain  the suit. Therefore, on 24.12.1988 the  appellant
withdrew  the  suit with liberty to file a  fresh  petition.
There upon, the appellant-Society filed Civil Writ  Petition
NO.263	of 1989 challenging the assessment order  dated	 4th
November, 1988 in the High Court of Delhi. That was heard by
a Division Bench. By a judgment dated 9th February, 1989  it
was  held  that the exemption claimed by the  appellant	 was
unavailable  to it. Therefore, the case was not	 covered  by
Section 115(4)
of the Act. Accordingly, finding no infirmity
in the order of assessment the writ petition was dimissed in
limine.	 By an order dated 23rd January, 1990 special  leave
having been granted, this appeal is before us.
We will now advert to the arguments addressed in  Civil
Appeal	No.  228 of 1990 since the main arguments  were	 ad-
dressed by Mr. Harish Salve, learned counsel for the  appel-
lant.  The appellant is a Public School called	Green  Field
School.	 It is recognized under
Delhi School Education	Act,
1973
and  the	Rules made thereunder.	The  conditions	 for
recognition are:-
(i) The society must run the School.
(ii) The School must maintain its accounts.
The  Society in this case owns a  building.  Therefore,
the  building which houses the School, whether	exempt	from
tax,  is  the issue. The tests to be applied  under
Section
115(4)
are two in principle.
(i) Society must be a charitable Society.
(ii) Use must be for a charitable purpose.
In	 the submission of the learned counsel, the  proviso
does  not  lay down the quantitative test  in  relations  to
voluntary contribution but only qualitative test.
Education	per se is a charitable	purpose.  Therefore,
even if the School charges a fee, that would be	 irrelevant.
The Society must satisfy the following conditions:
(i) That it is supported by voluntary contributions;
546
(ii) applies its own income to promote its objects; and
(iii) it does not pay dividend to any other members.
     Two classes of societies could be thought of
(i) Where members receive full value for their  contri-
bution.
(ii) Society for private gain.
For the application of
Section 115(4)
two tests are:
(i) In relation to explanation education per se  chari-
ty.
(ii)  In relation to the proviso, distributive  in	 na-
ture.
Therefore, one has to look at the memorandum of objects
and  the  bye-laws. If the object is  charitable  one,	that
would  be enough. It makes little difference as to  how	 the
funds are utilised. Secondly if the bye-laws do not  provide
for  the payment of dividend, that again is  descriptive  on
the  same line of reasoning where the proviso says "is	sup-
ported wholly or in part by voluntary contributions",  which
means  it has no funds. It does not matter how the  accounts
are drawn.
The learned counsel strenuously urged that the statuto-
ry setting in which
Section 115(4)
has to be construed, must
be kept in the background. He draws our attention to
Section
4
of Delhi School Education Act, 1973, which prescribes	 the
conditions  under which a School could be recognised.  Again
Section	 5
provides for scheme of management.
Section  17(3)
makes it obligatory on the Manager to file with the Directo-
ry a full statement of the fees to be levied by the  school.
It further provides that no fee shall be levied except	with
the prior approval of the Director. No fee in excess of	 the
fee specified by the Manager could be levied.
Section  18(3)
talks of recognition under aided school fund.
The  Rules made under the
Delhi School  Education	Act,
1973
also have a great bearing. Rule 50 lays down elaborate-
ly  the conditions for recognition. Clause (i) of  the	said
Rule  requires that the School is run by a  Society.  Clause
(iv) says that the school shall not be run for profit to any
individual  or group or association. Clause (ix)  stipulates
that  the  School building shall not be used for  any  other
purpose.
547
Chapter  XIV of the Rules deals with the School  funds.
Rule  172 requires the Trust or the Society not	 to  collect
fees.
Rules  173 stipulates the requirement for	the  mainte-
nance of the School fund. It inter alia provides:
(i) School funds shall be kept separately.
(ii) It cannot run for profit.
(iii) The Society cannot draw from School funds.
Rules  177	 clearly lays down the manner in  which	 the
funds  realised	 by  unaided recognised schools	 are  to  be
utilised.
Thus,  according to learned counsel, in construing	 the
scope  of
Section 115(4)
, all these provisions will have  to
be  adverted to and then the tests must be  formulated.	 The
next  question is whether education per se is  charity.	 The
leading	 case  on this subject is Special  Commissioners  of
Income	Tax v. Pemsel (3 Tax Cases 53 at 96). Again, in	 The
King v. The Commissioners for Special Purposes of the Income
Tax  (5 Tax Cases 408 at 414) it was laid down that a  trust
for  advancing of education would be charitable	 in  nature.
The  dictum  laid  down in The Abbey,  Malvern	Wells,	Ltd.
v.Minister  of Town and Country Planning (1951 (2) All	Eng-
land  Law Reports 154 at 161) squarely applies to the  facts
of this case. Therefore it is beyond dispute that the Socie-
ty is engaged in a charitable purpose.
The  learned counsel further relies on The Trustees  of
the `Tribune' (1939 (VII) Income Tax Reports 415),  particu-
larly  at  pages 422-423; All  India  Spinners'	 Association
v.Commissioner of Income-Tax, Bombay (12 Income Tax  Reports
1944  482) and the propositions stated at pages 488-489	 and
Commissioner of Income-Tax, Bombay city v.Breach Candy Swim-
ming  Bath Trust, Bombay (27 Income Tax Reports 1955 279  at
pages 288-289). Therefore, according to him, the only essen-
tial  factor  to determine whether it is a  charity  or	 not
would  be to find out whether there is any private  gain  by
setting up of the institution. This was the test adopted  in
Addl.  C.I.T., Gujarat v.Surat Art Silk Cloth  Manufacturers
Association (121 Income Tax Reports 1980 Page 1 at Pages  11
and 24).
Therefore	if there is no private gain; if the  Society
cannot utilise the funds as the rules under the
Delhi School
Act
state, as long as there is no
548
profit it is charitable. The essential test of a  charitable
purpose	 is the destination of profits. If the profits	con-
tinue  to feed the charity, the mere occurrence	 of  profits
would  not detract from the charitable nature of the  enter-
prise.	The  proviso under Section 115(4)  prescribes  three
qualitative  tests  for	 identifying  charitable  societies.
These  tests relate to the nature and the character  of	 the
societies and not to its actual transactions in any particu-
lar year or group of years.
When the proviso uses the words "supported wholly or in
part by voluntary contributions", the test for	ascertaining
the same would be:
(i)  Does	a Society rely upon  voluntary	contribution
ultimately  to meet the deficits, if any which may arise  in
its capital or revenue account?
(ii) Does the Society rely upon voluntary contributions
to  finance its capital outlays to the extent  such  outlays
exceed its savings and borrowings ?
The  test is essentially qualitative in nature.  It  is
that  test  which  is commanded for acceptance	by  us.	 The
learned counsel further states that the advantages of apply-
ing the qualitative test would be:
(i)  By  a series of decisions it has been  held	that
mere generation of profits would not detract from the  char-
itable nature of society so long as the profits continue  to
feed the charity and are not diverted to either non-charita-
ble or private purpose.
(ii) It would conform to the interpretation adopted by
English Courts on similar expressions used in statute  which
are pari materia.
(iii)  It would afford a definite and a reliable	test
for identifying the exempt societies.
(iv) It would do away with the artificial	 distinction
between	 societies which are efficiently run and generate  a
surplus and others which run into deficits.
On the contrary if the quantitative test is applied  it
may  lead  to arbitratiness and anomalies. in  a  particular
year, in order to meet its
549
expenses,  the society may depend upon	voluntary  contribu-
tions  while  in the succeeding year it may not	 any  longer
depend. It is also impossible to adopt a number of years  or
a  particular  year as yardstick to  determine	whether	 the
society satisfies the conditions enumerated in the  proviso.
This  becomes  further apparent when it is  applied  to	 the
second and third parts of the proviso.
Where  the bye-laws of a society permit application  of
profits	 for private purpose or payment of dividend  to	 its
members that undoubtedly would be disqualified from claiming
exemption.  As laid down in Girl's Public Day  School  Trust
Ltd v.Minister of Town and Country 1951 (i) Chancery 400 the
object of the proviso when it insists on  support by  volun-
tary contribution wholly or in part, is to disqualify mutual
benefit societies. Voluntary Contributions would, therefore,
mean contributions other than those made by beneficiaries of
the  services.	Reliance is placed on the Overseers  of	 the
Poor and Chapelwarden of the Royal Precinct of the Savoy  in
the County of London v.The Art Union of London (1896  Appeal
Cases  296 at 310) and Institution of  Mechanical  Engineers
v.Cane	(Valuation Officer) and others (1960 3	All  England
Reports 715). The last submission of the learned counsel is,
the  expression "support" does not, in any manner,  connotes
sustenance otherwise it would not make even partial  support
to  qualify  for exemption. The word  "support",  therefore,
must  mean which enriches the society itself or relieves  it
of  a burden or furthers its objects or powers as laid	down
in Cane (Valuation Officer)  and Another v.Royal College  of
Music  (1961 2 Queen's Bench Division 89 at  pages  120-121.
Thus it is submitted that the approach of the High Court  is
incorrect and warrants interference.
Mr. B.Sen, learned counsel for the respondent in  reply
to  the arguments of the appellant would urge  that  Section
115(4) a peculiar section which provides for relief to those
societies  or bodies carrying on charitable  support  either
fully or in part. The proviso of the Delhi municipal  Corpo-
ration	Act distinguished itself from other enactments.	 The
legislative  intent is to narrow down the clauses of  exemp-
tion.
The  Municipal General Tax is an annual tax. The  ques-
tion of assessability to such tax or exemption will,  there-
fore, have to be determined each year. Therefore, unless and
until the society satisfies the assessing authority that  it
fulfills  the  conditions for exemption in respect  of	that
particular year,
550
it cannot claim exemption as a rule. Therefore the facts  in
each case will have to be ascertained in each year.  Similar
is the method adopted under the
Income Tax Act
in respect of
assessment of societies under
Sections 11
to
13
of the	said
Act or even with regard to exempting donations to charitable
societies under Section 80G.
One  other method will be to decide with  reference  to
the overall position of the society or body over a period of
4  or 5 years. This was the method adopted in Brighton	Col-
lege  v.Marriott  (H.M. Inspector of Taxes)  (10  Tax  Cases
213). Similar was the test adopted in  the case of Southwell
(Surveyor  of Taxes) v.The Governors of Holloway College  (3
Tax Cases 386) while determining whether it fell within	 the
concept of a charitable school within the meaning of erratic
statute.
It	 is conceivable that society may depend upon  volun-
tary  contributions for a number of years. But, in  a  given
year  it might not be able to generate a small	surplus.  In
such  a case it might be entitled to exemption. On the	con-
trary,	where the surplus is generated in a systematic	man-
ner, year after year, it will lose its character as a socie-
ty supported by voluntary contributions.
The  word "supported" must mean sustenance.  Where	 the
society does not depend upon voluntary contributions for its
sustenance  it cannot have the benefit of the  proviso.	 The
expression  "wholly or in part" when read in the context  of
"supported" would mean that there could be  a  society which
would depend upon wholly on voluntary contributions for	 its
sustenance,  that is, for the expenses for carrying  on	 its
activities.  The word "part" means a society may  have	some
income	of  its	 own. Still it could claim  the	 benefit  of
exemption if it is not sufficient for its maintenance and it
has to be supplemented by voluntary contributions. In  other
words,	the  test to be applied is whether the	society	 can
survive	 without voluntary contributions even though it	 may
have  some income of its own. As regards the part, it  would
depend	upon the facts of each case. The submission is	that
it must be a substantial part as laid down by this Court  in
case arising out of
Land Acquisition Act
; Smt. Somavanti and
other v.The State of Punjab and Others, [1963] 2 SCR 774.
When the Section talks of Contribution it must be given
its  proper meaning. Such a contribution must be  voluntary.
Therefore,  a voluntary contribution is not made under	com-
pulsion. Equally, it should not be made
551
under  any  kind of apprehension that  some  adverse  conse-
quences	 would	follow if such a contribution  is  no  made.
Equally,  if  a contribution is not made in return  for	 any
benefit	 except	 incidental,  it would be  entitled  to	 the
benefit.  In support of the submission, the learned  counsel
relies on Forbes (surveyor of Taxes) v.Standard Life  Assur-
ance  Company  (3 Tax Cases 268 at 272) and  Institution  of
Mechanical  Engineers (supra). On the basis of these, it  is
submitted  that any donation paid at the time  of  admission
cannot be treated as voluntary.
The argument, that the transfer of funds to the society
by the school can be regarded as voluntary contribution	 re-
ceived by the society, is wrong.
The Delhi School  Education
Act
does  not create the school into  a  specific  juristic
entity different from the society.
The Act
only makes  regu-
lations in the matter of running the school and the  service
conditions of the  employees. Indeed, the Act itself imposes
a  condition that the school must be run by a society  or  a
body  under Rule 50. Further, the Managing Committee of	 the
school shall act under the  control  and  supervision of the
society which runs the school. Consequently, if the funds of
the  school were transferred to the society, it	 would	only
amount	to  transfer of funds from one account	to  another,
both under the control of the same society.
Under Section 115(4) if the society were to run  educa-
tion as a trade or business, even in such a case, the  bene-
fit  of	 exemption will be lost, as laid  down	in  Brighton
College case (supra).
It	 cannot	 be urged as an axiomatic  proposition	that
imparting  education would be a charitable purpose  per	 se.
Pemsel's  case (supra) no doubt continues to hold the  field
in England. A careful reading of the judgement will disclose
that  there must be an element of public benefit or  philan-
thropy	that was what was stressed by each of the Law  Lord.
Therefore, while applying the ratio under the Delhi  Munici-
pal Corporation Act one cannot straightaway adopt the  views
expressed  in  England.	 Here, the  definition	is  somewhat
circumspect. Hence, it must be viewed with reference  to the
objects	 to be achieved by a particular statute.  Therefore,
education per se cannot	 be regarded as a charitable  object
otherwise  even if education was carried  on with a view  to
make  profit, to call it a charity, would  be  unreasonable.
Hence, it is submitted that the concept of a public  benefit
will  have  to be introduced. If that  is  one,	 "education"
under Section 115(4)
552
must  be interpreted a ejusdem generis. Therefore, it  ought
to  be	understood as having some element of relief  to	 the
public at large or public benefit.
The  learned  counsel refers to the balance  sheet	 and
states	that the donations to the school have been  credited
to  the society's accounts. The Term 'fees" appropriated  by
the society is reflected in the balance sheet which  clearly
shows that there have never been two separate entities as is
sought to be made out now.
CIVIL APPEAL NO.2805 OF 1980
     Mr. B. Sen, Sr. Advocate for the  appellant-Corporation
would  submit that respondent-Book Trust was established  on
7.5.57. The building was constructed during the years  1961-
65.  Part of the building has been let out in  1970-71.	 The
rental income is Rs.86,632.80 per mensum. The Children	Book
Trust has:-
(a) Delhi Office
(b) Printing Press
(c) Dolls Museum
(d) Library
(e) Singer Institution.
For  the  years  1964-65  and  1969-70  exemption	from
property tax was granted since the respondent was  depending
on  the Government grants. However, in 1971  notice,  making
the  demand for property tax, was issued with regard to	 the
portion which had been rented out to the press.	 Admittedly,
no exemption could be claimed concerning this portion. It is
only  the other portions which are relevant for the  purpose
of the case. The High Court in its judgment while interpret-
ing Section 115(4)(a) proviso has held that, because of	 the
use  of words "in part" in the proviso the society would  be
entitled  to claim exemption provided other  conditions	 are
satisfied if it is able to show that it has received even  a
small amount of voluntary contribution.
It	 is this finding which is objected to by the  appel-
lant.  The  society cannot pay the tax, is the	test  to  be
adopted. In other words, to claim the
553
exemption it must be shown that the society is supported  by
the voluntary contribution. Where the activity of the socie-
ty   generates income to support itself and, therefore,	 the
society does not any longer depend on the voluntary  contri-
bution, certainly the exemption should be made	unavailable.
From  this point of view, the finding, that even if  it	 re-
ceives a small contribution irrespective of the fact whether
it is able to support or not, is not the correct test. It is
this aspect of the matter which requires to be clarified and
the law settled by this Court.
Mr. G.B. Pai, learned counsel for the respondent-Trust
submits	 that the broad purpose of Section 115 is to  exempt
charity. There may be two types of voluntary contributions:
(i)  From the Society
(ii) From third parties
     The  object  of the Section is to help  the  charitable
institution. The sine qua non is non-distribution of profit.
Once  that test is answered the rest becomes immaterial.
In
support	 of  this submission, the case in
P.C.	Raja  Ratnam
Institution  v. Municipal Corporation of Delhi	and  others
,
[1990]	Supp. SCC 97 is relied on. Lastly, it  is  submitted
that  the  proviso must be read down to find out as  to	 the
income	is  realised and whether there	is   non-payment  of
dividends  to the members. That would be in consonance	with
the  object of the Section, granting exemption to those	 who
are engaged in charitable  purpose. Certainly, it cannot  be
contended  that imparting of education is not  a  charitable
purpose.  The leading case on this aspect is  Pemsel's	case
(supra).
The learned counsel for the intervenors (the  petition-
ers  in W.P.No.1754 of 1979) draws our attention to  Section
115(4) and submits that exemption would be available if	 the
following tests were satisfied:-
(i)  Land or buildings or portion thereof.
(ii) Exclusive occupation and use.
(iii) Such user must be by a society or body.
(iv) For the charitable purpose.
554
(v)  Charitable purpose includes education,  relief  of
poor and medical relief.
(vi)  Such a society is supported wholly or in part  by
voluntary contributions.
(vii)  Applies its profit to itself for furtherance  of
the objects of the society.
(viii) In promoting its objects.
(ix) It does not pay dividend or bonus to its members.
In	 this case, elements (iv), (v) and (vi) are in	dis-
pute. It must be held education per se charity. However,  it
is not contended that the taxing authority is precluded from
going  into  the question whether the society  is  imparting
education and thereby is pursuing a charitable object.
It	 is  further submitted that  the  voluntary  support
talked	of under Section must be qualitative in	 nature	 and
not  quantitative. In Cane (Valuation Officer)	and  Another
(supra) is what is relied on for advancing this proposition.
In  that  case, the test that was laid down  was:  (1)	that
enriches  the  Corporation itself of (2) relieves  it  of  a
burden or (3) furthers its objects or powers.
British  School  of Egyptian  Archaeology,	 Murray	 and
others	v. Public Trustee and others, [1954(1)	All  England
Reports	 887]  is a case which deal with the  quid  pro	 quo
nature of voluntary contribution. Therefore, it is submitted
if  the Court were to adopt the test whether voluntary	con-
tributions  provide  the  life line, such a  test  would  be
violative  of
Article 14.
When property tax  exemption	 was
granted	 for aided schools and such exemption was denied  to
non-aided schools it was held to be discriminatory in  Bald-
win
Girls' High School, Bangalore v. Corporation of the City
of Bangalore
, AIR 1984 Karnataka 162.
Before we deal with the respective contentions we think
it  necessary to provide the background in relation  to	 the
municipality  and the power of taxation. Every	municipality
is a local self-government. Therefore, in order that it	 may
sustain	 itself	 a power of taxation has been  delegated  to
municipal bodies. The taxes are local taxes for local needs.
Such  taxes must obviously differ from one  municipality  to
another. It is impossible for the
555
Legislature  to	 pass statutes for the	imposition  of	such
taxes in local areas. In a  democratic set up the municipal-
ities  which need the proceeds of these taxes for their	 own
administration,	 it  would be but proper to leave  to  these
municipalities the power to impose and collect taxes.
The  local authorities do not act as  Legislature	when
they  impose  a	 tax but they do so as the  agent  of  State
Legislature. The powers and the extent of these powers	must
be found in the statute which creates them with such powers.
Local  bodies being subordinate branches of  government
activities are democratic institutions managed by the repre-
sentatives of the people. They function for public  purpose.
They bear the burden of government affairs in local areas as
they  are  required to carry on local  self-government.	 The
power  of  taxation is a necessary  adjunct to	their  other
powers. There are various kinds of taxes provided under each
Municipal Act
, importantly, property tax.
Now, we come to
Section 114
of the Act. Sub-section (1)
of the said Section reads:-
"Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the proper-
ty  shall   be levied on lands and buildings  in  Delhi	 and
shall consist of the following, namely:-
(a) ...................................................
(b) ...................................................
(c) ...................................................
(d) a general tax.
(i) ...................................................
(ii). .................................................
Explanation:-  Where any portion of a land or  building
is  liable to a higher rate of the general tax such  portion
shall be deemed to be a separate property for the purpose of
municipal taxation.
556
The  Corporation may exempt from the	general	 tax
lands  and  buildings of which the rateable value  does	 not
exceed one  hundred rupees".
While  dealing  with the premises in respect  of  which
property  taxes are to be levied sub-section (4)(a) of	Sec-
tion 115 states:
"(4)	Save as otherwise provided in this Act,	 the
general	 tax  shall  be levied in respect of all  lands	 and
buildings in Delhi except-
(a)  lands and buildings or portions of lands	 and
buildings  exclusively occupied and used for public  worship
or by a society	 or body for a charitable purpose.
Provided  that such society or body  is  supported
wholly	or in  part by voluntary contributions, applies	 its
profits,  if any, or other income in promoting	its  objects
and does not pay any  dividend or bonus to its members.
	  Explanation: "Charitable purpose" includes  relief
of  the	 poor,	education and medical relief  but  does	 not
include	 a purpose  which relates exclusively  to  religious
teaching;
(b) ..............................................
(c) ..............................................
(Emphasis supplied)
     It	 is  this scope of the sub-section that	 has  to  be
determined in these two cases.
Sub-section (5) of Section 115 provides:
"(5) Lands and buildings or portions thereof shall
not  be	  deemed  to be exclusively occupied  and  used	 for
public worship or for a charitable purpose within the  mean-
ing  of	 clause	 (a)  of sub-section (4), if  any  trade  or
business  is carried on in such lands and buildings or	por-
tions  thereof or if in respect of such lands and  buildings
or portions thereof, any rent is derived."
	  Sub-section (6) of Section 115 provides:-
557
"(6) Where any portion of any land or building  is
exempt	from the general tax by reason of its  being  exclu-
sively	occupied and used for public worship or for a  char-
itable purpose such portion shall be deemed to be a separate
property for the purpose of municipal taxation."
Therefore,	 after	providing for exemption	 under	sub-
sections  (4) and (5) Section 115 categorises  cases,  which
will  lose the exemption under sub-section (4). Again,	sub-
section	 (6)  clarifies	 that a part of a  building  in	 the
occupation  of	society	 may not be  entitled  to  exemption
though the other part is clearly exempt.
By a reading of the above, it is clear that sub-section
(4) of Section 115 provides that general tax shall be levied
in respect of all lands and buildings except those lands and
buildings  or part of lands and buildings which	 are  exclu-
sively occupied and used (i) for  public  worship or (ii) by
society or body for charitable purpose.
The conditions for claiming exemption under sub-section
(4) are:-
(i)  The lands and buildings or portions of  lands
and  buildings,	 in respect of which  exemption	 is  claimed
shall  be  exclusively occupied by a society or a  body	 and
used for a charitable  purpose.
(ii) Such society or body must be supported wholly
or in part by voluntary contributions.
(iii)	 It must apply its profit, if any, or  other
income for promoting its objects.
(iv) It must not pay any dividend or bonus to	 its
members.
In the Explanation as to what is charitable purpose  is
stated in an inclusive manner, relief of the poor, education
and medical relief. In the present case, the questions which
arise for our determination are:
(i)  Whether the society or body is occupying	 and
using the land and building for a charitable purpose  within
the meaning of sub-section (4)?
558
(ii)  What	 is  the  meaning  of  the  expression	"sup
ported wholly or in part by voluntary contribution?"
(iii)  Whether any trade or business is carried  on  in
the premises  within the meaning of sub-section (5)?
We	 will first take up the case of Civil Appeal  no.228
of 1990.
The appellant-Society is a society registered under the
Society's  Registration	 Act. It is engaged in	running	 the
school	known as Green Field School. This school  is  recog-
nised private unaided school. The school is run in a  build-
ing owned by the appellant-Society. Mr Harish Salve, learned
counsel	 for the appellant draws our attention to the
Delhi
School Education Act, 1973
and the Rules framed	 thereunder,
in  order to appreciate the statutory setting in which	Sec-
tion 115 (4), according to him, is to be construed.
As	 far as
Delhi School Education Act
is  concerned  we
will refer to Section (3). It reads as follows:
"(3)  The	manager of every  recognised  school  shall,
before the commencement of each academic session, file	with
the  Director  a full statement of the fees to be levied  by
such school during the ensuing academic session, and  except
with  the  prior approval of the Director,  no	such  school
shall  charge,	during	that academic session,	any  fee  in
excess	of the fee specified by its  manager in said  state-
ment."
Section 18 (3)
talks of unaided school like the present
and its school fund, which is extracted below:
"(3) In every recognised unaided school, there shall be
a  fund, to be called the "Recognised Unaided School  Fund",
and there shall be credited there to income accruing to	 the
school by way of-
(a) fees,
(b) any charges and payments which may be realised  by
the school for other specific purpose, and
559
(c)	 any other contributions, endowments, gifts and	 the
like."
Sub-section (4) states as under:-
"(4)(a)  income  derived by unaided schools by  way  of
fees shall be utilised only for such educational purposes as
may be prescribed; and
(b) charges and payments realised and all other contri-
butions,  endowments and gifts received by the school  shall
be  utilised  only for the specific purpose for	 which	they
were realised or received."
Rule  50 of the Rules framed under this Act  stipulates
the conditions for recognition. The important conditions for
our purpose are:-
(i) the school is run by a society registered under the
Societies  Registration Act, 1860
(21 of 1860), or a  public
trust constituted under any law for the time being in  force
and  is	 managed in accordance with a scheme  of  management
made under these rules;
(iv) the school is not run for profit to any  individu-
al,  group or association of individuals or any	 other	per-
sons; and
(ix)  the school buildings or other structures  of	 the
grounds	 are   not used during the day or night for  commer-
cial  or  residential purposes (except for  the	 purpose  of
residence  of any employee of the school) or  for  communal,
political or non-educational activity of any kind  whatsoev-
er.
Under Rule 59(2)(q) it is specifically stated that	 the
Management  Committee  shall be subject to the	control	 and
supervision  of	 the trust society by which such  school  is
run.
Now,  we  come to Chapter XIV which relates  to  school
fund. Rules 172 and 173 may be quoted:
"172.  Trust  or  society not to  collect	fees,  etc.,
schools to grant receipts for fees, etc., collected by it  -
(1) No fee, contribution
560
or  other charge shall be collected from any student by	 the
trust	or  society running any recognised  school;  whether
aided or not.
(2)  Every fee, contribution or other charge  collected
from  any student by a recognised school, whether  aided  or
not, shall be  collected by the school for every  collection
made by it.
173.  School  fund how to be maintained  -  (1)  Every
School	Fund shall be kept deposited in a nationalised	bank
or  a  scheduled  bank any post office in the  name  of	 the
school.
(2) Such part of the School Fund as may be approved by
the Administrator, or any officer authorised by him in	this
behalf,	 may be kept in the form of Government securities.
(3)  The	Administrator  may allow such  part  of	 the
School	Fund as he may specify in the case of  each  school,
(depending upon the size and needs of the school) to be kept
as cash in hand.
(4) Every Recognised Unaided School Fund shall be kept
deposited in a nationalised bank or a scheduled bank or in a
post  office in the name of the school and such part of	 the
said  Fund as may be specified by the Administrator  or	 any
officer	 authorised by him in this behalf shall be  kept  in
the  form of Government securities and as cash in  hand	 re-
spectively:
Provided	that  in  the case of  an  unaided  minority
school, the proportion of such Fund which may be kept in the
form  of Government securities or as cash in hand  shall  be
determined by the managing committee of such school."
Rule 177 deals with utilisation of the fees realised by
unaided recognised schools. In sub-rule (1) it is stated:-
"177.  Fees realised by unaided recognised schools	 how
to be utilised-
(1)  Income derived by an unaided recognised school  by
way  of	 fees shall be utilised in the	first  instance	 for
meeting the pay, allowances and other benefits admissible to
the employees of the school:
561
Provided  that savings, if any from the fees  collected
by such school may be utilised by its managing committee for
meeting capital or contingent expenditure of the school,  or
for  one  or  more of the  following  educational  purposes,
namely:-
(a) award of scholarships to students;
(d) establishment of any other recognised school, or
(c) assisting any other school or educational  institu-
tion,  not  being a college, under management  of  the	same
society	 or  trust by which the first  mentioned  school  is
run."
In this background, we will consider whether  education
per  se is a charitable purpose and its application  to	 the
appellant-society.  The	 case relied on strongly  is  Pemsel
(supra).   The	dictum of Lord Macnaghten at page 96  is  as
follows :-
"Charity'	in its legal sense comprises four  principal
divisions: trusts for the relief of poverty, trusts  for the
advancement  of	 education, trusts for	the  advancement  of
religion,  and trusts for other purposes beneficial  to	 the
community not falling under any of the preceding heads.	 The
trusts	last referred to are not the less charitable in	 the
eye of the law because incidentally they benefit the rich as
well as the poor, as indeed every charity that deserves	 the
name must do, either directly or indirectly."
One  thing that is clear is that each of the Law  Lords
emphasised  the	 underlying  idea of  charity  involving  an
element	 of philanthropy or something derived from  pity  of
early  times  as  being the fundamental of  the	 concept  of
charity. Lord Bramwell at page 83 states:
"I think a "charitable purpose" is where assistance  is
given to the bringing up, feeding, clothing, lodging, educa-
tion  of  those who, from poverty  or  comparative  poverty,
stand in need of such assistance."
Again, Lord Hershell at page 88 observed:
"It is the helplessness of those who are the objects of
its  care which evokes the assistance of the  benevolent.  I
think, then,
562
that  the popular conception of a charitable purpose  covers
the  relief on any form of necessity, destitution, or  help-
lessness  which excites the compassion or sympathy  of	men,
and so appeals to their benevolence for relief."
Therefore, an element of public benefit or philanthropy
has  to be present. The reason why we stress on this  aspect
of  the matter is if education is run on  commercial  lines,
merely because it is a school, it does not mean it would  be
entitled to the exemption under
Section 115(4)
of the Act.
The  next	case to which reference can be made  is	 The
King v.The Commissioners for Special Purposes of the  Income
Tax, 5 Tax Cases 408. The question arose whether the Univer-
sity College of North Wales could be held as established for
charitable  purposes.  Fletcher	 Moulton,  L.J.	 relying  on
Pemsel's  case (supra)held that a trust for  advancement  of
education was charitable.
In The Abbey, Malvern Wells, Ltd.(supra) it is observed
at pages 160-161:-
"In the present case, it seems to me that one is  enti-
tled, and, indeed,bound, to look at the constitution of	 the
company to see who, in fact, is in control. I find that,  by
art. 3
of the company's articles, the company is  controlled
entirely by a body called a council, a body of persons, and,
by
art. 64
, that body of persons must be the trustees of the
trust deed. Therefore, while the company, theoretically, has
the  power to apply its property and assets for the  purpose
of  making profits and devoting the resulting profit to	 the
distribution of dividends among the members, I find that the
persons	 who regulate the operations of the company are	 not
free  persons unrestricted in their operations, but are	 the
trustees  of  the trust deed, and, under the  terms  of	 the
trust deed, they may use the property of the company only in
a particular way and must not make use of the assets of	 the
company	 for the purpose of a profitmaking concern.  I	find
that  they  are strictly bound by the trusts  of  the  trust
deed, and that those trusts are charitable trusts. It  seems
to  me, therefore, that while nominally the property of	 the
company is held under the provisions of the memorandum
563
and articles of association, in actual fact the property  of
the company is regulated by the terms of the memorandum	 and
articles  of  association plus the provisions of  the  trust
deed,  and, therefore, the company is restricted in fact  in
the  application  of its property and assets and  may  apply
them for the charitable purposes which are mentioned in	 the
trust deed."
Relying  on this passage it is contended on  behalf  of
the  appellant that the position is exactly the same in	 the
instant case. The submission is where the society's building
houses, the school which is imparting education, it being  a
charitable  purpose,  the  exemption would  apply.  We	will
consider  this aspect of the matter after referring  to	 the
Indian cases.
In The Trustees of the `Tribune' (supra) at pages	422-
423 it is observed :
"In the High Court stress was laid by the learned Chief
Justice	 and by Addison, J., one the fact that	the  Tribune
newspaper  charges its readers and advertisers	at  ordinary
commercial  rates  for the advantages which it	affords.  As
against	 this the evidence or findings do not disclose	that
any  profit was made by the newspaper or press	before	1918
and  it	 is at least certain that neither  was	founded	 for
private profit whether to the testator or any other  person.
By  the	 terms of the trust it is not to be carried  on	 for
profit	to  any individual. It cannot  in  their  Lordships'
opinion be regarded as an element necessarily present in any
purpose	 of general public utility, that it  should  provide
something for nothing or for less than it costs or for	less
than  the  ordinary  price. An elemosynary  element  is	 not
essential even in the strict English view of charitable uses
(Commissioners v. University College of North Wales)".
In All India Spinners' Association (supra) at page	 483
it is observed :
"
Section  4(3)
of the Indian Income-tax  Act  gives  a
clear and succinct definition of "charitable purposes" which
must  be  construed  according to its  actual  language	 and
meaning. Lord Macnaghten's definition of charity and English
decisions on the law of charities have no binding  authority
on its construction and though they sometimes afford help or
guidance, cannot
564
relieve	 the  Indian  Courts from  their  responsibility  of
applying  the language of the Act to the particular  circum-
stances	 that  emerge under conditions of Indian  life.	 The
difference  in language, particularly the inclusion  in	 the
Indian Act of the word "public" is of importance.
The  constitution of
Section 4(3)
is obviously a  ques-
tion  of law, but so also is the question what is  the	real
purpose of an Association. The Court must make its  decision
on the latter point on the basis of the facts found for	 it,
but  given the facts the question is one of law.  Where	 the
principal  fact is the constitution of the  Association	 the
true  construction of the constitution	for finding out	 its
purpose is a question of law.
The words "general public utility" in
Section 4(3)
are
very  wide wards. They would exclude the object	 of  private
gain,  such as an undertaking for commercial  profit  though
all the same it would subserve general public utility."
In	 Commissioner of Income-tax, Bombay City (supra)  it
was observed at page 289:
"A settlor or a donor may make a charity by setting  up
an  institution and also providing funds by which those	 who
take  advantage of the institution can do so without  paying
any charge ; or we may have a case where the charity may not
go to those limits and one may confine his charity to merely
setting up the institution and providing that those who wish
to  take  advantage of the institution must  pay  reasonable
charges	 for the same.	In both cases the setting up of	 the
institution would be a charitable object if the	 institution
serves a purpose of general public utility. The only  essen-
tial  factor  to determine whether it is a  charity  or	 not
would be whether there is any private gain by the setting up
of  the	 institution.  If the gain derived  by	running	 the
institution  continues to be impressed with the trust  which
is  a  charitable trust, then it is immaterial	whether	 the
institution  is run as a commercial institution or not,	 but
if  in the running of the institution profits are  made	 and
the profit goes to any private individual or if the institu-
tion is intended for any private gain, then undoubtedly	 the
running of
565
the  institution could not be considered as being run for  a
charitable object."
In Addl. C.I.T. v.Surat Art Silk Cloth Assocn., (Income
Tax Reports 121 Page 1 at 24) it is observed:
"Where  an	 activity is carried on as a matter  of	 ad-
vancement  of the charitable purpose or for the	 purpose  of
carrying out the charitable purpose, it would not be  incor-
rect  to say as a matter of plain English grammar  that	 the
charitable purpose involves the carrying on of such  activi-
ty,  but the predominant object of such activity must be  to
subserve the charitable purpose and not to earn profit.	 The
charitable  purpose  should not be submerged by	 the  profit
making	motive ; the latter should not masquerade under	 the
guise of the former."
In	 view  of the above rulings it would be	 clear	that
where  the  predominant	 object is  to	subserve  charitable
purpose and not to earn profit it would be a charitable pur-
pose.  However, the argument of the appellant is as per	 the
Delhi School Education Act
and the Rules framed	 thereunder,
if the society cannot utilise the fund and the school cannot
be  run	 for private gain in the absence of any	 profit,  it
would be a charitable purpose.
We	 have already seen that merely because education  is
imparted  in the school, that by itself, cannot be  regarded
as  a  charitable object. Today, education  has	 acquired  a
wider  meaning. If education is imparted with a	 profit	 mo-
tive,  to hold, in such a case, as charitable purpose,	will
not  be	 correct. We are inclined to  agree  with  Mr.B.Sen,
learned counsel for the Delhi Municipal Corporation in	this
regard.	 Therefore,  it	 would	necessarily  involve  public
benefit.
The rulings arising out of
Income-tax Act
may not be of
great  help because in the
Income-tax Act
"charitable	pur-
pose"  includes the relief of the poor,	 education,  medical
relief	and the advancement of any other object	 or  general
public	utility.  The  advancement of any  other  object  of
general public utility is not found under the Delhi  Munici-
pal  Corporation  Act.	In other words,	 the  definition  is
narrower in scope. This is our answer to question No. 1.
566
The  second  important  aspect is society	or  body  is
supported  wholly  or in part  by  voluntary  contributions.
Reliance is placed on The Overseers of the Poor and  Chapel-
warden	of the Royal Precinct of the Savoy in the County  of
London (supra). At page 310 it is observed:
"The  expression "supported by voluntary  contribution"
has  long been well known in connection with  hospitals	 and
other  institutions; I think the essential idea conveyed  by
them is that the payments are a gratuitous offering for	 the
benefit	 of others, and not the price of an  advantage	pur-
chased by the contributor."
But  this case is not helpful because it turned on	 the
meaning of "voluntary".
The test according to the appellant to determine volun-
tary  contributions is qualitative and not quantitative.  We
will  examine the correctness of this submission.
The  Delhi
Municipal Corporation Act
of 1957 in so far as it grants  an
exemption  under Section 115(4) makes a departure  from	 the
other  statutes	 of similar kind. As a matter of  fact,	 the
learned	 counsel have provided us with the  relevant  provi-
sions of the various municipal statutes of the other States.
Only  the  Delhi Municipal Corporation Act  and	 Kerala	 Act
adopt this pattern of exemption. Therefore, unlike the other
Acts relating to municipalities of the various other States,
the  legislative  intent appears to be to  narrow  down	 the
nature of exemption.
It cannot be gainsaid that the municipal general tax is
an  annual tax. Therefore, normally speaking, the  liability
for taxation must be determined with reference to each year.
In other words, the society claiming exemption will have  to
show  that  if fulfills the conditions	for  exemption	each
year. If it shows, for example, that for its support it	 has
to depend on, either wholly or in part, voluntary  contribu-
tions, in that particular year, it may be exempt. But  where
in that year, for its support, it need not depend on  volun-
tary  contributions at all or again if the society  produces
surplus	 income	 and excludes the  dependence  on  voluntary
contributions it may cease to be exempt. Of course, the word
"support" will have to mean sustenance or maintenance.	Only
to  get	 over this difficulty that the qualitative  test  is
pressed	 into service. We would consider the reasonable	 way
of giving effect to the exemption, will be to take each case
and  assess for a period of five years and find out  whether
the  society or body depends on voluntary contributions.  Of
course, at the end of each five year period the assessing
567
authority could review the position. In other words, what we
want to stress is, where a society or body is making system-
atic  profit, even though that profit is utilised  only	 for
charitable  purposes,  yet it cannot be said that  it  could
claim  exemption. If, merely qualitative test is applied  to
societies,  even schools which are run on  commercial  basis
making	profits would go out to the purview of taxation	 and
could  demand  exemption. Thus, the test, according  to	 us,
must be whether the society could survive without  receiving
voluntary contributions, even though it may have some income
by the activities of the society. The word "part' must	mean
an  appreciable	 amount and not an  insignificant  one.	 The
"part"	in  other words, must be substantial part.  What  is
substantial would depend upon the facts and circumstances of
each case.
The  word "contribution" used in the proviso must	also
be  given its due meaning. It cannot be understood as  dona-
tions. If that be so, a voluntary contribution cannot amount
to a compulsive donation. If the donor, in order to gain  an
advantage  or  benefit, if he apprehends that  but  for	 the
contribution some adverse consequence would follow, makes  a
donation certainly it ceases to be voluntary.
Therefore,	 we conclude that the test to be applied  is
not merely qualitative but quantitative as well.
The  last	aspect of the matter is utilisation  of	 the
income in promoting its objects and not paying any  dividend
or bonus to its members. The learned counsel for the  appel-
lant and the intervener would urge that on the basis of Cane
(Valuation  Officer)  and Another (supra)  (1961(2)  Queen's
Bench  Division 89) the position in the instant case is	 the
same. At Page 121 the following observation is found:
"One, I  think,  that	 enriches the	 corporation
	  itself or  relieves  it  of a burden	 or furthers
	  its objects or powers."
In	 the light of the above discussion, we will  analyse
the  position in the context of the
Delhi  School  Education
Act
and the Rules, since the school is regulated  by  these
statutory provisions. The school no doubt is run by a regis-
tered  society as required under Rule 50. It is	 managed  in
accordance  with the scheme of management as provided  under
the Rules. However, Rule 59 sub-rule 2(q) which has  already
been extracted clearly lays down that the managing committee
shall be subject to the control and
568
supervision  of the trust or society by which the school  is
run. Rule 177 which we have quoted above requires the utili-
sation of the income only for  the purpose mentioned in that
rule.  Therefore,  it would be clear that the rules  do	 not
contemplate  the  transfer of funds from the school  to	 the
society.
It cannot be denied and it is not denied that the	only
activity  carried  on by the society is the running  of	 the
Green Field School at Safdarjung Enclave. We have	been
provided with copies of	 the balance sheets of the  society.
That  shows for years ending on 31.3.1980 to  31.3.1984	 and
31.3.1986  to  31.3.1990 the society had  not  incurred	 any
expenditure. The income of the society consists of:-
(i) term fees received;
(ii) donations; and
(iii) interest from bank
     What  exactly are the donations, we have not  been	 ex-
plained. The following extracts from the Income and Expendi-
ture Accounts furnish us the following details:
-------------------------------------------------------------------
"Year  Excess of Income	*Term		**Donation
  Ending  over expenditure  Fees/Contributions
			     received from the
				  School
-------------------------------------------------------------------
31.3.80	       49,865	      3,31,189		   76,230
31.3.81	       79,564	      3,25,725		   87,274
31.3.82	     1,06,698	      2,78,650		 1,00,244
31.3.83	     1,23,032	      2,43,398		 1,15,301
31.3.84	     2,21,561		57,109		 2,17,020
31.3.86	     5,35,973	      3,32,662		 1,87,580
31.3.87	     6,73,645	      4,81,200		 1,76,778
31.3.88	    13,91,743	      7,16,700		 5,30,547
31.3.89	    10,31,228	      7,59,820		 2,53,230
31.3.90	     9,91,487	      6,30,725		 5,06,255
----------------------------------------------------------------
*The  receipts are from the School which are  collected
from the students thrice an year and are called "Term Fee'.
569
** Sources not explained. It appears that these are the
collections  made  from the parents of the students  at	 the
time of admission."
When  we turn to the extracts from the income  the	 ex-
penditure  accounts of Green Field School, we find from	 the
tabulated  statement  furnished to us for  the	year  ending
31.3.77	 to 31.3.87 contributions have been made every	year
to  the	 society. It has already been seen  that  the  Delhi
School Education Rules nowhere contemplate transfer of funds
from  the school to the society. Certainly,  such  contribu-
tions cannot amount to voluntary contributions. The transfer
of  funds are in disregard of the rules and run	 counter  to
Rule 177 quoted above. We cannot, by any process of  reason-
ing, hold that these are voluntary contributions received by
the  society.
The Delhi School Education Act
does not create
the school entity a specific juristic entity different	from
the  society. Where under rule 59(2)(q) of the Rules  it  is
provided that the managing committee shall be subject to the
control	 and supervision of the society by which the  school
is  run,  it means that school is a part and parcel  of	 the
society.  Where, therefore, the funds are transferred,	even
calling	 the  contribution from the school to  the  society,
would be nothing more than transfer oneself. In fact, we  do
not find under the
Delhi School Education Act
any  provision
by which the school is made a separate juristic entity.
There  is	another way of looking at  the	matter.	 The
school	being  a separate entity, premises occupied  by	 the
school will belong to it and not to the society.  Therefore,
the  society cannot claim to be in exclusive occupation	 and
use  of	 the  land and building in question.  In  fact,	 the
proposal for assessment sets out these aspects clearly which
are extracted below:
"The first step would be to determine whether the
	  activity in which the society is engaged is char-
	  itable or not.The charitable purpose has not been
	  defined in the Act,  but it  definitely  means to
	  include only such acts as relief of the poor, me-
	  dical relief to the poor and education relief. In
	  P.C. Rajaratnam Institutions	v. MCD	(Civil Writ
	  Petition No. 1764 of 1979) division bench of	the
	  Delhi High Court has held that to be held as cha-
	  ritable institutions for the purpose	of  Section
	  115(4), the society  must give education  relief.
	  It  was further held by the  Hon'ble	Court  that
	  where fees are charged, exemption cannot be gran-
	  ted. The
570
scrutiny of the Income and Expenditure account  of
	  the school shows that the activity which is  being
	  carried out by the society i.e. running of school,
	  generates positive income from year to year. Posi-
	  tive income in the years 1977 to 1987 ranged	bet-
	  ween	32,000 to Rs.3 lacs per year. I do not	know
	  on  what criteria   this activity can be called as
	  charitable activity. The institute is	  being	 run
	  purely on commercial	lines for  the	purposes  of
	  profits. Even the society for which  receipts	 and
	  payments accounts have not   been filed are in re-
	  ceipt of income  generated  from this activity  in
	  the form of building fund and donations etc. which
	  are forced on the students and their guardians.
The figures picked up from some of the  final
	 accounts of the  society  show	 that  contributions
	 from  the school to the society was Rs.1,56,895  in
	 the  year ending  31.3.79,  and every	year  there-
	 after	 the amount of contribution from  school  to
	 the  society has been increasing. Since the  insti-
	 tute	is   not only self-supporting  but  also  is
	 generating positive income, I hold that the activi-
	 ty  carried out by the society is not a  charitable
	 activity. The second confusion that the  institute/
	 society   should be supported wholly or in part  by
	 voluntary  contribution  is also   not	  fulfilled.
	 The  element  of voluntary contributions comes only
	 if  there  is	an excess of expenditure   over	 the
	 receipts   of	 the  society.	Even  otherwise	 the
	 donations received  by the society if any cannot be
	 treated as voluntary in view of the  fact that they
	 are  all forced on the	 student/parents.  The	very
	 fact that the tax payer  society has claimed depre-
	 ciation  in the income and expenditure	 account  of
	 the school shows that	what  they are preparing  is
	 not  the  income  and	expenditure account,  but  a
	 Profit	 and Loss Account as is	 done in  commercial
	 establishments.  Depreciation is  not	an  expendi-
	 ture  but is only a deduction @ certain  percentage
	 of the capital assets for  arriving  at profits and
	 gains	of the business. In view of  the   foregoing
	 discussions   I  have	no  hesitation	 to  decline
	 exemption from payment of general  tax	 in  respect
	 of   the  property known  as  Green  Field  School,
	 A-2  Block,  S.J.D.A New  Delhi.  Accordingly,	 all
	 property taxes are payable by the tax payer."
571
The  High Court correctly appreciated the law and	held
as under in C.W.P. No.263 of 1989 reported in AIR 1989 Delhi
266:
"At	 our instance, Mr Bhasin brought  on
	  record  the  balancesheets of the school  for	 the
	 years 1981 to 1987-88	    and that of the  society
	 for  the  years  from 1978-79 to  1984-85.  It	 was
	 stated	 that  balance	sheets	of  the	  petitioner
	 society for subsequent years were not ready.
	  If reference is made to the income and expenditure
	  account   of	the  school  for  the  year   ending
	  31.3.1988  it	 would be seen that the	 school	 has
	 collected  Rs.25,35,900.66 as fees and has given  a
	 contribution  of  Rs.17,148.60	 to  the   petitoner
	 society. Again, if reference is made to the balance
	 sheet for the year ending 31.3.1985 of the  school,
	 the school has collected over Rs.14.5 lakhs as fees
	 and   contributed   to	  the	petitioner   society
	 Rs.1,00,724.13.  The  amount is  reflected  in	 the
	 balance  sheet of the petitioner society as  having
	 been received from the school. Countribution of the
	 school	 for the year ending 31.3.1984 to the  peti-
	 tioner society is Rs.1,06,459.50. As on  31.3.1983,
	 the  amount of contribution from the school to	 the
	 petitioner  society is Rs.2,43,398.91. It  is	not,
	 therefore,  that  there is any	 contribution  being
	 made  by  the society for running  of	the  school.
	 Rather	 the school is contributing various  amounts
	 to the petitioner society."
"Merely because the petitioner society is	 not
	 distributing  profit  or is  applying	the  profits
	 earned	 from running of the school on	construction
	 of  school building is not enough for it  to  claim
	 exemption.  It has to be shown that the  petitioner
	 society is supported wholly or in part by voluntary
	 contributions.	 The  learned  Deputy  Assessor	 and
	 Collector has given weighty reasons to come to	 the
	 conclusion  that there were no voluntary  contribu-
	 tions	to the petitioners society and also to	show
	 that  the  case of the petitioner society  was	 not
	 covered  by
S.115(4)
of the Act. As has been  noted
	 above,	 in the present case it is the school  which
	 is generating income for the petitioner society and
	 no  amount whatsoever is being spent by  the  peti-
	 tioner	 society on the school. The  learned  Deputy
	 Assessor  and collector has further  observed	that
	 the  petitioner society is being
572
run purely on commercial lines for the purpose  of
	  profits  and it is in receipt of income  generated
	  from	this activity in the form of building	fund
	  and  donations  etc.,	 which	are  forced  on	 the
	  students  and their guardians. Thus, there  is  no
	  voluntary contribution."
We are  in  entire agreement	with these findings.
     The  last question is whether any trade or business  is
carried	 on within the meaning of sub-section  (5).
Section
115(6)
of Act covers those cases where a part of the land or
building is used for trade or business or for getting rental
income	therefrom. That part undoubtedly will be subject  to
tax. Suppose, there is another portion of the same lands  or
buildings where trade or business is carried on and  profits
are  made and are applied to charitable purposes  then	that
portion shall, for purposes of municipal taxation, be deemed
to be a separate property. In other words, this part of	 the
lands  or buildings will qualify for relief. But  the  other
part  will be subject to tax. This is the idea of  making  a
part  of the lands or buildings a separate property so	that
the  entire building does not get the exemption.  The  trade
portion is subjected to tax, and the charity portion is	 not
subjected to tax.
Trade   or	 business  can	be  present  in	 both	sub-
sections(4)  and (5) of section 115. But, if the profits  of
income	of  trade  or business is devoted  to  a  charitable
purpose and no part thereof is distributed among the members
as dividends or bonus, then that trade or business is a mean
to an end. It is charity.
But,  if there is a trade or business carried on  in  a
land  or  building  and its profits are	 not  applied  to  a
charitable  purpose,  sub-section(6) says that part  of	 the
land or building where a trade or business is carried on  or
from rent is derived, will be subject to tax.
Applying  the  above propositions, it  would  only,  at
best,  make  the  society running the  school  a  charitable
purpose,  beyond that it does not strengthen its case as  it
fails  to answer the test that it is supported wholly or  in
part by voluntary contributions.
We	 are unable to read down the proviso to	 utilisation
of income and
non-payment of dividends to the members as submitted by	 Mr.
G.B.Pai.
573
CIVIL APPEAL NO.2805 OF 1980
     Mr.  B.Sen, learned counsel for the appellant does	 not
dispute before us that the Children Book Trust qualifies  in
every  respect for exemption. He only objected to that	part
of the finding wherein the High Court had held as follows:
"  The next contention of Mr. Arun Kumar was	that
the respondent was not supported mainly by voluntary contri-
butions and was as such not entitled to the exemption.	This
contention of the appellant is answered by the provision  to
the said sub-section which clearly provides that the society
may  be supported `wholly or in part by voluntary  contribu-
tions'.	 Because  of the use of the words `in part'  in	 the
proviso	 the society would be entitled to  claim  exemption,
provided  other conditions are satisfied, if it is  able  to
show  that it has received even a small amount of  voluntary
contribution."
But this finding cannot be correct in view of our  foregoing
discussion.
In	 the result, we dismiss both the  appeals.  However,
there shall be no orders as to costs.
N.V.K.					  Appeals dismissed.
574