[Cites
8
, Cited by
8
]
Supreme Court of India
Cipla Ltd vs Union Of India & Ors on 27 November, 2012
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2012 SC 363
Bench:
Dipak Misra
,
K.S. Radhakrishnan
REPORTABLE
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                    CIVIL APPEAL NO(s).8479-8480 OF 2012
               (arising out of SLP(C)No(s).34504-34505/2012 )


     CIPLA LTD.                                 Appellant(s)


                      VERSUS


     UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS                  Respondent(s)




                                  O R D E R
Leave granted.
Sugen Inc. USA and Pharmacia and Upjohn Company  USA  filed
     an application on 9.8.2002 for the grant of patent.   The  application
     was recommended for grant of  patent  on  23.8.2007  and  was  finally
     alloted the patent No.209251, which was published in the Patent Office
     Journal under
Section 43(2)
of the Patents Act, 1970 (for short.  “the
     Act”).  Cipla Ltd. filed an application under
section 25(2)
of the Act
     on 1.9.2008 for revocation of the said patent,  before  the  Assistant
     Controller of Patent and Design (in short, “the Controller”), who vide
     his order dated 24th September, 2012 revoked  the  patent  which  gave
     rise to this litigation.
Heard Mr. Harish Salve, learned  senior  counsel  appearing
     for the appellant and Mr. T.R. Andhyarujina,  learned  senior  counsel
     appearing for Respondent Nos.2 and 3 at  length.   Detailed  arguments
     were addressed with regard to the  correctness  or  otherwise  of  the
     order passed by the Controller as well as by the High  Court  and  the
     consequences thereof.
We find it unnecessary to  examine  all  those  contentions
     since we are sending this matter back  to  the  Controller  for  fresh
     consideration in accordance with law.  The main controversy raised  in
     the case is on the non-furnishing of the copy of the recommendation of
     the Statutory Board constituted under
Section 25(4)
of the Act to  the
     parties.
Chapter V of the Patents Act, 1970
(for short,  “the  Act”)
     deals with the Opposition Proceedings to grant  of  patents.
Section
     25(1)
of the Act enables any person to represent by way of  Opposition
     to the Controller against the grant of patent, but before a patent has
     not been granted.  Sub-section (2) of
Section 25
enables  any  person
     interested to give notice of opposition to the Controller at any  time
     after the grant of patent, but before the expiry of period of one year
     from the date of publication of grant of the patent.  Clauses  (a)  to
(k) of this sub-section are the grounds which  can  be  taken  by  any
     person.  It is specifically made clear that in  sub-sections  (1)  and
     (2) of
Section 25
of the Act that no other grounds are available to be
     taken by any person.
Section 25(3)(b)
of the Act deals with the constitution  of
     the  Opposition  Board  for  examination   and   submission   of   its
     recommendations to the Controller.  Clause (c)  of
Section 25(3)
says
     that every Opposition Board constituted under clause (b) shall conduct
     examination in accordance with such procedure as  may  be  prescribed.
     Chapter VI of the Patent Rules, 2003 (for short,  “the  Rules”)  deals
     with the Opposition proceedings to grant of patents.   Rule  56  deals
     with the constitution of Opposition Board and its proceeding.  Rule 56
     is given below for easy reference:
“56. Constitution of Opposition Board and its proceeding-
                 (1) On receipt of notice of opposition under rule 55A, the
                 Controller shall, by order, constitute an Opposition Board
                 consisting of  three  members  and  nominate  one  of  the
                 members as the Chairman of the Board.
(2) An examiner appointed under sub-section (2) of
section
                 73
shall be eligible to be  a  member  of  the  Opposition
                 Board.
(3) The examiner, who has dealt with the  application  for
                 patent during the proceeding for grant of  patent  thereon
                 shall not be eligible as member  of  Opposition  Board  as
                 specified in sub-rule (2) for that application.
(4) The Opposition Board shall conduct the examination  of
                 the notice of opposition along with documents filed  under
                 rule 57 to 60 referred to under sub-section (3) of
section
                 25
, submit a report with reasons on each ground  taken  in
                 the notice of opposition  with  its  joint  recommendation
                 within three months from the date on which  the  documents
                 were forwarded to them.”




                 Rule  57  deals  with  filing  of  written   statement   of
     opposition and evidence.  Rule 58 deals with filing of reply statement
     and evidence.   Rule  59  deals  with  filing  of  reply  evidence  by
     opponent. Rule 60 says that no further evidence shall be delivered  by
     either party except with the leave or directions of the Controller.
The aforesaid provisions indicate that the Opposition Board
     has to conduct an examination of notice of opposition along  with  the
     documents filed under Rules 57 to 60 and then to submit a report  with
     reasons on each  ground  taken  in  the  notice  of  opposition.   The
     Opposition Board has, therefore, to make recommendation  with  reasons
     after examining documents produced by the parties as per Rules.
Section 25(4)
of the  Act  says  that  on  receipt  of  the
     recommendation of the Opposition Board and after giving  the  patentee
     and the opponent an opportunity of being heard, the  Controller  shall
     order either to maintain or to amend or to  revoke  the  patent.   The
     procedure to be followed by the Controller is provided in Rule  62  of
     the Rules, which reads as follows:
“62. Hearing - (1) On the completion of the presentation of
                 evidence, if any, and on receiving  the  recommendation  of
                 Opposition Board or at such other time  as  the  Controller
                 may think fit, he shall fix a date and time for the hearing
                 of the opposition and shall give the parties not less  than
                 ten days' notice of such hearing and may require members of
                 Opposition Board to be present in the hearing.
                 (2) If either party to the proceeding desires to be  heard,
                 he shall inform the Controller by a notice along  with  the
                 fee as specified in the First Schedule.
(3) The Controller may refuse to hear any party who has not
                 given notice under sub-rule (2).
(4) If either party intends to rely on any  publication  at
                 the hearing not already mentioned in the notice,  statement
                 or evidence, he shall give to the other party  and  to  the
                 Controller  not  less  than  five  days'  notice   of   his
                 intention, together with details of such publication.
(5) After hearing the party or parties  desirous  of  being
                 heard, or if  neither  party  desires  to  be  heard,  then
                 without a hearing, and after taking into consideration  the
                 recommendation of Opposition Board,  the  Controller  shall
                 decide the  opposition  and  notify  his  decision  to  the
                 parties giving reasons therefor.”




                 Sub-rule (1) of Rule 62 confers power on the Controller  to
     require members of Opposition Board to be present in the hearing after
     receiving recommendation of the  Opposition  Board.   The  Controller,
     after hearing the parties if they so  desire  and  after  taking  into
     consideration the recommendation  of  the  Opposition  Board,  has  to
     decide the opposition giving reasons.  Provisions of the Act  and  the
     Rules, therefore, clearly indicate that the Opposition  Board  has  to
     make its recommendations after considering the  written  statement  of
     opposition, reply statement, evidence adduced,  by  the  parties  with
     reasons on each ground taken by the parties. Rule 62 also empowers the
     Controller to take  into  consideration  the  reasons  stated  by  the
     Opposition Board in its Report.  In other words,  the  Report  of  the
     Opposition  Board  has  got  considerable  relevance  while  taking  a
     decision by the Controller under
Section 25(4)
of the  Act  read  with
     Rule 62(5) of the Rules.
The  Opposition  Board  in  a  given  case   may   make   a
     recommendation that the patent suffers from serious defects like  lack
     of novelty, lack of inventive steps etc., so  also  it  can  recommend
     that the patent shall be granted  since  the  invention  has  novelty,
     inventive steps etc.  Such recommendations are  made  after  examining
     the evidence adduced by the parties before it. Unless the parties  are
     informed of the reasons, for making such  recommendations  they  would
     not be able to effectively advance their respective contentions before
     the Controller.
Section  25(3)(b)
read  with  Rule  56(4)  cast  no
     obligation on the Opposition Board to give a copy  of  the  Report  to
     either of the parties.  So also no obligation is  cast  under
Section
     25(4)
or under Rule 62 on the Controller to make available the  report
     of the recommendation of the Opposition Board.   But  considering  the
     fact that the Report of the Opposition Board can  be  crucial  in  the
     decision making process, while passing order by the  Controller  under
Section 25(4)
, principles of natural justice must be read  into  those
     provisions.  Copy of the Report/recommendation  of  Opposition  Board,
     therefore,  should  be  made  available  to  the  parties  before  the
     Controller passes orders under
Section 25(4)
of the Act.
We have gone through the order passed by the Controller and
     we notice that Controller has placed reliance on the recommendation of
     the Opposition Board, but without giving copy of the report to  either
     of the parties.  Hence, order is vitiated for violation  of  principle
     of natural justice.  Order passed by the Controller on  24.9.2012  is,
     therefore, set aside.  Since we have set aside  order  passed  by  the
     Controller on  the  ground  of  violation  of  principles  of  natural
     justice, the order passed by learned Single Judge of the High Court on
     8.10.2012 in Writ Petition No.6361 of 2012 as well as the order passed
     by the Division Bench of the High  Court  on  12.10.2012   in  Letters
     Patent Appeal No.695 of 2012 also would stand set aside.
Recommendation made by Opposition Board  is  now  available
     with the parties, hence we direct the Controller  to  dispose  of  the
     matter afresh after hearing all the parties and also affording them an
     opportunity  to  raise  their  contentions   for   and   against   the
     recommendation of the Opposition Board.  The Controller would  dispose
     of the  matter  within  a  period  of  one  month  from  the  date  of
     communication of copy of this order.  Since the matter is remitted  to
     the Controller, the Writ Petition No.6361 of 2012, pending before  the
     Delhi High Court also stands disposed of.
The Civil Appeal is disposed of as above with no  order  as
     to costs. We make it clear that we are not expressing any  opinion  on
     the various contentions raised by the parties before us and  are  left
     to be decided by the Controller.
....................J.
                                                        [K.S. RADHAKRISHNAN]



                                                      ....................J.
                                                               [DIPAK MISRA]
     NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 27, 2012