[Cites
11
, Cited by
36
]
Supreme Court of India
Gurcharan Singh vs Surjit Singh & Anr on 2 November, 2012
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2012 SC 459
Author:
A. K. Patnaik
Bench:
A. K. Patnaik
Reportable

                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                              I.A. NOs. 2 TO 6

                                     IN

                 SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) No. 7735 of 2010


Gurcharan Singh                                   … Petitioner

                                   Versus

Surjit Singh & Anr.                             … Respondents




                                  O R D E R
These interlocutory applications have been filed by the petitioner  in
Special Leave  Petition  No.7735  of  2010.   I.A.  No.  2  of  2011  is  an
application  for  substitution  of   legal   representatives   of   deceased
respondent No.1.  As respondent no.1 died on 09.06.2009 and the  application
for substitution has been filed on 05.09.2011, I.A. No.3 of  2011  has  been
filed for condonation of delay in filing the  application  for  substitution
of legal representatives of the  deceased  respondent  No.1.   The  question
which I have to decide is whether  an  application  for  substitution  of  a
respondent who was dead when  the  Special  Leave  Petition  was  filed  was
maintainable, and if not, the remedy of the  petitioner  when  he  comes  to
learn that the respondent was actually dead when he filed the Special  Leave
Petition.
2.    Learned counsel for the petitioner relied on the provisions  of
Order
XXII of the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 (for short “
the CPC
”) as  well  as
the amendments made thereto by the High Court  of  Punjab  and  Haryana  and
submitted that even where the respondent was dead  when  the  Special  Leave
Petition  was  filed,  his  legal  heirs  can  be  substituted  under  these
provisions
of the C.P.C
.  He  also  relied  on  the  decisions  in  Bank  of
Commerce Ltd., Khulna v. Protab Chandra Ghose  and  Others  [AIR  (33)  1946
Federal Court 13], (
Adusumilli) Gopalakrishnayya & Anr. v.  Adivi  Lakshmana
Rao
[
AIR 1925 Madras 1210], H.H. Darbar Alabhai Vajsurbhai & Ors.  v.  Bhura
Bhaya & Ors.
[
AIR  1937  Bombay  401],  Sachindra  Chandra  Chakravarti  v.
Jnanendra Narayan Singh Roy & Anr.
[
AIR 1963 Calcutta 417],  State  of  West
Bengal v. Manisha Maity and Others
[
AIR 1965 Calcutta 459],  Angadi  Veettil
Sreedharan vs. Cheruvalli Illath  Sreedharan  Embrandiri  Manoor
[
AIR  1968
Kerala 196], Vantaku Appalanaidu & Ors. v. Peddinti Demudamma  &  Anr.
[
AIR
1982 A.P. 281], Karuppaswamy and Others v. C. Ramamurthy
[AIR 1993 SC  2324]
and Ram Kala v. Deputy Director (Consolidation) and  Others  [(1997)  7  SCC
498].
3.    I have perused the aforesaid decisions cited by  learned  counsel  for
the petitioner and I find that in Bank of Commerce Ltd., Khulna  vs.  Protab
Chandra Ghose and Others (supra), the  Federal  Court  took  the  view  that
where an appeal has to be preferred for the first  time  against  the  legal
heir of a person in whose favour the lower Court had passed  a  decree,  the
mere fact that an  appeal  had  already  been  preferred  as  against  other
persons will not justify the application being treated merely as one to  add
a party because it is in substance an appeal preferred against him  for  the
first time.  After  taking  this  view,  the  Federal  Court  held  that  an
application for substitution of legal representatives of a  respondent,  who
was dead before the filing of the appeal, must be treated as  if  appeal  is
filed for the first time  against  legal  representatives  of  the  deceased
respondent and the delay in making the application is  only  to  be  excused
under
Section 5
of  the  Limitation  Act  if  the  delay  is  satisfactorily
explained.
4.
In  (
Adusumilli)  Gopalakrishnayya  &  Anr.  v.  Adivi  Lakshmana  Rao
(supra), the facts were that an appeal had been presented by  the  appellant
against a person who was dead at the  time  of  presentation  and  the  Full
Bench of the Madras High Court took the view that although  such  an  appeal
may be incompetent owing to the wrong person being named as respondent,  the
Court which deals with it has full power under
Section 153
of  the  CPC  to
direct an amendment of the appeal memorandum and if the  appeal  is  out  of
time against the legal representatives, the Court will have  to  excuse  the
delay  in  presentation  of  the  appeal  before  it  in  exercise  of   its
discretion.
The Full Bench overruled the contrary view of a Division  Bench
of the Madras High Court in
Govind Kaviraj  Purohito  v.  Gauranga  Sa
[AIR
1924 Madras 56] that an appeal  filed  against  a  dead  person  has  to  be
dismissed.  The Full Bench of the Madras High
Court further held
that  Rule
6  of  Order  15  of  the  Federal  Court  Rules,  1942,  which  dealt  with
substitution of the representative of one who is a party to  an  appeal  and
for addition of party did not apply to a party who was dead at the  time  of
filing of the appeal.
5.    The Calcutta High Court has taken a similar  view  in
State  of  West
Bengal v. Manisha  Maity
(supra)  that
Order  XXII,  Rule  4  of  the  CPC
providing for  the  procedure  for  substitution  of  the  heirs  and  legal
representatives of the deceased  defendants  has  no  application  when  the
appeal itself was preferred against a dead person.  The  Division  Bench  of
the Calcutta High Court, however, has suggested that in such a case:
“The remedy of an appellant, who has unknowingly filed an appeal
           against  a  dead  person,  is  to  file   an   application   for
           presentation of the appeal against the heirs of the dead  person
           afresh.  If the time for filing the appeal was in  the  meantime
           over, he is to present an application, under
Section  5
of  the
           Limitation Act, therein explaining the delay in  presenting  the
           appeal afresh against the heirs of the dead person.  If  he  can
           make out sufficient cause for making  the  belated  prayer,  the
           Court  may  allow  the  same,  amend  the  cause  title  of  the
           memorandum of appeal by incorporation of the names of the  heirs
           and legal representatives of  the  dead  person  and  treat  the
           appeal as a freshly presented appeal against the heirs.”
6.    Thus, the aforesaid authorities are clear that where a party has  been
impleaded as respondent in an appeal but such  respondent  was  dead  before
filing of the appeal, the  remedy  of  the  appellant  is  not  to  file  an
application for substitution of legal representatives  of  such  respondent,
but to file an application for an amendment of the appeal memorandum and  in
a case where such application for amendment is filed beyond  the  limitation
prescribed  for  filing  the  appeal,  the  appellant  must  also  file   an
application under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act for condonation  of  delay
in filing the application for amendment and if the Court is  satisfied  with
the explanation given by the appellant for the delay, the Court can  condone
the delay and allow the amendment of the appeal memorandum.
7.    Order XVI of the Supreme Court  Rules,  1966  is  titled  “Appeals  by
Special Leave”.  Rules 8 and 9 in Order XVI which provide  for  substitution
and addition of parties are extracted hereinbelow:
“8. Where any person is sought to be impleaded in the  petition  as
        the legal representative of any party to  the  proceedings  in  the
        Court below, the petition shall contain a prayer  for  bringing  on
        record such  person  as  the  legal  representative  and  shall  be
        supported by an affidavit setting out the facts showing him  to  be
        the proper person to  be  entered  on  the  record  as  such  legal
        representative.
9.  Where at any time  between  the  filing  of  the  petition  for
        special leave to appeal and the hearing thereof the record  becomes
        defective by reason of the death or change of status of a party  to
        the appeal or for any other reason, an application shall be made to
        the Court stating who is the proper person  to  be  substituted  or
        entered on the record in place of or in addition to  the  party  on
        record.  Provisions contained in rule 33 of Order XV shall apply to
        the hearing of such applications.”




Considering the authorities discussed above,  the  aforesaid  provisions  of
Order XVI Rules 8 and 9 will apply where  at  the  time  of  filing  of  the
Special Leave Petition, the respondent was alive and  after  the  filing  of
the Special Leave Petition  his  legal  representatives  are  sought  to  be
substituted, but will not apply where  the  respondent  was  dead  when  the
Special Leave Petition was filed.  Where the respondent was  dead  when  the
Special Leave Petition  was  filed,  the  Court  can,  in  the  interest  of
justice, allow an application for amendment of the  Special  Leave  Petition
and condone the delay in filing such an application  for  amendment  if  the
delay is satisfactorily explained.
8.    I.A. No.2 of  2011  is,  therefore,  treated  as  an  application  for
amendment of the Special Leave Petition and  as  the  delay  in  filing  the
application  for  amendment  of  the  Special  Leave   Petition   has   been
satisfactorily explained in I.A. No.3 of 2011, the delay is condoned and  in
the interests of justice, I.A. Nos. 2  and  3  of  2011  are  allowed.   The
prayers in I.A. Nos.  4  and  5  are  for  exemption  from  filing  official
translation and from filing  death  certificate  of  the  deceased  and  are
allowed.  I.A. No.6 of 2011 is for  deletion  of  proforma  respondent  No.2
Ajaib Singh, who appears to be the attorney  of  the  contesting  respondent
No.1, and is allowed at the  risk  of  the  petitioner.    The  I.As.  stand
disposed of.
…………………….J.
                                                            (A. K. Patnaik)


New Delhi,
November 02, 2012.