[Cites
78
, Cited by
81
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Newtech Promoters And Developers ... vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 11 November, 2021
Author:
Ajay Rastogi
Bench:
Aniruddha Bose
,
Ajay Rastogi
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
REPORTABLE



                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                              CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 6745 ­ 6749 OF 2021
                         (Arising out of SLP(Civil) No(s). 3711­3715 OF 2021)


          M/s. NEWTECH PROMOTERS AND
          DEVELOPERS PVT. LTD.                             …..APPELLANT(S)


                                  VERSUS




          STATE OF UP & ORS. ETC.                          …..RESPONDENT(S)



                                                 WITH

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 6750 OF 2021
                             (Arising out of SLP(Civil) No(s). 14733 OF 2020)

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 6751 OF 2021
                             (Arising out of SLP(Civil) No(s). 2647 OF 2021)

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 6752 OF 2021
                             (Arising out of SLP(Civil) No(s). 3185 OF 2021)
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
Neelam Gulati
Date: 2021.11.12
15:29:07 IST
Reason:

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 6753 OF 2021
                             (Arising out of SLP(Civil) No(s). 3426 OF 2021)

                                                                                1
                CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 6754 OF 2021
          (Arising out of SLP(Civil) No(s). 6199 OF 2021)

                CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 6755 OF 2021
          (Arising out of SLP(Civil) No(s). 6671 OF 2021)

                CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 6756 OF 2021
          (Arising out of SLP(Civil) No(s). 6711 OF 2021)

                CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 6757 OF 2021
          (Arising out of SLP(Civil) No(s). 1670 OF 2021)




                          JUDGMENT
Rastogi, J.
1.   Leave granted.
2.   The present batch of appeals are filed at the instance of

promoter/real estate developer assailing the common issues and

certain provisions of The Real Estate(Regulation and Development)

Act, 2016(hereinafter being referred to as “the Act”), The Uttar

Pradesh Real Estate(Regulation and Development) Rules, 2016

(hereinafter referred to as “the Rules”) and the functioning of the

Uttar Pradesh Real Estate Regulatory Authority (hereinafter referred

to as “the Authority”), although being decided by separate orders by
2
the High Court of Allahabad, since the self­same questions are

involved with the consent are being decided by the present

judgment.
3.   The respondents herein are the allottees/home buyers who

have made their substantial investment from their hard earned

savings under the belief that the promotor/real estate developer will

hand over possession of the unit in terms of home buyer’s

agreement but their bonafide belief stood shaken when the

promotors failed to hand over possession of a unit/plot/building in

terms of the agreement and complaints were instituted by the home

buyers for refund of the investment made along with interest under

Section 31 of the Act.
4.   The impugned orders came to be passed by the single member

of the authority on the complaint instituted at the instance of the

home buyers/allottees after hearing the parties with the direction to

refund the principal amount along with interest(MCLR + 1%) as

prescribed by the State Government under the Act. In the ordinary

course of business, the order passed by the authority is appealable

under Section 43(5) of the Act provided the statutory compliance of
3
pre­deposit being made under proviso to Section 43(5) before the

Appellate   Tribunal   but   the   promoter/real   estate   developers

approached the High Court by filing a writ petition under
Articles

226
and
227
of the Constitution questioning the order passed by

the authority holding it to be without jurisdiction as it has been

passed by a single member of the authority who according to the

appellants holds no jurisdiction to pass such orders of refund of the

amount as contemplated under Section 18 of the Act and have also

challenged the condition of pre­deposit as envisaged under proviso

to Section 43(5) of the Act for filing of a statutory appeal and raised

certain ancillary questions for consideration in writ jurisdiction of

the High Court of Allahabad. Being aggrieved by the orders passed

by the High Court dismissing their writ petitions, the present batch

of appeals have been preferred at the instance of the promoters/real

estate developers.
5.   Before adverting to the legal submissions made before us, we

consider it appropriate to take a bird’s­eye view of the scheme of the

Act 2016 which may be apposite for proper appreciation of the

submissions made by the parties.
4
Object and Reasons of the Act 2016
6.   Over the past two decades, with the growth of population and

the attraction of the people to shift towards urbanization, the

demand for housing       increased manifold.      Government also

introduced various housing schemes to cope with the increasing

demand but the experience shows that demands of the housing

sector could not be meted out by the Government at its own level

for various reasons to meet the requirement, the private players

entered into the real estate sector in meeting out the rising demand

of housing.   Though availability of loans, both from public and

private banks, become easier, still the High rate of interest and the

EMI has posed additional financial burden on the people.
7.   At the given time, the real estate and housing sector was

largely unregulated and the consequence was that consumers were

unable to procure complete information for enforced accountability

towards builders and developers in the absence of an effective

mechanism in place. Though, The Consumer Protection Act, 1986
5
was available to cater the demand of home buyers in the real estate

sector but the experience shows that this mechanism was

inadequate to address the needs of the home buyers and promoters

in the real estate sector.
8.   At this juncture, the need for Real Estate(Regulation) Bill was

badly felt for establishing an oversight mechanism to enforce

accountability    to   the   real   estate    sector    and    providing     an

adjudicating machinery for speedy dispute redressal mechanism

and safeguarding the investments made by the home buyers

through legislation to the extent permissible under the law.
9.   The statement of object and reasons of the Act indicates that

the primal position of the regulatory authority is to regulate the real

estate sector having jurisdiction to ensure compliance with the

obligation cast upon the promoters.            The opening statement of

objects and reasons which has a material bearing on the subject

reads as follows:­

     “The real estate sector plays a catalytic role in fulfilling the need
     and demand for housing and infrastructure in the country. While
     this sector has grown significantly in recent years, it has been
     largely unregulated, with absence of professionalism and
     standardisation and lack of adequate consumer protection. Though
6
the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986
is available as a forum to the
     buyers in the real estate market, the recourse is only curative and
     is not adequate to address all the concerns of buyers and
     promoters in that sector. The lack of standardisation, has been a
     constraint to the healthy and orderly growth of industry. Therefore,
     the need to regulating the sector has been emphasised in various
     forums.
2. In view of the above, it becomes necessary to have a Central
     legislation, namely, the Real Estate (Regulation and Development)
     Bill, 2013, in the interest of the effective consumer protection,
     uniformity and standardisation of business practices and
     transactions in the real estate sector. The proposed Bill provides
     for the establishment of the Real estate Regulatory Authority (the
     Authority) for regulation and promotion of real estate sector and to
     ensure sale of plot, apartment or building, as the case may be, in
     an efficient and transparent manner and to protect the interest of
     consumers in real estate sector and establish the Real Estate
     Appellate Tribunal to hear appeals from the decisions, directions or
     orders of the Authority.”
10. It   was    introduced      with   an    object    to   ensure    greater

accountability towards consumers, to significantly reduce frauds &

delays and also the current high transaction costs, and to balance

the interests of consumers and promoters by imposing certain

responsibilities on     both, and      to   bring     transparency    of    the

contractual conditions, set minimum standards of accountability

and a fast­track dispute resolution mechanism. It also proposes to

induct professionalism and standardization in the sector, thus
7
paving the way for accelerated growth and investments in the long

run.
11.    Some of the relevant Statement of Objects and Reasons are

extracted as under:­

       “4…
(d) to impose liability upon the promoter to pay such compensation
       to the allottees, in the manner as provided under the proposed
       legislation, in case if he fails to discharge any obligations imposed
       on him under the proposed legislation;
(f) the functions of the Authority shall, inter alia, include – (i) to
       render advice to the appropriate Government in matters relating to
       the development of real estate sector; (ii) to publish and maintain a
       website of records of all real estate projects for which registration
       has been given, with such details as may be prescribed; (iii) to
       ensure compliance of the obligations cast upon the promoters, the
       allotees and the real estate agents under the proposed legislation.
       …
(i)  to appoint an adjudicating officer by the Authority for
       adjudging compensation under
sections 12
,
14
and
16
of the
       proposed legislation.
...”
12.    The Bill provides for establishment of the authority for

regulation and promotion of real estate sector, to ensure sale of

plot, apartment or building or sale of real estate project in an

efficient and transparent manner and to protect the interest of

consumers in the real estate sector and provide the adjudicating
8
mechanism for speedy dispute redressal mechanism by establishing

the regulatory authority and the adjudicating officer and in

hierarchy, the Appellate Tribunal for early and prompt disposal of

the complaint being instituted primarily by the home buyers for

whom this Act has been enacted by the Parliament in 2016.
13.   To examine the matter in this perspective, consider what a

house means in India. The data shows that about more than 77% of

total assets of an average Indian household are held in real estate

and it’s the single largest investment of an individual in his lifetime.

The real estate in India has a peculiar feature. The buyer borrows

money to pay for a house and simultaneously plays the role of a

financer as building projects collect money upfront and this puts

the buyer in a very vulnerable position­the weakest stakeholder

with a high financial exposure. The amendment to the Insolvency

and Bankruptcy Code, 2018 recognised the home buyers as

financial creditors and the present enactment is the most important

regulatory intervention in favour of the home buyers and it’s had an

impact and with passage of time, has become a yardstick of laying

down minimum standards in the market. Earlier, the real estate
9
sector was completely unregulated and there was no transparency

in their business profile and after the present enactment, it is open

for the potential home buyers to check if a project is approved

under the Act, 2016 that at least gives a satisfaction to a person

who is coming forward in making a lifetime investment.
14.   That apart from the project being statutorily regulated, it

attaches certain authenticity with regard to completion of the

project and a statutory obligation upon the developer and home

buyer to abide by the terms and conditions of the home buyers

agreement and statutory compliance to the mandate of law.          In

addition, any project which is approved under the Act, 2016 helps

the promoter in raising funds from banks and statistics shows that

buyers express their satisfaction in approved projects which is

beneficial not only to the home buyers but to the promoters and

real estate agents as well.
15.
Chapter II of the Act
relates to the registration of real estate

projects.
Section 3
mandates prior registration of real estate

projects including ongoing projects with the Real Estate Regulatory

Authority.
Section 4
prescribes the ingredients of application by
10
the promotor for registration of real estate projects. In particular,

the promotor is required to state in the application under sub­
section 2(L)
(c ) of
Section 4
, the timelines for completion of the

project.
Section 5
relates to the grant of registration by the

authority and inter alia states that no application shall be rejected

unless the applicant has been given an opportunity of being heard

in the matter. As per
Section 5(3)
of the Act, the registration is co­

terminus with the completion of the project. Under
Section 6
, the

authority can extend registration based on the facts of each case or

the occurrence of the force majeure.
Section 7
pertains to

revocation of registration. As per
Section 8
, the authority is under

obligation to inter alia carry out the remaining development work

where there is lapse or revocation of the registration.
16.   Chapter III lays down, ‘functions and duties of promotor’

which is relevant for the purpose of the present case.
Section 11
thereof elaborates on the functions and duties of the promoters.

Under sub­Section (4) of
Section 11
, several obligations have been

casted upon the promoters. Under sub­section (5) of
Section 11
,

the promoter may cancel the allotment if the allottee/home buyer
11
commits any breach of the terms of the agreement for sale, and in

such case, the aggrieved allottee has the right to approach the

authority.
17.
Section 12
provides that if any default being committed by the

promoter, either in reference to the information contained in the

notice, advertisement or prospectus or on the basis of the model

apartment, plot or building which causes any loss or damage to the

allottee/home buyer by reason of any incorrect or false statement or

wants to withdraw from the project, he shall be compensated by the

promoter in the manner as prescribed under the Act.
18.
Section 14
relates to adherence to Sanctioned Plans & Project

specification by the promoters and
Section 14(3)
empowers the

allottee to receive compensation in the event where there is any

structural defect.
19.
Section 18(1)
of the Act spells out the consequences if the

promoter fails to complete or is unable to give possession of an

apartment, plot or building either in terms of the agreement for sale

or to complete the project by the date specified therein or on

account of discontinuance of his business as a developer either on
12
account of suspension or revocation of the registration under the

Act or for any other reason, the allottee/home buyer holds an

unqualified right to seek refund of the amount with interest at such

rate as may be prescribed in this behalf.
20.
Section 18(2)
of the Act mandates that in case, loss is caused

to allottee due to defective title of the land, on which the project is

being developed or has been developed, the promoter shall

compensate the allottee and such claim for compensation under
Section 18(2)
shall not be barred by limitation provided under any

law for the time being in force.
21.
Section 18(3)
of the Act states that where the promoter fails to

discharge any other obligation under the Act or the rules or

regulations framed thereunder or in accordance with the terms and

conditions of the agreement for sale, the promoter shall be liable to

pay ‘such compensation’ to the allottees, in the manner as

prescribed under the Act.
22.   If we take a conjoint reading of sub­sections (1), (2) and (3) of
Section 18
of the Act, the different contingencies spelt out therein,

(A) the allottee can either seek refund of the amount by withdrawing
13
from the project; (B) such refund could be made together with

interest as may be prescribed; (C) in addition, can also claim

compensation payable under
Sections 18(2)
and
18(3)
of the Act; (D)

the allottee has the liberty, if he does not intend to withdraw from

the project, will be required to be paid interest by the promoter for

every months’ delay in handing over possession at such rates as

may be prescribed.
23.   Correspondingly,
Section 19
of the Act spells out “Rights and

duties of allottees”.
Section 19(3)
makes the allottee entitled to

claim possession of the apartment, plot or building, as the case may

be.
Section 19(4)
provides that if the promoter fails to comply or

being unable to give possession of the apartment, plot or building in

terms of the agreement, it makes the allottees entitled to claim the

refund of amount paid along with interest and compensation in the

manner prescribed under the Act.
24.
Section 19(4)
is almost a mirror provision to
Section 18(1)
of

the Act.   Both these provisions recognize right of an allottee two

distinct remedies, viz, refund of the amount together with interest
14
or    interest   for   delayed   handing   over   of   possession   and

compensation.
25.   The unqualified right of the allottee to seek refund referred

under
Section 18(1)(a)
and
Section 19(4)
of the Act is not dependent

on any contingencies or stipulations thereof.      It appears that the

legislature has consciously provided this right of refund on demand

as an unconditional absolute right to the allottee, if the promoter

fails to give possession of the apartment, plot or building within the

time stipulated under the terms of the agreement regardless of

unforeseen events or stay orders of the Court/Tribunal, which is in

either way not attributable to the allottee/home buyer, the

promoter is under an obligation to refund the amount on demand

with interest at the rate prescribed by the State Government

including compensation in the manner provided under the Act with

the proviso that if the allottee does not wish to withdraw from the

project, he shall be entitled for interest for the period of delay till

handing over possession at the rate prescribed.
26.   If we turn to the power of the authority, it envisages under
Section 31
, the complaints can be filed either with the authority or
15
adjudicating officer for violation or contravention of the provisions

of the Act or the rules and regulations framed thereunder. Such

complaint can be filed against “any promoter, allottee or real estate

agent”, as the case may be, and can be filed by “any aggrieved

person”, and it has to be read with an explanation, “person”

includes an association of allottees or any voluntary consumer

association registered under any law for the time being in force.

The form and manner in which complaint is to be instituted has

been provided under sub­section(2) of
Section 31
.
27.   Section 32 refers to functions of the authority for promotion of

real estate sector and
Sections 34
to
38
of the Act recognize

different nature of powers and functions of the authority regarding

compliance of its regulations cast upon the promoters, allottee or

the real estate agents and to appoint one or more persons to make

an inquiry into the affairs of any promoter, allottee or the real estate

agent and to pass any interim orders, if the promoter, allottee or

real estate agent is failing in discharging of its functions under the

Act, rules or regulations, and to issue directions from time to time

to the promoter, allottee or real estate agents, if considered
16
necessary can impose penalty or interest if failed to carry out its

obligations.
28.   At the same time,
Chapter VIII of the Act
talks about offences,

penalties and adjudication. Various kinds of penalties are set out in

Sections 59 to 68. Each of these provisions clearly states that the

penalty thereunder is required to be determined by the authority.
29.   We are concerned with
Section 71
of the Act titled ‘power to

adjudicate’ which is specific to the adjudicating officer.       Sub­

section(1) of Section 71 opens with the words “for the purpose of

adjudging compensation under
Sections 12
,
14
,
18
and
19
”, the

Authority has to appoint in consultation with the appropriate

Government, a judicial officer not below the rank of the District

Judge, as an adjudicating officer, to hold inquiry in the prescribed

manner after giving a person concerned a reasonable opportunity of

hearing. At the same time, sub­section (2) casts an obligation upon

the adjudicating officer that while adjudging compensation under

sub­section (1), the application has to be dealt with expeditiously as

possible and to be disposed of within 60 days. If there is a delay

being caused exceeding the statutory period of 60 days, in disposal
17
of the application, reasons are to be recorded for extension of the

period.
30.   Under sub­section (3) of Section 71, the adjudicating officer

has been empowered not only to summon and enforce the

attendance of persons acquainted with the facts and circumstances

of the case to give evidence or to produce any document which may

be useful and relevant for adjudication, is supposed to take note of

the various parameters as referred to under Section 72 which still is

illustrative and not exhaustive while adjudging the quantum of

compensation payable to the person aggrieved and interest, as the

case may be.
31.   After we have heard learned counsel for the parties at length,

the following questions emerges for our consideration in the present

batch of appeals are as under:­
1.    Whether the Act 2016 is retrospective or retroactive in its

operation and what will be its legal consequence if tested on the

anvil of the Constitution of India?
2.    Whether the authority has jurisdiction to direct return/refund

of the amount to the allottee under
Sections 12
,
14
,
18
and
19
of
18
the Act or the jurisdiction exclusively lies with the adjudicating

officer under
Section 71
of the Act?
3.    Whether
Section 81
of the Act authorizes the authority to

delegate its powers to a single member of the authority to hear

complaints instituted under
Section 31
of the Act?
4.    Whether the condition of pre­deposit under proviso to
Section

43(5)
of the Act for entertaining substantive right of appeal is

sustainable in law?
5.    Whether the authority has power to issue recovery certificate

for recovery of the principal amount under
Section 40(1)
of the Act?



Question 1:­ Whether the Act 2016 is retrospective or

retroactive in its operation and what will be its legal

consequence if tested on the anvil of the Constitution of

India?
32.   The   issue   concerns   the   retroactive   application   of   the

provisions of the Act 2016 particularly, with reference to the

ongoing projects. If we take note of the objects and reasons and the

scheme of the Act, it manifests that the Parliament in its wisdom
19
after holding extensive deliberation on the subject thought it

necessary to have a central legislation in the paramount interest for

effective consumer protection, uniformity and standardisation of

business practices and transactions in the real estate sector, to

ensure greater accountability towards consumers, to overcome

frauds and delays and also the higher transaction costs, and

accordingly intended to balance the interests of consumers and

promoters by imposing certain duties and responsibilities on both.

The deliberation on the subject was going on since 2013 but finally

the Act was enacted in the year 2016 with effect from 25 th March,

2016.
33.
Under Chapter II of the Act
2016, registration of real estate

projects became mandatory and to make the statute applicable and

to take its place under sub­Section (1) of
Section 3
, it was made

statutory that without registering the real estate project with a real

estate regulatory authority established under the Act, no promoter

shall advertise, market, book, sell or offer for sale, or invite persons

to purchase in any manner a plot, apartment or building, as the

case may be in any real estate project but with the aid of proviso to
20
Section 3(1)
, it was mandated that such of the projects which are

ongoing on the date of commencement of the Act and more

specifically the projects to which the completion certificate has not

been issued, such promoters shall be under obligation to make an

application to the authority for registration of the said project

within a period of three months from the date of commencement of

the Act. With certain exemptions being granted to such of the

projects covered by sub­section (2) of
Section 3
of the Act, as a

consequence, all such home buyers agreements which has been

executed by the parties inter se has to abide the legislative mandate

in completion of their ongoing running projects.
34.   The term “ongoing project” has not been so defined under the

Act while the expression “real estate project” is defined under
Section 2(zn)
of the Act which reads as under:­


      “2(zn) “real estate project” means the development of a building or
      a building consisting of apartments, or converting an existing
      building or a part thereof into apartments, or the development of
      land into plots or apartments, as the case may be, for the purpose
      of selling all or some of the said apartments or plots or building, as
      the case may be, and includes the common areas, the development
      works, all improvements and structures thereon, and all easement,
      rights and appurtenances belonging thereto;”
21
35.
The Act
is intended to comply even to the ongoing real estate

project. The expression “ongoing project” has been defined under

Rule 2(h) of the Uttar Pradesh Real Estate (Regulation and

Development) Rules, 2016 which reads as under:­

      “2(h) “Ongoing project” means a project where development is
      going on and for which completion certificate has not been issued
      but excludes such projects which fulfil any of the following criteria
      on the date of notification of these rules:
(i)   where services have been handed over to the
            Local Authority for maintenance.
(ii)  where common areas and facilities have been
            handed over to the Association for the Residents'
            Welfare Association for maintenance.
(iii) where all development work have been
            completed and sale/lease deeds of sixty percent of the
            apartment/houses/plots have been executed.
(iv)    where all development works have been
             completed and application has been filed with the
             competent authority for issue of completion
             certificate.”
36.   The expression “completion certification” has been defined

under
Section 2(q)
and “occupancy certificate” under
Section 2(zf)
of

the Act which reads as under:­


      “2(q) “completion certificate” means the completion certificate, or
      such other certificate, by whatever name called, issued by the
      competent authority certifying that the real estate project has been
      developed according to the sanctioned plan, layout plan and
22
specifications, as approved by the competent authority under the
      local laws;
2(zf) “occupancy certificate” means the occupancy certificate, or
      such other certificate, by whatever name called, issued by the
      competent authority permitting occupation of any building, as
      provided under local laws, which has provision for civic
      infrastructure such as water, sanitation and electricity;”
37.   Looking to the scheme of Act 2016 and
Section 3
in particular

of which a detailed discussion has been made, all “ongoing projects”

that commence prior to the Act and in respect to which completion

certificate has not been issued are covered under the Act. It

manifests that the legislative intent is to make the Act applicable

not only to the projects which were yet to commence after the Act

became operational but also to bring under its fold the ongoing

projects and to protect from its inception the inter se rights of the

stake holders, including allottees/home buyers, promoters and real

estate agents while imposing certain duties and responsibilities on

each of them and to regulate, administer and supervise the

unregulated real estate sector within the fold of the real estate

authority.
38.   The emphasis of Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned senior counsel for the

appellant is that the agreement of sale was executed in the year
23
2010­11, i.e. much before the coming into force of the Act and the

present Act has retrospective application and registration of ongoing

project under the Act would be in contravention to the contractual

rights established between the promoter and allottee under the

agreement for sale executed which is impermissible in law and

further submits that
Sections 13
,
18(1)
,
19(4)
of the Act 2016 to the

extent of their retrospective application is in violation of
Articles 14
,

19(1)(g)
of the Constitution of India.
39.   Mr. Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General, on the other

hand, submits that a bare perusal of the object and reasons

manifest that the Act does not take away the substantive

jurisdiction, rather it protects the interest of homebuyers where

project/possession is delayed and further submits that the scheme

of the Act has retroactive application, which is permissible under

the law.   The provisions make it clear that it operates in future,

however, its operation is based upon the character and status

which have been done earlier and the presumption against

retrospectivity in this case is ex­facie rebuttable.         The literal

interpretation of the statute manifest that it has not made any
24
distinction between the “existing” real estate projects and “new” real

estate projects as has been defined under
Section 2(zn)
of the Act.
40.    Learned counsel further submits that the key word, i.e.,

“ongoing on the date of the commencement of this Act” by

necessary implication, ex­facie and without any ambiguity, means

and includes those projects which were ongoing and in cases where

only    issuance      of   completion   certificate   remained   pending,

legislature intended that even those projects have to be registered

under the Act. Therefore, the ambit of Act is to bring all projects

under its fold, provided that completion certificate has not been

issued.    The case of the appellant is based on “occupancy

certificate” and not of “completion certificate”.        In this context,

learned counsel submits that the said proviso ought to be read with
Section    3(2)(b)
,    which   specifically   excludes   projects   where

completion certificate has been received prior to the commencement

of the Act.   Thus, those projects under
Section 3(2)
need not be

registered under the Act and, therefore, the intent of the Act hinges

on whether or not a project has received a completion certificate on

the date of commencement of the Act.
25
41.   The clear and unambiguous language of the statute is

retroactive in operation and by applying purposive interpretation

rule of statutory construction, only one result is possible, i.e., the

legislature consciously enacted a retroactive statute to ensure sale

of plot, apartment or building, real estate project is done in an

efficient and transparent manner so that the interest of consumers

in the real estate sector is protected by all means and
Sections 13
,
18(1)
and
19(4)
are all beneficial provisions for safeguarding the

pecuniary interest of the consumers/allottees.           In the given

circumstances, if the Act is held prospective then the adjudicatory

mechanism under
Section 31
would not be available to any of the

allottee for an on­going project. Thus, it negates the contention of

the promoters regarding the contractual terms having an overriding

effect over the retrospective applicability of the Act, even on facts of

this case.
42.   What the provision further emphasizes is that a promoter of a

project which is not complete/sans completion certificate shall get

the project registered under the Act but while getting the project

registered, promoter is under an obligation to prescribe fresh
26
timelines for getting the remaining development work completed

and from the scheme of the Act, we do not find that the first proviso

to
Section 3(1)
in any manner is either violative of
Articles 14
and
19(1)(g)
of the Constitution of India. The Parliament is always

competent to enact any law affecting the antecedent events under

its fold within the parameters of law.
43.
In
State of Bombay (Now Maharashtra) versus Vishnu

Ramchandra1
, this Court observed that if the part of requisites for

operation of the statute were drawn from a time antecedent to its

passing, it did not make the statute retrospective so long as the

action was taken after the Act came into force.
44.    To meet out different nature of exigencies, it was noticed by

the Parliament that Pan India, large number of real estate projects

where the allottees did not get possession for years together and

complaints being filed before different forums including under the
Consumer Protection Act
has failed to deliver adequate/satisfactory

results to the consumer/allottees and their life savings is locked in

and sizable sections of allottees had invested their hard­earned

1   AIR 1961 SC 307
27
money, money obtained through loans or financial institutions with

the belief that they will be able to get a roof in the form of their

apartments/flats/unit.
45.   At the given time, there was no law regulating the real estate

sector, development works/obligations of promoter and allottee, it

was badly felt that such of the ongoing projects to which completion

certificate has not been issued must be brought within the fold of

the Act 2016 in securing the interests of allottees, promoters, real

estate agents in its best possible way obviously, within the

parameters of law. Merely because enactment as prayed is made

retroactive in its operation, it cannot be said to be either violative of
Articles 14
or 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India. To the contrary,

the   Parliament    indeed    has   the   power     to   legislate   even

retrospectively to take into its fold the pre­existing contract and

rights executed between the parties in the larger public interest.
46.   The consequences for breach of such obligations under the Act

are prospective in operation and in case ongoing project, of which

completion certificate is not obtained, are not to be covered under

the Act, there is every likelihood of classifications in respect of
28
underdeveloped ongoing project and the new project to be

commenced.
47.    The     legislative     power      to     make      the     law        with

prospective/retrospective effect is well recognized and it would not

be permissible for the appellants/promoters to say that they have

any vested right in dealing with the completion of the project by

leaving the allottees in lurch, in a helpless and miserable condition

that at least may not be acceptable within the four corners of law.
48.    The distinction between retrospective and retroactive has been

explained by this Court in
Jay Mahakali Rolling Mills Vs. Union

of India and Others2
, which reads as under:­


       “8. “Retrospective” means looking backward, contemplating what
       is past, having reference to a statute or things existing before the
       statute in question. Retrospective law means a law which looks
       backward or contemplates the past; one, which is made to affect
       acts or facts occurring, or rights occurring, before it comes into
       force. Retroactive statute means a statute, which creates a new
       obligation on transactions or considerations or destroys or impairs
       vested rights.”




2   2007(12) SCC 198
29
49.   Further, this Court in
Shanti Conductors Private Limited

and Another Vs. Assam State Electricity Board and Others
3,

held as under:­



      “67. Retroactivity in the context of the statute consists of
      application of new rule of law to an act or transaction which has
      been completed before the rule was promulgated.
68. In the present case, the liability of buyer to make payment and
      day from which payment and interest become payable under
Sections 3
and
4
does not relate to any event which took place
      prior to the 1993 Act, it is not even necessary for us to say that the
      1993 Act is retroactive in operation. The 1993 Act is clearly
      prospective in operation and it is not necessary to term it as
      retroactive in operation. We, thus, do not subscribe to the opinion
      dated 31­8­2016 [Shanti Conductors (P) Ltd. v. Assam SEB, (2016)
      15 SCC 13] of one of the Hon'ble Judges holding that the 1993 Act
      is retroactive.”
50.
In the recent judgment of this Court rendered in the case of
Vineeta Sharma Vs. Rakesh Sharma and Others4
wherein, this

Court has interpreted the scope of
Section 6(1)
of the Hindu

Succession Act, 1956, the law of retroactive statute held as under:­

      “61. The prospective statute operates from the date of its
      enactment conferring new rights. The retrospective statute
      operates backwards and takes away or impairs vested rights
      acquired under existing laws. A retroactive statute is the one that
      does not operate retrospectively. It operates in futuro. However, its
      operation is based upon the character or status that arose earlier.
      Characteristic or event which happened in the past or requisites
3 2019(19) SCC    529
4 2020(9) SCC 1
30
which had been drawn from antecedent events. Under the
      amended
Section 6
, since the right is given by birth, that is, an
      antecedent event, and the provisions operate concerning claiming
      rights on and from the date of the Amendment Act.”
51.   Thus, it is clear that the statute is not retrospective merely

because it affects existing rights or its retrospection because a part

of the requisites for its action is drawn from a time antecedent to its

passing, at the same time, retroactive statute means a statute

which creates a new obligation on transactions or considerations

already passed or destroys or impairs vested rights.
52.   The Parliament intended to bring within the fold of the statute

the ongoing real estate projects in its wide amplitude used the term

“converting and existing building or a part thereof into apartments”

including every kind of developmental activity either existing or

upcoming in future under
Section 3(1)
of the Act, the intention of

the legislature by necessary implication and without any ambiguity

is to include those projects which were ongoing and in cases where

completion certificate has not been issued within fold of the Act.
53.   That even the terms of the agreement to sale or home buyers

agreement invariably indicates the intention of the developer that
31
any subsequent legislation, rules and regulations etc. issued by

competent authorities will be binding on the parties. The clauses

have imposed the applicability of subsequent legislations to be

applicable and binding on the flat buyer/allottee and either of the

parties, promoters/home buyers or allottees, cannot shirk from

their responsibilities/liabilities under the Act and implies their

challenge to the violation of the provisions of the Act and it negates

the contention advanced by the appellants regarding contractual

terms having an overriding effect to the retrospective applicability of

the Authority under the provisions of the Act which is completely

misplaced and deserves rejection.
54.   From the scheme of the Act 2016, its application is retroactive

in character and it can safely be observed that the projects already

completed or to which the completion certificate has been granted

are not under its fold and therefore, vested or accrued rights, if any,

in no manner are affected. At the same time, it will apply after

getting the on­going projects and future projects registered under
Section 3
to prospectively follow the mandate of the Act 2016.
32
Question no. 2:         Whether the authority has jurisdiction to

direct return/refund of the amount to the allottee under
Sections 12
,
14
,
18
and
19
of the Act or the jurisdiction

exclusively lies with the adjudicating officer under
Section 71
of the Act?
55.   Before examining the question, we have to take a holistic view

of the scheme of the Act along with the rules/regulations framed by

the Authority in exercise of its powers under
Sections 84
and
85
of

the Act that postulates certain functions and duties to the promoter

of the real estate project and its entailing consequences if the

promoter fails to fulfil his obligations defined under Chapter III.

Some of the obligations are spelt out in
Sections 12
,
14
,
18
and
19
of the Act.
56.
Section 12
which falls for consideration in these petitions

reads as follows:
“12. Where any person makes an advance or a deposit on the basis
      of the information contained in the notice advertisement or
      prospectus, or on the basis of any model apartment, plot or
      building, at the case may be, and sustains any loss or damage by
      reason of any incorrect, false statement included therein, he shall
33
be compensated by the promoter in the manner as provided
      under this Act:”

      Provided that if the person affected by such incorrect, false
      statement contained in the notice, advertisement or prospectus, or
      the model apartment, plot or building, as the case may be, intends
      to withdraw from the proposed project, he shall be returned his
      entire investment along with interest at such rate as may be
      prescribed and the compensation in the manner provided
      under this Act.”
57.
Section 14
relates to adherence to sanctioned plans and

project specifications by the promoter.
Section 14(3)
empowers the

allottee to receive compensation in the event there is any structural

defect or any other defect in workmanship etc.
Section 14(3)
reads

as under:
“(3) In case any structural defect or any other defect in
      workmanship, quality or provision of services or any other
      obligations of the promoter as per the agreement for sale relating to
      such development is brought to the notice of the promoter within a
      period of five years by the allottee from the date of handing over
      possession, it shall be the duty of the promoter to rectify such
      defects without further charge, within thirty days, and in the event
      of promoter's failure to rectify such defects within such time, the
      aggrieved allottees shall be entitled to receive appropriate
      compensation in the manner as provided under this Act.”
58.
Section 18
starts with the marginal note “Return of amount

and compensation”. The two aspects namely ‘return of amount’ and
34
‘compensation’ are distinctly delineated.
Section 18
reads as

follows:
18.(1) If the promoter fails to complete or is unable to give
     possession of an apartment, plot or building,­
(a) in accordance with the terms of the agreement for
           sale or, as the case may be, duly completed by the
           date specified therein; or
(b) due to discontinuance of his business as a
           developer on account of suspension or revocation of
           the registration under this Act or for any other reason,

     he shall be liable on demand to the allottees, in case the
     allottee wishes to withdraw from the project, without
     prejudice to any other remedy available, to return the amount
     received by him in respect of that apartment, plot, building, as
     the case may be, with interest at such rate as may be
     prescribed in this behalf including compensation in the
     manner as provided under this Act:
Provided that where an allottee does not intend to withdraw from
     the project, he shall be paid, by the promoter, interest for every
     month of delay, till the handing over of the possession, at such
     rate as may be prescribed.
(2) The promoter shall compensate the allottees in case of any
     loss caused to him due to defective title of the land, on which the
     project is being developed or has been developed, in the manner as
     provided under this Act, and the claim for compensation under
     this subsection shall not be barred by limitation provided under
     any law for the time being in force.
(3) If the promoter fails to discharge any other obligations imposed
     on him under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder
     or in accordance with the terms and conditions of the agreement
     for sale, he shall be liable to pay such compensation to the
     allottees, in the manner as provided under this Act.
(emphasis supplied)
35
59.   Chapter IV deals with the rights and duties of the allottees and

in particular,
Section 19(4)
entitles the allottees to a refund of the

amount paid.
Section 19(4)
reads as follows:­

      “(4) The allottee shall be entitled to claim the refund of amount
      paid along with interest at such rate as may be prescribed and
      compensation in the manner as provided under this Act from
      the promoter, if the promoter fails to comply or is unable to give
      possession of the apartment, plot or building, as the case may be,
      in accordance with the terms of agreement for sale or due to
      discontinuance of his business as a developer on account of
      suspension or revocation of his registration under the provisions of
      this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.”
60.
Section 31
relates to the filing of complaints to the authority

and reads as follows:
Filing of complaints with the Authority or the adjudicating
      officer—

      (1) Any aggrieved person may file a complaint with the Authority or
      the adjudicating officer, as the case may be, for any violation or
      contravention of the provisions of this Act or the rules and
      regulations made thereunder, against any promoter, allottee or real
      estate agent, as the case may be.
Explanation—For the purpose of this sub­section “person” shall
      include the association of allottees or any voluntary consumer
      association registered under any law for the time being in force.
      (2) The form, manner and fees for filing complaint under sub­
      section (1) shall be such as may be prescribed.
36
61.   Section 71 relates to Power to Adjudicate vested with the

adjudicating officer while adjudging compensation which reads as

follows:
71. Power to adjudicate.—

      (1) For the purpose of adjudging compensation under
sections
      12
,
14
,
18
and
section 19
, the Authority shall appoint, in
      consultation with the appropriate Government, one or more
      judicial officer as deemed necessary, who is or has been a
      District Judge to be an adjudicating officer for holding an
      inquiry in the prescribed manner, after giving any person
      concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard:
Provided that any person whose complaint in respect of matters
      covered under
sections 12
,
14
,
18
and
section 19
is pending before
      the Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum or the Consumer
      Disputes Redressal Commission or the National Consumer
      Redressal Commission, established under
Section 9
of the
      Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (68 of 1986), on or before the
      commencement of this Act, he may, with the permission of such
      Forum or Commission, as the case may be, withdraw the
      complaint pending before it and file an application before the
      adjudicating officer under this Act.
(2) The application for adjudging compensation under sub­
      section (1), shall be dealt with by the adjudicating officer as
      expeditiously as possible and dispose of the same within a period
      of sixty days from the date of receipt of the application: Provided
      that where any such application could not be disposed of within
      the said period of sixty days, the adjudicating officer shall record
      his reasons in writing for not disposing of the application within
      that period.
(3) While holding an inquiry the adjudicating officer shall have
      power to summon and enforce the attendance of any person
      acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case to give
      evidence or to produce any document which in the opinion of the
      adjudicating officer, may be useful for or relevant to the subject
37
matter of the inquiry and if, on such inquiry, he is satisfied that
      the person has failed to comply with the provisions of any of the
      sections specified in sub­section (1), he may direct to pay such
      compensation or interest, as the case any be, as he thinks fit in
      accordance with the provisions of any of those sections.
62.   The    broad     factors    to    be    considered   while    adjudging

compensation have been provided under Section 72 which reads as

under:­

      “72. While adjudging the quantum of compensation or
      interest, as the case may be, under section 71, the
      adjudicating officer shall have due regard to the following
      factors, namely:—
(a) the amount of disproportionate gain or unfair
            advantage, wherever quantifiable, made as a result of
            the default;
(b) the amount of loss caused as a result of the
            default;
(c) the repetitive nature of the default;
(d) such other factors which the adjudicating officer
            considers necessary to the case in furtherance of
            justice.”
63.   The Uttar Pradesh Real Estate Regulatory Authority in exercise

of its power under
Section 85
of the Act 2016 has framed its

regulations on 27th February, 2019 called as Uttar Pradesh Real

Estate Regulatory Authority(General) Regulations, 2019(hereinafter

being referred to as “Regulations 2019”).
38
64.   Regulations 18 to 23 deal with meetings of the authority, other

than adjudication proceedings.
Regulation 24
falls in the chapter of

“Adjudicatory Proceedings” and reads as follows:­

      “24(a) For adjudication proceedings with respect to complaints
      filed with the Authority, the Authority may, by order, direct that
      specific matters or issues be heard and decided by a single bench
      of either the Chairperson or any Member of the Authority.
(b) The Authority, in consultation with the state government, will
      appoint Adjudicating Officers on the Panel of U.P. RERA for the
      purposes of adjudicating the matters of compensation admissible
      under the Act.
(c) The aggrieved persons will be required to file complaints before
      the Authority online in form – M. The Claims of compensation will
      also be included in form – M itself. While the Authority will decide
      all the questions of breaches of the Act, Rules and Regulations, it
      will refer the question relating to the adjudication of compensation
      to one of the Adjudicating Officers on the Panel of U.P. RERA who
      will then decide the matter expeditiously and preferably within 60
      days.
(d) The Adjudicating Officers on the Panel of U.P. RERA will hold
      their courts at Lucknow or Gautam Buddhnagar as decided by the
      chairman. The complaints relating to the districts of NCR will be
      heard at Gautam Buddhnagar whereas complaints from the
      remaining districts of the State will be heard at Lucknow.
65.   The complaint before the regulatory authority for any violation

of the Act or rules or regulations made thereunder by an aggrieved

person has to be submitted in Form (M) as per the procedure

prescribed under Rule 33(1) which the regulatory authority has to
39
follow.   At the same time, any person who is aggrieved to claim

compensation under
Sections 12
,
14
,
18
and
19
has to submit his

compliant in Form (N) for adjudging compensation as per the

procedure provided under
Section 71(3)
of the Act taking into

consideration the factors indicated under Section 72 and in the

manner provided under Rule 34(1) of the Rules 2016.
66.   Rules    33(1)    and     34(1)    of   the    Uttar    Pradesh        Real

Estate(Regulation and Development) Rules, 2016 which is relatable

to the adjudicatory powers of the regulatory authority/adjudicating

officer reads as follows:­

      “33(1) Any aggrieved person may file a complaint with the
      regulatory authority for any violation under the Act or the rules
      and regulations made thereunder, save as those provided to be
      adjudicated by the adjudicating officer, in Form ‘M’ which shall be
      accompanied by a fee of rupees one thousand in the form of a
      demand draft drawn on a nationalized bank in favour of regulatory
      authority and payable at the main branch of that bank at the
      station where the seat of the said regulatory authority is situated.
      Explanation:­ For the purpose of this sub­rule "person" shall
      include the association of allottees or any voluntary consumer
      association registered under any law or the time being in force.
      34(1) Any aggrieved person may file a complaint with the
      adjudicating officer for compensation under
Sections 12
,
14
,
18
and
19
in Form N which shall be accompanied by a fee of rupees
      one thousand in the form of a demand draft drawn on a
      nationalized bank in favour of regulatory authority and payable at
      the main branch of that bank at the station where the rest of the
      said regulatory authority is situated.”
                                                    (emphasis supplied)
40
67.   Rule 33(2) of the Rules 2016 delineates the procedure which

the authority has to follow in making inquiry to the allegations or

violations of the provisions of the Act, rules and regulations. At the

given time, Rule 34(2) delineates the procedure to be followed by the

adjudicating officer while adjudging quantum of compensation and

interest which the person aggrieved is entitled for under the

provisions of the Act.
68.   Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned senior counsel for the appellants

submits that both the ‘authority’ and the ‘adjudicating officer’

operate in completely distinct spheres.      The authority and the

adjudicating officer are defined under
Sections 2(i)
and
2(a)
of the

Act and are, therefore, creature of statute and their powers and

respective jurisdiction(s) are explicitly delineated in the statute

itself.
69.   The adjudicating officer under Section 71 is specifically vested

with the jurisdiction to adjudicate complaints under
Sections

12
,
14
,
18
&
19
of the Act 2016. In disposing of such complaints,

the adjudicating officer alone is empowered under Section 71(3) to
41
conduct enquiry and direct the payment of refund as well as

compensation and interest, as the case may be, in taking note of

the broad parameters enumerated in Section 72 and such

complaints are to be statutorily disposed of within 60 days failing

which the reasons are to be recorded.
70.   According to the learned counsel for the appellants, proviso to

Section 71(1), the jurisdiction to adjudicate complaints under
Sections 12
,
14
,
18
and
19
which were earlier pending before the

authority established under the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986
stands vested with the adjudicating officer.   According to him, the

legislative intent is clear and unambiguous that the complaints

emanating from the bundle of rights which flow from
Sections 12
,
14
,
18
and
19
including the cause of action for refund and interest

be withdrawn from the forums established under the
Consumer

Protection Act
and in turn be filed before and adjudicated by the

Adjudicating Officer under this Act and that being the legislative

intent, matters arising under
Sections 12
,
14
,
18
and
19
would be

examined and adjudicated exclusively by the adjudicating officer as

mandated by law.
42
71.   Per contra, Ms. Madhavi Divan, learned senior counsel for the

respondents while supporting the findings recorded by the High

Court in the impugned judgment submits that the Act provides

distinct remedies, i.e., ‘return of amount/investment’ on the one

hand and ‘compensation’ on the other, to be determined separately.

According to her, the right to refund on demand is a statutory right,

fundamentally, contextually and conceptually distinct from the

right to receive compensation. While the right to refund emanates

from the Legislature’s recognition of the fact that homebuyers are

“out of pocket” financial creditors, the right to compensation seeks

to make amends for injury or loss.
72.   Thus, refund and compensation are two distinct rights under

the Act and cannot be conflated. The manner in which the two are

to be determined would require a different process and involve

different considerations.   According to her, the determination of

compensation involves a full­fledged adjudicatory process which is

more complex than that involved in determining refund. To do so, it

would tantamount to regressing into the very malaise that the

legislature intended to liberate the allottees­homebuyers.       The
43
result of conflating the rights and/or relegating the allottees to the

adjudicating officer would amount to a compromise of the

timeliness of the right to refund on demand. It would also deter

and daunt allottees from seeking compensation because in the

process the remedies would be clubbed and the availability of

refund would get relatively delayed as compensation requires a

more elaborate adjudication process (even though the same is

required to be completed in 60 days). The authority to determine a

claim for refund on demand while the adjudicating officer to

determine the claim for compensation.
73.   The expression “on demand” which follows the right to “return

of amount” is indicative of the priority, immediacy and expediency

which is accorded to the right to refund. Thus, according to her,

the expressions “refund” and “return of amount” is an act of

restitution, and the obligation to restitute lies on the person or the

authority that has received unjust enrichment or unjust benefit.
74.   Learned counsel further submits that in order to give full effect

to the letter and spirit of the right to refund in the context explained

above, there can be no doubt that the determination of the right to
44
refund must be left to the authority whereas the adjudication for

adjudging compensation with the adjudicating officer as reflected

under
Section 71
of the Act.   According to the learned counsel, the

authority is fully seized with the standard agreements entered into

between the promoters and the allottees, and therefore, is best

equipped to determine the extent of delay, if any. Therefore, refund

claims can most conveniently and effectively be dealt with by the

authority and interest on refund is available at the rate prescribed

by the appropriate Government. In the instant batch of matters,

the prescribed rate of interest is (MCLR + 1%), which has been

notified by the Government of Uttar Pradesh.
75.   The legislature in its wisdom has made a specific provision

delineating   power    to   be    exercised    by   the   regulatory

authority/adjudicating officer.    “Refund of the amount” and

“compensation” are two distinct components which the allottee or

the person aggrieved is entitled to claim if the promoter has not

been able to hand over possession with a nature of enquiry and

mechanism provided under the Act.        So far as the claim with

respect to refund of amount on demand under
Sections 18(1)
and
45
19(4)
of the Act is concerned, it vests within the jurisdiction of the

regulatory authority. Section 71 carves out the jurisdiction of the

adjudicating officer to adjudge compensation under
Sections 12
,
14
,
18
and
19
after holding enquiry under
Section 71(3)
of the Act

keeping in view the broad contours referred to under
Section 72
of

the Act.
76.   The submission made by learned counsel for the appellants

that the proviso under Section 71(1) empowers the adjudicating

officer to examine the complaints made under
Sections 12
,
14
,
18
and
19
pending   before   the   Consumer    Disputes    Redressal

Forum/Commission is in different context and it was one time

mechanism to provide a window to the consumers whose composite

claims are pending before the Consumer Forum/Commission to

avail the benevolent provision of the Act 2016 for the reason that

under the
Consumer Protection Act
, there is no distinction as to

whether the complaint is for refund of the amount or for

compensation as defined under
Section 71(1)
of the Act, but after

the Act 2016 has come into force, if any person aggrieved wants to

make complaint for refund against the promotor or real estate agent
46
other than compensation, it is to be lodged to the regulatory

authority and for adjudging compensation to the adjudicating

officer, and the delineation has been made to expedite the process

of adjudication invoked by the person aggrieved when a complaint

has been made under
Section 31
of the Act to be adjudicated either

by    the   authority/adjudicating   officer   as   per   the   procedure

prescribed under the Act.
77.   The further submission made by the learned counsel for the

appellants is that the return of the amount adversely impacts the

promotor and such a question can be looked into by the

adjudicating officer in the better prospective. The submission has

no foundation for the reason that the legislative intention and

mandate is clear that
Section 18(1)
is an indefeasible right of the

allottee to get a return of the amount on demand if the promoter is

unable to handover possession in terms of the agreement for sale or

failed to complete the project by the date specified and the

justification which the promotor wants to tender as his defence as

to why the withdrawal of the amount under the scheme of the Act

may not be justified appears to be insignificant and the regulatory
47
authority with summary nature of scrutiny of undisputed facts may

determine the refund of the amount which the allottee has

deposited, while seeking withdrawal from the project, with interest,

that too has been prescribed under the Act, as in the instant case,

the State of Uttar Pradesh has prescribed MCLR + 1% leaving no

discretion to the authority and can also claim compensation as per

the procedure prescribed under Section 71(3) read with
Section 72
of the Act.
78.    This Court while interpreting
Section 18
of the Act, in
Imperia

Structures Ltd. Vs. Anil Patni and Another5
held that
Section 18
confers an unqualified right upon an allottee to get refund of the

amount deposited with the promoter and interest at the prescribed

rate, if the promoter fails to complete or is unable to give possession

of an apartment as per the date specified in the home buyer’s

agreement in para 25 held as under:­

       “25. In terms of
Section 18
of the RERA Act, if a promoter fails to
       complete or is unable to give possession of an apartment duly
       completed by the date specified in the agreement, the promoter
       would be liable, on demand, to return the amount received by him
       in respect of that apartment if the allottee wishes to withdraw from
       the Project. Such right of an allottee is specifically made “without
       prejudice to any other remedy available to him”. The right so

5   2020(10) SCC 783
48
given to the allottee is unqualified and if availed, the money
      deposited by the allottee has to be refunded with interest at such
      rate as may be prescribed. The proviso to
Section 18(1)
contemplates a situation where the allottee does not intend to
      withdraw from the Project. In that case he is entitled to and must
      be paid interest for every month of delay till the handing over of the
      possession. It is up to the allottee to proceed either under
Section
      18(1)
or under proviso to
Section 18(1)
. The case of Himanshu Giri
      came under the latter category.
The RERA Act
thus definitely
      provides a remedy to an allottee who wishes to withdraw from the
      Project or claim return on his investment.”


                                                     (emphasis supplied)
79.   To safeguard the interests of the parties, on being decided by

the regulatory authority/adjudicating officer, it is always subject to

appeal before the Tribunal under Section 43(5) provided condition

of pre­deposit being complied with can be further challenged in

appeal before the High Court under
Section 58
of the Act and, thus,

the legislature has put reasonable restriction and safeguards at all

stages.
80.   The further submission made by learned counsel for the

appellants that if the allottee has defaulted the terms of the

agreement and still refund is claimed which can be possible, to be

determined by the adjudicating officer. The submission appears to
49
be attractive but is not supported with legislative intent for the

reason that if the allottee has made a default either in making

instalments or made any breach of the agreement, the promoter has

a right to cancel the allotment in terms of
Section 11(5)
of the Act

and proviso to sub­
section 5
of
Section 11
enables the allottee to

approach the regulatory authority to question the termination or

cancellation of the agreement by the promotor and thus, the

interest of the promoter is equally safeguarded.
81.   The opening words of
Section 71(1)
of the Act make it clear

that the scope and functions of the adjudicating officer are only for

“adjudging compensation” under
Sections 12
,
14
,
18
and
19
of the

Act. If the legislative intent was to expand the scope of the powers of

the adjudicating officer, then the wording of Section 71(1) ought to

have been different.   On the contrary, even the opening words of
Section 71(2)
of the Act make it clear that an application before the

adjudicating officer is only for “adjudging compensation”. Even in
Section 71(3)
of the Act, it is reiterated that the adjudicating officer

may direct “to pay such compensation or interest” as the case may

be as he thinks fit, in accordance with provisions of
Sections 12
,
50
14
,
18
and
19
of the Act. This has to be seen together with the

opening words of
Section 72
of the Act, which reads “while

adjudging the quantum of compensation or interest, as the case

may be, under Section 71, the adjudicating officer shall have due

regards” to the broad parameters to be kept in mind while

adjudging compensation to be determined under
Section 71
of the

Act.
82.    The further submission made by the learned counsel for the

appellants that if the authority and the adjudicating officer either

come to different conclusions on the same questions or in a single

complaint, the person aggrieved is seeking manifold reliefs with one

of the relief of compensation and payment of interest, with the

timelines being provided for the adjudicating officer to decide the

complaint under
Section 71
of the Act.         At least, there is no

provision which could be referred to expedite the matter if filed

before the regulatory authority. The submission may not hold good

for the reason that there is a complete delineation of the jurisdiction

vested with the regulatory authority and the adjudicating officer. If

there is any breach or violation of the provisions of
Sections 12
,
14
,
51
18
and
19
of the Act by the promoter, such a complaint

straightaway has to be filed before the regulatory authority. What

is being referable to the adjudicating officer is for adjudging

compensation, as reflected under
Section 71
of the Act and

accordingly rules and regulations have been framed by the

authority for streamlining the complaints which are made by the

aggrieved person either on account of violation of the provisions of
Sections 12
,
14
,
18
and
19
or for adjudging compensation and

there appears no question of any inconsistency being made, in the

given circumstances, either by the regulatory authority or the

adjudicating officer.
83.   So far as the single complaint is filed seeking a combination of

reliefs, it is suffice to say, that after the rules have been framed, the

aggrieved person has to file complaint in a separate format. If there

is a violation of the provisions of
Sections 12
,
14
,
18
and
19
, the

person aggrieved has to file a complaint as per form (M) or for

compensation under form (N) as referred to under Rules 33(1) and

34(1) of the Rules. The procedure for inquiry is different in both the

set of adjudication and as observed, there is no room for any
52
inconsistency and the power of adjudication being delineated, still if

composite application is filed, can be segregated at the appropriate

stage.
84.   So far as submission in respect of the expeditious disposal of

the application before the adjudicating officer, as referred to under

sub­section (2) of Section 71 is concerned, it pre­supposes that the

adjudicatory mechanism provided under
Section 71(3)
of the Act

has to be disposed of within 60 days.         It is expected by the

regulatory authority to dispose of the application expeditiously and

not to restrain the mandate of 60 days as referred to under
Section

71(3)
of the Act.
85.   The provisions of which a detailed reference has been made, if

we go with the literal rule of interpretation that when the words of

the statute are clear, plain and unambiguous, the Courts are bound

to give effect to that meaning regardless of its consequence.       It

leaves no manner of doubt and it is always advisable to interpret

the legislative wisdom in the literary sense as being intended by the

legislature and the Courts are not supposed to embark upon an
53
inquiry and find out a solution in substituting the legislative

wisdom which is always to be avoided.
86.   From the scheme of the Act of which a detailed reference has

been made and taking note of power of adjudication delineated with

the regulatory authority and adjudicating officer, what finally culls

out is that although the Act indicates the distinct expressions like

‘refund’, ‘interest’, ‘penalty’ and ‘compensation’, a conjoint reading

of
Sections 18
and
19
clearly manifests that when it comes to

refund of the amount, and interest on the refund amount, or

directing payment of interest for delayed delivery of possession, or

penalty and interest thereon, it is the regulatory authority which

has the power to examine and determine the outcome of a

complaint.   At the same time, when it comes to a question of

seeking the relief of adjudging compensation and interest thereon

under
Sections 12
,
14
,
18
and
19
, the adjudicating officer

exclusively has the power to determine, keeping in view the

collective reading of Section 71 read with
Section 72
of the Act. If

the adjudication under
Sections 12
,
14
,
18
and
19
other than

compensation as envisaged, if extended to the adjudicating officer
54
as prayed that, in our view, may intend to expand the ambit and

scope of the powers and functions of the adjudicating officer under

Section 71 and that would be against the mandate of the Act 2016.


Question no. 3: Whether
Section 81
of the Act authorizes the

authority to delegate its powers to a single member of the

authority to hear complaints instituted under
Section 31
of

the Act?
87.   It is the specific stand of the respondent Authority of the State

of Uttar Pradesh that the power has been delegated under Section

81 to the single member of the authority only for hearing

complaints under
Section 31
of the Act. To meet out the exigency,

the authority in its meeting held on 14 th August 2018, had earlier

decided to delegate the hearing of complaints to the benches

comprising of two members each but later looking into the volume

of complaints which were filed by the home buyers which rose to

about 36,826 complaints, the authority in its later meeting held on

5th December, 2018 empowered the single member to hear the
55
complaints relating to refund of the amount filed under
Section 31
of the Act.
88.   Mr.     Gopal   Sankarnarayanan,    learned    counsel   for   the

appellants submits that if this Court comes to the conclusion that

other than adjudging compensation wherever provided all other

elements/components including refund of the amount and interest

etc. vests for adjudication by the authority,       in that event, such

power vests with the authority constituted under
Section 21
and is

not open to be delegated in exercise of power under
Section 81
of

the Act to a single member of the authority and such delegation is a

complete abuse of power vested with the authority and such orders

passed by the single member of the authority in directing refund of

the amount with interest are wholly without jurisdiction and is in

contravention to the scheme of the Act.
89.   Learned counsel further submits that the order passed by the

single member of the authority is without jurisdiction and it suffers

from coram non­judice.
Section 21
of the Act clearly provides that

the authority shall consist of a Chairperson and not less than two

whole time members to         be appointed by        the Government.
56
Regulation 24(a)
of the Regulations 2019 framed by the authority is

in clear contravention to the parent statute that the delegation of

power can be of class, category of cases, specific to the member of

the authority but a general delegation of power to the single

member of the authority in exercise of power under Section 81 is

not contemplated under the Act and delegation to a single member

of the authority in adjudicating the disputes under
Sections 12
,
14
,
18
and
19
is without jurisdiction and that is the reason for which

the appellants have approached the High Court by filing a writ

petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution and in furtherance to

this Court.
90.   Learned counsel further submits that from the plain reading of

the statute itself, the role of the authority is of a quasi­judicial body

forms its underpinning. The adjudicatory role of the authority is

specifically recognized under
Sections 5
,
6
,
7(2)
,
9(3)
and
31
where

the authority is supposed to hear the other side, after compliance of

the principles of natural justice, is supposed to pass an order in

accordance with law.
57
91.
Section 31
allows the aggrieved person to file a complaint with

the authority or the adjudicating officer for any violation or breach

or contravention to the provisions of the Act or the rules and

regulations made thereunder and this being a quasi­judicial power

to be exercised by the authority could not be delegated to a single

member of the authority under the guise of
Section 81
of the Act,

that apart, there are certain provisions where authority alone holds

power to initiate action or make inquiries like Sections 35(1), 35(2),

36 or 38, the powers are exclusively exercised by the authority and

the tests for determining whether an action is quasi­judicial or not

are
laid down in
Province of Bombay Vs. Kushaldas S Advani

and   Others6
which has been consistently followed by the

Constitution Bench in its decision in
Shivji Nathubhai Vs. Union

of India and Others7
;
Harinagar Sugar Mills Limited Vs.

Shyam Sunder Jhunjhunwala and Others8
.
92.   Learned counsel further submits that according to him, the

powers which have been exercised by the authority under
Sections

6
1950 SCR 621
7 1960(2) SCR 775
8 1962(2) SCR 339
58
12, 14, 18 and 19 of the Act have the trappings of the judicial

function which in no manner can be delegated without being

expressly bestowed.    Placing reliance on two decisions of the

Queen’s Bench in Barnard Vs. National Dock Labour Board9 and

Vine Vs. National Dock Labour Board10 and taking assistance

thereof, learned counsel submits that the judgments indicated

above makes it clear that the delegation of judicial power must be

express; that a provision of quorum for a quasi­judicial body is

distinguishable from the delegation of power to the exclusion of

other members of that body; and the reasons of workload cannot

trump the legal requirement.
These principles have been adopted

by this Court consistently in
Bombay Municipal Corporation Vs.

Dhondu Narayan Chowdhary11
;
Sahni Silk Mills(P) Ltd. and

Another     Vs.   Employees   State   Insurance    Corporation12
;
Jagannath Temple Managing Committee Vs. Siddha Math and

Others13
.
9 1953(2) QB 18
10 1956(1) QB 658
11 1965(2) SCR 929
12 1994(5) SCC 346
13 2015(16) SCC 542
59
93.   Learned counsel submits that it has been consistently held by

this Court that the power being quasi­judicial in nature, the

presumption is that it ought to be exercised by the authority

competent and no other, unless the law expressly or by clear

implication permits it.
94.   Learned counsel further submits that even by necessary

implication, the judicial power of the authority cannot be delegated

by the multi­member authority to any of its members. If at all there

are practical considerations of workload, the Government can

always establish more than one authority in terms of the second

proviso to
Section 20(1)
.
95.   Per contra, Mr. Devadatt Kamat, learned senior counsel for the

respondents submits that the complaint of the appellants has been

primarily on the issue that a single member is not competent to

exercise power to hear complaints under
Section 31
of the Act and

the delegation of its power by the authority invoking Section 81 is

beyond jurisdiction.
96.   Learned counsel submits that as a matter of fact the entire

functioning of the authority has not been delegated to the single
60
member. It is only the hearing of complaints under
Section 31
that

the single member of the authority has been empowered to deal

with such complaints, keeping in view the overall object of speedy

disposal of such complaints mandated under the law. According to

him, it is factually incorrect to say that the other functions of the

authority like imposition of penalty under Section 38, revocation of

registration under
Section 7
or functions of the authority under

Sections 32 or 33 have been delegated to a single member of the

authority.
97.   Learned counsel further submits that the question is not

whether the delegation per se to a single member is bad, but the

question is whether the power to hear complaints in reference to
Sections 12
,
14
,
18
and
19
delegated to a single member is

permissible under the law. It may be noticed that the authority has

been vested with several other powers and functions under the Act,

which the authority has consciously not delegated to a single

member.
98.   Learned counsel further submits that pursuant to the

delegation of power under Section 81 by the special order dated 5 th
61
December, 2018 read with
Regulation 24
, a single member has

been authorized by the authority to hear the matters related to

refund of the amount under
Section 31
of the Act.
99.     Learned counsel further submits that almost in a pari materia

scheme,
Section 29
­
A of the SEBI Act
gives the power to delegate

and
Section 19
of the SEBI Act empowers the board to delegate its

power to any member of the Board has been examined by this

Court in
Saurashtra Kutch Stock Exchange Ltd. Vs. Securities

and Exchange Board of India and Another
.
This Court has
14
approved the power of delegation to a single member of the

respective authority and held that such delegation is always

permissible in law unless specifically prohibited and as long as

there is a legislative sanction for delegation of even judicial power,

there     is   no   illegality   as   held   in
Bombay   Municipal

Corporation
(supra);
State of Uttar Pradesh Vs. Batuk Deo Pati

Tripathi and Another15 Heinz India Private Limited and

Another
Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh16; and taking assistance

14 2012(13) SCC 501
15 1978(2) SCC 102
16 2012(5) SCC 443
62
thereof, learned counsel submits that such delegation of power to a

single member of the authority in deciding application for refund of

the amount and interest under
Section 18
of the Act is well within

the jurisdiction of the authority to its delegatee more so when the

power to delegate under Section 81 has not been questioned in

either of the pending appeals before the Court.
100. Learned counsel further submits that
Section 21
of the Act

relates to the composition of the authority and does not deal with

minimum bench strength.      At the given time, the legislature has

consciously avoided prescribing any minimum bench/quorum

strength to hear complaints by the authority. At the same time, the

Act only prescribes a bench/quorum only of the Appellate Tribunal

under
Section 43(3)
of the Act and further submits that in the

absence of the minimum bench/quorum strength being fixed by

statute, it is impermissible to treat the composition of the authority

itself as a minimum bench strength.
101. Learned counsel further submits that
Sections 29
and 81 are

not in derogation to each other and operate in different fields.
Section 29
is concerned with the meetings of the authority and does
63
not envisage in its fold the quasi­judicial functions which the Act

casts upon the authority. The term “meetings” under
Section 29
does not deal with the performance of quasi­judicial functions

which are referred to the authority under
Section 31
. It can only

refer to meetings on policy/regulatory issues and invited attention

to
Sections 32
and
33
of the Act which are in the nature of

policy/regulatory decisions the authority is mandated under the

Act. It can be further noticed from
Section 29(3)
and (4) which talks

about ‘questions’ before the authority, to be disposed off within 60

days of receiving the ‘application’ and there is no reference to any

‘complaints’ as indicated in
Section 31
of the Act.
102. To examine the scheme of the Act it may be relevant to take

note of certain provisions add infra:­

     “21. The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and not less than
     two whole time Members to be appointed by the appropriate
     Government.
29. (1) The Authority shall meet at such places and times, and
     shall follow such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of
     business at its meetings, (including quorum at such meetings), as
     may be specified by the regulations made by the Authority.
     (2) If the Chairperson for any reason, is unable to attend a meeting
     of the Authority, any other Member chosen by the Members
     present amongst themselves at the meeting, shall preside at the
     meeting.
64
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the
    Authority shall be decided by a majority of votes by the Members
    present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the
    Chairperson or in his absence, the person presiding shall have a
    second or casting vote.
(4) The questions which come up before the Authority shall be
    dealt with as expeditiously as possible and the Authority shall
    dispose of the same within a period of sixty days from the date of
    receipt of the application:
Provided that where any such application could not be disposed of
    within the said period of sixty days, the Authority shall record its
    reasons in writing for not disposing of the application within that
    period.
31. (1) Any aggrieved person may file a complaint with the
    Authority or the adjudicating officer, as the case may be, for any
    violation or contravention of the provisions of this Act or the rules
    and regulations made thereunder against any promoter allottee or
    real estate agent, as the case may be.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub­section "person" shall
    include the association of allottees or any voluntary consumer
    association registered under any law for the time being in force. (2)
    The form, manner and fees for filing complaint under sub­section
    (1) shall be such as may be specified.
81. The Authority may, by general or special order in writing,
    delegate to any member, officer of the Authority or any other
    person subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in
    the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act (except
    the power to make regulations under section 85), as it may deem
    necessary.
103.
Section 21
of the Act relates to the composition of the

authority which consists of a Chairperson and not less than two

whole   time   members      to   be    appointed     by    the   appropriate

Government but conspicuously it does not mention minimum
65
bench strength at the same time consciously prescribes minimum

bench/quorum     while   constituting   the   Real   Estate   Appellate

Tribunal as reflected under
Section 43(3)
of the Act.
104. The emphasis of the appellants was on
Section 29
of the Act

which indicates the quorum of meetings of the authority. There is a

specific provision that there shall be a meeting of the authority with

the minimum quorum being prescribed, such business of the

meeting of the authority indeed could not be delegated to a single

member of the authority in exercise of power under
Section 81
of

the Act.
105. The term meeting under
Section 29
of the Act does not deal

with the performance of the authority in quasi­judicial matters

which are referred to under
Section 31
of the Act. It only refers to

meetings, policy/regulatory issues that the authority is mandated

to discharge under the Act. It may be noticed that Sections 32 and

33 are in the nature of policy/regulatory directions which the

authority is mandated to be discharged indisputably have to be

undertaken by the authority while functioning as a whole body

under
Section 29
of the Act.
66
106. To add it further,
Section 29(3)
and (4) of the Act talks about

the questions before the authority which are to be disposed of

within 60 days on receiving the applications. It may be noticed that

there is no reference to any complaint referred to under
Section 31
of the Act. To buttress it further,
Section 29
and
Section 81
of the

Act are not in derogation to each other.      To the contrary, both

operate in different fields.
Section 29
deals with the meetings of the

authority to be held for taking policy/regulatory decisions in the

interest of the stake holders and does not envisage in its fold quasi­

judicial functions which the Act casts upon the authority.        The

legislative intention as reflected from
Section 29
is a recognition of

the rationale that policy matters ought to be considered and

decided by the entire strength of the authority so that the policy

decisions reflect the acquired experience of the members and

Chairman of the authority.
107. It may be relevant to note that the authority in its meeting

held on 5th December, 2018 in exercise of its power under
Section

81
of the Act for disposal of complaints under
Section 31
delegated

its power to a single member of the authority. The extract of the
67
minutes of the meeting dated 5th December, 2018 relevant for the

purpose is extracted as under:­

Sl. No.                            Agenda
5.01        Both the benches of Uttar Pradesh Real Estate Regulatory
            Authority in the month of December 2018 and subsequently also
            while working as single benches as per the requirement, proposal
            for disposal of complaint cases at Lucknow and Gautambudh
            Nagar on same dates
­           ­
­           ­


Point wise decision on agenda is as under:­
Agenda point no. 1:
Regarding hearing by both the benches of Uttar Pradesh Real Estate Regulatory
Authority in the month of December 2018 and subsequently also while working
as single benches as per the requirement, for disposal of complaint cases at
Lucknow and Gautambudh Nagar on same dates.
Decision:
Proposal was approved by the authority.
..
..”
108. Pursuant to the delegation of power to the single member of

the authority, complaints filed by the allottees/home buyers for

refund of the amount and interest under
Section 31
of the Act came

to be decided by the single member of the authority after hearing

the parties in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
68
109. This Court, while examining the pari materia provisions of

delegation of power under
Section 29A
and
Section 19
of the SEBI

Act which empowered the board to delegate its power to any

member of the Board held that the board may in writing delegate its

power to any member of the board and such is valid in law as held

by this Court in
Saurashtra Kutch Stock Exchange Ltd.
(supra)

as under:­

     “6.
The High Court dismissed the special civil application vide
     order dated 19­11­2007 [
Saurashtra Kutch Stock Exchange
     Ltd. v. SEBI, Special Civil Application No.
23902 of 2007, decided
     on 19­11­2007 (Guj)] and considered the submission of the
     appellant in the following manner:
“
Section 29
­A is reproduced hereunder:
‘29­A. Power to delegate.—The Central Government
             may, by order published in the Official Gazette, direct
             that the powers (except the power under
Section 30
)
             exercisable by it under any provision of this Act shall,
             in relation to such matters and subject to such
             conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, be
             exercisable also by the Securities and Exchange Board
             of India or Reserve Bank of India constituted under
Section 3
of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of
             1934).’

     Notification dated 13­9­1994 issued by the Central Government
     reads as under:
‘In exercise of powers conferred by
Section 29
­
A of the
             Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956
(42 of
             1956), the Central Government hereby directs that the
             powers exercisable by it under
Section 3
, sub­sections
69
(1), (2), (3) and (4) of
Section 4
,
Section 5
, sub­section
      (2) of
Section 7
­A,
Section 13
, sub­section (2) of
Section 18
,
Section 22
and sub­section (2) of
Section
      28
of the Act shall also be exercisable by the Securities
      and Exchange Board of India.’
Section 19
of the SEBI Act, 1992 reads as under:
‘19. Delegation.—The Board may, by general or
      special order in writing delegate to any member, officer
      of the Board or any other person subject to such
      conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order,
      such of its powers and functions under this Act
      (except the powers under
Section 29
) as it may deem
      necessary.’

      Thus, the above Notification dated 13­9­1994 issued in
      exercise of power under
Section 29
­
A of the SCR Act
of
      1956, read with
Section 19
of the SEBI Act, would
      mean that the Board may in writing delegate its power
      to any member of the Board and, therefore, the power
      exercised by the Full­Time Member of the Board under
Section 11
of the SEBI Act, 1992, or even withdrawal
      or recognition under
Section 5
of the SCR Act of 1956,
      cannot be said to be unjust or arbitrary or dehors the
      provisions of the statute and, therefore, the contention
      of Mr Shelat that no remedy of appeal is available to
      the petitioner cannot be accepted.”
9. In Para 2 of the civil appeal, the following question of law has
been framed:
“Whether the whole­time single member of SEBI has
      no jurisdiction to cancel or withdraw recognition
      granted to a stock exchange on the principle that
      delegate cannot further delegate its power, and
      whether the order under challenge is without
      jurisdiction?”

      In our view, it is not necessary to go into the above
      question as we find that this very question was raised
      by the appellant before the High Court in
70
extraordinary jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the
          Constitution of India. The High Court, as noted above,
          in its order dated 19­11­2007 [
Saurashtra Kutch Stock
          Exchange Ltd. v. SEBI, Special Civil Application No.
23902 of 2007, decided on 19­11­2007 (Guj)] held that
          the withdrawal of recognition under
Section 5
of the
          1956 Act by the Full­Time Member of SEBI under
Section 11
of the Securities and Exchange Board of
          India Act, 1992 cannot be said to be dehors the
          provisions of the Act.
The special leave petition from
          the above order of the High Court came to be
          dismissed by this Court on 10­3­2008 [
Saurashtra
          Kutch Stock Exchange Ltd. v. SEBI, SLP (C) No.
5197 of
          2008, decided on 10­3­2008 (SC)] . The same question
          cannot be allowed to be reopened in the present
          appeal.”
110. The express provision of delegation of power under the
SEBI

Act
is akin to
Section 81
of the Act 2016. This Court observed that

if the power has been delegated by the competent authority under

the statute, such action, if being exercised by a single member

cannot be said to be dehors the provisions of the Act.
111.
In
Heinz India Private Limited and Another
(supra), the

revisional powers were conferred upon the State Agricultural

Market Board under
Section 32
of the state law to examine the

orders passed by the market committee.
Section 33
thereof

empowered the Board to delegate its powers to the Director. In the

facts of the case, an objection was taken to the exercise of revisional
71
powers not by the Director himself but by some officer lower in the

hierarchy.    This Court, while taking note of the definition of

‘Director’ as provided in
Section 2(h)
to include “any other officer

authorized by the Director to perform all or any of his functions

under this Act” held as under:­

     “34. Now, it is true that the stakes involved in the present batch of
     cases are substantial and those called upon to satisfy the demands
     raised against them would like their cases to be heard by a senior
     officer or a committee of officers to be nominated by the Board. But
     in the absence of any data as to the number of cases that arise for
     consideration involving a challenge to the demands raised by the
     Market Committee and the nature of the disputes that generally
     fall for determination in such cases, it will not be possible for this
     Court to step in and direct an alteration in the mechanism that is
     currently in place. The power to decide the revisions vests with the
     Board who also enjoys the power to delegate that function to the
     Director. So long as there is statutory sanction for the Director to
     exercise the revisional power vested in the Board, any argument
     that such a delegation is either impermissible or does not serve the
     purpose of providing a suitable machinery for adjudication of the
     disputes shall have to be rejected.”
112.
Section 81
of the Act 2016 empowers the authority, by general

or special order in writing, to delegate its powers to any member of

the authority, subject to conditions as may be specified in the

order, such of the powers and functions under the Act. What has

been excluded is the power to make regulations under Section 85,

rest of the powers exercised by the authority can always be
72
delegated to any of its members obviously for expeditious disposal

of the applications/complaints including complaints filed under
Section 31
of the Act and exercise of such power by a general and

special order to its members is always permissible under the

provisions of the Act.
113. In the instant case, the authority by a special order dated

5th December, 2018 has delegated its power to the single member

for disposal of complaints filed under
Section 31
of the Act. So far

as refund of the amount with interest is concerned, it may not be

considered strictly to be mechanical in process but the kind of

inquiry which has to be undertaken by the authority is of a

summary procedure based on the indisputable documentary

evidence, indicating the amount which the allottee/home buyer had

invested and interest that has been prescribed by the competent

authority leaving no discretion with minimal nature of scrutiny of

admitted material on record is needed, if has been delegated by the

authority, to be exercised by the single member of the authority in

exercise of its power under
Section 81
of the Act, which explicitly
73
empowers the authority to delegate under its wisdom that cannot

be said to be dehors the provisions of the Act.
114. What is being urged by the learned counsel for the appellants

in interpreting the scope of
Section 29
of the Act is limited only to

policy matters and cannot be read in derogation to
Section 81
of the

Act and the interpretation as argued by learned counsel for the

promoters if to be accepted, the very mandate of Section 81 itself

will become otiose and nugatory.
115. It is a well­established principle of interpretation of law that

the court should read the section in literal sense and cannot rewrite

it to suit its convenience; nor does any canon of construction permit

the court to read the section in such a manner as to render it to

some extent otiose.
Section 81
of the Act positively empowers the

authority to delegate such of its powers and functions to any

member by a general or a special order with an exception to make

regulations under
Section 85
of the Act. As a consequence, except

the power to make regulations under
Section 85
of the Act, other

powers and functions of the authority, by a general or special order,
74
if delegated to a single member of the authority is indeed within the

fold of
Section 81
of the Act.
116. The further submission made by learned counsel for the

promoters that
Section 81
of the Act empowers even delegation to

any officer of the authority or any other person, it is true that the

authority, by general or special order, can delegate any of its powers

and functions to be exercised by any member or officer of the

authority or any other person but we are not examining the

delegation of power to any third party. To be more specific, this

Court is examining the limited question as to whether the power

under
Section 81
of the Act can be delegated by the authority to any

of its member to decide the complaint under
Section 31
of the Act.
What has been urged by learned counsel for the promoters is

hypothetical which does not arise in the facts of the case. If the

delegation is made at any point of time which is in contravention to

the scheme of the Act or is not going to serve the purpose and

object with which power to delegate has been mandated under
Section 81
of the Act, it is always open for judicial review.
75
117. The further submission made by learned counsel for the

appellants that
Section 81
of the Act permits the authority to

delegate such powers and functions to any member of the authority

which are mainly administrative or clerical, and cannot possibly

encompass any of the core functions which are to be discharged by

the authority, the judicial functions are non­delegable, as these are

the core functions of the authority. The submission may not hold

good for the reason that the power to be exercised by the authority

in deciding complaints under
Section 31
of the Act is quasi­judicial

in nature which is delegable provided there is a provision in the

statute. As already observed,
Section 81
of the Act empowers the

authority to delegate its power and functions to any of its member,

by general or special order.
118. In the instant case, by exercising its power under
Section 81
of

the Act, the authority, by a special order dated 5 th December, 2018

has delegated its power to the single member of the authority to

exercise and decide complaints under
Section 31
of the Act and that

being permissible in law, cannot be said to be de hors the mandate

of the Act.   At the same time, the power to be exercised by the
76
adjudicating officer who has been appointed by the authority in

consultation with the appropriate Government under
Section 71
of

the Act, such powers are non­delegable to any of its members or

officers in exercise of power under
Section 81
of the Act.
119.     That scheme of the Act, 2016 provides an in­built

mechanism and any order passed on a complaint by the authority

under
Section 31
is appealable before the tribunal under Section

43(5) and further in appeal to the High Court under
Section 58
of

the Act on one or more ground specified under
Section 100
of the

Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, if any manifest error is left by the

authority either in computation or in the amount refundable to the

allottee/home buyer, is open to be considered at the appellate stage

on the complaint made by the person aggrieved.
120. In view of the remedial mechanism provided under the scheme

of the Act 2016, in our considered view, the power of delegation

under
Section 81
of the Act by the authority to one of its member

for deciding applications/complaints under
Section 31
of the Act is

not only well defined but expressly permissible and that cannot be

said to be dehors the mandate of law.
77
Question no. 4:­ Whether the condition of pre­deposit under

proviso to
Section 43(5)
of the Act for entertaining substantive

right of appeal is sustainable in law?
121. Before we examine the challenge to the proviso to
Section

43(5)
of the Act of making pre­deposit for entertaining an appeal

before the Tribunal, it may be apposite to take note of
Section 43(5)
of the Act, 2016. Section 43(5) reads as follows:­


     “43. Establishment of Real Estate Appellate Tribunal­
           …….
(5) Any person aggrieved by any direction or decision or order
     made by the Authority or by an adjudicating officer under this Act
     may prefer an appeal before the Appellate Tribunal having
     jurisdiction over the matter:
Provided that where a promoter files an appeal with the Appellate
     Tribunal, it shall not be entertained, without the promoter first
     having deposited with the Appellate Tribunal at least thirty per
     cent of the penalty, or such higher percentage as may be
     determined by the Appellate Tribunal, or the total amount to be
     paid to the allottee including interest and compensation imposed
     on him, if any, or with both, as the case may be, before the said
     appeal is heard.
Explanation – For the purpose of this sub­section “person” shall
     include the association of allottees or any voluntary consumer
     association registered under any law for the time being in force.”
122. It may straightaway be noticed that
Section 43(5)
of the Act

envisages the filing of an appeal before the appellate tribunal
78
against the order of an authority or the adjudicating officer by any

person aggrieved and where the promoter intends to appeal against

an order of authority or adjudicating officer against imposition of

penalty, the promoter has to deposit at least 30 per cent of the

penalty amount or such higher amount as may be directed by the

appellate tribunal. Where the appeal is against any other order

which involves the return of the amount to the allottee, the

promoter is under obligation to deposit with the appellate tribunal

the total amount to be paid to the allottee which includes interest

and compensation imposed on him, if any, or with both, as the case

may be, before the appeal is to be instituted.
123. The plea advanced by the learned counsel for the appellants is

that   substantive    right   of    appeal    against   an   order   of

authority/adjudicating    officer   cannot    remain    dependent    on

fulfilment of pre­deposit which is otherwise onerous on the builders

alone and only the builders/promoters who are in appeal are

required to make the pre­deposit to get the appeal entertained by

the Appellate Tribunal is discriminatory amongst the stakeholders

as defined under the provisions of the Act.
79
124. Learned counsel further submits that if the entire sum as has

been computed either by the Authority or adjudicating officer, is to

be deposited including 30 per cent of the penalty in the first place,

the remedy of appeal provided by one hand is being taken away by

the other since the promoter is financially under distress and

incapable   to   deposit   the    full   computed   amount   by   the

authority/adjudicating officer.     The right of appreciation of his

defence at appellate stage which is made available to him under the

statute became nugatory because of the onerous mandatory

requirement of pre­deposit in entertaining the appeal only on the

promoter who intends to prefer under
Section 43(5)
of the Act which

according to him is in the given facts and circumstances of this

case is unconstitutional and violative of
Article 14
of the

Constitution of India.
125. The submission in the first blush appears to be attractive but

is not sustainable in law for the reason that a perusal of scheme of

the Act makes it clear that the limited rights and duties are

provided on the shoulders of the allottees under
Section 19
of the

Act at a given time, several onerous duties and obligations have
80
been imposed on the promoters i.e. registration, duties of

promoters, obligations of promoters, adherence to sanctioned plans,

insurance of real estate, payment of penalty, interest and

compensation, etc. under Chapters III and VIII of the Act 2016. This

classification between consumers and promoters is based upon the

intelligible differentia between the rights, duties and obligations

cast upon the allottees/home buyers and the promoters and is in

furtherance of the object and purpose of the Act to protect the

interest of the consumers vis­a­viz., the promoters in the real estate

sector. The promoters and allottees are distinctly identifiable,

separate class of persons having been differently and separately

dealt with under the various provisions of the Act.
126. Therefore, the question of discrimination in the first place does

not arise which has been alleged as they fall under distinct and

different categories/classes.
127. It may further be noticed that under the present real estate

sector which is now being regulated under the provisions of the Act

2016, the complaint for refund of the amount of payment which the

allottee/consumer has deposited with the promoter and at a later
81
stage, when the promoter is unable to hand over possession in

breach of the conditions of the agreement between the parties, are

being instituted at the instance of the consumer/allotee demanding

for refund of the amount deposited by them and after the scrutiny

of facts being made based on the contemporaneous documentary

evidence on record made available by the respective parties, the

legislature in its wisdom has intended to ensure that the money

which has been computed by the authority at least must be

safeguarded if the promoter intends to prefer an appeal before the

tribunal and in case, the appeal fails at a later stage, it becomes

difficult for the consumer/allottee to get the amount recovered

which has been determined by the authority and to avoid the

consumer/allottee to go from pillar to post for recovery of the

amount that has been determined by the authority in fact, belongs

to the allottee at a later stage could be saved from all the miseries

which come forward against him.
128. At the same time, it will avoid unscrupulous and uncalled for

litigation at the appellate stage and restrict the promoter if feels

that there is some manifest material irregularity being committed or
82
his defence has not been properly appreciated at the first stage,

would prefer an appeal for re­appraisal of the evidence on record

provided substantive compliance of the condition of pre­deposit is

made over, the rights of the parties inter se could easily be saved for

adjudication at the appellate stage.
129. There are multiple statutes which provide a condition of pre­

deposit of a stipulated statutory amount to be deposited before an

appeal is entertained by an appellate forum/tribunal for re­

appraisal of facts and law at the appellate stage and it has been

examined by this Court as well. Proviso to
Section 18
of SARFAESI

Act, 2002 of the Act which provides pre­deposit is as follows:­

     “18. Appeal to Appellate Tribunal
     …….
Provided further that no appeal shall be entertained unless the
     borrower has deposited with the Appellate Tribunal fifty per cent of
     the amount of debt due from him, as claimed by the secured
     creditors or determined by the Debts Recovery Tribunal, whichever
     is less:
Provided also that the Appellate Tribunal may, for the reasons to
     be recorded in writing, reduce the amount to not less than twenty­
     five per cent. of debt referred to in the second proviso.”
83
130. The intention of the legislature appears to be to ensure that

the rights of the decree­holder (the successful party) is to be

protected and only genuine bona fide appeals are to be entertained.

While interpretating
Section 18
of SARFAESI Act, this Court in
Narayan Chandra Ghosh Vs. UCO Bank and Others
17 observed

as under:­

        “8. It is well­settled that when a statute confers a right of appeal,
        while granting the right, the legislature can impose conditions for
        the exercise of such right, so long as the conditions are not so
        onerous as to amount to unreasonable restrictions, rendering the
        right almost illusory. Bearing in mind the object of the Act, the
        conditions hedged in the said proviso cannot be said to be onerous.
        Thus, we hold that the requirement of pre­deposit under sub­
        section (1) of
Section 18
of the Act is mandatory and there is no
        reason whatsoever for not giving full effect to the provisions
        contained in
Section 18
of the Act. In that view of the matter, no
        court, much less the Appellate Tribunal, a creature of the Act
        itself, can refuse to give full effect to the provisions of the statute.
        We have no hesitation in holding that deposit under the second
        proviso to
Section 18(1)
of the Act being a condition precedent for
        preferring an appeal under the said section, the Appellate Tribunal
        had erred in law in entertaining the appeal without directing the
        appellant to comply with the said mandatory requirement.”
131.
In
Har Devi Asnani Vs. State of Rajasthan and Others
18,

the validity of proviso to
Section 65(1)
of the Rajasthan Stamp Act,

1998 came up for consideration in terms of which no revision

application could be entertained unless it was accompanied by a
17   (2011) 4 SCC 548
18   (2011) 14 SCC 160
84
satisfactory proof of payment of 50 per cent of the recoverable

amount.
Relying on the earlier decisions of this Court including in
Government of Andhra Pradesh and Others Vs. P. Laxmi Devi

(Smt.
)19, the challenge was repelled and the view expressed in
P.

Laxmi Devi
(supra) was repeated in
Har Devi Ashani
(supra)

wherein this Court held as under:­

      “In our opinion in this situation it is always open to a party to file a
      writ petition challenging the exorbitant demand made by the
      registering officer under the proviso to Section 47­A alleging that
      the determination made is arbitrary and/or based on extraneous
      considerations, and
in that case
it is always open to the High
      Court, if it is satisfied that the allegation is correct, to set aside
      such exorbitant demand under the proviso to Section 47­
A of the
      Stamp Act
by declaring the demand arbitrary.
It is well settled that
      arbitrariness violates
Article 14
of the Constitution vide
Maneka
      Gandhi v. Union of India
[(1978) 1 SCC 248] . Hence, the party is
      not remediless in this situation.”
132. At the same time,
Section 19
of the Consumer Protection Act,

1986 prescribes a condition for pre­deposit which provides that an

appeal shall not be entertained unless 50 per cent of the amount

awarded by the State Commission or Rs. 35,000/­ whichever is less

is deposited before the National Consumer Disputes Redressal

Commission(NCDRC). This Court while placing reliance on
State of



19 (2008)   4 SCC 720
85
Haryana Vs. Maruti Udyog Ltd. and Others20
; in
Shreenath

Corporation and Others Vs. Consumer Education and Research

Society and Others21
held that such a condition is imposed to

avoid frivolous appeals.
“7.
Section 19
of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 deals with the
     appeals against the order made by the State Commission in
     exercise of its power conferred by sub­clause (i) of clause (a) of
Section 17
and the said section reads as follows:
“19. Appeals.—Any person aggrieved by an order
              made by the State Commission in exercise of its
              powers conferred by sub­clause (i) of clause (a) of
Section 17
may prefer an appeal against such order to
              the National Commission within a period of thirty days
              from the date of the order in such form and manner as
              may be prescribed:
Provided that the National Commission may entertain an appeal
     after the expiry of the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that
     there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period:
Provided further that no appeal by a person, who is required to pay
     any amount in terms of an order of the State Commission, shall be
     entertained by the National Commission unless the appellant has
     deposited in the prescribed manner fifty per cent of the amount or
     rupees thirty­five thousand, whichever is less.”

     On plain reading of the aforesaid
Section 19
, we find that the
     second proviso to
Section 19
of the Act relates to “pre­deposit”
     required for an appeal to be entertained by the National
     Commission.
9. The second proviso to
Section 19
of the Act mandates pre­
     deposit for consideration of an appeal before the National
20 2000(7)   SCC 348
21 2014(8)   SCC 657
86
Commission. It requires 50% of the amount in terms of an order of
     the State Commission or Rs 35,000, whichever is less for
     entertainment of an appeal by the National Commission. Unless
     the appellant has deposited the pre­deposit amount, the appeal
     cannot be entertained by the National Commission. A pre­deposit
     condition to deposit 50% of the amount in terms of the order of the
     State Commission or Rs 35,000 being condition precedent for
     entertaining appeal, it has no nexus with the order of stay, as such
     an order may or may not be passed by the National Commission.
     The condition of pre­deposit is there to avoid frivolous appeals.”
133. Similarly, under
Section 19
of the Micro, Small and Medium

Enterprises Development Act, 2006, any appellant, other than the

supplier, is required to make a pre­deposit of 75 per cent to

maintain an appeal against any decree, award or order made either

by the Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council or by any

institution or center providing alternate dispute resolution services

to which a reference is made by the Council.
Section 19
reads as

follows:­

     “19. Application for setting aside decree, award or order.—No
     application for setting aside any decree, award or other order made
     either by the Council itself or by any institution or centre providing
     alternate dispute resolution services to which a reference is made
     by the Council, shall be entertained by any court unless the
     appellant (not being a supplier) has deposited with it seventy­five
     per cent. of the amount in terms of the decree, award or, as the
     case may be, the other order in the manner directed by such court:
Provided that pending disposal of the application to set aside the
     decree, award or order, the court shall order that such percentage
     of the amount deposited shall be paid to the supplier, as it
     considers reasonable under the circumstances of the case, subject
     to such conditions as it deems necessary to impose.”
87
134. Similarly, the condition of pre­deposit has been examined

recently by this Court in
Tecnimont Pvt. Ltd. (Formerly Known

As Tecnimont ICB Private Limited) Vs. State of Punjab and

Others22
, where the validity of
Section 62(5)
of the Punjab Value

Added Tax Act, 2005 (PVAT) which imposes a condition of 25 per

cent of pre­deposit for hearing of first appeal has been upheld.
Section 62(5)
of the PVAT Act reads as follows:­

       “62. First Appeal
       ……

       (5) No appeal shall be entertained, unless such appeal is
       accompanied by satisfactory proof of the prior minimum payment
       of twenty­five per cent of the total amount of tax, penalty and
       interest, if any.
……..”
135. To be noticed, the intention of the instant legislation appears

to be that the promoters ought to show their bona fides by

depositing the amount so contemplated.
136. It is indeed the right of appeal which is a creature of the

statute, without a statutory provision, creating such a right the

person aggrieved is not entitled to file the appeal. It is neither an

22   AIR 2019 SC 4489
88
absolute right nor an ingredient of natural justice, the principles of

which must be followed in all judicial and quasi­ judicial litigations

and it is always be circumscribed with the conditions of grant.     At

the given time, it is open for the legislature in its wisdom to enact a

law that no appeal shall lie or it may lie on fulfilment of pre­

condition, if any, against the order passed by the Authority in

question.
137. In our considered view, the obligation cast upon the promoter

of pre­deposit under
Section 43(5)
of the Act, being a class in itself,

and the promoters who are in receipt of money which is being

claimed by the home buyers/allottees for refund and determined in

the first place by the competent authority, if legislature in its

wisdom intended to ensure that money once determined by the

authority be saved if appeal is to be preferred at the instance of the

promoter after due compliance of pre­deposit as envisaged under
Section 43(5)
of the Act, in no circumstance can be said to be

onerous as prayed for or in violation of
Articles 14
or 19(1)(g) of the

Constitution of India.
89
Question No.5    :­Whether     the authority has the power to issue

recovery certificates for recovery of the principal amount

under
Section 40(1)
of the Act?
138. To examine this question, it will be apposite to take note of

Section 40 that states regarding the recovery of interest or penalty

or compensation to be recovered as arrears of land revenue, and

reads as under:­
40. Recovery of interest or penalty or compensation and
     enforcement of order, etc.—

     (1) If a promoter or an allottee or a real estate agent, as the case
     may be, fails to pay any interest or penalty or compensation
     imposed on him, by the adjudicating officer or the Regulatory
     Authority or the Appellate Authority, as the case may be, under
     this Act or the rules and regulations made thereunder, it shall be
     recoverable from such promoter or allottee or real estate agent, in
     such manner as may be prescribed as an arrears of land revenue.
     (2) If any adjudicating officer or the Regulatory Authority or the
     Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, issues any order or directs
     any person to do any act, or refrain from doing any act, which it is
     empowered to do under this Act or the rules or regulations made
     thereunder, then in case of failure by any person to comply with
     such order or direction, the same shall be enforced, in such
     manner as may be prescribed.”
139. The submission of the appellants/promoters is that under
Section 40(1)
of the Act only the interest or penalty imposed by the

authority can be recovered as arrears of land revenue and no
90
recovery certificate for the principal amount as determined by the

authority can be issued. If we examine the scheme of the Act, the

power of authority to direct the refund of the principal amount is

explicit in
Section 18
and the interest that is payable is on the

principal amount in other words, there is no interest in the absence

of a principal amount being determined by the competent authority.

Further the statute as such is read to mean that the principal sum

with interest has become a composite amount quantified upon to be

recovered as arrears of land revenue under
Section 40(1)
of the Act.
140. It is settled principle of law that if the plain interpretation does

not fulfil the mandate and object of the Act, this Court has to

interpret the law in consonance with the spirit and purpose of the

statute. There is indeed a visible inconsistency in the powers of the

authority regarding refund of the amount received by the promoter

and the provision of law in
Section 18
and the text of the provision

by which such refund can be referred under Section 40(1). While

harmonising the construction of the scheme of the Act with the

right of recovery as mandated in
Section 40(1)
of the Act keeping in

mind the intention of the legislature to provide for a speedy recovery
91
of the amount invested by the allottee along with the interest

incurred thereon is self­explanatory.    However, if Section 40(1) is

strictly construed and it is understood to mean that only penalty

and interest on the principal amount are recoverable as arrears of

land revenue, it would defeat the basic purpose of the Act.
141. Taking into consideration the scheme of the Act what is to be

returned to the allottee is his own life savings with interest on

computed/quantified by the authority becomes recoverable and

such arrear becomes enforceable in law.         There appears some

ambiguity in
Section 40(1)
of the Act that in our view, by

harmonising the provision with the purpose of the Act, is given

effect to the provisions is allowed to operate rather running either of

them redundant, noticing purport of the legislature and the above­

stated principle into consideration, we make it clear that the

amount which has been determined and refundable to the

allottees/home buyers either by the authority or the adjudicating

officer in terms of the order is recoverable within the ambit of
Section 40(1)
of the Act.
92
142. The upshot of the discussion is that we find no error in the

judgment impugned in the instant appeals.         Consequently, the

batch of appeals are disposed off in the above terms. However, we

make it clear that if any of the appellant intends to prefer appeal

before the Appellate Tribunal against the order of the authority, it

may be open for him to challenge within 30 days from today

provided the appellant(s) comply with the condition of pre­deposit

as contemplated under the proviso to
Section 43(5)
of the Act which

may be decided by the Tribunal on its own merits in accordance

with law. No costs.
143. Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
…………………………………J.
                                     (UDAY UMESH LALIT)


                                     …………………………………J.
                                     (AJAY RASTOGI)


                                     …………………………………J.
                                     (ANIRUDDHA BOSE)
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER 11, 2021
93