[Cites
53
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M.Siddiq (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Mahant Suresh Das on 27 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 5134, 2019 (1) ALJ 194, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 1698, (2018) 11 SCALE 667, (2018) 6 KANT LJ 1, (2018) 4 CURCC 182, 2018 (4) KCCR SN 362 (SC), AIRONLINE 2018 SC 300
Author:
Ashok Bhushan
Bench:
S. Abdul Nazeer
,
Ashok Bhushan
1

                                                                     REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                               
                              CIVIL APPEAL NOS.
                                               10866
                                                    ­10867 OF 2010


             M. SIDDIQ (D) THR. LRS.                   … APPELLANT(S)

                                             VERSUS

             MAHANT SURESH DAS AND OTHERS ETC.        … RESPONDENT(S)

                                              WITH

             C.A.   No.       4768­4771/2011,   C.A.   No.   2636/2011,
             C.A.   No.   821/2011,   C.A.   No.   4739/2011,   C.A.   No.   4905­
             4908/2011,  C.A. No. 2215/2011, C.A. No. 4740/2011, C.A.
             No.   2894/2011,   C.A.   No.   6965/2011,   C.A.   No.   4192/2011,
             C.A.   No.   5498/2011,   C.A.   No.   7226/2011,   C.A.   No.
             8096/2011,       C.A.No.   ________   of   2018   (@   Diary   No.
             22744/2017).




                                        J U D G M E N T



             ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.(For Self & Dipak Misra, CJI.)

                         These appeals were fixed for commencement of final

             arguments on 05.12.2017, when Dr. Rajeev Dhavan, learned

             senior   counsel   appearing   for   the   appellants   (C.A.   No.
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
DEEPAK GUGLANI
Date: 2018.09.27
16:02:26 IST
Reason:      10866­10867 of 2010 and C.A. No. 2215 of 2011) submitted

             that   the   Constitution   Bench   Judgment   of   this   Court   in
                                                                        2

Dr.   M.   Ismail   Faruqui   and   Ors.   Vs.   Union   of   India   and

Ors.,   (1994)   6   SCC   360  (hereinafter   referred   to   as

“Ismail   Faruqui’s  case”)   needs   reconsideration,   hence

the   reference   be   made   to   a   larger   Bench.     The   above

submission of Dr. Dhavan was opposed by learned counsel

appearing for the respondents.   After completion of the

pleadings, when matter was again taken on 14.03.2018, we

thought it appropriate that we should hear Dr. Dhavan as

to   whether   the   judgment   in  Ismail   Faruqui’s  case

requires reconsideration.  

2.   We   have   heard   Dr.   Rajeev   Dhavan,   learned   senior

counsel  for  the  appellants,  Shri   K.  Parasaran   and   Shri

C.S.   Vaidyanathan,   learned   senior   counsel   for   the

respondents in Civil Appeal Nos. 4768­4771 of 2011, Shri

Tushar   Mehta,   learned   Additional   Solicitor   General   has

appeared for the State of U.P.  We have also heard Shri

P.N.   Mishra,   Shri   S.K.   Jain   and   several   other   learned

counsels.       Shri   Raju   Ramachandran,   learned   senior

counsel   has   also   addressed   submissions   supporting   the

reference   to   larger   Bench.     Learned   counsel   for   the

parties have given their notes of submissions. 

3.   Before   we   notice   the   respective   submissions   of
                                                                    3

learned counsel for the parties, we need to notice few

facts,   leading   to   the     Constitution   Bench   decision   in

Ismail   Faruqui’s  case.     The   sequence   of   events   which

lead   filing   of   these   appeals   be   also   noticed.       The

Constitution   Bench   in  Ismail   Faruqui’s  case   has

extracted   few   facts   from   White   Paper,   which   was

published by Central Government.  In Para 5 and 6 of the

judgment, the Constitution Bench noticed:­

     “5. The ‘Overview’ at the commencement of the
     White Paper in Chapter I states thus:

           “1.1   Ayodhya   situated   in   the   north
           of   India   is   a   township   in   District
           Faizabad   of   Uttar   Pradesh.   It   has
           long been a place of holy pilgrimage
           because   of   its   mention   in   the   epic
           Ramayana   as   the   place   of   birth   of
           Sri   Ram.   The   structure   commonly
           known   as   Ram   Janma   Bhoomi­Babri
           Masjid   was   erected   as   a   mosque   by
           one Mir Baqi in Ayodhya in 1528 AD.
           It is claimed by some sections that
           it was built at the site believed to
           be the birthspot of Sri Ram where a
           temple   had   stood   earlier.   This
           resulted in a long­standing dispute.

           1.2   The   controversy   entered   a   new
           phase   with   the   placing   of   idols   in
           the   disputed   structure   in   December
           1949.   The   premises   were   attached
           under
Section   145
of the   Code   of
           Criminal Procedure. Civil suits were
           filed   shortly   thereafter.   Interim
           orders   in   these   civil   suits
                                                            4

     restrained the parties from removing
     the idols or interfering  with their
     worship.   In   effect,   therefore,   from
     December   1949   till   6­12­1992   the
     structure   had   not   been   used   as   a
     mosque.”

6.  The movement to construct a Ram Temple at
the   site   of   the   disputed   structure   gathered
momentum   in   recent   years   which   became   a
matter   of   great   controversy   and   a   source   of
tension.   This   led   to   several   parleys   the
details   of   which   are   not   very   material   for
the   present   purpose.   These   parleys   involving
the   Vishwa   Hindu   Parishad   (VHP)   and   the   All
India Babri Masjid Action Committee (AIBMAC),
however, failed to resolve the dispute. A new
dimension   was   added   to   the   campaign   for
construction of the temple with the formation
of   the   Government   in   Uttar   Pradesh   in   June
1991 by the Bhartiya Janata Party (BJP) which
declared   its   commitment   to   the   construction
of the temple and took certain steps like the
acquisition   of   land   adjoining   the   disputed
structure   while   leaving   out   the   disputed
structure   itself   from   the acquisition.   The
focus   of   the   temple   construction   movement
from   October   1991   was   to   start   construction
of the temple by way of  kar sewa  on the land
acquired   by   the   Government   of   Uttar   Pradesh
while   leaving   the   disputed   structure   intact.
This   attempt   did   not   succeed   and   there   was
litigation   in   the   Allahabad   High   Court   as
well as in this Court. There was a call for
resumption of kar sewa from 6­12­1992 and the
announcement made by the organisers was for a
symbolic  kar   sewa  without   violation   of   the
court   orders   including   those   made   in   the
proceedings   pending   in   this   Court.   In   spite
of initial reports from Ayodhya on 6­12­1992
indicating an air of normalcy, around midday
a   crowd   addressed   by   leaders   of   BJP,   VHP,
etc.,   climbed   the   Ram   Janma   Bhumi­Babri
Masjid   (RJM­BM)   structure   and   started
                                                                  5

     damaging the domes. Within a short time, the
     entire structure was demolished and razed to
     the   ground.   Indeed,   it   was   an   act   of
     “national shame”. What was demolished was not
     merely an ancient structure; but the faith of
     the   minorities   in   the   sense   of   justice   and
     fairplay of majority. It shook their faith in
     the rule of law and constitutional processes.
     A   five­hundred­year­old   structure   which   was
     defenceless   and   whose   safety   was   a   sacred
     trust   in   the   hands   of   the   State   Government
     was demolished.”

4.   The Constitution Bench has noticed details of suits,

which were filed in the year 1950 and thereafter, which

suits were ultimately transferred to the Allahabad High

Court to be heard together in the year 1989.  In Para 9

of the judgment, following has been noticed:­

     “9.  A   brief reference   to   certain   suits   in
     this connection may now be made. In 1950, two
     suits   were   filed   by   some   Hindus;   in   one   of
     these suits in January 1950, the trial court
     passed   interim   orders   whereby   the   idols
     remained   at   the   place   where   they   were
     installed in December 1949 and their puja by
     the   Hindus   continued.   The   interim   order   was
     confirmed by the High Court in April 1955. On
     1­2­1986,   the   District   Judge   ordered   the
     opening of the lock placed on a grill leading
     to the sanctum sanctorum of the shrine in the
     disputed structure and permitted puja by the
     Hindu devotees. In 1959, a suit was filed by
     the   Nirmohi   Akhara   claiming   title   to   the
     disputed structure. In 1981, another suit was
     filed   claiming   title   to   the   disputed
     structure by the Sunni Central Wakf Board. In
     1989,   Deoki   Nandan   Agarwal,   as   the   next
     friend   of   the   Deity   filed   a   title   suit   in
     respect   of   the   disputed   structure.   In   1989,
                                                                      6

     the   aforementioned   suits   were   transferred   to
     the Allahabad High Court and were ordered to
     be   heard   together.   On   14­8­1989,   the   High
     Court   ordered   the   maintenance   of   status   quo
     in   respect   of   the   disputed   structure
     (Appendix­I   to   the   White   Paper).   As   earlier
     mentioned,   it   is   stated   in   para   1.2   of   the
     White Paper that:
           “…  interim   orders   in   these   civil
           suits   restrained   the   parties   from
           removing   the   idols   or   interfering
           with   their   worship.   In   effect,
           therefore,   from   December   1949   till
           6­12­1992 the structure had not been
           used as a mosque.”


5.   As   a   result   of   the   happenings   at   Ayodhya   on

06.12.1992, the President of India issued a proclamation

under
Article 356
of the Constitution of India assuming

to himself all the functions of the Government of Uttar

Pradesh,   dissolving   the   U.P.   Vidhan   Sabha.     As   a

consequence of the events at Ayodhya on 06.12.1992, the

Central   Government   decided   to   acquire   all   areas   in

dispute   in   the   suits   pending   in   the   Allahabad   High

Court. It was also decided to acquire suitable adjacent

area,   which   would   be   made   available   to   two   Trusts   for

construction of a Ram Temple and a Mosque respectively.

The Government of India has also decided to request the

President   to   seek   the   opinion   of   the   Supreme   Court   on

the  question   whether   there   was   a   Hindu   temple   existing
                                                                     7

on   the   site   where   the   disputed   structure   stood.     An

ordinance   was   issued   on   07.01.1993   namely   “Acquisition

of Certain Area at Ayodhya Ordinance” for acquisition of

67.703 acres of land in the Ram Janam Bhumi­Babri Masjid

complex.  A reference to the Supreme Court under
Article

143
of the Constitution was also made on the same day,

i.e. 07.01.1993.   The Ordinance No. 8 of 1993 had been

replaced   by  the  Acquisition  of   Certain   Area  at   Ayodhya

Act, 1993 (No. 33 of 1993) (hereinafter referred to as

“Act,   1993”).     A   Writ   Petition   Under
Article   32
was

filed in this Court challenging the validity of the Act

No.   33   of   1993.     Several   writ   petitions   at   Allahabad

High   Court   were   also   filed   challenging   various   aspects

of the Act, 1993. This Court exercising its jurisdiction

under
Article   139A
had   transferred   the   writ   petitions,

which   were   pending   in   the   High   Court.     The   Writ

Petitions under
Article 32
, transferred cases from High

Court   of   Allahabad   as   well   as   Reference   No.1   of   1993

made   by   President   under
Article   143
were   all   heard

together   and   decided   by   common   judgment   dated

24.10.1994, where the Constitution Bench had upheld the

validity of the Act except that of
Section 4(3)
of the
                                                                      8

Act, 1993 which was struck down.  

6.   After   the   judgment   of   this   Court   in   the   above

Constitution   Bench,   all   the   suits,   which   had   been

transferred   by   the   High   Court   to   be   heard   by   a   Full

Bench of the High Court stood revived.  One Mohd. Aslam,

who   was   also   one   of   the   petitioners   in   Constitution

Bench   Judgment   in  Ismail   Faruqui’s  case   filed   a   writ

petition   seeking   certain   reliefs   with   regard   to   67.703

acres of land acquired under the Act, 1993.   This Court

on 13.03.2002 passed an interim order.  Paras 4 and 5 of

the interim order are as follows:­

     “4.    In   the   meantime,   we   direct   that   on
     67.703   acres   of   acquired   land   located   in
     various plots detailed in the Schedule to the
     Acquisition   of   Certain   Area   at   Ayodhya   Act,
     1993,   which   is   vested   in   the   Central
     Government, no religious activity of any kind
     by anyone either symbolic or actual including
     bhumi puja or shila puja, shall be permitted
     or allowed to take place.

     5.    Furthermore,   no   part   of   the   aforesaid
     land   shall   be   handed   over   by   the   Government
     to   anyone   and   the   same   shall   be   retained   by
     the Government till the disposal of this writ
     petition   nor   shall   any   part   of   this   land   be
     permitted   to   be   occupied   or   used   for   any
     religious   purpose   or   in   connection
     therewith.”

7.   The   above   writ   petition   was   ultimately   decided   on

31.03.2003   by   a   Constitution   Bench,   which   judgment   is
                                                                      9

reported in  (2003) 4 SCC 1, Mohd. Aslam alias Bhure Vs.

Union   of   India   and   Others.  Before   the   Constitution

Bench,   both the   parties   had   placed   reliance   on  Ismail

Faruqui’s case. This Court disposed of the writ petition

directing   that   order   of  this   Court   dated   13.03.2002  as

modified   on   14.03.2002   should   be   operative   until

disposal   of   the   suits   in   the   High   Court   of   Allahabad.

The Allahabad High Court after hearing all the suits on

merits   decided   all   the   suits   vide   its   judgment   dated

30.08.2010.  The parties aggrieved ­ both plaintiffs and

defendants   in   the   original   suits   have   filed   these

appeals in this Court.  

8.   Dr.   Rajeev   Dhavan   submits   that   judgment   in  Ismail

Faruqui’s  case   had   made   observations   that   a   mosque   is

not an essential part of the practice of the religion of

Islam   and   namaz   (prayer)   by   Muslims   can   be   offered

anywhere,   even   in   open.     The   observations   made   by   the

Constitution   Bench   has   influenced   the   decisions   under

the   appeal,   the   law   laid   down   in  Ismail   Faruqui  in

relation to praying in a mosque not being an essential

practice is contrary to both, i.e. the law relating to

essential   practice   and   the   process   by   which   essential
                                                                     10

practice is to be considered. Whether essential practice

can   be   decided   on   a   mere  ipse   dixit  of   the   Court   or

whether  the  Court   is   obliged   to  examine  belief,  tenets

and   practices,   is   a   pure   question   of   law.     The  Ismail

Faruqui’s   judgment   being   devoid  of   any   examination   on

the   above issues,     the   matter   need   to   go   to   a   larger

Bench. 

9.   Dr. Dhavan specifically referred to paras 78 and 82

of   the   judgment   in  Ismail   Faruqui’s  case.     He

specifically   attacked   following   observations   in

Paragraph 78 :­

     “78.   While   offer   of   prayer   or   worship   is   a
     religious   practice,   its   offering   at   every
     location   where   such   prayers   can   be   offered
     would not be an essential or integral part of
     such religious practice unless the place has
     a   particular   significance   for   that   religion
     so   as   to   form   an   essential   or   integral   part
     thereof.   Places   of   worship   of   any   religion
     having   particular   significance   for   that
     religion, to make it an essential or integral
     part   of   the   religion,   stand   on   a   different
     footing   and   have   to   be   treated   differently
     and more reverentially.”


10. In   Para   82,   following   observation   is   specifically

attacked:­

     “A   mosque   is   not   an   essential   part   of   the
     practice   of   the   religion   of   Islam   and
     namaz(prayer)   by   Muslims   can   be   offered
                                                                   11

     anywhere, even in open.”


11. He   submits   that   essential   practice   of   a   religion

requires   a   detailed   examination.     He   has   referred   to

various   judgments   of   this   Court   to   support   his

submission that wherever this Court had to determine the

essential   practice   of   a   religion,   detailed   examination

was  undertaken.     He  submits  that  Ismail   Faruqui’s   case

does   not   refer   to   any   material   nor   enters   into   any

detailed   examination   before   making   the   observations   in

Paragraphs   78   and   82   as   noticed   above.     Dr.   Dhavan

further   submits   that   a   broad   test   of   essentiality   as

laid   down   by   Seven   Judges   Bench   in  The   Commissioner,

Hindu   Religious   Endowments,   Madras   Vs.   Sri   Lakshmindra

Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt, 1954 SCR 1005 cannot

be   cut   down   by   a   later   judgment   of   lesser   strength,

which judgments have introduced the test of integrality.

He   submits   that   the   test   of   integrality   is

interchangable   with   essentiality   test.     Dr.        Dhavan,

during his submissions, has taken us to submissions made

by various parties before the High Court, where reliance

was   placed   on  Ismail   Faruqui’s   case.     He   has   also

referred   to   various    grounds    taken   in   these   appeals,
                                                                   12

which   grounds   rely   on   the   judgment   of  Ismail   Faruqui’s

case.  He submits that the above furnishes ample grounds

for   appellants   to   pray   for   reconsideration   of  Ismail

Faruqui’s case.   Dr. Dhavan in his notes 'For reference

to   a   larger   Bench'   has   clarified   that   questionable

aspects   as   noted   above   are   not   the   ratio   of  Ismail

Faruqui’s case.  Dr. Dhavan submits that ratio in Ismail

Faruqui’s   case   can   be   summed   up   to   the   following

effect:­

   (i)     The suits revive in their entirety.
   (ii)    The   acquisition   was   legally   competent,
           traceable   to   List   III   and   Entry   42   of   the
           Seventh Schedule of the Constitution.
   (iii) The   word   ‘vest’   has   multiple   meanings   and
           implied   that   the   status   of   the   Central
           Government   was   that   of   a   statutory   receiver
           which   would   dispense   with   the   land   (including
           the   other   areas   acquired)   in   accordance   with
           the   judgment   in   the   suits   rather   than   the
           Reference which was declined. 
   (iv)    Status quo as in Section 7(2) of the Act would
           be   maintained,   justified   on   the   basis   of
           comparative user since 1949.
   (v)     Secularism   is   a   facet   of         equality   and
           represents equal treatment of all religions in
           their   own   terms   and   with   equal   respect   and
                                                                     13

           concern for all.


12. Shri   K. Parasaran,   learned   senior   counsel   refuting

the submissions of Dr. Dhavan submitted that the prayer

for reconsideration of the judgment in  Ismail Faruqui’s

case   is   not   maintainable   at   the   instance   of   the

appellants.   He submitted that those who were eo nomine

parties   to   the   proceedings   in   the   case   in  Ismail

Faruqui,  litigated   bona   fide   in   respect   of   a   public

right viz. the right of the Muslim public, all persons

interested   in   such   right   shall,   for   the   purposes   of
Section   11
Civil   Procedure   Code,   be   deemed   to   claim

under   the   persons   so   litigating   and   are   barred   by   Res

Judicata in view of Explanation VI to
Section 11
C.P.C.

He   submits   that  the  interests   of   Muslim  community   were

adequately   represented   before   this   Court   in  Ismail

Faruqui’s case.     He further submits that the judgment

in Ismail Faruqui’s case is binding on those who are eo­

nomine parties thereto.  Even apart from the question of

res judicata, the doctrine of representation binds those

whose   interests   are   the   same   in   the   subject   matter   of

Ram   Janam   Bhumi­Babri   Masjid   as   those   of   eo­nomine

parties.     He   submitted   that   the   appellants   are   not
                                                                        14

entitled   to   request   for   reconsideration   of   the   said

judgment on the principle of doctrine of representation.

Mr. Parasaran submitted that to reconsider the judgment

in Ismail Faruqui’s case will be an exercise in futility

as   the   judgment   therein   is   binding   on   the   present

appellants. Assuming without admitting that by a further

reference   to   a   larger   bench  Ismail   Faruqui’s   case   is

overruled,   nevertheless,   in   so   far   as   “Ayodhya

Janmasthan   Babri   Masjid”   is   concerned,   the   judgment   in

Ismail   Faruqui’s   case   will   still   be   binding   on   the

appellants   on   the   principle   of   finality.     He   submits

that   in   the   present   case,   the   submissions   made   were   a

reargument   of   the   submissions   made   in  Ismail   Faruqui’s

case as if it were an appeal against the said judgment

by canvassing the correctness of the said judgment.   He

further submits that in addition to being binding on the

parties,   the   judgment   operates   as   a  declaration  of   law

under
Article 141
of the Constitution.     

13. Shri Parasaran further submits that observations in

Ismail Faruqui’s  case that a mosque is not an essential

part   of   the   practice   of   Islam   have   to   be   read   in   the

context   of   validity   of   the   acquisition   of   the
                                                                    15

suit   property   under   the   Act,   1993.       He   submits   that

this Court has not ruled that offering namaz by Muslims

is   not   an   essential   religious   practice.   It   only   ruled

that   the   right   to   offer   namaz  at   every   mosque   that

exists  is   not   essential   religious   practice.   But   if   a

place   of   worship   of   any   religion   has   a   particular

significance   for   that   religion,   enough   to   make   it   an

essential   or   integral   part   of   the   religion,   then   it

would stand on a different footing and would have to be

treated       differently        and       more       reverentially.

Mr.Parasaran   respectfully   submitted   that   the   thrust   of

the reasoning of this Court has to be understood as to

the freedom of religion under
Articles 25
and
26
of the

Constitution   in   the   context   of the   inherent   sovereign

power   of   the   State   to   compulsorily   acquire   property  in

the exercise of its jurisdiction of eminent domain in a

secular democracy.   

14. Shri Parasaran further submits that the fundamental

right of the Muslim community under
Article 25
, to offer

namaz, is not affected because the Babri Masjid was not

a mosque with particular significance for that religion.

The  faith/practice   to   offer  namaz   is   an  essential   part
                                                                    16

of   Muslim   religion   and,  therefore,   it   may   be   performed

in   any   mosque   at   Ayodhya.     Ayodhya   is   of   particular

significance   to   the   Hindus   as   a   place   of   pilgrimage

because   of   the   ancient   belief   that   Lord   Ram   was   born

there.     He   further   submits   that   the   impact   of

acquisition is equally on the right and interest of both

the communities. Shri Parasaran, during his submissions,

has   also   tried   to  distinguish  the   cases   relied   by   the

appellants   to   support   their   submissions   in   favour   of

reference.  

15. Shri C.S. Vaidyanathan has submitted that present is

not a case where judgment of  Ismail Faruqui’s case need

any   reference   to   a   larger   Bench.   He   has   adopted   the

submissions made by Shri Parasaran.

16. Shri   Tushar   Mehta,   learned   Additional   Solicitor

General,   submits   that   Constitution   Bench   judgment   of

this   Court   in  Ismail   Faruqui’s   case   is   a   correct   law,

which does not deserves to be disturbed by referring it

to a larger Bench.   Shri Mehta further submits that the

prayer   made by   the   appellants   for   referring   to   larger

Bench   deserves   to   be   rejected   on   the   ground   of

inordinate delay.      He submits that judgment was rendered
                                                                     17

in 1994.   The judgment came for consideration in  Mohd.

Aslam’s case, (2003) 4 SCC 1 where both the parties have

relied   on   the   judgments.     Had   there   been   any   genuine

grounds,   request   for   reference   ought   to  have   been   made

at that time.  He further submits that a request is not

a bona fide request and has been made with the intent to

delay   the   proceedings.     Shri   Tushar   Mehta,   learned

Additional   Solicitor   General   has   reiterated   his

submissions that State of U.P. is neutral in so far as

merits   of   the   case   of   either   of   the   parties   is

concerned.  

17. Shri   Parmeshwar   Nath   Mishra,   learned   counsel

appearing   for   one   of   the   respondents submits   that   all

Mosques of the World are not essential for practice of

Islam.    During   the   submissions,  he   referred  to   various

texts, sculptures of the religion of Islam.   He further

submits that the Al­Masjid, Al­Haram i.e. Ka‘ba in Mecca

is   a   mosque  of   particular   significance   for   the   reasons

that   there   is   Quranic   command   to   offer   prayers   facing

towards   Ka‘ba   and   to   perform   Haj   as   well   as   Umra   in

Ka‘ba   without   which   right   to   practise   the   religion   of

Islam is not conceivable.  Two other Mosques namely, Al­
                                                                      18

Masjid Al­Aqsa i.e. Baitul Muqaddas in Jerusalem and Al­

Masjid   of   Nabi   at   Madina   also   have   particular

significances   for   the   reason   that   besides   Ka‘ba,

pilgrimage to these two mosques have also been commanded

by   the   sacred   Hadiths.     Shri   Mishra   in   his   submission

has   referred   to   and   relied   on   various   texts   and

sculptures.  He has referred to verses of Holy Quran and

Hadiths,   which   are   principal   source   of   religion   of

Islam, its beliefs, doctrine, tenets and practices.  

18. Shri S.K. Jain, learned senior counsel appearing for

Nirmohi   Akhada   has   also   refuted   the   submission   of   Dr.

Dhavan   that  Ismail   Faruqui’s   case   needs  to   be   referred

to a larger Bench.

19. Dr.   Rajeev   Dhavan   in   his   submissions   in   rejoinder

refutes the submission of Shri Parasaran that principle

of   res   judicata   is   attracted   in   the   present   case.     He

submits that Ismail Faruqui’s case was about a challenge

to the Act, 1993 and the Presidential Reference and the

question as to whether in the light of the Act, 1993 the

suits abated due to
Section 4(3)
of the Act, 1993.  The

cases   under   these   appeals   are   from   suits,   where   the

issues were entirely different.              He submits that for
                                                                   19

constituting   a   matter   res   judicata   the   following

conditions must be satisfied, namely:­

    1.   The matter directly and substantially in issue
         in   the   subsequent   suit   or   issue   must   be   the
         same   matter   which   was   directly   and
         substantially in issue in the former suit;
    2.   The  former  suit  must   have  been  a  suit  between
         the same parties or between parties under whom
         they or any of them claim;
    3.   The parties must have litigated under the same
         title in the former suit;
    4.   The court which decided the former suit must be
         a court competent to try the subsequent suit or
         the   suit   in   which   such   issue   is   subsequently
         raised; and
    5.   The matter directly and substantially in issue
         in the subsequent suit must have been heard and
         finally decided by the Court in the first suit.
         Further Explanation I shows that it is not the
         date   on   which   the   suit   is   filed   that   matters
         but the date on which the suit is decided, so
         that even if a suit was filed later, it will be
         a  former   suit  if   it  has  been  decided   earlier.
         In   order   therefore   that   the   decision   in   the
         earlier two appeals dismissed by the High Court
         operates   as   res   judicata   it   will   have   to   be
         seen whether all the five conditions mentioned
         above have been satisfied.         
                                                                     20

20. He   submits   that   matter,   which   was   directly   and

substantially   in   issue   in   the   suits   is   entirely

different from the issues, which came for consideration

in   the   case   of  Ismail   Faruqui.  His   submission   is   that

Ismail   Faruqui’s   case   was   concerned  with   the   Act,   1993

and the Presidential Reference.  He further submits that

issue   of   essentiality   of   a   Mosque   generally   was   not

before the Court and emerged only in the judgment.   He

further submits that pure questions of law are not res

judicata.     The   ipse   dixit   of   the   Court   that   something

is,   or   not   the   essential   practice   is   contrary   to   law.

He   further   submits   that  in   the   Constitution  Bench,   the

suits   were   not   transferred   rather   it   was   the   writ

petitions,   which   were   filed   in   the   High   Court

challenging   the   Act,   1993,   were   transferred.     No

transfer   of   the   suit   having   been   made   in   the   Supreme

Court   to   be  heard   alongwith  Ismail   Faruqui’s   case,   the

judgment in  Ismail Faruqui’s case cannot be said to be

judgment   in   the   suits.     What   constitute   an   essential

practice   and   how   it   is   to   be   established   is   a   pure

question of law and not amenable to res judicata.  It is

open   to   this   court   to   examine   the   law   relating   to
                                                                     21

determination and application of the essential practices

test.   The observations on prayer in a Mosque not being

essential   or   concept   of   particular   significance   and

comparative   significance   are   without   foundation.

Replying   to   the   submission   of   Shri   Tushar   Mehta,   Dr.

Dhavan   submits   that   State   has   not   taken   a   non­neutral

stance   in   the   present   proceedings.     He   submits   that

there   is   no   delay   on   the   part   of   the   appellants   in

praying   for   reconsideration   of            Ismail   Faruqui’s

judgment.  He submits that impugned judgment of the High

Court is affected by the observations made in the Ismail

Faruqui’s   case.     He   submits     that   submission   of   Shri

Tushar   Mehta   that   prayer   is   not   bonafide   and   has   been

made   only   to   delay   the   proceedings   are   incorrect   and

deserves to be rejected.   Dr. Dhavan has also referred

to   various   observations  made   by  judgment   in  High   Court

to   support    its   submissions   that   judgment   of  Ismail

Faruqui’s  case  has  influenced   the   judgment  of   the   High

Court.     He has further referred to various submissions

made by the learned counsel for the parties relying on

judgment of Ismail Faruqui’s case before the High Court.

He further submits that in these appeals also, several
                                                                       22

grounds have been taken by the different learned counsel

relying on Ismail Faruqui’s case.  

21. Learned counsel for the parties have referred to and

relied   on   various   judgments  of   this  Court,   which   shall

be   referred   to   while   considering   the   submissions   in

detail. 

22. Before   we   enter   into   the   submissions   advanced   by

the   learned   counsel   for   the   parties   it   is   relevant   to

notice   certain   established   principle   on   reading   of   a

judgment   of   the   Court.   The   focal   point   in   the   present

case being Constitution Bench judgment in  Dr. M. Ismail

Faruqui & Ors.  vs. Union of India & Ors. reported    in

(1994)   6   SCC   360.  We   have   to   find   out   the   context   of

observations made in the judgment which according to the

appellant   are   questionable   and   to   decide   whether   the

said observations furnish any ground for reconsideration

of the Constitution Bench judgment. The most celebrated

principle   on   reading   of   a   judgment   of   a   Court   of   law

which has been approved time and again by this Court is

the statement by LORD HALSBURY in Quinn v. Leathem, 1901

AC 495, where following was laid down:

          “Before   discussing   the   case   of   Allen   v.
     Flood   (1898)   AC   1   and   what   was   decided
                                                                 23

    therein,   there   are   two   observations   of   a
    general   character   which   I   wish   to   make,   and
    one is to repeat what I have very often said
    before,   that   every   judgment   must   be   read   as
    applicable to the particular facts proved, or
    assumed to be proved, since the generality of
    the expressions which may be found there are
    not   intended   to   be   expositions   of   the   whole
    law,   but   are   governed   and   qualified   by   the
    particular   facts   of   the   case   in   which   such
    expressions   are   to   be   found.   The   other   is
    that a case is only an authority for what it
    actually decides. I entirely deny that it can
    be quoted for a proposition that may seem to
    follow   logically   from   it.   Such   a   mode   of
    reasoning assumes that the law is necessarily
    a   logical   code,   whereas   every   lawyer   must
    acknowledge   that   the   law   is   not   always
    logical at all. ”


23. The following words of LORD DENNING in the matter of

applying precedents have become locus classicus:

          “Each case depends on its own facts and a
    close similarity between one case and another
    is   not   enough   because   even   a   single
    significant   detail   may   alter   the   entire
    aspect,   in   deciding   such   cases,   one   should
    avoid the temptation to decide cases (as said
    by   Cardozo,   J.   )   by   matching   the   colour   of
    one   case   against   the   colour   of   another.   To
    decide therefore, on which side of the line a
    case falls, the broad resemblance to another
    case is not at all decisive. 

                             * * *

         Precedent should be followed only so far
    as it marks the path of justice, but you must
    cut   the   dead   wood   and   trim   off   the   side
    branches else you will find yourself lost in
    thickets and branches. My plea is to keep the
                                                                   24

     path   of   justice   clear   of   obstructions   which
     could impede it.”

     The above passage has been quoted with approval by
this Court in  Sarva Shramik Sanghatana (KV), Mumbai vs.
State of Maharashtra and others, (2008) 1 SCC 494.



24. In   the   Constitution   Bench   judgment   in  Islamic

Academy of Education and  another v. State of  Karnataka

and others, (2003) 6 SCC 697,  Chief Justice  V.N. Khare

speaking for majority held:

     “The ratio decidendi of a Judgment has to be
     found   out   only   on   reading   the   entire
     Judgment.   In   fact   the   ratio   of   the   judgment
     is   what   is   set   out   in   the   judgment   itself.
     The answer to the question would necessarily
     have to be read in the context of what is set
     out in the judgment and not in isolation. In
     case   of   any   doubt   as   regards   any
     observations,   reasons   and   principles,   the
     other   part   of   the   judgment   has   to   be   looked
     into. By reading a line here and there from,
     the judgment, one cannot find out the entire
     ratio   decidendi   of   the   judgment.   We,
     therefore,   while   giving   our   clarifications,
     are   deposed   to   look   into   other   parts   of   the
     Judgment other than those portions which may
     be relied upon.” 



25. Justice S.B. Sinha, J. in his concurring opinion has

reiterated   the   principles   of   interpretation   of   a

judgment   in   paragraphs   139   to   146.   Following   has   been
                                                                  25

held in paragraphs 139­146:


    “INTERPRETATION OF A JUDGMENT
          139. A judgment, it is trite, is not to
    be read as a statute. The ratio decidendi of
    a   judgment   is   its   reasoning   which   can   be
    deciphered only upon reading the same in its
    entirety.   The   ratio   decidendi   of   a   case   or
    the   principles   and   reasons   on   which   it   is
    based   is   distinct   from   the   relief   finally
    granted   or   the   manner   adopted   for   its
    disposal.
    [See  Executive   Engineer,   Dhenkanal   Minor
    Irrigation   Division   v.   N.C.   Budharaj
    [2001]2 SCC 721].

         140.  In   Padma   Sundara   Rao   v.   State   of
    T.N.,(2002) 3 SCC 533, it is stated: (SCC p.
    540 paragraph 9)

          "There   is   always   peril   in   treating   the
    words of a speech or judgment as though they
    are words in a legislative enactment, and it
    is to be remembered that judicial utterances
    are   made   in   the   setting   of   the   facts   of   a
    particular   case,   said   Lord   Morris   in
    Herrington v. British Railways Board (1972) 2
    WLR   537   [Sub   nom   British   Railways   Board   v.
    Herrington,   (1972)   1   All   ER   749.
    Circumstantial flexibility, one additional or
    different fact may make a world of difference
    between conclusions in two cases."
    [See   also  Haryana   Financial   Corporation   v.
    Jagadamba Oil Mills (2002 3 SCC 496]

         141. In General Electric Co. v. Renusagar
    Power   Co.,   (1987)   4   SCC   137,   it   was   held:
    (SCC p.157, paragraph 20)

          "As often enough pointed out by us, words
    and expressions used in a judgment are not to
    be   construed in   the   same   manner   as   statutes
    or   as   words   and   expressions   defined   in
                                                               26

statutes. We do not have any doubt that when
the words "adjudication of the merits of the
controversy   in   the   suit"   were   used   by   this
Court in State of U.P. v. Janki Saran Kailash
Chandra  [1974]1SCR31   ,   the   words   were   not
used   to   take   in   every   adjudication   which
brought   to   an   end   the   proceeding   before   the
court   in   whatever   manner   but   were   meant   to
cover only such adjudication as touched upon
the   real   dispute   between   the   parties   which
gave   rise   to   the   action.   Objections   to
adjudication   of   the   disputes   between   the
parties, on whatever ground are in truth not
aids to the progress of the suit but hurdles
to   such   progress.   Adjudication   of   such
objections   cannot   be   termed   as   adjudication
of the merits of the controversy in the suit.
As   we   said   earlier,   a   broad   view   has   to   be
taken   of   the   principles   involved   and   narrow
and   technical   interpretation   which   tends   to
defeat the object of the legislation must be
avoided." 

142. In  Rajeshwar Prasad Mishra v. The State
of   West,   Bengal,  AIR   1965   SC   1887,   it   was
held: 

      "
Article   141
empowers   the   Supreme   Court
to   declare   the   law   and   enact   it.   Hence   the
observation   of   the   Supreme   Court   should   not
be   read   as   statutory   enactments.   It   is   also
well   known   that   ratio   of   a   decision   is   the
reasons assigned therein."
(See   also  Amar   Nath   Om   Prakash   and   Ors.   v.
State   of   Punjab[1985]   1   SCC   345   and  Hameed
Joharan v. Abdul Salam, 2001 (7) SCC 573).

      143.   It   will   not,   therefore,   be   correct
to   contend,   as   has   been   contended   by   Mr.
Nariman, that answers to the questions would
be   the   ratio   to   a   judgment.   The   answers   to
the   questions   are   merely   conclusions.   They
have to be interpreted, in a case of doubt or
dispute with the reasons assigned in support
                                                                   27

     thereof   in   the   body   of   the   judgment,   where
     for, it would be essential to read the other
     paragraphs   of   the   judgment   also.   It   is   also
     permissible for this purpose (albeit only in
     certain   cases   and   if   there   exist   strong   and
     cogent   reasons)   to   look   to   the   pleadings   of
     the parties.

          144. In Keshav Chandra Joshi  v. Union of
     India, 1992 Supp (1) SCC 272, this Court when
     faced   with   difficulties   where   specific
     guidelines   had   been   laid   down   for
     determination of seniority in Direct Recruits
     Class II Engineering Officers' Association v.
     State of Maharashtra, (1990) 2 SCC 715, held
     that   the   conclusions   have   to   be   read   along
     with the discussions and the reasons given in
     the body of the judgment.

           145. It is further trite that a decision
     is   an   authority   for   what   it   decides   and   not
     what can be logically deduced therefrom. [See
     Union   of   India   v.   Chajju   Ram,   (2003)   5   SCC
     568.

           146. The judgment of this Court in T.M.A.
     Pai   Foundations,   (2002)   8   SCC   481,  will,
     therefore,   have   to   be   construed   or   to   be
     interpreted on the aforementioned principles,
     The   Court   cannot   read   some   sentences   from
     here   and   there   to   find   out   the   intent   and
     purport   of   the   decision   by   not   only
     considering   what   has   been   said   therein   but
     the   text   and   context   in   which   it   was   said.
     For   the   said   purpose   the   Court   may   also
     consider   the   constitutional   or   relevant,
     statutory   provisions   vis­a­vis   its   earlier
     decisions on which reliance has been placed.”

26. Justice Arijit Pasayat, J. speaking for the Court in

Commissioner   of   Central   Excise,   Delhi   vs.   Allied   Air­

conditioning Corporation (Regd.), (2006) 7 SCC 735, held
                                                                      28

that the judgment should be understood in the light of

facts   of   the   case   and no   more   should   be   read   into   it

than what it actually says. In paragraph 8 following has

been laid down:

           “8.....A judgment should be understood in
     the   light   of   facts   of   the   case   and   no   more
     should be read into it than what it actually
     says. It is neither desirable nor permissible
     to   pick   out   a   word   or   a   sentence   from   the
     judgment   divorced   from   the   context   of   the
     question under consideration and treat it to
     be   complete   law   decided   by   this   Court.   The
     judgment   must   be   read   as   a   whole   and   the
     observations   from   the   judgment   have   to   be
     considered   in   the   light   of   the   questions
     which   were   before   this   Court.   (See  Mehboob
     Dawood   Shaikh   v.   State   of   Maharashtra   ,
     (2004) 2 SCC 362.....”


27. In the light of the above principles, we now revert

back   to   the   Constitution   Bench   judgment   in    Ismail

Faruqui.  We need to notice  the issues which had come up

for   consideration   before   the   Constitution   Bench,   the

ratio   of   the   judgment   and   the   context   of   observations.

We   have   noticed   above   that   the   Constitution   Bench   in

Ismail Faruqui case  decided five transferred cases, two

writ   petitions   filed   under
Article   32
and   Special

Reference   No.1   of   1993.   The   Special   Reference   No.1   of

1993   made   by   the   President   of   India   under
Article   143
                                                                   29
was   respectfully   declined   to   be   answered   by   the

Constitution Bench. The challenge in the writ petitions

under
Article 32
and transferred cases was to the Act,

1993.
The   Act,   1993
was   enacted   to   provide   for   the

acquisition  of   certain   area  at   Ayodhya   and   for   matters

connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Section 2(a)
defines the area as:

          “2(a)   “area”   means   the   area   (including
     all   the   buildings,   structures   or   other
     properties   comprised   therein)   specified   in
     the Schedule;


28.
The Schedule of the Act
contained the description of

the   area   acquired.   Apart   from   the   other   plots   Revenue

Plot Nos.159 and 160  situated in village Kot Ramchandra

wherein   structure   commonly   known   as   Ram   Janam   Bhumi­

Babri   Masjid   was   situated   was   also   included.   Several

other   plots   including   all   the   building   structure   on

other properties comprised therein were acquired. 

29. The validity of Act, 1993 was challenged on several

grounds.   The   ground   for   challenge   has   been   noticed   in

paragraph 17 of the judgment which is to the following

effect:

          “17.   Broadly   stated,   the   focus   of
     challenge to the statute as a whole is on the
                                                                 30

     grounds of secularism, right to equality and
     right   to   freedom   of   religion.   Challenge   to
     the acquisition of the area in excess of the
     disputed   area   is   in   addition   on   the   ground
     that   the   acquisition   was   unnecessary   being
     unrelated   to   the   dispute   pertaining   to   the
     small   disputed   area   within   it.   A   larger
     argument   advanced   on   behalf   of   some   of   the
     parties   who   have   assailed   the   Act   with
     considerable vehemence is that a mosque being
     a place of religious worship by the Muslims,
     independently   of   whether   the   acquisition   did
     affect   the   right   to   practice   religion,   is
     wholly   immune   from   the   State's   power   of
     acquisition   and   the   statute   is,   therefore,
     unconstitutional   as   violative   of
Articles   25
and
26
of the Constitution of India for this
     reason   alone.   The   others, however,   limited
     this   argument   of   immunity from   acquisition
     only   to   places   of   special   significance,
     forming an essential and integral part of the
     right   to   practice   the   religion,   the
     acquisition   of   which   would   result   in   the
     extinction   of   the   right   to   freedom   of
     religion   itself.   It   was   also   contended   that
     the   purpose   of   acquisition   in   the   present
     case   does   not   bring   the   statute   within   the
     ambit of Entry 42, List III but is referable
     to   Entry   1,   List   II   and,   therefore,   the
     Parliament   did   not   have   the   competence   to
     enact the same. It was then urged by learned
     Counsel   canvassing   the   Muslim   interest   that
     the   legislation   is   tilted   heavily   in   favour
     of   the   Hindu   interests   and,   therefore,
     suffers from the vice of non­secularism, and
     discrimination in   addition   to   violation   of
     the   right   to   freedom   of   religion   of   the
     Muslim community.....”



30. The   challenge   to   the   acquisition   of   the   area   in

excess of area which is disputed area was on the ground
                                                                      31

that   same   was   unnecessary,   hence,   ought  to   be   declared

invalid.   The   challenge   to   excess   area   was   laid   by

members   of   the   Hindu   community   to   whom   the   said   plots

belonged.   One   of   the   grounds   of   attack   was   based   on

secularism. It was contended that Act read as a whole is

anti­secular and against the Muslim community. A mosque

has  immunity   from   State's   power  of   acquisition.  It   was

contended   on   behalf   of   the   Muslim   community   that   the

defences   open   to   the   minority   community   in   the   suits

filed by other side including that of adverse possession

for   over   400   years   since   1528   AD   when   the   Mosque   was

constructed   have   been   extinguished   by   the   acquisition.

The  suits   have   been  abated   without   the   substitution  of

an alternate dispute resolution mechanism to which they

are entitled in the Constitutional scheme. 

31. The Constitution Bench held that acquisition of the

properties under the Act affects the rights of both the

communities   and   not   merely   those   of   the   Muslim

community. In paragraph 49 following has been noticed:

          “49.   The   narration   of   facts   indicates
     that the acquisition of properties under the
     Act   affects   the   rights   of   both   the
     communities   and   not   merely   those   of   the
     Muslim community. The interest claimed by the
     Muslims is only over the disputed site where
                                                                    32

     the   mosque   stood   before   its   demolition.   The
     objection of the Hindus to this claim has to
     be adjudicated. The remaining entire property
     acquired under the Act is such over which no
     title is claimed by the Muslims. A large part
     thereof comprises of properties of Hindus of
     which the title is not even in dispute.... ”


32. This Court also noticed that Ayodhya is said to be

of particular significance to the Hindus as a place of

pilgrimage because of the ancient belief that Lord Rama

was   born   there.   The   Court   also   noticed   that   equally

mosque   was   of   significance   for   the   Muslim   community  as

an   ancient   mosque   built   by   Mir   Baqi   in   1528   AD.   In

paragraph 51 of the judgment following has been noticed:

           “51.  It  may  also  be  mentioned that  even
     as   Ayodhya   is   said   to   be   of   particular
     significance   to   the   Hindus   as   a   place   of
     pilgrimage because of the ancient belief that
     Lord   Rama   was   born   there,   the   mosque   was   of
     significance   for   the   Muslim   community   as   an
     ancient mosque built by Mir Baqi in 1528 A.D.
     As   a   mosque,   it   was   a   religious   place   of
     worship   by   the   Muslims.   This   indicates   the
     comparative significance of the disputed site
     to   the   two communities   and   also   that   the
     impact of acquisition is equally on the right
     and interest of the Hindu community. Mention
     of this aspect is made only in the context of
     the argument that the statute as a whole, not
     merely
Section   7
thereof,   is   anti­secular
     being   slanted   in   favour   of   the   Hindus   and
     against the Muslims.” 


33. As   noted   above,   one   of   the   principal   submission
                                                                   33

which   was   raised   by   the   petitioners   before   the

Constitution   Bench   was   that   mosque   cannot   be   acquired

because of a special status in the Mohammedan Law.   The

Constitution Bench in  Ismail Faruqui case  by a separate

heading   “MOSQUE   –   IMMUNITY   FROM   ACQUISITION”   from

paragraphs 65 to 82 considered the above ground. 

34. The discussion from paragraphs 65 to 82 as per above

heading   indicates   that   the   discussion   and   all

observations   were   in   the   context   of   immunity   from

acquisition of a mosque. In paragraph 65 of the judgment

a larger question was raised at the hearing that there

is   no   power   in   the   State   to   acquire   any   mosque,

irrespective   of   its   significance   to   practice   of   the

religion   of   Islam.   The   Court   after   noticing   the   above

observation   has   observed   that   the   proposition   advanced

does   appear   to   be   too   broad   for   acceptance.   We   re­

produce paragraph 65 which is to the following effect:

          “65.   A   larger   question   raised   at   the
     hearing   was   that   there   is   no   power   in   the
     State to acquire any mosque, irrespective of
     its significance to practice of the religion
     of Islam. The argument is that a mosque, even
     if it is of no particular significance to the
     practice   of   religion   of   Islam,   cannot   be
     acquired   because   of   the   special   status   of   a
     mosque   in   Mahomedan   Law.   This   argument   was
     not   confined   to   a   mosque   of   particular
                                                                  34

    significance   without   which   right   to   practice
    the   religion   is   not   conceivable   because   it
    may   form   an   essential   and   integral   part   of
    the   practice   of   Islam.   In   the   view   that   we
    have taken of limited vesting in the Central
    Government   as   a   statutory   receiver   of   the
    disputed area in which the mosque stood, for
    the   purpose   of   handing   it   over   to   the   party
    found   entitled   to   it,   and   requiring   it   to
    maintain   status   quo   therein   till   then,   this
    question   may   not   be   of   any   practical
    significance   since   there   is   no   absolute
    divesting of the true owner of that property.
    We may observe that the proposition advanced
    does   appear   to   us   to   be   too   broad   for
    acceptance inasmuch as it would restrict the
    sovereign   power   of   acquisition   even   where
    such   acquisition   is   essential   for   an
    undoubted   national   purpose,   if   the   mosque
    happens   to   be   located   in   the   property
    acquired   as   an   ordinary   place   of   worship
    without   any   particular   significance   attached
    to   it   for   the   practice   of   Islam   as   a
    religion.   It   would   also   lead   to   the   strange
    result   that   in   secular   India   there   would   be
    discrimination   against   the   religions,   other
    than   Islam.   In   view   of   the   vehemence   with
    which   this   argument   was   advanced   by   Dr.
    Rajeev   Dhavan   and   Shri   Abdul   Mannan   to
    contend   that   the   acquisition   is   invalid   for
    this reason alone, it is necessary for us to
    decide this question. ”


35. Although in paragraph 65 the Court observed that the

proposition is too broad for acceptance but in view of

the vehemence with which argument of the learned counsel

appearing   for   the   petitioners   was   put   the   Court

proceeded to decide the issue.
                                                                     35

36. The   contention     before   the   Constitution   Bench   was

also   that   acquisition   of   a   mosque   violates   the   right

given   under
Articles   25
and
26
of   the   Constitution   of

India.   After   noticing   the   law   in   the   British   India,

prior   to   1950,   and   the law   after   enforcement   of   the

Constitution,   the   Constitution   Bench   came   to   the

conclusion   that   places   of   religious   worship   like

mosques,   churches,   temples   etc.   can   be   acquired   under

the   State's   sovereign   power   of   acquisition.   Such

acquisition  per  se   does  not  violates   either
Article  25
or
Article   26
of   the   Constitution.   After   noticing   the

various   decisions   following   was   laid   down   in   paragraph

74:

           “74.It   appears   from   various   decisions
      rendered by this Court, referred later, that
      subject   to   the   protection   under
Articles   25
and
26
of   the   Constitution,   places   of
      religious   worship   like   mosques,   churches,
      temples   etc.   can   be   acquired   under   the
      State's   sovereign   power   of   acquisition.   Such
      acquisition   per   se   does   not   violate   either
Article 25
or
Article 26
of the Constitution.
      The decisions relating to taking over of the
      management   have   no   bearing   on   the   sovereign
      power of the State to acquire property. ”



37. The Constitution Bench further held that the right

to   practice,   profess   and   propagate   religion   guaranteed
                                                                   36

under
Article   25
of   the   Constitution   does   not

necessarily   include   the   right   to   acquire   or   own   or

possess property. Similarly, this right does not extend

to   the   right   of   worship   at   any   and   every   place   of

worship.   Further,   it   was   held   that   protection   under
Articles 25
and
26
of the Constitution is to religious

practice   which   forms   an  essential   and   integral   part  of

the religion. In paragraphs 77 and 78 following has been

held:

           “77.   It   may   be   noticed   that
Article   25
does   not   contain   any   reference   to   property
     unlike
Article   26
of   the   Constitution.   The
     right   to   practice,   profess   and   propagate
     religion   guaranteed   under
Article   25
of   the
     Constitution does not necessarily include the
     right to acquire or own or possess property.
     Similarly   this   right   does   not   extend   to   the
     right   of   worship   at   any   and   every   place   of
     worship so that any hindrance to worship at a
     particular   place   per   se   may   infringe   the
     religious   freedom   guaranteed   under
Articles
     25
and
26
of the Constitution. The protection
     under
Articles 25
and
26
of the Constitution
     is   to   religious   practice   which   forms   an
     essential and integral part of the religion.
     A   practice   may   be   a   religious   practice   but
     not   an   essential   and   integral   part   of
     practice of that religion. 

           78. While offer of prayer or worship is a
     religious   practice,   its   offering   at   every
     location   where   such   prayers   can   be   offered
     would not be an essential or integral part of
     such religious practice unless the place has
     a   particular   significance   for   that   religion
                                                                    37

     so   as   to   form   an   essential   or   integral   part
     thereof.   Places   of   worship   of   any   religion
     having   particular   significance   for   that
     religion, to make it an essential or integral
     part   of   the   religion,   stand   on   a   different
     footing   and   have   to   be   treated   differently
     and more reverentially. ”


38. With   the   above   observation   the   Constitution   Bench

held   that   offer   of   prayer   or   worship   is   a   religious

practice, its offering at every location would not be an

essential   or   integral   part   of   such   religious   practice

unless the place has a particular significance for that

religion   so   as   to   form   an   essential   or   integral   part

thereof. Places   of   worship   of   any   religion   having

particular significance for that religion, to make it an

essential or integral part of the religion, stand on a

different footing and have to be treated differently and

more reverentially. 

39. From   what   we   have   noticed   above   following   are

deducible:

     (i) Places   of   religious   worship   like   mosques,

           churches,   temples,   etc.   can   be   acquired   under

           the   State's   sovereign   power   of   acquisition,

           which does not violate
Articles 25
or 26 of the

           Constitution.
                                                              38

(ii) The   right   to   practice,   profess   and   propagate

     religion   guaranteed   under
Article   25
does   not

     extend to the right of worship at any and every

     place   of   worship   so   that   any   hindrance   to

     worship   at   a   particular   place   per   se   may

     infringe the religious freedom guaranteed under
Articles 25
and
26
of the Constitution.

(iii)The protection under
Articles 25
and
26
of the

     Constitution   is   to   religious   practice   which

     forms   an   essential   or   integral   part   of   the

     religion.

(iv) A practice may be a religious practice but not

     an   essential   and   integral   part   of   practice   of

     that religion.

(v) While offer of prayer or worship is a religious

     practice, its offering at every location where

     such   prayers   can   be   offered   would   not   be   an

     essential   or   integral   part   of   such   religious

     practice   unless   the   place   has   a   particular

     significance for that religion so as to form an

     essential or integral part thereof.


The Court itself has drawn a distinction with regard
                                                                     39

to   the   place   of   a   particular   significance   for   that

religion   where   offer   of   prayer   or   worship   may   be   an

essential or integral part of the religion.


40. The Court held that the mosques were subject to the

provisions   of   statute   of   limitation   thereby

extinguishing the right of Muslims to offer prayers in a

particular mosque. In paragraph 80 following was held:

           “80. It has been contended that a mosque
     enjoys   a   particular   position   in   Muslim   Law
     and once a mosque is established and prayers
     are   offered   in   such   a   mosque,   the   same
     remains   for   all   time   to   come   a   property   of
     Allah and the same never reverts back to the
     donor or founder of the mosque and any person
     professing Islamic faith can offer prayer in
     such   a mosque   and   even   if   the   structure   is
     demolished, the place remains the same where
     the   Namaz   can   be   offered.   As   indicated
     hereinbefore,   in   British   India,   no   such
     protection   was   given   to   a   mosque   and   the
     mosque   was   subjected   to   the   provisions   of
     statute   of   limitation   there   by   extinguishing
     the   right   of   Muslims   to   offer   prayers   in   a
     particular   mosque   lost   by   adverse   possession
     over that property.”

41. The Constitution Bench unequivocally laid down that

every   immovable  property   be  a   temple,   church   or  mosque

etc.   is   liable   to   be   acquired   and   a   mosque   does   not

enjoy   any   additional   protection   which   is   not   available

to religious places of worship of other religions. 
                                                                   40

42. Now, we come to paragraph 82 of the judgment which

is   the   sheet   anchor   of   the   submission   raised   by   Dr.

Rajiv Dhavan. Serious objections have been raised by Dr.

Rajiv Dhavan to some observations made in paragraph 82.

Entire paragraph 82 is quoted below:

           “82.   The   correct   position   may   be
     summarised   thus.   Under   the   Mahomedan   Law
     applicable in India, title to a mosque can be
     lost   by   adverse   possession   (See   Mulla's
     Principles of Mahomedan Law, 19th Edn. by M.
     Hidaytullah   ­   Section   217;   and   AIR   1940   PC
     116).   If   that   is   the   position   in   law,   there
     can be no reason to hold that a mosque has a
     unique or special status, higher than that of
     the   places   of   worship   of   other   religions   in
     secular   India   to   make   it   immune   from
     acquisition   by   exercise   of   the   sovereign   or
     prerogative   power   of   the   State.   A   mosque   is
     not an essential part of the practice of the
     religion   of   Islam   and   Namaz   (prayer)   by
     Muslims   can   be   offered   anywhere,   even   in
     open.   Accordingly,   its   acquisition   is   not
     prohibited   by   the   provisions   in   the
     Constitution   of   India.   Irrespective   of   the
     status of a mosque in an Islamic country for
     the   purpose   of   immunity   from   acquisition   by
     the State in exercise of the sovereign power,
     its   status   and   immunity   from   acquisition   in
     the   secular   ethos   of   India   under   the
     Constitution is the same and equal to that of
     the places of worship of the other religions,
     namely,   church,   temple   etc.   It   is   neither
     more   nor   less   than   that   of   the   places   of
     worship   of   the   other   religions.   Obviously,
     the acquisition of any religious place is to
     be   made   only   in   unusual   and   extraordinary
     situations   for   a   larger   national   purpose
     keeping in view that such acquisition should
     not   result   in   extinction   of   the   right   to
                                                                       41

     practice the religion, if the significance of
     that   place   be   such.   Subject   to   this
     condition,   the   power   of   acquisition   is
     available   for   a   mosque   like   any   other   place
     of   worship   of   any   religion.   The   right   to
     worship   is   not   at   any   and   every   place,   so
     long   as   it   can   be   practised   effectively,
     unless   the   right   to   worship   at   a   particular
     place   is   itself   an   integral   part   of   that
     right. ”


“A   mosque   is   not   an   essential   part   of   the   practice   of
the  religion   of  Islam   and   namaz(prayer)  by   Muslims   can
be offered anywhere, even in open.”

43. Dr. Dhavan submits that above observation in Para 82

of   the   Constitution   Bench   judgment   in  Ismail   Faruqui’s

case is the reason for reconsideration of the judgment.

He submits that the above statements in paragraph 82 are

wrong because it is wrong to say that 

     (vi)     A mosque is not essential to Islam.

     (vii)    The   essential   practices   doctrine   does   not

              protect   places   of   worship   other   than   those

              having particular significance.   


44. Elaborating   his   submission,   Dr.   Dhavan   relies   on

several   judgments   of   this   Court   where   what   are   the

essential practice of a religion had been elaborated and

how the Court should determine the essential practice of

a   religion   has   been   noticed.     The   submission   is   that
                                                                   42

above   observations   were   made   by   the   Constitution   Bench

on its  ipse dixit  without consideration of any material

due to which reason the statement is unsustainable. 

45. Before we proceed to examine the nature and content

of above statement, it is relevant to have an overview

of   the   law   laid   down   by   this   Court   with   regard   to

essential practices of a religion.   The  locus classicus

of   the   subject   is   Constitution   Bench   judgment   of   this

Court   in  Commissioner,   Hindu   Religious   Endowments,

Madras Vs. Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur

Mutt, AIR 1954 SC 282.    The Mathadipati of Shirur Mutt

filed   a  writ   petition   in   Madras  High   Court   challenging

various   provisions   of
Madras   Hindu   Religious   and

Charitable   Endowments   Act,   1951
.     Challenge  to   the   Act

was   on   various   grounds   including   the   ground   that

provisions   of   the   Act   violate   the   fundamental   right

guaranteed under
Articles 25
and
26
of the Constitution

of   India.     The   High   Court   had   struck   down   various

provisions of the Act against which appeal was filed by

the   Commissioner,   Hindu   Religious   Endowments,   Madras.

Justice   B.K.   Mukherjea   speaking   for     the   Constitution

Bench held that it would not be correct to say that a
                                                                      43

religion   is   nothing   but   a   doctrine   or   belief.     It   was

held that a religion may also lay down a code of ethical

rules   for   its   followers  and  it   might   prescribe   rituals

and   observances,   ceremonies   and   modes   of   worship   which

are regarded as integral parts of religion.  In Para 17,

following was held:­

     “17.....Religion   is   certainly   a   matter   of
     faith with individuals or communities and it
     is   not   necessarily   theistic.   There   are   well
     known   religions   in   India   like   Buddhism   and
     Jainism which do not believe in God or in any
     Intelligent   First   Cause.   A   religion
     undoubtedly   has   its   basis   in   a   system   of
     beliefs   or   doctrines   which   are   regarded   by
     those who profess that religion as conducive
     to   their   spiritual   well   being,   but   it   would
     not   be   correct   to   say   that   religion   is
     nothing   else   but   a   doctrine   or   belief.   A
     religion   may   not   only   lay   down   a   code   of
     ethical rules for its followers to accept, it
     might   prescribe   rituals   and   observances,
     ceremonies   and   modes   of   worship   which   are
     regarded   as   integral   parts   of   religion,   and
     these forms and observances might extend even
     to matters of food and dress.”

46. Further, in Para 18, following was laid down:­
     18.   The guarantee under our Constitution not
     only   protects   the   freedom   of   religious
     opinion   but   it   protects   also   acts   done   in
     pursuance   of   a   religion   and   this   is   made
     clear by the use of the expression “practice
     of religion” in
Article 25......
”

47. The     Court    further     held;     what    constitutes      the
                                                                    44

essential   part   of   a   religion   is   primarily   to   be

ascertained   with   reference   to   the   doctrines   of   that

religion   itself.     In   Para   19,   following   has   been   laid

down:­

     “19.  The contention formulated in such broad
     terms cannot, we think, be supported. In the
     first   place,   what   constitutes   the   essential
     part   of   a   religion   is   primarily   to   be
     ascertained   with   reference   to   the   doctrines
     of that religion itself. If the tenets of any
     religious   sect   of   the   Hindus   prescribe   that
     offerings of food should be given to the idol
     at   particular   hours   of   the   day,   that
     periodical   ceremonies   should   be   performed   in
     a certain way at certain periods of the year
     or   that   there   should   be   daily   recital   of
     sacred texts or oblations to the sacred fire,
     all   these   would   be   regarded   as   parts   of
     religion and the mere fact that they involve
     expenditure of money or employment of priests
     and   servants   or   the   use   of   marketable
     commodities   would   not   make   them   secular
     activities   partaking   of   a   commercial   or
     economic character; all of them are religious
     practices   and   should   be   regarded   as   matters
     of   religion   within   the   meaning   of
Article
     26(b).
What
Article   25(2)(a)
contemplates   is   not
     regulation   by   the   State   of   religious
     practices   as   such,   the   freedom   of   which   is
     guaranteed   by   the   Constitution   except   when
     they run counter to public order, health and
     morality   but   regulation   of   activities   which
     are   economic,   commercial   or   political   in
     their   character   though   they   are   associated
     with religious practices......” 

48. Two other judgments were delivered in the same year,
                                                                    45

which   had   relied   and   referred   to   Madras   judgment.     In

Ratilal Panachand  Gandhi and Others Vs. State of Bombay

and Others, AIR 1954 SC 388, in paragraph Nos. 10 and 13

following was held:­

     “10.
Article   25
of   the   Constitution
     guarantees to every person and not merely to
     the   citizens   of   India,   the   freedom   of
     conscience   and   the   right   freely   to   profess,
     practise   and   propagate   religion.   This   is
     subject,   in   every   case,   to   public   order,
     health   and   morality.   Further   exceptions   are
     engrafted   upon   this   right   by   clause   (2)   of
     the   article.   Sub­clause   (a)   of   clause   (2)
     saves   the   power   of   the   State   to   make   laws
     regulating   or   restricting   any   economic,
     financial,   political   or   other   secular
     activity   which   may   be   associated   with
     religious   practice;   and   sub­clause   (b)
     reserves   the   State’s   power   to   make   laws
     providing   for   social   reform   and   social
     welfare even though they might interfere with
     religious practices. 

          Thus,   subject   to   the   restrictions   which
     this   article   imposes,   every   person   has   a
     fundamental   right   under   our   Constitution   not
     merely to entertain such religious belief as
     may   be   approved   of   by   his   judgment   or
     conscience   but   to   exhibit   his   belief   and
     ideas   in   such   overt   acts   as   are   enjoined   or
     sanctioned   by   his   religion   and   further   to
     propagate   his   religious   views   for   the
     edification of others.....

     13.  Religious   practices   or   performances   of
     acts in pursuance of religious belief are as
     much a part of religion as faith or belief in
     particular   doctrines.   Thus   if   the   tenets   of
     the Jain or the Parsi religion lay down that
                                                                      46

     certain   rites   and   ceremonies   are   to   be
     performed   at   certain   times   and   in   a
     particular   manner,   it   cannot   be   said   that
     these   are   secular   activities   partaking   of
     commercial   or   economic   character   simply
     because they involve expenditure of money or
     employment   of   priests   or   the   use   of
     marketable   commodities.   No   outside   authority
     has   any   right   to   say   that   these   are   not
     essential   parts   of   religion   and   it   is   not
     open to the secular authority of the State to
     restrict or prohibit them in any manner they
     like   under   the   guise   of   administering   the
     trust estate.....” 

49. Another   judgment,   which   followed   the  Shirur   Mutt

case was Sri Jagannath Ramanuj Das and Another Vs. State

of Orissa and Another, AIR 1954 SC 400. The Constitution

Bench in  Sri Venkataramana Devaru  and Others Vs. State

of   Mysore   and   Others,   AIR   1958   SC   255  had   occasion   to

consider
Articles 25
and
26
of the Constitution of India

in   context   of   Madras   Temple   Entry   Authorisation   Act,

1947 as amended in 1949.  Referring to Shirur Mutt case,

following was stated in para 16(3):­

     “16(3)....Now, the precise connotation of the
     expression "matters of religion" came up for
     consideration   by   this   Court   in   The
     Commissioner,   Hindu   Religious   Endowments,
     Madras v. Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of
     Sri Shirur Mutt (AIR 1954 SC 282), and it was
     held   therein   that   it   embraced   not   merely
     matters of doctrine and belief pertaining to
     the religion but also the practice of it, or
     to   put   it   in   terms   of   Hindu   theology,   not
                                                                     47

       merely its Gnana but also its Bakti and Karma
       Kandas....”
        

50. Another judgment, which needs to be noticed is Mohd.

Hanif Quareshi and Others Vs. State of Bihar, AIR 1958

SC   731.    A   writ   petition   under
Article   32
was   filed

questioning the validity of three legislative enactments

banning  the  slaughter   of   certain   animals   passed  by   the

States   of   Bihar,   Uttar   Pradesh   and   Madhya   Pradesh

respectively.   One   of   the   submissions   raised   by   the

petitioner   was   that   banning   of   slaughter   of   cows

infringes   fundamental   right   of   petitioner   to   sacrifice

the cow on Bakra­Id.   The Court proceeded to dwell with

essential   practice   of   the   religion   of   Islam   in   above

context.   The Court examined the material placed before

it   for   determining   the   essential   practice   of   the

religion   and   made   following   observations   in   paragraph

13:­

       “What   then,   we   inquire,   are   the   materials
       placed   before   us   to   substantiate   the   claim
       that   the   sacrifice   of   a   cow   is   enjoined   or
       sanctioned by Islam? The materials before us
       are   extremely   meagre   and   it   is   surprising
       that   on   a   matter   of   this   description   the
       allegations   in   the   petition   should   be   so
       vague.   In   the   Bihar   Petition   No.   58   of   1956
       are set out the following bald allegations:
                            Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
                                                                     48


     We   have,   however,   no   material   on   the   record
     before us which will enable us to say, in the
     face   of   the   foregoing   facts,   that the
     sacrifice   of   a   cow   on   that   day   is   an
     obligatory   overt   act   for   a   Mussalman   to
     exhibit his religious belief and idea. In the
     premises, it is not possible for us to uphold
     this claim of the petitioners.”



51. Next   case   to   be   considered   is  Sardar   Syedna   Taher

Saifuddin   Saheb   Vs.   State   of   Bombay,   AIR   1962   SC   853.

The issue raised before this Court in the above case was

regarding   validity   of   law   interfering   with   right   of

religious   denomination   to   excommunicate   its   members.
Articles 25
and
26
came to be considered in the above

context.   In paragraph 34 of the judgment, referring to

earlier   decisions   of   this   Court,   main   principles

underlying have been noticed, which is to the following

effect:­  

     “34. The content of
Articles 25
and
26
of the
     Constitution came up for consideration before
     this Court in 1954 SCR 1005 : (AIR 1954 S.C.
     282);   Ramanuj   Das   v.   State   of   Orissa,   1954
     SCR 1046 : (AIR 1954 SC 400); 1958 SCR 895 :
     (AIR 1958 S.C. 255); (Civil Appeal No. 272 of
     1969 D/­17­3­1961 : (AIR 1961 S.C. 1402) and
     several   other   cases   and   the   main   principles
     underlying   these   provisions   have   by   these
     decisions been placed beyond controversy. The
     first   is   that   the   protection   of   these
     articles is not limited to matters of
                                                                     49

     doctrine or belief, they extend also to acts
     done   in   pursuance   of   religion   and   therefore
     contain   a   guarantee   for   rituals   and
     observances,   ceremonies   and   modes   of   worship
     which   are   integral   parts   of   religion.   The
     second is that what constitutes an essential
     part of a religion or religious practice has
     to be decided by the courts with reference to
     the   doctrine   of   a   particular   religion   and
     include   practices   which   are   regarded   by   the
     community as a part of its religion.”



52. Next   judgment   to   be   noticed   is   Constitution   Bench

judgment   of  Tikayat   Shri   Govindlalji   Maharaj   etc.   Vs.

State   of   Rajasthan   and   Others,   AIR   1963   SC   1638.    The

validity of
Nathdwara Temple Act, 1959
was challenged in

the Rajasthan High Court.   It was contended by Tilkayat

that the idol of Shri Shrinathji in the Nathdwara Temple

and all the properties pertaining to it were his private

properties   and   hence,   the   State   Legislature   was   not

competent to pass the Act. It was also contended that if

the temple was held to be a public temple, then the Act

would be invalid because it contravened the fundamental

rights guaranteed to the denomination under
Articles 25
and
26
of the Constitution.  Gajendragadkar, J. speaking

for   the   Court   in   Paragraphs   58   and   59   laid   down

following:­
                                                              50

“58. In deciding the question as to whether a
given religious practice is an integral part
of the religion or not, the test always would
be   whether   it   is   regarded   as   such   by   the
community following the religion or not. This
formula   may   in   some   cases   present
difficulties in its operation. Take the case
of   a  practice   in   relation   to   food   or   dress.
If in a given proceeding, one section of the
community   claims   that   while   performing
certain rites white dress is an integral part
of   the   religion   itself,   whereas   another
section   contends   that   yellow   dress   and   not
the white dress is the essential part of the
religion,   how   is   the   Court   going   to   decide
the   question?   Similar   disputes   may   arise   in
regard   to   food.   In   cases   where   conflicting
evidence   is   produced   in   respect   of   rival
contentions   as   to   competing   religious
practices   the   Court   may   not   be   able   to
resolve the dispute by a blind application of
the formula that the community decides which
practice   in   an   intergral   part   of   its
religion,   because   the   community   may   speak
with   more   than   one   voice   and   the   formula
would,   therefore,   break   down.   This   question
will   always   have   to   be   decided   by   the   Court
and   in   doing   so,   the   Court   may   have   to
enquire   whether   the   practice   in   question   is
religious in character and if it is, whether
it   can   be   regarded   as   an   integral   or
essential   part   of   the   religion,   and   the
finding   of   the   Court   on   such   an   issue   will
always   depend   upon   the   evidence   adduced
before   it   as   to   the   conscience   of   the
community and the tenets of its religion. It
is in the light of this possible complication
which may arise in some cases that this Court
struck   a   note   of   caution   in   the   case   of
Dungah Committee Ajmer v. Syed Hussain Ali &
Ors.18   and   observed   that   in   order   that   the
practices in question should be treated as a
part of religion they must be regarded by the
said   religion   as   its   essential   and   integral
                                                                 51

     part; otherwise even purely secular practices
     which   are   not   an   essential   or   an   integral
     part of religion are apt to be clothed with a
     religious form and may make a claim for being
     treated   as   religious   practices   within   the
     meaning of
Article 26.
59.  In this connection, it cannot be ignored
     that   what   is   protected   under
Articles   25(1)
and
26(b)
respectively   are   the   religious
     practices and the right to manage affairs in
     matters   of   religion.   If   the   practice   in
     question   is   purely   secular   or   the   affair
     which   is   controlled   by   the   statute   is
     essentially   and   absolutely   secular   in
     character,   it   cannot   be   urged   that
Article
     25(1)
or
Article 26(b)
has been contravened.
     The   protection   is   given   to   the   practice   of
     religion   and   to   the   denomination’s   right   to
     manage   its   own   affairs   in   matters   of
     religion. Therefore, whenever a claim is made
     on   behalf   of   an   individual   citizen   that   the
     impugned   statute   contravenes   his   fundamental
     right to practise religion or a claim is made
     on   behalf   of   the   denomination   that   the
     fundamental right guaranteed to it to manage
     its   own   affairs   in   matters   of   religion   is
     contravened,   it   is   necessary   to   consider
     whether the practice in question is religious
     or the affairs in respect of which the right
     of   management   is   alleged   to   have   been
     contravened   are   affairs   in   matters   of
     religion.   If   the   practice   is   a   religious
     practice   or   the   affairs   are   the   affairs   in
     matter   of   religion,   then,   of   course,   the
     right guaranteed by
Article 25(1)
and
Article
     26 (b)
cannot be contravened.”



53. The above decisions of this Court clearly lay down

that   the   question   as   to   whether   particular   religious
                                                                     52

practice   is  essential   or   integral   part   of   the   religion

is a question, which has to be considered by considering

the doctrine, tenets and beliefs of the religion.   What

Dr. Dhavan contends is that Constitution Bench in Ismail

Faruqui’s  case without there being any consideration of

essentiality   of   a   religion   have   made   the   questionable

observations in paragraph 82 as noticed above.  

54. We   have   to   examine   the   observations   made   in

paragraph   82   of  the  Constitution   Bench   judgment  in   the

light of the above submission, law and the precedents as

noticed above.  The statement “a mosque is not essential

part   of   the   practice   of   religion…..”   is   a   statement

which   has   been   made   by   the   Constitution   Bench   in

specific context and reference.   The context for making

the above observation was claim of immunity of a mosque

from acquisition.  Whether every mosque is the essential

part   of  the  practice   of  religion   of  Islam,   acquisition

of   which  ipso   facto  may   violate   the   rights   under
Articles 25
and
26
, was the question which had cropped

up   for   consideration   before   the   Constitution   Bench.

Thus,   the   statement   that   a   mosque   is   not   an   essential

part of the practice of religion of Islam is in context
                                                                     53

of issue as to whether the mosque, which was acquired by

Act, 1993 had immunity from acquisition.    

55. The above observation by the Constitution Bench has

been made to emphasise that there is no immunity of the

mosque   from   the   acquisition.   We   have   noticed   that

Constitution   Bench   had   held  that   while   offer   of  prayer

or   worship   is   a   religious   practice,   its   offering   at

every   location   where   such   prayers   can   be   offered   would

not be an essential or integral part of such religious

practice unless the place has a particular significance

for that religion so as to form an essential or integral

part thereof. The above observation made in paragraph 78

has to be read along with observation made in paragraph

82.   What   Court   meant   was   that   unless   the   place   of

offering of prayer has a particular significance so that

any   hindrance   to   worship     may   violate   right   under
Articles 25
and
26
, any hindrance to offering of prayer

at   any   place   shall   not   affect   right   under
Articles   25
and
26.
The   observation   as   made   in   paragraph   82   as

quoted   above   has   to   be   understood   with   the   further

observation made in the same paragraph where this Court

held:
                                                                      54

           “82....Obviously,   the   acquisition   of   any
     religious place is to be made only in unusual
     and   extraordinary   situations   for   a   larger
     national   purpose   keeping   in   view   that   such
     acquisition should not result in extinction of
     the   right   to   practice   the   religion,   if   the
     significance of that place be such. Subject to
     this   condition,   the   power   of   acquisition   is
     available for a mosque like any other place of
     worship of any religion. The right to worship
     is not at any and every place, so long as it
     can be practised effectively, unless the right
     to worship at a particular place is itself an
     integral part of that right. ”


56. The Court held that if the place where offering of

namaz is a place of particular significance, acquisition

of   which   may   lead   to   the   extinction   of   the   right   to

practice   of   the   religion,   only in   that   condition   the

acquisition   is   not   permissible   and   subject   to   this

condition,   the   power   of  acquisition  is   available   for   a

mosque like any other place of worship of any religion.

Thus,   observation   made   in   paragraph   82   that   mosque   is

not an essential part of the practice of the religion of

Islam   and namaz   even   in   open   can   be   made   was   made   in

reference   to   the   argument   of   the   petitioners   regarding

immunity of mosque from acquisition.

57. The   submission   which   was   pressed   before   the

Constitution   Bench   was   that   there   is   no   power   in   the
                                                                   55

State   to   acquire   any   mosque,   irrespective   of   its

significance   to  practice   of  the  religion   of  Islam.   The

said contention has been noticed in paragraph 65 of the

judgment as extracted above.  

58. The sentence “A mosque is not essential part of the

practice   of  the  religion   of  Islam   and   namaz(prayer)  by

Muslims   can   be   offered   anywhere,   even   in   open”   is

followed   immediately   by   the   next   sentence   that   is

“Accordingly,   its   acquisition   is   not   prohibited   by   the

provisions in the Constitution of India” which makes it

amply clear that the above sentence was confined to the

question of immunity from acquisition of a mosque which

was canvassed before the Court. First sentence cannot be

read divorced from the second sentence which immediately

followed the first sentence. 

59. No   arguments   having   been   raised   before   the

Constitution Bench that Ram Janam Bhumi­Babri Masjid is

a   mosque   of   a   particular   significance,   acquisition   of

which   shall   extinct   the   right   of   practice   of   the

religion, the Court had come to the conclusion that by

acquisition   of   mosque   rights   under
Articles   25
and
26
are   not   infringed.     We   conclude   that   observations   as
                                                                  56

made by the Constitution Bench in paragraphs 78 and 82

which   have   been   questioned   by   the   petitioners   were

observations   made   in   reference   to   acquisition   of   place

of   worship   and   has   to   confine   to   the   issue   of

acquisition   of   place   of   worship   only.   The   observation

need not be read broadly to hold that a mosque can never

be an essential part of the practice of the religion of

Islam.


"Comparative significance” & “Particular significance”.

60. Dr. Rajiv Dhavan submits that the Constitution Bench

has   entered   into   the   comparative   significance   of   both

the places that is birth place of Ram for Hindus and Ram

Janam   Bhumi­Babri   Masjid   for   Muslims.   He   submits   that

India is a secular country and all religions have to be

treated equal and the Court by entering into comparative

significance   concept   has   lost   sight   of   the   secular

principles   which   are   embedded   in   the   Constitution   of

India. It is true that the Constitution Bench has used

phrase   “comparative   significance”   but   comparative

significance   of   both   the   communities   were   noticed   only

to highlight the significance of place which is claimed

by both the parties and to emphasise that the impact of
                                                                   57

acquisition is equally on the  right and interest of the

Hindu   community   as   well   as   Muslim   community.   In

paragraph 51 of the judgment following has been noticed:

           “51.   It   may   also   be   mentioned   that   even
     as   Ayodhya   is   said   to   be   of   particular
     significance   to   the   Hindus   as   a   place   of
     pilgrimage because of the ancient belief that
     Lord   Rama   was   born   there,   the   mosque   was   of
     significance   for   the   Muslim   community   as   an
     ancient mosque built by Mir Baqi in 1528 A.D.
     As   a   mosque,   it   was   a   religious   place   of
     worship   by   the   Muslims.   This   indicates   the
     comparative significance of the disputed site
     to   the   two   communities   and   also   that   the
     impact of acquisition is equally on the right
     and   interest   of   the   Hindu   community.   Mention
     of this aspect is made only in the context of
     the argument that the statute as a whole, not
     merely
Section   7
thereof,   is   anti­secular
     being   slanted   in   favour   of   the   Hindus   and
     against the Muslims. ”


61. Dr.   Dhavan   has   also   taken   exception   to   the   phrase

'particular   significance'   as   is   occurring   in   the

Constitution   Bench   judgment.   He   submits   that   all

religions are equal and have to be equally respected by

all  including   the   State.   All   mosques,   all   churches   and

all temples are equally significant for the communities

practicing   and   professing   such   religions.   The   concept

that   some   places   are   of   particular   significance   is

itself faulty. We have bestowed our consideration to the
                                                                     58

above aspect of the matter. We have already noticed that

the   Constitution   Bench   held   that   acquisition   is   a

sovereign   or   prerogative   power   of   the   State  to   acquire

property   and   all   religious   places,   namely,   church,

mosque,   temple   etc.   are   liable   to   be   acquired   in

exercise   of   right   of   eminent   domain   of   the   State.   The

Constitution   Bench   also   observed   that   acquisition   of

place of religious worship like church, mosque etc. per

se does not violate rights under
Articles 25
and
26.
The

Court,   however,   has   noticed   one   fetter   on   such

acquisition.   The   Constitution   Bench   held   that   if   a

particular   place   is   of   such   significance   for   that

religion   that   worship   at   such   place   is   an   essential

religious practice and the extinction of such place may

breach   their   right   of
Article   25
,   the   acquisition   of

such   place   is   not   permissible. A   place   of   particular

significance has been noticed by the Constitution Bench

in   the   above   context.   When   acquisition   of   such   place

results   in   extinction   of   the   right   to   practice   the

religion, there is violation of
Article 25
, which was an

exception   laid   by   the   Constitution   Bench   while   laying

down general proposition that acquisition of all places
                                                                    59

of   worship   is   permissible.   Thus,   no   exception   can   be

taken   to   the   Constitution   Bench   having   used   expression

'place   of   particular   significance'   for   carving   out   an

exception   to   the   general   power   of   acquisition   of   the

State of religious places like church, mosque and temple

or   gurudwara.   The   above   exception   carved   out   by   the

Constitution   Bench   is   to   protect   the   constitutional

right guaranteed under
Article 25.
'Particular significance' of place of birth of Lord Rama

62. Dr.   Dhavan   has   taken  exception  to   observation   of

Constitution Bench, where, place of birth of Lord Rama,

has   been   held   to   be   of   particular   significance.       He

submits   that   the   above   observation   was   uncalled   for

since   there   cannot   be   any   comparison   between   two

religions.   We   have   observed   above   that   phrase

“particular   significance”   was   used   by   the   Constitution

Bench only in context of immunity from acquisition. What

the   Court   held   was   that   if   a   religious   place   has   a

particular   significance,   the   acquisition   of   it  ipso

facto  violates   the   right   of  religion   under
Articles  25
and
26
,   hence   the   said   place   of   worship   has   immunity

from acquisition.   It is another matter that the place
                                                                       60

of   birth   of   Lord   Rama   is   referred   as   sacred   place   for

Hindu   community,   which   has   been   pleaded   throughout.   In

any   view   of   the   matter   acquisition   under   Act,   1993

having   been   upheld,   the   use   of   expression   “particular

significance” has lost all its significance for decision

of the suits and the appeals.


RES­JUDICATA

63. Shri Parasaran submits that appellants are precluded

from   questioning   the  Ismail   Faruqui’s  judgment.   The

petitioner   in  Ismail   Faruqui’s   case  represented   the

right   of   the   Muslim   public,   hence,   all   persons

interested in such rights for the purposes of
Section 11
be deemed to claim under the persons so litigating and

are barred by res­judicata in view of Explanation VI to
Section   11
,   CPC.   He   further   submits   that   judgment   in

Ismail   Faruqui’s   case  is   part of   the   judgment   in   the

suit itself, in view of the fact that IA in suits were

transferred   and   decided   alongwith   petitions   under
Article 32.
The appellants are thus clearly bound by the

judgment in Ismail Faruqui’s case. 

64. Dr.   Dhavan   replying   the   submissions   of   Shri

Parasaran submits that Ismail Faruqui’s case was about a
                                                                      61

challenge   to   the   Act,1993,   the   Presidential   reference

and further as to whether in the light of Act, 1993 the

suits abated due to
Section 4(3)
of the Act. The cases

under   appeal   are   from   suits   where   the   issues   are

entirely   different.   The   suits   having   never   been

transferred   to   be   decided   with  Ismail   Faruqui’s   case,

the decision rendered in Ismail Faruqui’s case cannot be

said   to   be   part   of   the   judgment   in   suits.   He   submits

that   the   issues   which   were   raised   in  Ismail  Faruqui’s

case  were   not   the   issues   which   are   directly   and

substantially in issue in the suits. He further  submits

that  res   judicata  is   not   attracted   in   the   present

proceedings.


65. The   principle   of  res   judicata  as   contained   in
Section   11
of   Civil   Procedure   Code   as   well   as   the

general principles are well settled by several judgments

of this Court. For applicability of the principle of res

judicata  there   are   several   essential   conditions   which

need to be fulfilled. Shri Parasaran, in support of his

submission, states that the parties in  Ismail Faruqui’s

case  represented   the   interest   of   Muslim   community   and

those   petitioners     bonafidely     litigated     in   respect    of
                                                                    62

public   rights,   hence,   all   persons   interested   in   such

rights   be   deemed   to   claim   under   the   person   so

lititgating   attracting   the   applicability   of   Explanation

VI of
Section 11
, CPC. He placed reliance on judgment of

this   Court   in  Ahmed   Adam   Sait   &   others   versus

Inayathullah Mekhri & others, 1964 (2) SCR 647.  In the

above case, in suit under
Section 92
, CPC, a scheme had

already been framed by Court of Competent Jurisdiction.

Another   suit   was   instituted   under
Section   92
of   CPC

praying for settling a scheme for proper administration

of the Jumma Masjid. The plea of res judicata was urged.

Upholding   the   plea   of  res  judicata,   following  was  laid

down:­


     “...   In   assessing   the   validity   of   this
     argument,   it   is   necessary   to   consider   the
     basis   of   the   decisions   that   a   decree   passed
     in  a  suit  under
s.92
binds  all  parties. The
     basis of this view is that a suit under
s.92
is a representative suit and is brought with
     the   necessary   sanction   required   by   it   on
     behalf of all the beneficiaries interested in
     the Trust. The said section authorises two or
     more persons having an interest in the Trust
     to   file   a   suit   for   claiming   one   or   more   of
     the   reliefs   specified   in   clauses   (a)   to   (h)
     of   sub­section   (1)   after   consent   in   writing
     there   prescribed   has   been   obtained.   Thus,
     when   a   suit   is   brought   under   s.92,   it   is
     brought by two or more persons interested in
     the Trust who have taken upon themselves the
                                                                     63

     responsibility   of   representing   all   the
     beneficiaries   of   the   Trust.   In   such   a   suit,
     though   all   the   beneficiaries   may   not   be
     expressly impleaded, the action is instituted
     on   their   behalf   and   relief   is claimed   in   a
     representative   character.   This   position
     immediately   attracts   the   provisions   of
     explanation   VI   to   s.11   of   the   Code.
     Explanation   VI   provides   that   where   persons
     litigate   bona fide   in   respect   of   a   public
     right or of a private right claimed in common
     for   themselves   and   others,   all   persons
     interested   in   such   right   shall,   for   the
     purposes of this section, be deemed to claim
     under the persons so litigating. It is clear
     that
s.11
read with its explanation VI leads
     to the result that a decree passed in a suit
     instituted by persons to which explanation VI
     applies   will   bar   further   claims   by   persons
     interested   in   the   same   right   in   respect   of
     which   the   prior   suit   had   been   instituted.
     Explanation VI thus illustrates one aspect of
     constructive   res   judicata.   Where   a
     representative suit is brought under
s.92
and
     a   decree   is   passed   in   such   a   suit,   law
     assumes   that   all   persons   who   have   the   same
     interest   as   the   plaintiffs   in   the
     representative   suit   were   represented   by   the
     said   plaintiffs   and,   therefore,   are
     constructively   barred   by   res   judicata   from
     reagitating   the   matters   directly   and
     substantially   in   issue   in   the   said   earlier
     suit.”



66. Learned Counsel for both the parties have referred

to   and   relied   on   Constitution   Bench   Judgment   of   this

Court   in  Gulabchand   Chhotalal   Parikh   versus   State   of

Gujarat,   AIR   1965   SC   1153.   Whether   a   decision   of   High
                                                                     64

Court   on   merits   on   certain   matters   after   contest   in   a

writ   petition   under
Article   226
of   the   Constitution

operates as res judicata in regular suit with respect to

the   same   matter   between   the   same   party   was   the   issue

considered by this court. This Court after referring to

almost all relevant judgments on the subjects laid down

following in paragraphs 60 and 61:­


     ”60. As a result of the above discussion, we
     are   of   opinion   that   the   provisions   of
S.11
,
     C.P.C., are not exhaustive with respect to an
     earlier   decision   operating   as   res   judicata
     between   the   same   parties   on   the   same   matter
     in   controversy   in   a   subsequent   regular   suit
     and   that   on   the   general   principle   of   res
     judicata,   any   previous   decision   on   a   matter
     in controversy, decided after full contest or
     after   affording   fair   opportunity   to   the
     parties   to   prove   their   case   by   a   Court
     competent   to   decide   it,   will   operate   as   res
     judicata in a subsequent regular suit. It is
     not   necessary   that   the   Court   deciding   the
     matter   formerly   be   competent   to   decide   the
     subsequent suit or that the former proceeding
     and   the   subsequent   suit   have   the   same
     subject­matter.   The   nature   of   the   former
     proceeding is immaterial.
     61. We do not see any good reason to preclude
     such   decisions   on   matters   in   controversy   in
     writ   proceedings   under   Arts.   226   and   32   of
     the   Constitution   from   operating   as   res
     judicata   in   subsequent   regular   suits   on   the
     same matters in controversy between the same
     parties   and   thus   to   give   limited   effect   to
     the   principle   of   the   finality   of   decisions
     after full contest. We therefore, hold that,
     on the general principle of res judicata, the
                                                                     65

     decision of the High Court on a writ petition
     under
Art.226
on the merits on a matter after
     contest   will   operate   as   res   judicata   in   a
     subsequent   regular   suit   between   the   same
     parties with respect to the same matter.”



67. In Daryao and others versus State of U.P. & others,

AIR   1961   SC   1457,  this   Court   held   that   on   general

consideration   of   public   policy   there   seems   to   be   no

reason   by   which   the   rule   of  res   judicata  should   be

treated as not admissible or irrelevant in deciding writ

petition filed under
Article 32.
68. A Constitution Bench of this Court in Sheodan Singh

versus   Daryao   Kunwar,   AIR   1966   SC   1332,              after

elaborately   considering   the   principles   underlined   under
Section   11
of   the   CPC,   held   that   there   are   five

essential conditions which must be satisfied before plea

of  res   judicata  can   be   pressed.   In   paragraph   9   of   the

judgment, the conditions have been enumerated which are

to the following effect:­ 


     ”9.   A   plain   reading   of
S.11
shows   that   to
     constitute   a   matter   res   judicata,   the
     following   conditions   must   be   satisfied,
     namely   ­(I)   The   matter   directly   and
     substantially in issue in the subsequent suit
     or issue must be the same matter which was
     directly   and   substantially   in   issue   in   the
                                                                  66

     formar   suit;   (II)   The   former   suit   must   have
     been   a   suit   between   the   same   parties   or
     between   parties   under   whom   they   or   any   of
     them   claim;   (III)   The   parties   must   have
     litigated under the same title in the former
     suit; (IV) The court which decided the former
     suit   must   be   a   Court   competent   to   try   the
     subsequent   suit   or   the   suit   in   which   such
     issue   is   subsequently   raised;   and   (V)   The
     matter directly and substantially in issue in
     the subsequent suit must have been heard and
     finally   decided   by   the   Court   in   the   first
     suit. Further Explanation I shows that it is
     not the date on which the suit is decided, so
     that even if a suit was filed later, it will
     be   a   former   suit   if   it   has   been   decided
     earlier. In order therefore that the decision
     in   the   earlier   two   appeals   dismissed   by   the
     High   Court   operates   as   res   judicata   it   will
     have   to   be   seen   whether   all   the   five
     conditions   mentioned   above   have   been
     satisfied.”


69. One   of   the   submissions   put   on   forefront   by     Dr.

Dhavan   is   that   issues   which   were   involved   in  Ismail

Faruqui’s   case  are   not   issues   which   are   directly   and

substantially involved in the suits giving rise to these

appeals, hence, the plea of  res judicata  should fail on

this   ground  alone.   One   of   the   conditions   as  enumerated

by   this   Court   in  Sheodan   Singh’s   case(supra)  is   that

“the   matter   directly   and   substantially   in   issue,   in

subsequent suit must have been heard and finally decided

by the Court in the first suit.” Dr. Dhavan elaborating
                                                                     67

the principle of directly and substatially in issue has

relied on judgment of this court in  Sajjadanashin Sayed

vs.   Musa   Dadabhai   Ummer,   (2000)   3   SCC   350.   This   Court

while   considering   the   condition   of   “directly   and

substantially in issue” in reference to
Section 11
laid

down following principles in paragraph 12, 13 & 14:­ 


     ”12.  It  will  be  noticed  that  the  words used
     in
Section   11
CPC   are   “directly   and
     substantially in issue”. If the matter was in
     issue   directly   and   substantially   in   a   prior
     litigation   and   decided   against   a   party   then
     the   decision   would   be   res   judicata   in   a
     subsequent   proceeding.   Judicial   decisions
     have  however  held  that  if  a matter  was  only
     “collaterally   or   incidentally”   in   issue   and
     decided in an earlier proceeding, the finding
     therein would not ordinarily be res judicata
     in   a   latter   proceeding   where   the   matter   is
     directly and substantially in issue. 
     13.   As   pointed   out   in   Halsbury’s   Law   of
     England(Vol.16,   para   1538,   4th  edition),   the
     fundamental   rule   is   that   a   judgment   is   not
     conclusive if any matter came collaterally in
     question[R.v.knaptoft   Inhabitants;   Heptulla
     Bros. v. Thakore WLR at p.297(PC)]; or if any
     matter   was   incidentally   cognizable
     [Sanders(otherwise   Saunders)v.   Sanders
     (otherwise Saunders) All ER at p.771].
     14.   A   collateral   or   incidental   issue   is   one
     that is ancillary to a direct and substantive
     issue;   the   former   is   an   auxillary   issue   and
     the   latter   the   principal   issue.   The
     expression   “collaterally   or   incidentally”   in
     issue   implies   that   there   is   another   matter
     which   is   “directly   and   substantially”   in
     issue(Mulla’s   Civil   Procedure   Code,   15th
                                                                     68

     edn.,p.104).
     Difficulty in distinguishing whether a matter
     was   directly   in   issue   or   collaterally   or
     incidentally in issue and tests laid down in
     various courts. 


70. In  Mahila   Bajrangi(dead)   through   Lrs.   versus

Badribai   w/o   Jagannath   and   another,   (2003)   2   SCC   464,

above   principle   was   reiterated   in   following   words   in

paragraph 6 which is to the following effect:­


     ”6.....That apart, it is always the decision
     on   an   issue   that   has   been   directly   and
     substantially   in   issue   in   the   former   suit
     between the same parties which has been heard
     and   finally   decided   that   is   considered   to
     operate   as   res   judicata   and   not   merely   any
     finding   on   every   incident   or   collateral
     question   to   arrive   at   such   a   decision   that
     would constitute res judicata.”



71. The   impugned   judgment   has   also   categorically   held

that issues, which have been raised in the suits are not

the issues, which can be said to have been noticed and

adjudicated by this court in  Ismail Faruqui’s  case. The

High   Court   has   clearly   held   that   the   authority   of   the

Superior   Court   laying   down   a   law   is   binding   on   the

courts below provided a matter has been decided by the

court.  In Para 4054, following has been held:­
                                                                     69

     “4054.   The   mere   fact   that   some   facts   have
     been   noticed   by   the   Government   of   India   in
     White Paper and those facts have simply been
     noticed by the Apex Court while referring to
     the   facts   mentioned   in   the   White   Paper,   it
     cannot   be   said   that   those   facts   can   be
     construed   as   if   they   have   been   accepted   by
     the   Apex   Court   to   be   correct   and   stand
     adjudicated.   The   law   of   precedent   is   well
     known.   The   authority   of   the   superior   Court
     laying   down   a   law   is   binding   on   the   Courts
     below   provided   a   matter   has   been   decided   by
     the   Court.   An   issue   can   be   considered   to   be
     decided   by   a   superior   Court   when   it   was
     raised,   argued   and   decided   and   only   then   it
     is a binding precedent for the other courts.”



72. We   have   noticed   above   that   the   issues   which   were

involved in  Ismail Faruqui’s case  were validity of Act,

1993.   One   of   the   issues   which   was   taken   up   by  Ismail

Faruqui’s case  was as to whether by virtue of
Section 4
sub­section (3) of Act, 1993 suits pending in Allahabad

High   Court   stands   abated.   The   Presidential   Reference

No.1   of   1993   was   also   heard   along   with   the   writ

petitions   and   transferred   cases.   The   issues   which   have

been   framed   in   the   suits   giving   rise   to   these   appeals

are different issues which cannot be said to be directly

and   substantially   in   issue   in  Ismail   Faruqui’s   case.

Non­fulfilment of this condition itself is sufficient to

reject   the   plea   of  res   judicata  as   raised   by   Shri
                                                                       70

Parasaran. 


73. We may further notice submissions of Shri Parasaran

that  IA  which  was  filed  in  the   suit  was  also   taken   up

along   with   the  Ismail   Faruqui’s   case,  hence,   the

judgment   rendered   in  Ismail   Faruqui’s   case  shall   be

treated   to   be   the   part   of   judgment   in   the   suits   which

preclude the appellant to reagitate the same issue. For

appreciating the above submissions we need to look into

as   to   what   matters   were   before   this   Court   in  Ismail

Faruqui’s case.


74.
The Act, 1993
was preceded by an ordinance which was

issued   on   07.01.1993.
Section   4(3)
of   the   Ordinance

contemplated   that   suit,   appeal   or   other   proceeding   in

respect   of   right,   title   or   interest   having   to   any

property   vested   in   Central   Government   under
Section   3
shall   abate.   After   the   ordinance   plaintiff   had   applied

for   amendment   of   plaints   challenging   the   legality   and

validity   of   the   Ordinance.   High   Court   in   the   suits

framed   the   issue   namely  “whether   the   suits   have  abated

or survive”. Many writ petitions were also filed in the

High   Court   challenging   the   Ordinance.  Writ   Petition

No.208 of 1993, Mohd. Aslam versus Union of India & Ors.
                                                                  71

was also filed under
Article 32
in this Court. The Union

of India had filed transfer petitions under
Article 139A
for   transferring   of   writ   petitions   filed   in   Allahabad

High Court. By an Order dated 24.09.1993 passed in Union

of   India   &   Others   versus   Dr.   M.Ismail   Faruqui   and

others,   (1994)   1   SCC   265,  this   Court   allowed   the

transfer application transferring five writ petitions to

be   heard   alongwith   the   Presidential   Reference   and   writ

petitions filed under
Article 32.
The preliminary issue

which was framed by the High Court in both the suits was

stayed. It is useful to extract paragraph 4 and 7 of the

order:­ 


     “4.  After   the   issuance   of   the   Ordinance   it
     appears that in the pending suits renumbered
     O.O.S.   Nos.   3   and   4   of   1989   the   plaintiffs
     applied   for   amendment   of   the   plaints
     challenging the legality and validity of the
     Ordinance by which the suits abated. The Full
     Bench   of   the   High   Court   heard   the   said
     applications and passed an order on March 15,
     1993. By the said order the High Court framed
     the question ‘whether the suit has abated or
     survives’   and   since   the   said   issue
     necessarily touched upon the validity of the
     Ordinance,   the   Court   ordered   notice   to   the
     Attorney   General   and   listed   the   case   for
     hearing   of   the   issue   on   April   26,   1993.
     Although this order was passed in Suit O.O.S.
     No.   4   of   1989,   it   was   also   to   govern   the
     amendment application in Suit O.O.S. No. 3 of
     1989. It also appears that in the meantime as
                                                                     72

     many   as   five   Writ   Petition   Nos.   552,   925,
     1351, 1532 and 1809 of 1993 came to be filed
     in the High Court challenging the validity of
     the   Ordinance,   now   the   Act.   Besides   these
     proceedings in the High Court a Writ Petition
     No. 208 of 1993 also came to be filed in this
     Court   under
Article   32
of   the   Constitution
     challenging the legality and validity of the
     very same law.
     7.  In   the   result,   we   allow   this   application
     by   ordering   the   withdrawal   of   the five   Writ
     Petition   Nos.   552,   925,   1351,   1532   and   1809
     of 1993 to this Court to be heard along with
     the  Presidential   reference   and  Writ  Petition
     No.   208   of   1993   pending   in   this   Court.   The
     hearing   of   the   preliminary   issue   framed   by
     the   High   Court   ‘whether   the   suit   has   abated
     or   survives’   in   both   the   suits   will   stand
     stayed   till   further   orders.   In   order   to
     expedite the hearing we direct as under:”


75. From   the   above,   it   is   clear   that   suits   which   were

pending in the High Court were never transferred to be

heard alongwith Presidential Reference and writ petition

filed under
Article 32.
This Court had only stayed the

hearing of preliminary issue framed by the High Court as

to whether the suits have abated or survive. It is also

relevant   to   notice   that   in   Special   Reference   No.   1   of

1993,   individual   notices   were   issued   to  the  parties  to

the  proceeding   which   stood   abated   by   virtue  of
Section

4(3)
of the Ordinance but mere issuance of notice when

the suits were not transferred by this Court to be heard
                                                                   73

alongwith   Presidential   Reference   is   not   sufficient   to

conclude   that   the   judgment   of  Ismail   Faruqui  should   be

treated as part of judgment in suits. We, thus, also do

not   accept   the   submissions   of   Shri   Parasaran   that

judgment   of Ismail   Faruqui  is   part   of   the   judgment   in

the suit itself. We, thus, do not find any substance in

the above submissions raised by Shri Parasaran.




Reliance on the judgment of Ismail Faruqui

76. Dr.   Dhavan   submits   that  Ismail   Faruqui’s  judgment

goes to the core of the issues in these appeals and it

permeates throughout the impugned judgment in the suits.

He   submits   that   observations   concerning   comparative

significance   of   the   disputed   site   and   the   observation

that a mosque is not an essential part of the practice

of   the   religion   of   Islam,   have   permeated   the   impugned

judgment as the Hindu parties have successfully claimed

that   the   disputed   site,   which   is   allegedly   the

birthplace of Lord Ram is protected by
Articles 25
and
26.
Dr. Dhavan has referred to various observations of

the HIGH Court in the impugned judgment to support his

submission.     He   has   also   referred   to   various   grounds
                                                                     74

taken in the appeals filed against the judgment of the

High Court.

77. Shri   Parasaran   and   Shri   Tushar   Mehta   refuting   the

above   submission   contend   that   even   if   the   judgment   of

Ismail Faruqui has been referred to in the submission of

the   counsel   for   the   parties   before   the   High   Court   and

has been noticed in the impugned judgment, the impugned

judgment in no way is affected by the observations made

in Ismail Faruqui’s case.  

78. It   is   relevant   to   notice   some   of   the   observations

made   by   the   High   Court   in   the   impugned   judgment   and

certain grounds taken in some of the appeals, which are

before   us.   Justice   S.U.Khan   referring   to  Ismail

Faruqui’s     case   in   his   judgment   made   following

observations:­

       “A   mosque   even   if   its   construction   remains
     as a mosque cannot be treated to be mosque if
     no prayers are offered in it and it is in the
     possession, occupation and use of non­Muslims
     as held by the Privy Council in Mosque known
     as Masjid Shahid Ganj Vs. S.G.P.C. Amritsar,
     AIR   1940   P.C.   116   approved   in   Dr.   M.   Ismail
     Farooqi   Vs.   Union   of   India,   1994   (6)   S.C.C.
     360.   Accordingly,   unless   it   is   proved   that
     prayers were being offered in the premises in
     dispute,   or   the   Hindus   had   not   exclusively
     possessed   the   constructed   portion   and   inner
     court yard it cannot be held to be a mosque
                                                                   75

     or   a   continuing   mosque   uptil   22nd/   23rd
     December,   1949.   The   case   set   up   and   the
     argument   of   some   of   the   Hindu   parties   that
     till 1855 no prayers (Namaz) were offered in
     the   mosque   is   not   at   all   acceptable.   If   a
     mosque   is   referred   to   as   mosque   in   several
     gazetteers,   books   etc.   and   nothing   else   is
     said then it means that it is a mosque in use
     as   such.   A   defunct   mosque   where   prayers   are
     not   at   all   offered,   whenever   mentioned   as
     mosque,   is   bound   to   be   further   qualified   as
     defunct   and   not   in   use.   If   construction   of
     mosque could not be obstructed, how offering
     of   prayer   in   it   could   be   obstructed.
     Moreover,   there   was   absolutely   no   sense   in
     dividing   the   premises   in   dispute   by   railing
     in 1856 or 1857 if Muslims were not offering
     Namaz   in   the   constructed   portion   till   then.
     In   the   riot   of   1855   seventy   Muslims   were
     killed   while   taking   shelter   in   the   premises
     in   dispute.   After   such   a   huge   defeat   Namaz
     could   not   be   for   the   first   time   started
     thereat.” 


79. Justice   Sudhir   Agarwal   in   his   judgment   has   also

noticed  Ismail   Faruqui’s  case.    Dr.  Dhavan   referred  to

the   submissions   made   by   Shri   Ravi   Shankar   Prasad   in

Paras 3501 and 3502 of the impugned judgment:­

        “3501.  Sri   Prasad   argued   that   belief   of
     Hindus that Lord Ram as incarnation of Vishnu
     having born at Ayodhya forms an integral part
     of   Hindu   religion   which   cannot   be   denied   to
     be practised, observed and performed by them
     and   refers   to   Commissioner   of   Police   and
     others   v.   Acharya   Jagadishwarananda   Avadhuta
     and   another,   (2004)   12   SCC   770   (para   9)   and
     Sri   Adi   Visheshwara   of   Kashi   Vishwanath
     Temple,   Varanasi   (supra).   In   order   to   show
                                                                76

    what   constitutes   public   order   under
Article
    25
of   the   Constitution,   he   also   placed
    reliance on Dalbir Singh and others v. State
    of Punjab, AIR 1962 SC 1106 (para 8).

      3502.  Next   he   submits   that   applying   the
    doctrine   of   Eminent   Domain,   the   place   in
    dispute,   having   special   significance   for
    Hindus,   cannot   be   touched   at   all   either   by
    any   particular   person   or   even   by   State   and
    the provisions of even acquisition would not
    apply   to   it   though   with   respect   to   the
    alleged mosque, it has been already held and
    observed by the Apex Court that the disputed
    building   could   not   be   shown   to   be   of   any
    special significance to Muslims. He refers to
    Dr. M. Ismail Faruqui and others v. Union of
    India and others, (1994) 6 SCC 360 (para 65,
    72, 75 and 96); Acharya Maharajshri Narendra
    Prasadji   Anandprasadji   Maharaj   and   others   v.
    State of Gujarat and others, (1975) 1 SCC 11.
    The   relief   sought   by   the   plaintiff   (Suit­4)
    is barred by
Section 34
Specific Reliefs Act,
    1963   and   reliance   is   placed   on   Executive
    Committee of Vaish Degree College, Shamli and
    others v. Lakshmi Narain and others, (1976) 2
    SCC   58   (para   20   and   27);   American   Express
    Bank   Ltd.   v.   Calcutta   Steel   Co.   and   others,
    (1993) 2 SCC 199 (pare 22).”


80. Justice Sudhir Agarwal has noticed  Ismail Faruqui’s

case in Para 2723 in following manner:­

           “2723. In         Ismail   Farooqui   (supra),
     Supreme   Court   has   considered   the   plea   of
     validity   of   acquisition   of   land   under
Land
     Acquisition Act
that once a waqf of mosque is
     created,   the   property   vests   in   almighty   and
     it always remain a waqf hence such a property
     cannot   be   acquired.   While   negativing   this
     plea,   the   Apex   Court   said   that   a   plea   in
     regard   to   general   religious   purposes   cannot
                                                                     77

      be   said   to   be   an   integral   part   of   religion
      which   will   deprive   the   worshippers   of   the
      right   of worship   at   any   other   place   and
      therefore, such a property can be acquired by
      the   State.   However,   the   position   would   be
      otherwise   if   the   religious   property   would
      have been of special significance and cannot
      be one of several such kind of properties. It
      will   be   useful   to   reproduce   the   relevant
      observation in this regard:

      “78.   lt   appears   from   various   decisions
      rendered by this Court, referred later, that
      subject   to   the   protection   under
Articles   25
and
26
of   the   Constitution,   places   of
      religious   worship   like   mosques,   churches,
      temples   etc.   can   be   acquired   under   the
      State’s sovereign power of acquisition. Such
      acquisition   per   se   does   not   violate   either
Article 25
or
Article 26
of the Constitution.
      The decisions relating to taking over of the
      management   have   no   bearing   on   the   sovereign
      power of the State to acquire property.”
     “82.   While   offer   of   prayer   or   worship   is   a
     religious   practice,   its   offering   at   every
     location   where   such   prayers   can   be   offered
     would not be an essential or integral part of
     such religious practice unless the place has a
     particular   significance   for   that   religion   so
     as   to   form   an   essential   or   integral   part
     thereof.   Places   of   worship   of   any   religion
     having   particular   significance   for   that
     religion, to make it an essential or integral
     part   of   the   religion,   stand   on   a   different
     footing and have to be treated differently and
     more reverentially.”


81. There   are   references   of   judgments   of  Ismail

Faruqui’s  case  in   various   other   places  in   the   judgment

of   Justice   Sudhir   Agarwal   like   Para   5   in   the   judgment
                                                                     78

where   it   has   been   observed   that   area   of   the   land   in

dispute, which is to be adjudicated by this Court (High

Court) is now restricted to what has been referred to in

Ismail   Faruqui’s  case.     Para   5   of   the   judgment   is   as

follows:­

      “5.     In   view   of   the   decision   of   the   Apex
     Court in Dr. M. Ismail Faruqui etc. v. Union
     of India and others, (1994) 6 SCC   360 : AIR
     1995   SC   605,   the   area   of   land   in   dispute
     which   is   to   be   adjudicated   by   this   Court   is
     now   restricted   to   what   has   been   referred   to
     in para 4 above, i.e. main roofed structure,
     the inner Courtyard and the outer Courtyard.
     In fact, the area under the roofed structure
     and   Sahan,   for   the   purpose   of   convenience
     shall   be   referred   hereinafter   as   “inner
     Courtyard” and rest as the “outer Courtyard”.
     Broadly, the measurement of the disputed area
     is about 130X80 sq. feet.”



82. Dr.   Dhavan,   in   his   written   submissions,   has

mentioned details of several other places, where Justice

Sudhir Agarwal has referred to  Ismail Faruqui’s  case in

the impugned judgment.  


83. Justice   Dharam   Veer   Sharma,   while   giving   a

dissenting   judgment   has   referred   to   submission   of

parties in  Ismail Faruqui’s  case at Paras 3038 and 3039

of   Volume   III,   following   observations   have   been   made
                                                                     79

while considering the Issue No.19(d):­

           “On behalf of defendants it is contended
     that   the   building   in   question   was   not   a
     mosque   under   the   Islamic   Law.     It   is   not
     disputed that the structure has already been
     demolished on 6.12.1992.  According to Dr. M.
     Ismail   Faruqui   and   others   v.   Union   of   India
     and   others,   (1994)   6   SCC   360,   the   Hon’ble
     Apex   Court   held   at   para   70   that   the   sacred
     character   of   the   mosque   can   also   be   lost.
     According   to   the   tenets   of   Islam,   minarets
     are required to give Azan.  There cannot be a
     public   place   of   worship   in   mosque   in   which
     Provision of Azan is not available, hence the
     disputed   structure   cannot   be   deemed   to   be   a
     mosque.”

84. Further,   Justice   Dharam   Veer   Sharma   while   noticing

submission of Shri H.S. Jain has observed as follows:­

         “Shri H.S. Jain, advocate relied upon para
     78 of Ismail Faruqui’s judgment to argue that
     since birth place of Lord Ram was considered
     as a place of worship which was integral part
     of   religious   practice   of   Hindu   from   times
     immemorial.     The   deity   stood   on   a   different
     footing and had to be treated reverentially.”


85. Justice Sharma has observed that, in para 78 of the

Ismail Faruqui’s  judgment, the Apex Court held that the

place of birth has a particular significance for Hindus

and   should   be   treated   on   a   different   footing.   At   page

3455,   following   observations   have   been   made   by   Justice

Sharma while referring to Ismail Faruqui’s case:­
                                                               80

   “Hon'ble Apex Court upheld the validity of
provisions of Acquisition of Certain Area at
Ayodhya,   1993   in   Dr.   Ismail   Faruqui   case
(supra) and held that the Central Government
can acquire any place of worship. At para­78
Apex Court held that the place of birth has a
particular   significance   for   Hindus   and   it
should be treated on different footing, which
reads as under: 

     “78. While offer of prayer or worship is a
religious   practice,   its   offering   at   every
location   where   such   prayers   can   be   offered
would not be an essential or integral part of
such religious practice unless the place has
a   particular   significance   for   that   religion
so   as   to   form   an   essential   or   integral   part
thereof.   Places   of   worship   of   any   religion
having   particular   significance   for   that
religion, to make it an essential or integral
part   of   the   religion,   stand   on   a   different
footing   and   have   to   be   treated   differently
and more reverentially.”

    On   behalf   of   Hindus   it   is   urged   that   the
plaintiffs   are   not   entitled   for   the   relief
claimed   and   as   such   the   relief   is   barred   by
the  provisions   of   Section   42   of  the  Specific
Relief Act, 1877 which is at par with
Section
34
of   the   Specific   Relief   Act,1963   on   the
ground   that   they   have   superior   fundamental
rights. Contentions of Hindus are as under:

    The Hindus have superior fundamental right
than   the   Muslims   under
articles   25
&   26
of
the   Constitution   of   India   for   the   reasons
that   performing   customary   rituals   and
offering   services   worship   to   the   lord   of
universe   to   acquire   merit   and   to   get
salvation   as   such   it   is   integral   part   of
Hindu Dharma & religion in view whereof it is
humbly submitted that the instant suit is
liable to be dismissed with exemplary cost:” 
                                                                      81




86. Dr.  Dhavan  further  submits  that  Justice  Sharma  has

relied on submissions advanced by Shri P.N. Mishra, who

had   relied   on   paragraphs   77,   78,   80   and   82   of  Ismail

Faruqui’s  case.   Dr.   Dhavan   has   also   referred   to

submission   of   Shri   Ravi   Shankar   Prasad,   which   was

noticed   by   Justice   Sharma   that   the   right   of   Hindus   to

worship at the Rama Janam Bhumi, continuing since times

immemorial was an integral part of their religious right

and   faith   and   was   also   sanctified   by   judicial   orders

since   1949.     This   right   has   concretised   and   has   to   be

protected. 

87. Although Dr. Dhavan has referred to various passages

from impugned judgment, where reference has been made of

Ismail Faruqui’s case but main paragraphs where findings

have been returned in reference to Ismail Faruqui’s case

are   Paragraphs   4049   to   4054   (Vol.   II)   of   judgment   of

Justice Sudhir Agarwal, as has been pointed out by Shri

Tushar Mehta, learned Additional Solicitor General.

88. Paragraphs   4049   and   4050   are   to   the   following

effect:­

     “4049.  Some   of   the   learned   counsel   for   the
                                                                82

    parties   sought   to   rely   on   the   Constitution
    Bench   decision   in   Dr.   M.   Ismail   Faruqui
    (supra)   by   reading   certain   passages   in   a
    manner as if the Apex Court has expressed its
    opinion   on   certain   aspects   which   are
    contentious   issues   before   this   Court   in   the
    suits   pending   before   us   and   said   that   the
    said   observations   are   binding   on   this   Court
    and,   therefore,   those   aspects   cannot   be
    looked into.

    4050.  Sri   Iyer,   Senior   Advocate   sought   to
    read   the   aforesaid   judgement   where   the
    contents   of   the   White   Paper   issued   by   the
    Central   Government   quoted   to   suggest   that
    these   are   the   findings   of   the   Government   of
    India   having   taken   note   by   the   Apex   Court
    and,   therefore,   should   be   treated   to   be
    concluded.   It   is   suggested   that   the   issues,
    if any, in those matters should be deemed to
    be   concluded   by   the   judgement   of   the   Apex
    Court.”

89. The   above   submission   was   noted   and   expressly

rejected by the High Court in Paragraph 4051, which is

to the following effect:­

    “4051.  We,   however,   find   no   force   in   the
    submission. The Constitution Bench considered
    the   validity   of   Ayodhya   Act,   1993   whereby
    certain   land   at   Ayodhya   including   the   land
    which   was   subject   matter   in   these   suits
    sought   to   be   acquired   by   the   Government   of
    India.   Further,   the   Apex   Court   was
    considering the special reference made by the
    President of India on 7th  January, 1993 under
Article   143
of   the   Constitution   seeking
    opinion   of   the   Apex   Court   on   the   following
    question:   "Whether   a   Hindu   temple   or   any
    Hindu   religious   structure   existing   prior   to
    the   construction   of   Ram   Janma   Bhumi­Babari
                                                                   83

     Masjid   (including   the   premises   of   the   inner
     and outer courtyard of said structure) in the
     area on which the structure stood."

90. The High Court has clearly held that mentioning of

certain   facts   in  Ismail   Faruqui’s  case   does   not   mean

that those facts stood adjudicated by this Court for the

reason that those facts were neither in issue before the

Supreme   Court   nor   had   been   adjudicated.     The   relevant

discussion   in   the   above   context   is   contained   in

Paragraph 4053, which is to the following effect:­

     “4053.   It   is   in   this   context   that   certain
     facts   place   on   record   are   mentioned   therein
     but it cannot be said that those facts stood
     adjudicated by the Apex Court for the reason
     that those facts neither were in issue before
     the Court nor actually have been adjudicated.
     The only one question which has specifically
     been   considered   and   decided   that   was
     necessary in the light of challenge thrown to
     the power of acquisition of land over which a
     mosque   existing.   It   appears   that   pro­mosque
     parties   raised   a   contention   that   a   mosque
     cannot be acquired because of special status
     in   Mohammedan   Law   irrespective   of   its
     significance   to   practice   of   the   religion   of
     Islam.   This   argument   in   the   context   of
     acquisition of land was considered from para
     68   (AIR)   and   onwards   in   the   judgement.   The
     Court   has   held   that   the   right   to   worship   of
     Muslims   in   a   mosque   and   Hindus   in   a   temple
     was   recognised   only   as   a   civil   right   in
     British   India.   Relying   on   the   Full   Bench
     decision of Lahore High Court in Mosque Known
     as Masjid Shahid Ganj Vs. Shiromani Gurdwara
     Prabandhak   Committee,   Amritsar,   AIR   1938
                                                              84

Lahore 369 where it was held that a mosque if
adversely   possessed   by   non   muslims   it   will
loose   its   sacred   character   as   mosque,   the
Apex   Court   held   that,   "the   view   that   once   a
consecrated mosque, it remains always a place
of worship as a mosque was not the Mahomedan
Law   of   India   as   approved   by   Indian   Courts."
The   Lahore   High   Court   also   held   that,   "a
mosque in India was an immovable property and
the right of worship at a particular place is
lost   when   the   right   to   property   on   which   it
stands   is   lost   by   adverse   possession."   Both
these   views   were   approved   by   the   Privy
Council and the Apex Court followed the said
view.   Besides, independently also the Court
took the view that the sovereign power of the
State empowers it to acquire property. It is
a   right   inherent   in   every   sovereign   to   take
an   appropriate   private   property   belonging   to
individual   citizens   for   public   use.     This
right   is   described   as   eminent   domain   in
American   Law   and   is   like   the   power   of
taxation   of   offering   of   political   necessity
and   is   supposed   to   be   based   upon   an   implied
reservation   by   the   Government   that   private
property   acquired   by   its   citizens   under   its
protection   may   be   taken   or   its   use   can   be
controlled for public benefit irrespective of
the   wishes   of   the   owner.   The   Court   also
considered   the   right   of   worship   whether   a
fundamental   right   enshrined   under
Article   25
or   26   of   the   Constitution   and   observed,
"while   offer   of   prayer   or   worship   is   a
religious   practice,   its   offering   at   every
location   where   such   prayers   can   be   offered
would not be an essential or integral part of
such religious practice unless the place has
a   particular   significance   for   that   religion
so   as   to   form   an   essential   or   integral   part
thereof.   Places   of   worship   of   any   religion
having   particular   significance   for   that
religion, to make it an essential or integral
part   of   the   religion,   stand   on   a   different
footing   and   have   to   be   treated   differently
                                                                 85

    and more reverentially".   Ultimately the law
    has been laid down by the Constitution Bench
    by   majority   that   under   the   Mohammedan   Law
    applicable in India title to a mosque can be
    lost   by   adverse   possession.   If   that   is   the
    position   in   law,   there   can   be   no reason   to
    hold   that   a   mosque   as   a   unique   or   special
    status,   higher   than   that   of   the   places   of
    worship   of   other   religions   in   secular   India
    to   make   it   immune   from   acquisition   by
    exercise   of   the   sovereign   or   prerogative
    power   of   the   State.   A   mosque   is   not   an
    essential part of the practice of religion of
    Islam   and   namaz   (prayer)   by   Muslims   can   be
    offered anywhere even in open. The Court also
    held   that   unless   the   right   to   worship   at   a
    particular   place   is   itself   an   integral   part
    of   that   right,   i.e.,   the   place   is   of   a
    particular   significance,   its   alienability
    cannot   be doubted.   The   Apex   Court   having
    answered   the   various   questions   on   the
    validity   of   the   Act   1993   decline   to   answer
    the   reference   and   returned   the   same   as   such
    as  it  is.  The  suits having  been revived due
    to striking down of
Section 4(3)
of the Act,
    this   Court   trying   the   original   suits   has   to
    decide the entire matter on merits unless it
    can be shown that a particular issue which is
    engaging attention of this Court in trial of
    the   original   suit   has   already   been   raised,
    argued   and   decided   by   the   Apex   Court.   The
    learned   counsels   for   the   parties   have   not
    been able to show any such finding in respect
    to the matters which are involved in various
    issues   before   this   Court   and,   therefore,   we
    are   not   in   agreement   with   the   counsels   for
    the parties as argued otherwise.”
                                           (underlined by us)


91. The High Court has clearly held that an issue can be

considered to be decided by a superior Court only when
                                                                       86

it was raised, argued and decided.   Following was held

in Paragraph 4054:­

     “4054.    The   mere   fact   that   some   facts   have
     been   noticed   by   the   Government   of   India   in
     White Paper and those facts have simply been
     noticed by the Apex Court while referring to
     the   facts   mentioned   in   the   White   Paper,   it
     cannot   be   said   that   those   facts   can   be
     construed   as   if   they   have   been   accepted   by
     the   Apex   Court   to   be   correct   and   stand
     adjudicated.   The   law   of   precedence   is   well
     known.   The   authority   of   the   superior   Court
     laying   down   a   law   is   binding   on   the   Courts
     below   provided   a   matter   has   been   decided   by
     the   Court.   An   issue   can   be   considered   to   be
     decided   by   a   superior   Court   when   it   was
     raised,   argued   and   decided   and   only   then   it
     is a binding precedent for the other courts.”


92. The   above   view   expressed   by   majority   judgment   in

appeal,   thus,   makes   it   clear   that   the   High   Court   has

held   that   judgment   of  Ismail   Faruqui's  case   does   not

decide any of the issues which are subject matter of the

suit.   Whatever   observations   have   been   made   in   the

judgment   of  Ismail   Faruqui  are  not   to   govern   the

decision   in   suits   and   the   suits   were   to   be   decided   on

the basis of the evidence on record.   The questionable

observations   made   in  Ismail   Faruqui's   case  have   to   be

treated as only observations and not for the purpose of

deciding   suits   and   these   appeals,   they   are   not   to   be
                                                                     87

treated   as   governing   factor   or   relevant.     The   said

observations are to be understood solely as observation

made in context of land acquisition and nothing more.   

93. It is due to above finding of the High Court that in

several   appeals   filed   against   impugned   judgment   by   the

plaintiff   of   Suit   Nos.1   and   5   grounds   have   been   taken

which grounds have been referred to and    relied by Dr.

Rajiv   Dhavan   in   his   submission   as   noted   above.   The

grounds taken in the appeal, to which exception is being

taken by Dr. Dhavan are:

     (i) Partition   of   the   site   would   effectively

           extinguish   the right   of   Hindus   to   worship   at

           the site protected by
Article 25
being a site

           which   is   integral   and   essential   part   of   Hindu

           religion;

     (ii) The purported Muslim structure on the area was

           never   pleaded   to   be   an   essential   or   integral

           part of the Islamic religion.

94. The   above   grounds   are   yet   to   be   looked   into   and

considered by this Court in these appeals.

95. We   have   already   dealt   with   and   noticed   the   extent

and   nature   of   the   observations   made   by   this   Court   in
                                                                    88

Paragraphs   78   and   82   of  Ismail   Faruqui’s  case.   The

expression   “particular   significance”   and   “comparative

significance”   as   occurring   in   the   judgment   in  Ismail

Faruqui’s  case has also been noted and explained by us

in foregoing paragraphs.  The observations of this Court

in  Ismail Faruqui’s  case has to be understood as above.

The   question   as   to   whether   in   the   impugned   judgment,

reliance   on  Ismail   Faruqui’s  case   affects   the   ultimate

decision   of   the   High   Court   and   needs   any   clarification

or correction is a task, which we have to undertake with

the assistance of learned counsel for the parties in the

present   appeals.     We,   thus,   conclude   that   reliance   on

the judgment of  Ismail Faruqui  by the High Court in the

impugned   judgment   and   reliance   by   learned   counsel   for

the   appellants   and   taking   grounds   in   these   appeals   on

the   strength   of   judgment   of  Ismail   Faruqui’s  case   are

all questions, on the merits of the appeals, which need

to   be   addressed   in   these   appeals.     Thus,   the   above

submission   does   not   help   the   appellant   in   contending

that   judgment   of        Ismail   Faruqui’s         case   needs

reconsideration.


Additional grounds for reference to larger Bench
                                                                     89

96. Shri   Raju   Ramachandran,   learned   senior   counsel

appearing   for   some   of   the   parties   has   pressed   for   the

reference to larger Bench for reconsideration of  Ismail

Faruqui’s case on some additional grounds in addition to

what has been canvassed by Dr. Rajeev Dhavan. Shri Raju

Ramachandran   submits   that   looking   to   the   importance   of

the   case   the   matter   should   be   referred   to   the

Constitution   Bench   for   reconsideration   of              Ismail

Faruqui’s  judgment.     He   submits   that   there   are   various

instances, where this court had made reference to larger

Bench   looking   to   the   importance   of   the   matter.   He

submits that High Court vide its order dated 10.07.1989

had withdrawn the suits to be tried by the High Court by

Full Bench looking to the importance of the case.   The

case being very important and appeals having been filed

by all the  sides, the case is of such magnitude that it

is appropriate that matter may be referred to a Bench of

a   larger   strength   to   consider   the   case.     Shri

Ramachandran   has   referred   to   and   relied   on   several

judgments   of   this   Court,   which   shall   be   noted   by   us

hereinafter.  

97.   The submission of Shri Raju Ramachandran has been
                                                                       90

refuted by Shri K. Parasaran, learned senior counsel and

Shri C.S. Vaidyanathan.   They submit that if there are

constitutional   principles   involved,   the   matter   can   be

referred   to   a   larger   bench,   but   present   is   not   a   case

where any principle of constitutional interpretation is

involved, hence reference of the case to a larger bench

needs   to   be   refused.     Shri   Parasaran   submits   that

present appeals arise out of a suit where for deciding

the issues in a suit, the evidence is to be appreciated,

which need not be done by five judges. He submits that

five judges are to appreciate the evidence only in case

of Presidential Election.

98. Before  we enter  into  submission  of  learned  counsel

for the parties, the constitutional provision regarding

reference   of   a   case   for   hearing   by   the   Constitution

Bench consisting of five judges need to be looked into.
Article 145(3)
of the Constitution provides that minimum

number of judges, who are to sit for purpose of deciding

any case involving a substantial question of law as to

the   interpretation   of   the   Constitution   or   for   the

purpose of hearing any reference under
article 143
shall

be five.  The proviso to
Article 145(3)
provides:­
                                                                  91

    “Provided   that,   where   the   Court   hearing   an
    appeal   under   any   of   the   provisions   of   this
    Chapter   other   than
Article   132
consists   of
    less   than   five   Judges   and   in   the   course   of
    the   hearing   of   the   appeal   the   Court   is
    satisfied   that   the   appeal   involves   a
    substantial   question   of   law   as   to   the
    interpretation   of   this   Constitution   the
    determination   of   which   is   necessary   for   the
    disposal   of   the   appeal,   such   Court   shall
    refer   the   question   for   opinion   to   a   Court
    constituted   as   required   by   this   clause   for
    the   purpose   of   deciding   any   case   involving
    such   a   question   and   shall   on   receipt   of   the
    opinion   dispose   of   the   appeal   in   conformity
    with such opinion”

99.   As  per  proviso,  the  reference  to a  bench of  five

judges can be made by judges sitting in lesser strength

than five judges while hearing an appeal, on fulfilment

of following two conditions:­

   (i)     The   Court   is   satisfied         that   the   appeal

           involves  a  substantial  question  of  law  as to

           the interpretation of this Constitution;

   (ii)    The   determination   of   which   is   necessary   for

           the disposal of the appeal.          




100. The proviso to
Article 145(3)
as noted above, thus,

clearly   indicate   that   on   fulfilment   of   both   the

conditions as noticed above, a bench of smaller strength
                                                                       92

than   five   judges   can   make   a   reference   of   a  case   to   be

heard by a Bench strength of five judges.  This Court in

Abdul   Rahim   Ismail   C.   Rahimtoola   Vs.   State   of   Bombay,

AIR   1959   SC   1315  had   occasion   to   consider
Article

145(3).
In   the   above   case,   question   pertaining   to
Article 19(1)(d)
, (e) and sub­section (5) of
Article 19
came for consideration.   A five Judge Bench in  Ebrahim

Vazir Mavat Vs. State of Bombay and others, AIR 1954 SC

229  had   already   held   that   requirement   that   an   Indian

citizen to produce a passport before entering into India

is a proper restriction upon entering India.  Before two

judge bench in Abdul Rahim Ismail (supra), challenge was

made to Rule 3 of Passport Rules, 1950, which provided

that no person, proceeding from any place outside India,

shall enter, or attempt to enter, India by water, land

or air unless he is in possession of a valid passport.

Contention raised was that
Section 3
of the Act and Rule

3 of the Rules in so far as it purported to relate to an

Indian citizen is ultra vires the Constitution, as they

offended against the provisions of
Articles 19(1)(d)
and

(e).  This Court had held that issue having already been

decided   by   a   five   judges   Bench   no   substantial   question
                                                                   93

of   law   as   to   the   interpretation   of   the   Constitution

arises.  In Para 6, following was held:­

     “6....It   was,   however,   urged   that   as   a
     constitutional   question   has   been   raised   this
     matter cannot be decided by Judges less than
     five in number. Therefore, the case should be
     referred   to   what   is   described   as   the
     Constitution   Bench.
Article   145(3)
of   the
     Constitution   states   that   the   minimum   number
     of Judges who are to sit for the purpose of
     deciding   any   case   involving   a   substantial
     question   of   law   as   to   the   interpretation   of
     the   Constitution   or   for   the   purpose   of
     hearing any reference under
Article 143
shall
     be   five.   It   is   clear   that no   substantial
     question   of   law   as   to   the   interpretation   of
     the   Constitution   arises   in   the   present   case
     as the very question raised has been decided
     by   a  Bench   of   this   Court   consisting   of   five
     Judges. As the question raised before us has
     been already decided by this Court it cannot
     be said that any substantial question of law
     arises   regarding   the   interpretation   of   the
     Constitution.”



101. In  Bhagwan   Swarup   Lal   Bishan   Lal   Vs.   State   of

Maharashtra,   AIR   1965   SC   682,   this   Court   held   that   a

substantial question of interpretation of a provision of

the   Constitution   cannot   arise   when   the   law   on   the

subject has been finally and effectively decided by this

Court.  In Para 11, following has been laid down:­

     “11.   ....Learned   counsel   suggests   that   the
     question   raised   involves the   interpretation
     of   a   provision   of   the   Constitution   and
                                                                    94

     therefore   the   appeal   of   this   accused   will
     have to be referred to a Bench consisting of
     not less than 5 Judges. Under
Article 145(3)
of   the   Constitution   only   a   case   involving   a
     substantial   question   of   law   as   to   the
     interpretation   of   the   Constitution   shall   be
     heard   by   a  bench   comprising   not   less   than   5
     Judges. This Court held in State of Jammu and
     Kashmir   v.   Thakur   Ganga   Singh,   AIR   1960   SC
     356     that   a   substantial   question   of
     interpretation   of   a   provision   of   the
     Constitution cannot arise when the law on the
     subject   has   been   finally   and   effectively
     decided by this Court…………………

                        XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX

     As   the   question   raised   has   already   been
     decided   by   this   Court,   what   remains   is   only
     the application of the principle laid down to
     the   facts   of   the   present   case.   We   cannot,
     therefore,   hold   that   the   question   raised
     involves a substantial question of law as to
     the interpretation of the Constitution within
     the   meaning
Article   145(3)
of   the
     Constitution.”



102.   A   three   Judge   Bench   in  People’s   Union   for   Civil

Liberties   (PUCL)   and   Another   Vs.   Union   of   India   and

Another, (2003) 4 SCC 399  had also occasion to consider
Article 145(3).
Submission was made that a substantial

question   of   law   as   to   the   interpretation   of   the

Constitution   has   arisen,   hence,   the   matter   may   be

referred   to   a   Bench   consisting   of   Five   Judges.     Three

Judge Bench notices that question raised having already
                                                                     95

been   decided   in  Union   of   India   Vs.   Association   for

Democratic   Reforms   and   Another,   (2002)   5   SCC   294   –   (A

Three   Judge   Bench   Judgment),  no   other   substantial

question of law regarding interpretation of Constitution

survives,   following   was   laid   in   Paragraph   Nos.   28,   32

and 78:­

     “28.  Mr Arun Jaitley, learned Senior Counsel
     and   Mr   Kirit   N.   Raval,   learned   Solicitor­
     General   submitted   that   the   question   involved
     in these petitions is a substantial question
     of   law   as   to   the   interpretation   of   the
     Constitution   and,   therefore,   the   matter   may
     be   referred   to   a   Bench   consisting   of   five
     Judges.

     32.  From the judgment rendered by this Court
     in  Assn.   for   Democratic   Reforms1  it   is
     apparent   that   no   such   contention   was   raised
     by   the   learned   Solicitor­General,   who
     appeared   in   appeal   filed   on   behalf   of   the
     Union of India that question involved in that
     matter was required to be decided by a five­
     Judge Bench, as provided under
Article 145(3)
of   the   Constitution.   The   question   raised
     before   us   has   been   finally   decided   and   no
     other   substantial   question   of   law   regarding
     the   interpretation   of   the   Constitution
     survives.   Hence,   the   matter   is   not   required
     to be referred to a five­Judge Bench.

     78.    What   emerges   from   the   above   discussion
     can be summarised thus:­

                         Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx

           (C)   The   judgment   rendered   by   this
                                                                     96

        Court   in  Assn.   for   Democratic   Reforms
        has   attained   finality,   therefore,
        there   is   no   question   of   interpreting
        constitutional   provision   which   calls
        for reference under
Article 145(3)
.”


103.   On question of reference to a larger bench, one

more Constitution Bench judgment of this Court needs to

be   noticed,   i.e.  Central   Board   of   Dawoodi   Bohra

Community   and   Another   Vs.   State   of   Maharashtra   and

Another, (2005) 2 SCC 673.   Constitution Bench of this

Court while noticing provisions of Supreme Court Rules,

1966 and
Articles 141
and
145(2)
noticed in Paragraph 12

of the judgment that the law laid down by this Court in

a   decision   delivered   by   a   Bench   of   larger   strength   is

binding   on   any   subsequent   Bench   of   lesser   or   coequal

strength.   A   bench   of   lesser   quorum   cannot   disagree   or

dissent from the view of the law laid down by a Bench of

larger quorum.   In case of doubt, the Bench of lesser

quorum can do is to invite the attention of the Chief

Justice   and   request   for the   matter   being   placed   for

hearing before a Bench of larger quorum than the Bench

whose   decision   has   come   for   consideration.     Two

exceptions   were   also   noticed   to   the   above   noted

principles   in   Para   12(3),   which   is   to   the   following
                                                                   97

effect:­

     “(3)   The   above   rules   are   subject   to   two
     exceptions:   (i)   The   abovesaid   rules   do   not
     bind   the   discretion   of   the   Chief   Justice   in
     whom   vests   the   power   of   framing   the   roster
     and   who   can   direct   any   particular   matter   to
     be   placed   for   hearing   before   any   particular
     Bench   of   any   strength;   and   (ii)   in   spite   of
     the   rules   laid   down   hereinabove,   if   the
     matter has already come up for hearing before
     a   Bench   of   larger   quorum   and   that   Bench
     itself   feels   that   the   view   of   the   law   taken
     by a Bench of lesser quorum, which view is in
     doubt,   needs   correction   or   reconsideration
     then by way of exception (and not as a rule)
     and   for   reasons   given   by   it,   it   may   proceed
     to hear the case and examine the correctness
     of   the   previous   decision   in   question
     dispensing   with   the   need   of   a   specific
     reference   or   the   order   of   Chief   Justice
     constituting the Bench and such listing. Such
     was the situation in Raghubir Singh and Ors.
     and Hansoli Devi and Ors. (supra). ”



104.   In the present case, since the submission of Shri

Raju Ramachandran and Dr. Dhavan is for a reference to a

Constitution Bench to reconsider  Ismail Faruqui’s  case,

the question needs to be considered in view of the law

laid down by this Court in reference to
Article 145(3)
as   noticed   above.   Both   Shri   Raju   Ramachandran   and

Dr. Dhavan have placed heavy reliance on order passed by

this Court on 26.03.2018 in W.P. (C) No. 222 of 2018 –

Sameena Begum Vs. Union of India & Ors.  Learned counsel
                                                                     98

submit that reference to the Constitution Bench has been

made by a three Judge Bench of this Court looking to the

importance of the issue.   A perusal of the order dated

26.03.2018   indicates   that   challenge   in   those   writ

petitions pertains to the prevalent practice of polygamy

including Nikah Halala; Nikah Mutah; and Nikah Misyar on

the ground that they are unconstitutional.  Referring to

a five Judges Constitution Bench judgment of this Court

in   the  case  of  Shayara  Bano   etc.  Vs.  Union  of  India  &

Ors.   etc.,   (2017)   9   SCC   1,   where   this   Court   declared

that   practice   of   talaq­e­biddat  or   triple   talaq  is   not

protected   by
Article   25
and   it   is   not   an   essential

religious   practice,   it   was   contended   that   the   five

Judges   Bench   judgment   in  Shayara   Bano   (supra)  has   not

dealt with the aspect of Nikah Halala; Nikah Mutah; and

Nikah Misyar.   Thus, the question as to those religious

practices   are   protected   by
Article   25
was   very   much

involved in the Writ Petition before three Judge Bench.

The three Judge Bench also came to the conclusion that

the   above   noted   concepts   have   not   been   decided   by   the

Constitution Bench, hence the reference was made to the

Constitution   Bench,   looking   to   the   importance   of   the
                                                                      99

issue. The reference made by order dated 26.03.2018 was

in   the   facts   as   noted   above   and   does   not   support   the

submissions   made   by   Shri   Raju   Ramachandran   in   the

present case.   

105. Now, we come to those cases, which have been relied

by Shri Raju Ramachandran in support of his submission.

106. The  Judgment  of  this  Court  in  Hyderabad  Industries

Ltd. And Another Vs. Union of India And Others, (1995) 5

SCC 338 was a case where a three Judge Bench had doubted

the correctness of an earlier judgment, i.e., Khandelwal

Metal   and   Engineering   Works   and   Another   Vs.   Union   of

India   and   Others,   (1985)   3   SCC   620.    Similarly,  S.S.

Rathore Vs. State of M.P., 1988 (Supp.) SCC 522 was also

a   case   where   correctness   of   a   five   Judges   decision   in

Sita   Ram   Goel   Vs.   Municipal   Board,   Kanpur   and   Others,

AIR   1958   SC   1036  was   doubted.     Further,   judgments   of

this Court due to difference of opinion in two judgments

or conflict of opinion in judgments insisted reference,

which   are   cases   of   this   court   in  Ashwani   Kumar   and

Others Vs. State of Bihar and Others, (1996) 7 SCC 577

and  Balasaria   Construction   (P)   Ltd.   Vs.   Hanuman   Seva

Trust   and   Others,   (2006)   5   SCC   662,   hence   these   cases
                                                                    100

also does not support the submission.   The judgment of

this   Court   in  Acchan   Rizvi   (I)   Vs.   State   of   U.P.   and

Others, (1994) 6 SCC 751 and Acchan Rizvi (II) Vs. State

of U.P. and Others, (1994) 6 SCC 752 are the cases where

interlocutory   applications   in   contempt   petitions   were

filed and decided.  No principle regarding reference was

noticed,   the   said   judgments   have   no   relevance   with

regard   to   issue   of   reference   of   larger   Bench.

Similarly,   judgment   of   this   Court   in  Mohd.   Aslam   alias

Bhure Vs. Union of India and Others, (2003) 2 SCC   576

was   a   case   where   an   interim   order   was   passed   by this

Court with regard to acquisition of 67.703 acres of land

as was noticed in  Ismail Faruqui’s  case.   This judgment

has   no   relevance   with   regard   to   reference   to   larger

Bench.     Judgment   of   this   Court   in  Mohd. Aslam   alias

Bhure Vs. Union of India and Others, (2003) 4 SCC 1, has

been relied, which was a case decided by a five Judges

Bench. A public interest writ petition under
Article 32
was   filed   with   regard   to   manner   in   which   the   adjacent

land,   i.e.,   adjacent   land   to   the   disputed   structure

should be preserved till the final decision in the suit

pending in the High Court, which was revived consequent
                                                                   101

to judgment in  Ismail Faruqui’s  case.   The five Judges

Bench noticed various observations and directions passed

in  Ismail   Faruqui’s  case   and   ultimately   had   directed

that interim order passed by this Court on 13.03.2002 as

modified   on   14.03.2002   should   be   operative   until

disposal of the suits in the High Court of Allahabad not

only   to   maintain   communal   harmony   but   also   to   fulfil

other   objectives   of   the   Act.   The   Writ   Petition   was

disposed   of   accordingly.   No   principle   regarding

reference   to   larger   Bench   was   laid   down   in   the   said

case,   which   may   support   the   submission   of   learned

counsel.  

107. A two Judge Bench judgment in Vinod Kumar Shantilal

Gosalia   Vs.   Gangadhar   and   Others,   1980   (Supp.)   SCC   340

has   also   been   relied,   in   which   following   order   was

passed:­

     “After   having   heard   counsel   for   the   parties
     we   reserved   judgment.   On   going   through   the
     judgment of the Judicial Commissioner and the
     documents   and   after   a   careful   consideration
     of the arguments of the parties, we find that
     these   appeals   involve   a   substantial   question
     of law of great importance which is likely to
     govern   a   number   of   cases   arising   out   of
     mining   leases   in   the   present   territory   of
     Goa, Daman & Diu. We, therefore, direct that
     this   case   be   placed   before   a   larger   Bench.
     Let   these   appeals   be   placed   before   the
                                                                   102

     Hon’ble the Chief Justice for orders.”



108.   The   above   order   was   passed   by   two   Judge   Bench,

which had directed the appeal to be placed before Chief

Justice for hearing the matter by a larger Bench due to

the fact that appeal involves a substantial question of

law of great importance.  The said matter cannot be read

as an order directing the matter to be placed before a

Constitution   Bench   nor   any   proposition   regarding

reference to Constitution Bench is decipherable from the

above   order,   which   may   help   the   learned   counsel.

Another judgment, which was relied by Shri Ramachandran

is   an   order   passed   by   Justice   E.S.   Venkatramiah   –

Vacation   Judge   in  Ram   Jethmalani   Vs.   Union   of   India,

(1984) 3 SCC 696.   The above order was passed in a Writ

Petition   (Criminal).   Issue   in   the   above   case   involves

release   of   Sikh   leaders   detained   after   Punjab   action.

One   of   the   issues   noticed   in   the   order   was   that   it

relates to personal liberty of a sizeable section of the

community.  Court was of the view that question involved

are too large and complex for the shoulders of a Single

Judge.   The Court opined that these and other cases of
                                                                   103

like nature should be heard by a seven Judges Bench of

this Court.   The above order was passed in the peculiar

circumstances   as   noticed   in   the   judgment   and   no

principle   of   law   has   been   laid   down   in   context   of

reference of a case to a Constitution Bench.   The above

order was, thus, in peculiar facts of the case.  

109.   In  Krishan   Kumar   Vs.   Union   of   India   and   Others,

(1989) 2 SCC 504, the Court noticed that on the issue,

there   are   no   decided   cases   of   this   Court,   hence   the

Court observed that in the above view, the matter should

be   referred   to   a   larger   Bench.     That   again   was   a

judgment of two Judge Bench and there was no direction

that   reference   should   be   made   to   a   larger   Bench

contemplated in the order, which might have been a Bench

of three Hon’ble Judges deciding the issue. In  Union of

India Vs. M. Gopalakrishnaiah, 1995 Supp. (4) SCC 81, an

earlier   Constitution   Bench   judgment   in  Delhi   Transport

Corporation Vs. D.T.C. Mazdoor Congress and Others, 1991

Supp   (1)   SCC   600  was   noticed   and   the   question   as   to

whether   the   reasoning   of   the   decision   in   the  Delhi

Transport   Corporation   (supra)  and  Central   Inland   Water

Transport Corporation Limited and Another Vs. Brojo Nath
                                                                      104

Ganguly and Another, (1986) 3 SCC 156, which applied to

permanent   employees   can   be   extended   to   the   Director   on

their   fixed   tenure   in   the   Scheme   should   be   considered.

Thus, whether the Constitution Bench Judgment applied in

aforesaid case was the question referred, which is again

an   order   passed   in   the   peculiar   facts   of   the   case   and

does   not   contain   any   ratio   pertaining   to   reference   to

larger Bench.  

110.  Similarly, in Syndicate Bank Vs. Prabha D. Naik and

Another,   (2002)   10   SCC   686,   a   two   Judge   Bench   made   a

reference to larger Bench to consider the interpretation

of   Article   535   of   the   Portuguese   Civil   Code   and

applicability of the
Limitation Act
.   The reference was

not   to   a   Constitution   Bench   and   was   only   to   a   larger

Bench, which might be to a three Judge Bench. Similarly,

in  Charanjeet   Singh   Vs.   Raveendra   Kaur,   (2008)   17   SCC

650  looking   to   the   importance   of   the   question,   a   two

Judge Bench had made reference to a larger Bench.   Two

Judge   Bench   reference   was   not   to   a   Constitution   Bench,

hence, does not support the submission.   To the similar

effect   is   the   judgment   of   this   Court   in  Telecom

Regulatory   Authority   of   India   Vs.   Bharat   Sanchar   Nigam
                                                                     105

Limited (2014) 3 SCC 304, where two Judge Bench has made

a   reference   to   a   larger   Bench.     In  Securities   and

Exchange   Board   of   India   Vs.   Sahara   India   Real   Estate

Corporation   Limited   and   Others,   (2014)   8   SCC   751,   an

earlier order passed by three Judge Bench was sought to

be enforced, hence reference was made to a Three Judge

Bench,   which   again   was   not   a   case   for   reference   to   a

Constitution   Bench   of   five   Judges.     Judgment   of   this

Court   in  Rajeev   Dhavan   Vs.   Gulshan   Kumar   Mahajan   and

Others,   (2014)   12   SCC   618  was   a   case   pertaining   to   a

contempt petition, which is not relevant for the present

controversy.   Last judgment relied by Shri Ramachandran

is Vivek Narayan Sharma Vs. Union of India, (2017) 1 SCC

388.  The three Judge Bench was considering the issue of

notification   dated   08.11.2016   demonetizing   currency

notes of Rs. 500/­ and Rs. 1000/­.   Various aspects of

demonetization   came   for   consideration   in   the   writ

petition   filed   under
Article   32
and   the   transfer

petitions,   where   this   Court   noticed   following   in

Paragraph 3:­

           "3.   Keeping   in   view   the   general   public
     importance   and   the   far­reaching   implications
     which the answers to the questions may have,
     we   consider   it   proper   to   direct   that   the
                                                                   106

     matters be placed before the larger Bench of
     five   Judges   for   an   authoritative
     pronouncement. The Registry shall accordingly
     place the papers before the Hon'ble the Chief
     Justice   for   constituting   an   appropriate
     Bench.”


111.  In the above background, the three Judge Bench has

directed the matter to be placed before larger bench of

five judges.  

112.   Present   is   a   case   where   appeals   have   been   filed

against   judgment   dated   30.09.2010   of   Allahabad   High

Court   by   which   Four   Original   Suits,   which   were

transferred   by   the   High   Court   to   itself   have   been

decided.   Four Civil Suits were filed claiming title to

the disputed structure. Parties lead elaborate evidences

running   in   several   thousands   pages.     The   Court,   after

marshalling   the   evidences   before   it   has   decided   the

Civil Suits giving rise to these appeals.   The issues,

which   have   arisen   in   these   appeals   are   no   doubt

important issues, which have to be heard and decided in

these appeals. Normally appeals arising out of suits are

placed before a Bench of Two Judges but looking to the

importance   of   the   matter,   the   present   appeals   have

already been placed before three Judge Bench.   For the
                                                                      107

aforesaid   reasons,   we   do   not   agree   with   the   submission

of Shri Raju Ramachandran that these appeals be referred

to   Constitution   Bench   of   Five   Judges   to   reconsider   the

Constitution Bench judgment in Ismail Faruqui’s case.

113. Before we close we remind us as well as members of

both   the   major   communities   of   this   country,   Hindus   and

Muslims,   the   thoughtful   message   given   by   Justice   S.U.

Khan     in   his   judgment   as   well   as   the   words   of   Justice

J.S.   Verma,   speaking   for   majority   in    Ismail   Faruqui’s

case. Justice S.U. Khan made following appeal:

     'Muslims must also ponder that at present the
     entire     world   wants   to   know   the   exact
     teaching of Islam in respect of relationship
     of   Muslims   with   others.   Hostility­peace­
     friendship­tolerance­opportunity   to   impress
     others with the Message­opportunity to strike
     wherever   and   whenever   possible­or   what?   In
     this   regard   Muslims   in   India   enjoy   a   unique
     position.   They   have   been   rulers   here,   they
     have   been   ruled   and   now   they   are   sharers   in
     power   (of   course   junior   partners).   They   are
     not   in   majority   but   they   are   also   not
     negligible   minority   (Maximum   member   of
     Muslims are in huge majority which makes them
     indifferent to the problem in question or in
     negligible   minority   which   makes   them
     redundant. Indian Muslims have also inherited
     huge   legacy   of   religious   learning   and
     knowledge.   They   are   therefore   in   the   best
     position   to   tell   the   world   the   correct
     position.   Let   them   start   with   their   role   in
     the resolution of the conflict at hand.” 
                                                                     108

114. Justice J.S. Verma in paragraph 156 of the judgment

expressed   great  hope   into   Hinduism   which   is  a   tolerant

faith. In paragraph 156 it was observed:

           "156.Before   we   pass   final   orders,   some
     observations of a general nature appear to be
     in order. Hinduism is a tolerant faith. It is
     that   tolerance   that   has   enabled   Islam,
     Christianity,   Zoroastrianism,   Judaism,
     Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism to find shelter
     and support upon this land. We have no doubt
     that the moderate Hindu has little taste for
     the   tearing   down   of   the   place   of   worship   of
     another   to   replace   it   with   a   temple.   It   is
     our   fervent   hope   that   that   moderate   opinion
     shall   find   general   expression   and   that
     communal   brotherhood   shall   bring   to   the
     dispute at Ayodhya an amicable solution long
     before the courts resolve it.”


115.   We are also reminded of rich culture and heritage

of this ancient country which has always been a matter

of great learning and inspiration for the whole world. 

116.   The great King Asoka in 245 B.C. (Before Christ),

had   given   several   messages   to   the   world   which   are

engraved   in  rock   edicts  which     shows   reverence   towards

faith   of   others.   The     Twelfth   Rock   Edict   of   the   great

King Asoka stated:

     "'The   King,   beloved   of   the   Gods,   honours
     every form of religious faith, but considers
     no gift or honour so much as the increase of
     the   substance   of   religion;   whereof   this   is
                                                                   109

     the   root,   to   reverence   one's   own   faith   and
     never to revile that of others. Whoever acts
     differently injures his own religion while he
     wrong's   another's.'   'The   texts   of   all   forms
     of   religion   shall   be   followed   under   my
     protection.'”

117.   Dr.   S.   Radhakrishnan,   most   Learned   and   respected

former   President   of  India,   in   his   celebrated   book  “The

Hindu   View   of   Life”  while   dealing   with   the   subject   of

“conflict   of   religion”   has   expressed   great   hope   with

Hindu view of life. Dr. Radhakrishnan in prophetic words

states:

           “That   the   Hindu   solution   of   the   problem
     of the conflict of religions is likely to be
     accepted   in   the   future   seems   to   me   to   be
     fairly certain. The spirit of democracy with
     its   immense   faith   in   the   freedom   to   choose
     one's   ends   and   direct   one's   course   in   the
     effort to realize them makes for it. Nothing
     is   good   which   is   not   self­chosen;   no
     determination is valuable which is not self­
     determination.   The   different   religions   are
     slowly   learning   to   hold   out   hands   of
     friendship to each other in every part of the
     world.   The   parliaments   of   religions   and
     conferences   and   congresses   of   liberal
     thinkers   of   all   creeds   promote   mutual
     understanding   and   harmony.   The   study   of
     comparative   religion   is   developing   a   fairer
     attitude to other religions. It is impressing
     onus   the   fundamental   unity   of   all   religions
     by   and   the   need   of   the   hour   determine   the
     emphasis in each religion. We are learning to
     think   clearly   about   the   inter­relations   of
     religions.   We   tend   to   look   upon   different
     religions      not    as     incompatibles      but    as
                                                                   110

     complementaries, and so indispensable to each
     other for the realization of the common end.
     Closer   contact   with   other   religions   has
     dispelled   the   belief   that   only   this   or   that
     religion   has   produced   men   of   courage   and
     patience,   self­denying   love   and   creative
     energy.   Every   great   religion   has   cured   its
     followers of the swell of passion, the thrust
     of   desire   and   the   blindness   of   temper.   The
     crudest   religion   seems   to   have   its   place   in
     the   cosmic   scheme,   for   gorgeous   flowers
     justify   the   muddy   roots   from   which   they
     spring.”


118.  We are confident that observations made by Justice

S.U.   Khan   of   Allahabad   High   Court   as   quoted   above   as

well   as   observations   of   Justice   J.S.   Verma   made   in

paragraph   156   of   the   judgment   are   observations   which

shall guide both the communities in their thought, deed

and action.

119.  To   conclude,   we   again   make   it   clear   that

questionable observations made in  Ismail Faruqui's case

as noted above were made in context of land acquisition.

Those   observations   were   neither   relevant   for   deciding

the suits nor relevant for deciding these appeals.

120. In view of our foregoing discussions, we are of the

considered   opinion   that   no   case   has   been   made   out   to

refer   the   Constitution   Bench   judgment of   this   Court  in
                                                                     111

Ismail Faruqui case (supra) for reconsideration. 

121.   We   record   our   appreciation   to   the   valuable

assistance rendered by the learned counsel for both the

parties,   especially   Shri   Ejaz   Maqbool   and   P.V.

Yogeswaran   who   have   rendered   great   assistance   to   the

Court   in   compiling   various   volumes   in   orderly   manner

which   had   been   of   great   help   to   the   Court,   both,   in

hearing and deciding the issue. 

122.   The   appeals   which   are   awaiting   consideration   by

this   Court   for   quite   a   long   period,   be   now   listed   in

week commencing 29th October, 2018 for hearing.



                                  ..........................CJI.
                                        ( DIPAK MISRA )


                                   ...........................J.
                                        ( ASHOK BHUSHAN )


NEW DELHI,                         
SEPTEMBER 27, 2018.
                                 1


                                                   REPORTABLE
              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

          CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 10866-10867 OF 2010


M. SIDDIQ (D) THR. LRS.                       … APPELLANT(S)

                             VERSUS

MAHANT SURESH DAS AND ORS. ETC.               … RESPONDENT(S)

                               WITH

                 CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 4768-4771 OF 2011
                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2636 OF 2011
                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 821 OF 2011
                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4739 OF 2011
                 CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 4905-4908 of 2011
                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2215 of 2011
                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4740 of 2011
                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2894 of 2011
                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6965 of 2011
                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4192 of 2011
                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5498 of 2011
                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7226 of 2011
                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8096 of 2011
                 DIARY NO. 22744 OF 2017


                        JUDGMENT
S.ABDUL NAZEER, J.
1.   I have had the privilege of reading the erudite Judgment of my

learned Brother Justice Ashok Bhushan. My learned Brother has
2
held that the questionable observations made in paragraph 82 of

the judgment in
Dr. M. Ismail Faruqui and Ors. v. Union of India

and Ors.
(1994) 6 SCC 360 (for short 'Ismail Faruqui') are not

relevant for deciding these appeals.   Therefore, His Lordship has

concluded that no case has been made out seeking reference of

these appeals to a Constitution Bench of this Court. I am unable to

accept this view expressed by my learned Brother. However, I am in

respectful agreement with his opinion on the question of res

judicata contained in paragraphs 63 to 75 of the Judgment and

have restricted this judgment to the other issues.
2.   Since the facts of the case and the rival contentions of the

parties have been set out by my learned Brother in detail, it is not

necessary to reiterate them. Therefore, I have stated only certain

relevant facts.
3.   In Ismail Faruqui, the Court started by elucidating the

background of the case leading to the Acquisition of Certain Area at

Ayodhya Act, 1993 (No. 33 of 1993) (for short '1993 Act') and the

reasons for making Special Reference to this Court by the President

of India in exercise of his power in clause (1) of
Article 143
of the
3
Constitution of India. Herein the Special Reference mentioned, had

the following question for consideration and opinion:
"Whether a Hindu temple or any Hindu
          religious structure existed prior to the
          construction of the Ram Janma Bhumi-Babri
          Masjid (including the premises of the inner
          and outer courtyards of such structure) in the
          area on which the structure stood?"
4.   After narrating the facts, the Court went on to examine the

constitutional validity of the 1993 Act. On this issue, the Court

concluded that the Parliament has the legislative competence to

enact the said legislation and except for
Section 4(3)
, the entire

1993 Act is constitutionally valid. While deciding so, the Court in

paragraph 51 went on to discuss the "comparative significance" of

the disputed site to the two communities. The following is

reproduced as under:
"51. It may also be mentioned that even as
          Ayodhya is said to be of particular significance
          to the Hindus as a place of pilgrimage because
          of the ancient belief that Lord Rama was born
          there, the mosque was of significance for the
          Muslim community as an ancient mosque built
          by Mir Baqi in 1528 AD. As a mosque, it was a
          religious place of worship by the Muslims.
          This indicates the comparative significance of
          the disputed site to the two communities and
          also that the impact of acquisition is equally
          on the right and interest of the Hindu
4
community. Mention of this aspect is made
         only in the context of the argument that the
         statute as a whole, not merely
Section 7
thereof, is anti-secular being slanted in favour
         of the Hindus and against the Muslims."
5.   After the aforementioned conclusion, in paragraphs 65 to 82

the Court examined the question as to whether a mosque is

immune    from   acquisition.   Among    these   paragraphs,   the

observations in paragraphs 77, 78 and 80 are important for the

matter in hand and are reproduced as under:-
"77. It may be noticed that
Article 25
does not
         contain any reference to property unlike
Article
         26
of the Constitution. The right to practise,
         profess and propagate religion guaranteed
         under
Article 25
of the Constitution does not
         necessarily include the right to acquire or own
         or possess property. Similarly this right does
         not extend to the right of worship at any and
         every place of worship so that any hindrance
         to worship at a particular place per se may
         infringe the religious freedom guaranteed
         under
Articles 25
and
26
of the Constitution.
         The protection under
Articles 25
and
26
of the
         Constitution is to religious practice which
         forms an essential and integral part of the
         religion. A practice may be a religious practice
         but not an essential and integral part of
         practice of that religion.
78. While offer of prayer or worship is a
         religious practice, its offering at every
         location where such prayers can be offered
         would not be an essential or integral part of
5
such religious practice unless the place has
          a particular significance for that religion so
          as to form an essential or integral part
          thereof. Places of worship of any religion
          having particular significance for that
          religion, to make it an essential or integral
          part of the religion, stand on a different
          footing and have to be treated differently
          and more reverentially.
80. It has been contended that a mosque
          enjoys a particular position in Muslim Law and
          once a mosque is established and prayers are
          offered in such a mosque, the same remains
          for all time to come a property of Allah and the
          same never reverts back to the donor or
          founder of the mosque and any person
          professing Islamic faith can offer prayer in
          such a mosque and even if the structure is
          demolished, the place remains the same where
          the namaz can be offered. As indicated
          hereinbefore, in British India, no such
          protection was given to a mosque and the
          mosque was subjected to the provisions of
          statute of limitation thereby extinguishing the
          right of Muslims to offer prayers in a particular
          mosque lost by adverse possession over that
          property."
(Emphasis supplied)
6.   In paragraph 82 this Court summarised the position as under:
"82. The correct position may be summarised
          thus. Under the Mahomedan Law applicable in
          India, title to a mosque can be lost by adverse
          possession       (See Mulla's  Principles    of
          Mahomedan Law, 19th Edn., by M.
6
Hidayatullah - Section 217; and
Shahid
Ganj v. Shiromani Gurdwara
[AIR 1940 PC
116, 121]. If that is the position in law, there
can be no reason to hold that a mosque has a
unique or special status, higher than that of
the places of worship of other religions in
secular India to make it immune from
acquisition by exercise of the sovereign or
prerogative power of the State. A mosque is
not an essential part of the practice of the
religion of Islam and namaz (prayer) by
Muslims can be offered anywhere, even in
open. Accordingly, its acquisition is not
prohibited    by    the     provisions   in   the
Constitution of India. Irrespective of the status
of a mosque in an Islamic country for the
purpose of immunity from acquisition by the
State in exercise of the sovereign power, its
status and immunity from acquisition in the
secular ethos of India under the Constitution
is the same and equal to that of the places of
worship of the other religions, namely, church,
temple etc. It is neither more nor less than
that of the places of worship of the other
religions. Obviously, the acquisition of any
religious place is to be made only in unusual
and extraordinary situations for a larger
national purpose keeping in view that such
acquisition should not result in extinction of
the right to practise the religion, if the
significance of that place be such. Subject to
this condition, the power of acquisition is
available for a mosque like any other place of
worship of any religion. The right to worship is
not at any and every place, so long as it can be
practised effectively, unless the right to
worship at a particular place is itself an
integral part of that right."
(Emphasis supplied)
7
7.   Dr. Rajeev Dhavan, learned senior counsel, submits that the

observations made in the above mentioned paragraph, reading "A

mosque is not an essential part of the practice of the religion of

Islam and namaz (prayer) by Muslims can be offered anywhere,

even in open." is contrary to law and the Court was obliged to

examine the faith to make this statement. He further contends that

the observations on the concepts of particular significance and

comparative significance are without foundation.       Moreover, he

contends that what constitutes the essential part of a religion is

primarily to be ascertained with reference to the doctrine of that

religion itself as has been done by the Seven-Judge Constitution

Bench of this Court in, the
Commissioner, Hindu Religious

Endowments, Madras v. Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri

Shirur Mutt
1954 SCR 1005 (for short 'Shirur Mutt'). It has also

been submitted that the broad test of "essentiality" in Shirur Mutt

cannot be cut down by later Five and Two Judges' decisions.
"Integral" is interchangeable with "essential". The latter cannot be

short circuited by the use of the former. This may lie at the root of

many mal-understandings and needs to be clarified. Further, it is

precisely this error of integrality that Ismail Faruqui uses when it
8
speaks of "particular significance". He also submits that the test

used in paragraph 78 of Ismail Faruqui was essential and integral

even though the word "or" was used. The Court has failed to

examine the tenets of faith and proceeded in its own intuitive

understanding to make ipse dixit observations. Learned senior

counsel has also relied on certain decisions of this Court in support

of his contentions.
Ismail Faruqui being devoid of any examination

on this issue, the matter needs to go to a larger Bench. Dr. Dhavan

further submits that the impugned judgment was affected by the

questionable observations in Ismail Faruqui. He has taken us

through various paragraphs in the impugned judgment in this

regard. Dr. Dhavan has also referred to various observations made

in the impugned judgment to support his submission that Ismail

Faruqui has influenced
the said judgment
.
8.   On the other hand, Shri Parasaran, learned senior counsel

submits that the questionable observations in Ismail Faruqui that

a mosque not being an essential part of the practice of Islam have

to be read in the context of the validity of the acquisition of the suit

property under the 1993 Act.     He submits that this Court has not

ruled that offering Namaz by Muslims is not an essential religious
9
practice. It only ruled that right to offer Namaz at every mosque

that exists is not essential religious practice. But if a place of

worship of any religion has a particular significance for that

religion, enough to make an essential or integral part of the religion,

then it would stand on a different footing and would have to be

treated differently and more reverentially.         It is argued that the

fundamental right of Muslim community under
Article 25
, to offer

namaz is not affected in the present case as the Babri Masjid was

not a mosque with particular significance for that religion.
9.   We    have    also    heard   S/Shri   C.S.    Vaidyanathan,     Raju

Ramachandran, S.K. Jain, learned senior counsel and Shri Tushar

Mehta, learned Additional Solicitor General and Shri P.N. Mishra,

learned advocate.
10. Learned counsel for the parties have also produced Islamic

religious texts on mosque, relevant excerpts of the holy Quran and

illuminating discourses on the holy Quran in support of their

respective contentions on whether a mosque is an essential part of

the practice of the religion of Islam.
11. It    is   evident    from   Ismail   Faruqui    that   the   principal

submission of the petitioners was that mosque cannot be acquired
10
because of a special status in Mahomedan Law. The Constitution

Bench has discussed this aspect under a separate heading "Mosque

– Immunity from Acquisition" from paragraph 65 of the judgment.
Specifically in paragraph 74, the Court observed that subject to

protection under
Articles 25
and
26
of the Constitution, places of

religious worship, like mosques, churches, temples, etc. can be

acquired under the State's sovereign power of acquisition.        Such

acquisition per se does not violate either
Article 25
or
Article 26
of

the Constitution. Further, the Court in paragraph 77 noted that
Article 25
does not contain any reference to property unlike
Article

26
of the Constitution. The right to practice, profess and propagate

religion guaranteed under
Article 25
of the Constitution does not

necessarily include right to acquire or own or possess property.
Similarly, this right does not extend to the right of worship at any

and every place of worship so that any hindrance to worship at a

place per se may infringe the religious freedom guaranteed under
Articles 25
and
26
of the Constitution. Additionally, in paragraph

78, it noted that places of worship of any religion having particular

significance for that religion, to make it an essential or integral part

of the religion, stand on a different footing and have to be treated
11
differently and more reverentially. While summarizing the position,

in paragraph 82, the Court has observed that a mosque is not an

essential part of practice of religion of Islam and namaz by Muslims

can be offered anywhere even in open.
12. What constitutes the essential part of a religion is primarily to

be ascertained with reference to the doctrine, tenets and beliefs of

that religion itself. This has been laid down at page 1025 in Shirur

Mutt :
"……..The learned Attorney-General lays stress
          upon clause (2)(a) of the article and his
          contention is that all secular activities, which
          may be associated with religion but do not
          really constitute an essential part of it, are
          amenable to State regulation.
The contention formulated in such broad
          terms cannot, we think, be supported. In the
          first place, what constitutes the essential
          part of a religion is primarily to be
          ascertained with reference to the doctrines
          of that religion itself. If the tenets of any
          religious sect of the Hindus prescribe that
          offerings of food should be given to the idol
          at particular hours of the day, that
          periodical ceremonies should be performed
          in a certain way at certain periods of the
          year or that there should be daily recital of
          sacred texts or oblations to the sacred fire,
          all these would be regarded as parts of
          religion and the mere fact that they involve
          expenditure of money or employment of
12
priests and servants or the use of
          marketable commodities would not make
          them secular activities partaking of a
          commercial or economic character; all of
          them are religious practices and should be
          regarded as matters of religion within the
          meaning of
Article 26(b).
What
Article
          25(2)(a)
contemplates is not regulation by
          the State of religious practices as such, the
          freedom of which is guaranteed by the
          Constitution except when they run counter
          to public order, health and morality, but
          regulation of activities which are economic,
          commercial or political in their character
          though they are associated with religious
          practices."
(Emphasis supplied)
13. Further, at pages 1028-1029 it is stated that,
          "Under
Article 26(b)
, therefore, a religious
          denomination         or   organization     enjoys
          complete autonomy in the matter of
          deciding as to what rites and ceremonies
          are essential according to the tenets of the
          religion they hold and no outside authority
          has any jurisdiction to interfere with their
          decision in such matters. Of course, the
          scale of expenses to be incurred in connection
          with these religious observances would be a
          matter of administration of property belonging
          to the religious denomination and can be
          controlled by secular authorities in accordance
          with any law
laid down by
a competent
          legislature; for it could not be the injunction of
          any religion to destroy the institution and its
          endowments by incurring wasteful expenditure
          on rites and ceremonies."
(Emphasis supplied)
13
14.
In
Ratilal Panachand Gandhi v. The State of Bombay and

Ors.
1954 SCR 1055, a Constitution Bench of this Court has held

thus:
"It may be noted that 'religion' is not
         necessarily theistic and in fact there are well
         known religions in India like Buddhism and
         Jainism which do not believe in the existence
         of God or of any Intelligent First Cause. A
         religion undoubtedly has its basis in a
         system of beliefs and doctrines which are
         regarded by those who profess that religion
         to be conducive to their spiritual well being,
         but it would not be correct to say, as seems
         to have been suggested by one of the
         learned Judges of the Bombay High Court,
         that matters of religion are nothing but
         matters of religious faith and religious
         belief.
xxx            xxx                  xxx

         ….. No outside authority has any right to
         say that these are not essential parts of
         religion and it is not open to the secular
         authority of the State to restrict or prohibit
         them in any manner they like under the
         guise of administering the trust estate."
(Emphasis supplied)
15. In Sri Venkataramana Devaru and Ors. v. The State of

Mysore and Ors. 1958 SCR 895, a Constitution Bench of this
14
Court had the opportunity to consider
Articles 25
and
26
of the

Constitution of India in the context of Madras Temple Entry

Authorisation Act, 1947 as amended in 1949.         After referring to

Shirur Mutt, this Court has held as under:
"16(3)…. Now, the precise connotation of the
          expression “matters of religion” came up for
          consideration     by    this    Court      in
The
          Commissioner, Hindu Religious Endowments,
          Madras v. Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of
          Sri Shirur Mutt
[(1954) SCR 1005] and it was
          held therein that it embraced not merely
          matters of doctrine and belief pertaining to the
          religion but also the practice of it, or to put it
          in terms of Hindu theology, not merely
          its Gnana but      also   its Bhakti and Karma
          Kandas. …."
16.
In
The Durgah Committee, Ajmer and Anr. v. Syed Hussain

Ali and Ors.
(1962) 1 SCR 383, a Constitution Bench of this Court,

after considering the historical background of the dispute, has held

thus:-
"Having thus reviewed broadly the genesis
          of the shrine, its growth and the story of its
          endowments and their management, it may
          now be relevant to enquire what is the
          nature of the tenets and beliefs to which
          Soofism subscribes. Such an enquiry would
          serve to assist us in determining whether the
          Chishtia sect can be regarded as a religious
15
denomination or a section thereof within
            Art 26."
(Emphasis supplied)
17.
In
Sardar Syedna Taher Saifuddin Saheb v. The State of

Bombay
1962 Supp (2) SCR 496, this Court was considering the

validity   of   the   law   interfering   with   the     right   of   religious

denominations to ex-communicate its members.                 In this context
Articles 25
and
26
came to be considered.              After referring to the

various decisions a Constitution Bench of this Court has held as

under:-
"The content of Arts. 25 and 26 of the
            Constitution came up for consideration before
            this Court in the
Commissioner, Hindu
            Religious    Endowments       Madras     v.   Sri
            Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur
            Matt
;
Mahant Jagannath Ramanuj Das v. The
            State of Orissa
; Sri Venkatamana Devaru v. The
            State of Mysore; Durgah Committee;
Ajmer v.
            Syed Hussain Ali
and several other cases and
            the    main    principles    underlying     these
            provisions have by these decisions been placed
            beyond controversy.      The first is that the
            protection of these articles is not limited to
            matters of doctrine or belief they extend also to
            acts done in pursuance of religion and
            therefore contain a guarantee for rituals and
            observances, ceremonies and modes of
            worship which are integral parts of religion.
16
The second is that what constitutes an
          essential part of a religious or religious
          practice has to be decided by the courts
          with reference to the doctrine of a
          particular religion and include practices
          which are regarded by the community as a
          part of its religion."
(Emphasis supplied)
18.
In
Tilkayat Shri Govindlalji Maharaj v. State of Rajasthan

and Ors.
(1964) 1 SCR 561, a Constitution Bench of this Court was

considering the validity of
Nathdwara Temple Act, 1959
(No. XIII of

1959). The same was challenged on behalf of the denomination of

followers of Vallabha. The case originally involved challenge to the

Nathdwara Ordinance, 1959 (No. II of 1959) which was issued on

February 6, 1959. Subsequently, this Ordinance was repealed by

the Act and the petitioner was allowed to amend his petition. It was

contended that if the temple was held to be a public temple then the

Act is to be invalid because it contravenes the fundamental rights

guaranteed to the denomination under
Articles 25
and
26
of the

Constitution. After considering the rival contentions, the Court has

held as under:
17
"In deciding the question as to whether a given
religious practice is an integral part of the
religion or not, the test always would be
whether it is regarded as such by the
community following the religion or not. This
formula may in some cases present difficulties
in its operation. Take the case of a practice in
relation to food or dress. If in a given
proceeding, one section of the community
claims that while performing certain rites
white dress is an integral part of the religion
itself, whereas another section contends that
yellow dress and not the white dress is the
essential part of the religion, how is the Court
going to decide the question? Similar disputes
may arise in regard to food. In cases where
conflicting evidence is produced in respect of
rival contentions as to competing religious
practices the Court may not be able to resolve
the dispute by a blind application of the
formula that the community decides which
practice in an integral part of its religion,
because the community may speak with more
than one voice and the formula would,
therefore, break down. This question will
always have to be decided by the Court and
in doing so, the Court may have to enquire
whether the practice in question is religious
in character and if it is, whether it can be
regarded as an integral or essential part of
the religion, and the finding of the Court on
such an issue will always depend upon the
evidence adduced before it as to the
conscience of the community and the
tenets of its religion. It is in the light of this
possible complication which may arise in some
cases that this Court struck a note of caution
in the case of
Durgah Committee Ajmer v. Syed
Hussain Ali
[(1962) 1 SCR 383 at p. 411] and
18
observed that in order that the practices in
           question should be treated as a part of religion
           they must be regarded by the said religion as
           its essential and integral part; otherwise even
           purely secular practices which are not an
           essential or an integral part of religion are apt
           to be clothed with a religious form and may
           make a claim for being treated as religious
           practices within the meaning of
Article 25(1)."
(Emphasis supplied)
19. It is clear from the aforesaid decisions that the question as to

whether a particular religious practice is an essential or integral

part of the religion is a question which is to be considered by

considering the doctrine, tenets and beliefs of the religion. It is also

clear that the examination of what constitutes an essential practice

requires   detailed   examination    as    reflected   in   the   aforesaid

judgments.
20. At this juncture, it is also pertinent to note the observations in
Sri Adi Visheshwara of Kashi Vishwanath Temple, Varanasi and

Ors. v. State of U.P. and Ors.
(1997) 4 SCC 606, at paragraph 28,

where it is stated:
"….The concept of essentiality is not itself a
           determinative factor. It is one of the
           circumstances      to  be    considered     in
           adjudging whether the particular matters of
           religion or religious practices or belief are
19
an integral part of the religion. It must be
          decided whether the practices or matters are
          considered integral by the community itself.
          Though not conclusive, this is also one of the
          facets to be noticed. The practice in question is
          religious in character and whether it could be
          regarded as an integral and essential part of
          the religion and if the court finds upon
          evidence adduced before it that it is an integral
          or essential part of the religion,
Article 25
accords protection to it…."
(Emphasis supplied)
21. As mentioned above, parties have produced various texts in

Islam in support of their respective contentions. For the present,

we are concerned with the approach of the Court in concluding

questionable observations without examining the doctrine, tenets

and beliefs of the religion. The conclusion in paragraph 82 of Ismail

Faruqui that "A mosque is not an essential part of the practice of

the religion of Islam and namaz (prayer) by Muslims can be offered

anywhere, even in open" has been arrived at without undertaking

comprehensive examination.
22. Now, the question is whether the impugned judgment has

been affected by the questionable observations in Ismail Faruqui.
A perusal of the impugned judgment shows that learned advocates
20
appearing    for   the   parties   have   repeatedly   quoted   various

paragraphs of Ismail Faruqui while arguing the case and have also

placed strong reliance on the questionable observations made in

Ismail Faruqui.
23. A few paragraphs mentioned at page Nos. 3038-3039, 3061,

3392, 3429 and 3439 of the impugned judgment delivered by

Justice D.V Sharma wherein Ismail Faruqui is quoted have been

reproduced as under:
"ISSUE NO. 19 (d): Whether the building in
            question could not be a mosque under the
            Islamic Law in view of the admitted position
            that it did not have minarets?
FINDINGS:
On behalf of defendants it is contended
            that the building in question was not a
            mosque under the Islamic Law. It is not
            disputed that the structure has already been
            demolished on 6.12.1992.
According to Dr. M.
            Ismail Faruqui and others v. Union of India and
            others
, case, 1994 (6) SCC 360, the Hon'ble
            Apex Court held at para 70 that the sacred
            character of the mosque can also be lost.
            According to the tenets of Islam, minarets are
            required to give Azan. There cannot be a public
            place of worship in mosque in which Provision
            of Azan is not available, hence the disputed
            structure cannot be deemed to be a mosque.
                According to Islamic tenets, there cannot
            be a mosque without place of Wazoo and
21
surrounded by a graveyard on three sides.
Thus, in view of the above discussions, there is
a strong circumstance that without any
minaret there cannot be any mosque. Issue
No. 19(d) is decided accordingly, against the
plaintiffs and in favour of the defendants."
[Printed volume of the judgment at
          page Nos. 3038-3039]
     "Defendants further claim that the
property in suit was not in exclusive
possession of Muslims right from 1858. It is
further submitted that in view of the
possession of Hindus from 1858 and onwards
which is evident from Ext. 15, 16, 18, 19, 20,
27 and 31, the outer Courtyard was
exclusively in possession of Hindus and the
inner Courtyard was not exclusively in
possession of Muslims but also in joint
possession of Hindus and Muslims till 1934.
Muslims were dispossessed from the inner
Courtyard also in 1934 and plaintiffs admit
that    Muslims     were     dispossessed    on
22/23December      1949     from    the   inner
Courtyard. Thus, on the basis of Islamic tenets
the Muslims claim that the property shall be
construed as a Mosque.
In this reference the
controversy has already been set at rest by the
Privy Council in the decision of
Masjid Shahid
Ganj v. Shiromani Gurudwara Prabandhak
Committee, Amritsar
, AIR 1940 PC 116.
The
aforesaid view has been approved in
Dr. M.
Ismail Faruqui v. Union Of India
, 1994 (6) SCC
360, Para 70 of the ruling is relevant which
reads as under……"
[Printed volume of the judgment at
          page Nos. 3061]
22
"Sri Jain has relied upon para 78 of
Dr. M.
Ismail Faruqui and others v. Union of India and
others
1994(6) SCC 360, which is reproduced
as under :
“While offer of prayer or worship is are
    religious practice, its offering at every
    location where such prayers can be
    offered would not be an essential or
    integral part of such religious practice
    unless the place has a particular
    significance for that religion so as to
    form an essential or integral part
    thereof. Places of worship of any
    religion having particular significance
    for that religion, to make it an
    essential or integral part of the
    religion, stand on a different footing
    and have to be treated differently and
    move reverentially."
Sri H.S. Jain, Advocate has further argued
that since birth place of Lord Ram was
considered as a place of worship which was
integral part of religious practice of Hindu from
times immemorial. It is deity and it stands on
a different footing and have to be treated
reverentially. Sri Jain has further urged that in
view of the constitutional mandate as provided
under
Article 25
of the Constitution this place
which was all the time being worshipped has
be treated by this Court as a place of worship
because of the belief of the Hindu based on
religious book and religious practice to be birth
place of Lord Ram as the temple was
constructed in the 12th century. It is expedient
to say that prior to 12th century there is
evidence that earlier temples were also
constructed at the site. Thus, according to Sri
H.S. Jain, Advocate there is overwhelming
23
evidence to establish the site of Ram
Janambhumi and the Court has to recognize
the same. Thus, the suit of the plaintiffs which
causes hindrance for worship of Hindu is liable
to be dismissed on this count as no relief can
be granted under Section 42 of the Specific
Relief Act, 1877, now
Section 34
of the Specific
Relief Act, 1963."
[Printed volume of the judgment at
          page Nos. 3392]
"LORD RAM AS THE AVATAR OF VISHNU
HAVING BEEN BORN AT AYODHYA AT THE
JANMASTHAN IS ADMITTEDLY THE CORE
PART OF HINDU BELIEF AND FAITH WHICH
IS IN EXISTENCE AND PRACTICED FOR THE
LAST THOUSANDS OF YEARS. THE HINDU
SCRIPTURES ALSOS SANCTIFY IT.
ARTICLE
25
OF THE CONSTITUTION BEING A
FUNDAMENTAL          RIGHT      ENSUES      ITS
PRESERVATION AND NO RELIEF CAN BE
TAKEN BY THE COURT WHICH SEEKS TO
RESTRICT OR ALTOGETHER EXTINGUISH
THIS RIGHT.
The fact that Ram Janambhumi is an
integral part of Hindu Religion and the right to
worship there is a fundamental right of the
Hindu religion and can be enforced through a
suit can be clearly made out through a
number of decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court."
[Printed volume of the judgment at
          page Nos. 3429]
"THE RELIGIOUS RIGHT OF HINDUS TO
WORSHIP RAM LALA AT THE JANMASTHAN
BECAME   CONCRETISED   BEFORE THE
24
CONSTITUTION CAME INTO BEING AND THE
SAME REQUIRES TO BE PROTECTED.
It is well-known that the Constitution of India
was enacted, i.e. given to ourselves, w.e.f. 26th
January, 1950. Before it, the right of Hindus
to worship was duly sanctified and recognized
by judicial orders.
In fact, the Supreme Court records in the
Ismail Faruqui
case above the contention in
paragraph 1.2 of the White Paper of the
Government of India as recorded in Paragraph
9, Page 380, of
the said judgment
. It reads as
follows: "Interim orders in these civil suits
restrained the parties from removing the idols
or interfering with their worship. In effect,
therefore, from December 1949 till 6.12.1992
the structure had not been used as a mosque."
It is further very significant to note that the
Muslims for the first time, after 1949, assert
their right howsoever unsustainable, only in
18th December, 1961.
Therefore, the right of the Hindus to worship
at the Rama Janma Bhumi, continuing since
times immemorial as an integral part of their
religious right and faith was also sanctified by
judicial orders from 1949 continuously. This
right has concretised and remains an integral
part of Hindu religion and has to be protected."
[Printed volume of the judgment at
          page Nos. 3439]
25
24. Similarly, in the judgment rendered by Justice Sudhir

Agarwal, Ismail Faruqui has been quoted at page No. 2015 in the

printed volume of the judgment, which is as under:
"3501. Sri Prasad argued that belief of Hindus
          that Lord Ram as incarnation of Vishnu having
          born at Ayodhya forms an integral part of
          Hindu religion which cannot be denied to be
          practised, observed and performed by them
          and refers to
Commissioner of Police & others v.
          Acharya     Jagadishwarananda       Avadhuta&
          another
, (2004) 12 SCC 770 (para 9) and
Sri
          Adi Visheshwara of Kashi Vishwanath Temple,
          Varanasi
(supra).
In order to show what
          constitutes public order under
Article 25
of the
          Constitution, he also placed reliance on
Dalbir
          Singh & others v. State of Punjab
, AIR 1962 SC
          1106 (para 8).
3502. Next he submits that applying the
          doctrine of Eminent Domain, the place in
          dispute, having special significance for Hindus,
          cannot be touched at all either by any
          particular person or even by State and the
          provisions of even acquisition would not apply
          to it though with respect to the alleged
          mosque, it has been already held and observed
          by the Apex Court that the disputed building
          could not be shown to be of any special
          significance to Muslims. He refers to Dr. M.
          Ismail Faruqui and others v. Union of India &
          others, (1994) 6 SCC 360 (para 65, 72, 75 and
96); Acharya Maharajshri Narendra Prasadji
          Anand prasadji
Maharaj and others v. State of
          Gujarat & others
, (1975) 1 SCC 11.
The relief
          sought by the plaintiff (Suit-4) is barred by
          Section 34 Specific Reliefs Act, 1963 and
26
reliance is placed on Executive Committee of
          Vaish Degree College, Shamli and others v.
Lakshmi Narain and others, (1976) 2 SCC 58
          (para 20 and 27);
American Express Bank Ltd.
          v. Calcutta Steel Co. and others
, (1993) 2 SCC
          199(para 22)."
25. After considering Ismail Faruqui, Justice Sudhir Agarwal in

paragraphs 2722 to 2725 has opined as under:
"2722. The Fourth angle: It is a deity which
          has filed the present suit for enforcement of its
          rights. The religious endowment in the case in
          hand so far as Hindus are concerned, as they
          have pleaded in general, is a place of a peculiar
          and unique significance for them and there
          cannot be any other place like this. In case
          this place is allowed to extinguish/extinct by
          application of a provision of statutes, may be
          of limitation or otherwise, the fundamental
          right of practicing religion shall stand denied
          to the Hindus permanently since the very
          endowment or the place of religion will
          disappear for all times to come and this kind of
          place cannot be created elsewhere.
          2723.
In
Ismail Farooqui
(supra), Supreme
          Court has considered the plea of validity of
          acquisition of land under
Land Acquisition Act
that once a waqf of mosque is created, the
          property vests in almighty and it always
          remain a waqf hence such a property cannot
          be acquired. While negativing this plea, the
          Apex Court said that a plea in regard to
          general religious purposes cannot be said to be
          an integral part of religion which will deprive
          the worshippers of the right of worship at any
          other place and therefore, such a property can
27
be acquired by the State. However, the position
would be otherwise if the religious property
would have been of special significance and
cannot be one of several such kind of
properties. It will be useful to reproduce the
relevant observation in this regard:
"78. It appears from various decisions
   rendered by this Court, referred later,
   that subject to the protection under
Articles 25
and
26
of the Constitution,
   places of religious worship like
   mosques, churches, temples etc. can
   be    acquired   under     the  State's
   sovereign power of acquisition. Such
   acquisition per se does not violate
   either
Article 25
or
Article 26
of the
   Constitution. The decisions relating to
   taking over of the management have
   no bearing on the sovereign power of
   the State to acquire property."
"82. While offer of prayer or worship is
   a religious practice, its offering at every
   location where such prayers can be
   offered would not be an essential or
   integral part of such religious practice
   unless the place has a particular
   significance for that religion so as to
   form an essential or integral part
   thereof. Places of worship of any
   religion having particular significance
   for that religion, to make it an
   essential or integral part of the
   religion, stand on a different footing
   and have to be treated differently and
   more reverentially."
2724. The above observations show if the
religious endowment is of such nature, which
28
is of specific significance or peculiar in nature,
could not have been found elsewhere, the
acquisition     of    such   property     by   the
Government will have the effect of depriving
the worshippers their right of worship under
Article 25
of the Constitution and such an
acquisition even under the statutory provision,
cannot be permitted. We find sufficient
justification to extend this plea to the statute
of limitation also, inasmuch as, if the statute
pertaining to acquisition cannot be extended to
a religious place of special significance which
may have the effect of destroying the right of
worship at a particular place altogether,
otherwise the provision will be ultra vires, the
same would apply to the statute of limitation
also and that be so, it has to be read that the
statute of limitation to this extent may not be
availed where the debutter's property is of
such a nature that it may have the effect of
extinction of the very right of worship on that
place which is of peculiar nature and specific
significance. This will be infringing the
fundamental right under
Article 25
of the
Constitution.
2725. In fact this reason could have been
available to the plaintiffs (Suit-4) also had it
been shown by them that the mosque in
question for them was a place of special
significance but this has already been
observed by the Apex Court in respect to this
particular mosque that like others it is one of
the several mosques and by acquisition of the
place it will not have the effect of depriving
such fundamental right of Muslims. It is
always open to them to offer prayer at any
other place like they could have done here but
Hindus are not placed on similar footing.
29
According to Hindus, this is a place of birth of
          lord Rama and that be so, there cannot be any
          other place for which such belief persists since
          time immemorial. Once this land is allowed to
          be lost due to the acts of persons other than
          Hindus, the very right of this Section of people,
          as protected by
Article 25
, shall stand
          destroyed. This is another reason for not
          attracting the provisions of limitation in the
          present case."
26. Similarly, Justice D.V. Sharma has stated thus:
"A SOVEREIGN GOVERNMENT EVEN BY
          EXERCISING THE POWER OF EMINENT
          DOMAN CANNOT EXERCISE THE POWER OF
          ACQUISITION OF LAND OR PROPERTY
          WHICH EXTINGUISHES THE CORE OF THE
          FAITH OR THE PLACE OR THE INSTITUTION
          WHICH IS HELD TO BE SACRED.
What clearly follows is that a sovereign
          Government cannot extinguish the core of the
          Hindu religion which is the Ram Janambhumi,
          let alone the same be extinguished through a
          suit, by transferring the same to some other
          party in this case the plaintiff thereby ensuring
          that the said fundamental right to worship at
          the Ram Janambhumi is extinguished forever.
          RELEVANT CASE LAW…
(
b) Dr. M. Ismail Faruqui and Others v. Union of
          India & Others
, 1994 (6) SCC Para 76, Page
          416 – Acharya Maharajshri Narendra Prasadji
          Anand Prasadji Maharaj v. State of Gujarat,
          (1976) 2 SCR 317 at pages 327-328: (AIR 1974
          SC 2098 at p. 2103), has held :
30
"One thing is, however, clear that
Article 26
guarantees inter alia the
    right to own and acquire movable and
    immovable property for managing
    religious affairs. This right, however,
    cannot take away the right of the State
    to compulsorily acquire property ......If,
    on the other hand, acquisition of
    property of a religious denomination by
    the State can be proved to be such as
    to destroy or completely negative its
    right to own and acquire movable and
    immovable property for even the
    survival of a religious institution the
    question may have to be examined in a
    different light."
Para 82 - A mosque is not an essential part of
the practice of religion of Islam and Namaz by
Muslims can be offered anywhere, even in the
open. Accordingly, its acquisition is not
prohibited    by     the   provisions    in    the
Constitution     of    India.   Obviously,     the
acquisition of any religious place is to be made
only in unusual and extraordinary situations
for a larger national purpose. Keeping in view
that such acquisition should not result in
extinction of the right to practice the religion if
the significance of that place be such.
Note (i) Ram Janmasthan in Ayodhya where
Ram Lala is Virajman is a place of religious
significance as described in the above
judgment. If the sovereign authority, under the
power of eminent domain, cannot acquire it,
can a plea at the instance of plaintiffs who are
private persons in Suit No. 4 be entertained,
upholding of which would lead to denial of
such sacred place altogether to the Hindus.
31
Note (ii) At page 413, Para 65 of Ismail Faruqui
– No argument made about a mosque of
special significance which forms an essential
part of Islam. Hence, no question raised about
Baburi Mosque as integral to Islam and it has
not been raised in the plaint here or evidence
laid or any contention ever made that the said
mosque was of any significance to the practice
of Islam as a religion……."
[Printed volume of the judgment at
          page Nos.3438-3439]
"FINDINGS ….. Hon'ble Apex Court upheld the
validity of provisions of Acquisition of Certain
Area at Ayodhya, 1993 in
Dr. Ismail Faruqui
case (supra) and held that the Central
Government can acquire any place of worship.
At para- 78 Apex Court held that the place of
birth has a particular significance for Hindus
and it should be treated on different footing,
which reads as under:-
“78. While offer of prayer or worship is
   a religious practice, its offering at every
   location where such prayers can be
   offered would not be an essential or
   integral part of such religious practice
   unless the place has a particular
   significance for that religion so as to
   form an essential or integral part
   thereof. Places of worship of any
   religion having particular significance
   for that religion, to make it an
   essential or integral part of the
   religion, stand on a different footing
   and have to be treated differently and
   more reverentially.”
32
On behalf of Hindus it is urged that the
plaintiffs are not entitled for the relief claimed
and as such the relief is barred by the
provisions of Section 42 of the Specific Relief
Act, 1877 which is at par with
Section 34
of
the Specific Relief Act,1963 on the ground that
they have superior fundamental rights.
Contentions of Hindus are as under:
"The Hindus have superior fundamental
right than the Muslims under
articles 25
& 26
of the Constitution of India for the reasons
that performing customary rituals and offering
service worship to the lord of universe to
acquire merit and to get salvation as such it is
integral part of Hindu Dharma & religion in
view whereof it is humbly submitted that the
instant suit is liable to be dismissed with
exemplary cost: …
2.
In
M. Ismail Faruqui (Dr.) v. Union of India
,
(1994) 6 SCC 360, the Hon’ble Supreme Court
has held that the Right to Practise, Profess and
Propagate Religion guaranteed under
Article
25
of the Constitution does not extend to the
Right of Worship at any and every place of
worship so that any hindrance to worship at a
particular place per se may infringe the
religious freedom guaranteed under
Articles 25
and
26
of the Constitution of India. The
protection under
Articles 25
and
26
is to
religious practice which forms integral part of
practice of that religion. While offer of prayer
or worship is a religious practice, its offering at
every location where such prayers can be
offered would not be an essential or integral
part of such religious practice unless the place
has a particular significance for that religion
so as to form an essential or integral part
thereof. Places of worship of any religion
33
having particular significance of that religion
to make it an essential or integral part of the
religion stand on a different footing and have
to be treated differently and more reverentially.
Relying on said judgment it is submitted that
Sri Ramjanamsthan has particular significance
for the Hinduism as visiting and performing
customary rites confer merit and gives
salvation it is firm belief of the Hindus based
on their sacred Divine Holy Scriptures which
belief neither can be scrutinized by any Court
of Law nor can be challenged by the persons
having no faith in Hinduism as this is
conscience of the Hindus having special
protection under
Article 25
of the Constitution
of India. Relevant paragraph 77 and 78 of
the
said judgment
read as follows:
77. It may be noticed that
Article 25
does not contain any reference to
    property unlike
Article 26
of the
    Constitution. The right to practise,
    profess    and     propagate     religion
    guaranteed under
Article 25
of the
    Constitution does not necessarily
    include the right to acquire or own or
    possess property. Similarly this right
    does not extend to the right of worship
    at any and every place of worship so
    that any hindrance to worship at a
    particular place per se may infringe the
    religious freedom guaranteed under
Articles 25
and
26
of the Constitution.
    The protection under
Articles 25
and
26
of the Constitution is to religious
    practice which forms an essential and
    integral part of the religion. A practice
    may be a religious practice but not an
34
essential and integral part of practice
    of that religion.
78. While offer of prayer or worship is
    a religious practice, its offering at every
    location where such prayers can be
    offered would not be an essential or
    integral part of such religious practice
    unless the place has a particular
    significance for that religion so as to
    form an essential or integral part
    thereof. Places of worship of any
    religion having particular significance
    for that religion, to make it an
    essential or integral part of the
    religion, stand on a different footing
    and have to be treated differently and
    more reverentially.
3.
In
M. Ismail Faruqui (Dr.) v. Union of
India
(supra) the Hon’ble Supreme Court held
that a mosque is not an essential part of the
practice of the religion of Islam and namaz
(prayer) by Muslims can be offered any where
even in open. The Right to Worship is not at
any and every place so long as it can be
practised effectively, unless the Right to
Worship at a particular place is itself an
integral part of that right. Relying on said ratio
of law it is submitted that without offering
prayer at Sri Ramjanamsthan described as
Babri mosque in the plaint it can be practised
somewhere else but offering prayer instead of
Sri Ramjanamsthan at any other place cannot
be practised because the merit which is
obtained by worshiping at the birth place of Sri
Ram cannot be obtained by doing so at other
places and it will be contrary to the holy Divine
Sacred Scripture of the Hindus and will cause
extinction of a most sacred shrine of the
35
Hindus. Relevant paragraph Nos. 80 to 87 of
the said judgment
read as follows:
80. It has been contended that a
   mosque enjoys a particular position in
   Muslim Law and once a mosque is
   established and prayers are offered in
   such a mosque, the same remains for
   all time to come a property of Allah
   and the same never reverts back to the
   donor or founder of the mosque and
   any person professing Islamic faith can
   offer prayer in such a mosque and
   even if the structure is demolished, the
   place remains the same where the
   namaz can be offered. As indicated
   hereinbefore, in British India, no such
   protection was given to a mosque and
   the mosque was subjected to the
   provisions of statute of limitation
   thereby extinguishing the right of
   Muslims to offer prayers in a particular
   mosque lost by adverse possession
   over that property.
81.
Section 3(26)
of the General
   Clauses     Act    comprehends      the
   categories of properties known to
   Indian Law.
Article 367
of the
   Constitution adopts this secular
   concept of property for purposes of our
   Constitution. A temple, church or
   mosque etc. are essentially immovable
   properties and subject to protection
   under
Articles 25
and
26.
Every
   immovable property is liable to be
   acquired. Viewed in the proper
   perspective, a mosque does not enjoy
   any additional protection which is not
36
available to religious places of worship
of other religions.
82. The correct position may be
summarised        thus.    Under     the
Mahomedan Law applicable in India,
title to a mosque can be lost by
adverse     possession    (See    Mulla’s
Principles of Mahomedan Law, 19th
Edn., by M. Hidayatullah — Section
217; and
Shahid Ganj v. Shiromani
Gurdwara
. If that is the position in
law, there can be no reason to hold
that a mosque has a unique or special
status, higher than that of the places
of worship of other religions in secular
India to make it immune from
acquisition by exercise of the sovereign
or prerogative power of the State. A
mosque is not an essential part of the
practice of the religion of Islam and
namaz (prayer) by Muslims can be
offered anywhere, even in open.
Accordingly, its acquisition is not
prohibited by the provisions in the
Constitution of India. Irrespective of
the status of a mosque in an Islamic
country for the purpose of immunity
from acquisition by the State in
exercise of the sovereign power, its
status and immunity from acquisition
in the secular ethos of India under the
Constitution is the same and equal to
that of the places of worship of the
other religions, namely, church, temple
etc. It is neither more nor less than
that of the places of worship of the
other     religions.    Obviously,   the
acquisition of any religious place is to
37
be made only in unusual and
              extraordinary situations for a larger
              national purpose keeping in view that
              such acquisition should not result in
              extinction of the right to practise the
              religion, if the significance of that place
              be such. Subject to this condition, the
              power of acquisition is available for a
              mosque like any other place of worship
              of any religion. The right to worship is
              not at any and every place, so long as
              it can be practised effectively, unless
              the right to worship at a particular
              place is itself an integral part of that
              right…..”


                     [Printed volume of the judgment at
                     page Nos.3454-3458]
27. Hence, it is clear that the questionable observations in Ismail

Faruqui have certainly permeated the impugned judgment. Thus,

the impugned judgment can be claimed to be both expressly and

inherently affected by the questionable observations made in Ismail

Faruqui. Further, Ismail Faruqui prima facie leads a different

approach regarding the application of essential and/or integral test

which also needs to be resolved as a matter of constitutional

significance. In my view, Ismail Faruqui needs to be brought in line

with the authoritative pronouncements in Shirur Mutt and other
38
decisions referred to in paragraphs 14 to 18 and 20 of this

judgment.
28. The importance and seriousness of the matter can be better

understood by the observations made by Justice S.U. Khan in the

impugned judgment itself, in the following words:-
"Here is a small piece of land (1500 square
            yards) where angels fear to tread. It is full of
            innumerable land mines. We are required to
            clear it. Some very sane elements advised us
            not to attempt that. We do not propose to
            rush in like fools lest we are blown. However,
            we have to take risk. It is said that the
            greatest risk in life is not daring to take risk
            when occasion for the same arises.
Once angels were made to bow before Man.
            Sometimes he has to justify the said honour.
            This is one of those occasions.        We have
            succeeded or failed? No one can be a judge in
            his own cause.
Accordingly, herein follows the judgment for
            which the entire country is waiting with bated
            breath."
29. It is relevant here to state that by an order dated 26.3.2018 a

three-Judge Bench of this Court in Sameena Begum v. Union of

India & Ors. [Writ Petition (Civil) No. 222 of 2018] has referred the

matter relating to polygamy including Nikah Halala; Nikha Mutah;
and Nikah Misya to a Constitution Bench. The order of reference in

the said case reads as under:
39
"It is submitted by learned counsel for the
petitioners that the challenge in these writ
petitions pertains to the prevalent practice of
polygamy including Nikah Halala; Nikah
Mutah; and Nikah Misyar as they are
unconstitutional. Various grounds have been
urged in support of the stand as to how these
practices, which come within the domain of
personal law, are not immune from judicial
review under the Constitution. It is urged by
them that the majority opinion of the
Constitution Bench in the case of Shayara
Bano etc. v. Union of India & Ors. etc. (2017) 9
SCC 1 has not dealt with these aspects. They
have drawn our attention to various
paragraphs of the judgment to buttress the
point that the said issues have not been really
addressed as there has been no delineation on
these aspects.
On a perusal of the judgment, we find the
submission of the learned counsel for the
parties/petitioners is correct that these
concepts have not been decided by the
Constitution Bench.
xxx             xxx              xxx

     xxx             xxx              xxx

     At this juncture, a submission has
been advanced at the Bar that keeping in
view the importance of the issue, the
matter should be placed before the
Constitution Bench.     Accepting the said
submission, it is directed that the matter
be placed before Hon'ble the Chief Justice
of India for constitution of appropriate
Constitution Bench for dwelling upon the
40
issues which may arise for consideration
          from the writ petitions."
(Emphasis supplied)
30. Moreover, a two-Judge Bench of this Court on 6.7.2018 in
Jyoti Jagran Mandal v. NDMC & Anr. [Civil Appeal No.
5820 of

2018] has referred the matter in relation to the policy decision

permitting Ram Leela and Puja once in a year in public parks to a

Constitution Bench holding as under:
"Application seeking exemption from filing
          certified copy of the impugned order is allowed.
Appeal admitted.
The order of the National Green Tribunal,
          Principal Bench, New Delhi has rejected an
          application made by the appellant to have
          what is known as “Mata-ki-Chowki” in a public
          park. The appellant has expressly relied upon
          earlier orders, including a policy decision,
          which permits Ram Leela and Puja to be
          allowed once in a year in such public parks.
The appeal raises a question of great
          constitutional importance as to whether
          such activities can be allowed in state
          owned premises in view of our Constitution
          being secular in nature. The Hon’ble Chief
          Justice    is,  therefore,  requested    to
          constitute an appropriate Bench to hear the
          aforesaid matter."
(Emphasis supplied)
41
31.
In
Sunita Tiwari v. Union of India & Ors. {Writ Petition (Civil)

No.
286 of 2017} a Three-Judge Bench of this Court was

considering the question relating to banning the practice of Female

Genital Mutilation (FGM) or Khatna or Female Circumcision (FC) or

Khafd. It was submitted by the senior counsel appearing for the

contesting respondent that the matter should be referred to a larger

Bench for an authoritative pronouncement because the practice is

an essential and integral practice of the religious sect.     Learned

Attorney General for India also submitted that it deserves to be

referred to a larger Bench. By Order dated 24.09.2018, the matter

was referred to a larger Bench, the relevant portion of which is as

under:
"Regard being had to the nature of the case,
          the impact on the religious sect and many
          other concomitant factors, we think it
          apposite not to frame questions which shall
          be addressed to by the larger Bench. We
          also think it appropriate that the larger
          Bench may consider the issue in its
          entirety from all perspectives.
In view of the aforesaid, we are of the view that
          the matter should be placed before a larger
          Bench. The Registry is directed to place the
          papers of the instant matter before the Hon’ble
          Chief Justice of India for obtaining appropriate
          directions in this regard."
(Emphasis supplied)
42
32. Considering the Constitutional importance and significance of

the issues involved, the following need to be referred to a larger

Bench:
(a)   Whether    in   the   light   of    Shirur   Mutt   and   other

           aforementioned cases, an essential practice can be

           decided without a detailed examination of the beliefs,

           tenets and practice of the faith in question?
(b)   Whether the test for determining the essential practice is

           both essentiality and integrality?
(c)   Does
Article 25
, only protect belief and practices of

           particular significance of a faith or all practices regarded

           by the faith as essential?
(d)   Do
Articles 15
, 25
and
26 (read with
Article 14
) allow the

           comparative significance of faiths to be undertaken?
33. The Registry is directed to place this matter before the Hon'ble

Chief Justice of India for appropriate orders.
…….……………………………J.
                                              (S. ABDUL NAZEER)
New Delhi;
September 27, 2018.