[Cites
4
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
Padmini Singha vs The State Of Assam on 27 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 4590, 2018 (10) SCC 561, (2018) 13 SCALE 597, (2018) 3 CAL LJ 49, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 589, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 740
Author:
Dipak Misra
Bench:
D.Y. Chandrachud
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
,
Dipak Misra
1


                                                                   REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4677 OF 2018
                             (Arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No. 33637 of 2017)


         Padmini Singha                                             …Appellant(s)

                                                 Versus

         The State of Assam & Others                              …Respondent(s)


                                            JUDGMENT
Dipak Misra, CJI


                         On 30.01.2014, the appellant along with seven members of

         Masughat Gaon Panchayat submitted a No Confidence Motion

         against the              President, respondent no. 6 herein,            and for

         requisition of a special meeting to prove the majority of Gaon

         Panchayat President as per
Section 15(1)
of the Assam Panchayat

         Act, 1994 (for brevity, „the Act‟). On 15.02.2014, the Secretary,

         Masughat Gaon Panchayat forwarded the said requisition to the

         President, Borkhola Anchalik Panchayat stating therein that the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK GUGLANI
Date: 2018.09.27
12:26:55 IST
matter had already been put up before the President, Masughat
Reason:
2
Gaon Panchayat on 07.02.2014 for taking necessary action but

she asked to wait due to some legal complications. Since the

stipulated period of calling a special meeting was over, the

petition was being referred for taking necessary action as per

provisions of the Act. By virtue of letter dated 26.02.2014, the

Block Development Officer (BDO), Borkhola Development Block

referred the matter to the Deputy Commissioner, Cachar, Silchar

stating that he had already put the matter before the President of

the concerned Panchayat on 20.02.2014; that she stated to wait

and that since the stipulated period for calling a special meeting

was over, the matter was being referred to him for taking

necessary action as per the Act.
2.   On 17.03.2014, the Additional Deputy Commissioner,

Cachar, Silchar sent a communication to the BDO, Borkhola

Development Block which is as follows:-
“No. CDO.1/2014/11           Dated,   Silchar,

          the 17th March, 2014

          To,

          The Block Development Officer,
          Borkhola Development Block.
Sub. Special Meeting of No Confidence
          Motion against the President Masughat GP.
3
Ref.BDE/E-11/92-98/Pt.II/AP
          Establishment, Dated
          26-02-2014

               I am to return herewith the proposal
          submitted by you for convening a special
          meeting of No Confidence Motion against
          the G.P. President Masughat G.P. and
          request you to take necessary action as per
          provision laid down in the
Assam Panchayat
          Raj Act, 1994
Sec. 15(1)
.
The extract copy of relevant portion of
          the said Act
Sec. 15(1)
is enclosed herewith
          for favour of your kind necessary action.
Encl: As stated above    A.R. Sheikh, ACS
                    Addl. Deputy Commissioner (Dev.)
                            Chchar, Silchar”
3.   In compliance of the above communication, on 21.03.2014,

the BDO wrote to the President, Masughat Gaon Panchayat

informing her to attend the special meeting of No Confidence to

be convened on 31.03.2014 at 12:30 p.m. in the office of the

BDO. On 31.03.2014, the meeting was presided over by BDO. In

the meeting, nine members cast their votes in favour of the No

Confidence Motion and one member cast vote against the No

Confidence Motion.    Thus, the President, respondent no. 6

herein, lost her Presidentship and the Vice President, appellant

herein, was directed to function as incharge President of the

concerned Panchayat for the time being.
4
4.    Being aggrieved by the passing of the No Confidence Motion

against her, the respondent no. 6 herein filed a writ petition,

being Writ Petition (Civil) No. 2051 of 2014, before the Gauhati

High Court. In the writ petition, she challenged the legal

acceptability and validity of the resolution expressing want of

confidence against her in a special meeting held on 31.03.2014.

The learned single Judge of the High Court, vide judgment and

order dated 09.08.2016, allowed the writ petition on the ground

that vide letter dated 17.03.2014, the Deputy Commissioner,

instead of taking action in the matter, merely wrote back to the

BDO to take steps in accordance with
Section 15
of the Act and

there was no delegation of authority to the BDO to preside over

the   meeting.   No   document   had   been   produced   showing

delegation of authority. It was the Deputy Commissioner who

ought to have taken steps in terms of the provisions of the Act by

convening a meeting. A meeting convened and presided over by

an authority alien to the mandate postulated in
Section 15
of the

Act could not sanctify the proceeding of a meeting.       On this

foundation, the resolution adopted expressing no confidence

against the President was set aside and declared null and void.
5
5.   Being grieved by the judgment and order of the learned

single Judge, the appellant filed Writ Appeal (Civil) No. 310 of

2016 before the Division Bench of the High Court which, by the

impugned judgment and order dated 24.11.2017, dismissed the

Writ Appeal. The Division Bench held that it is only the Deputy

Commissioner who can convene the meeting within seven days

from the date of receipt of the information and
Section 15
does

not authorize the Deputy Commissioner to delegate his power of

convening the meeting to the BDO. The BDO can preside over the

meeting   being   a   Gazetted   officer only   when the   Deputy

Commissioner is unable to preside over the meeting and it is so

conveyed by him.       The appellate Bench opined that as per
Section 15
of the Act, the meeting was to be convened by the

Deputy Commissioner and no one else and when law provides to

do a certain thing in a certain way, the thing must be done in

that way or not at all. Being of this view, it concurred with the

opinion expressed by the learned single Judge and dismissed the

intra court appeal.
6.   In the present appeal by special leave, the appellant has

assailed the correctness of the impugned judgment.
6
7.   Despite service of notice, there has been no appearance. We

have heard Mr. Pijush Kanti Roy, learned counsel for the

appellant.
8.   The relevant part of
Section 15
reads as follows:-
“
Section 15
- No confidence motion
             against     the     President   and    Vice
             President:–
             (1) Every President or Vice-President shall
             be deemed to have vacated his office
             forthwith when resolution expressing want
             of confidence in him is passed by a majority
             of two third of the total number of members
             of the Gaon Panchayat.
Such a meeting shall be specially
             convened by the Secretary of the Gaon
             Panchayat with approval of the President of
             the Gaon Panchayat. Such meeting shall be
             presided over by the President if the motion
             is against the Vice- President, and by the
             Vice-President, if the motion is against the
             President. In case such a meeting is not
             convened within a period of fifteen days
             from the date of receipt of notice, the
             Secretary of the Gaon Panchayat shall
             within three days, refer the matter to the
             President of the concerned Anchalik
             Panchayat, who shall convene the meeting
             within seven days from the date of receipt of
             the information from the Secretary of the
             Gaon Panchayat and preside over such
             meeting.
In case the President of the Anchalik
             Panchayat does not take action as above,
             within the specified seven days time, the
             concerned Gaon Panchayat Secretary shall
             inform   the   matter    to   the  Deputy
7
Commissioner/Sub-Divisional Officer (Civil)
              as the case may be within three days after
              the expiry of the stipulated seven days time
              and       the        concerned       Deputy
              Commissioner/Sub-Divisional Officer (C)
              shall convene the meeting within seven days
              from the date of the receipt of the
              information with intimation to the Zilla
              Parishad and the Anchalik Panchayat and
              preside over the meeting so convened :
Provided that the concerned Deputy
              Commissioner/Sub-Divisional Officer (C) as
              the case may be, in case of his inability to
              preside over the meeting, may depute one
              Gazetted Officer under him not below the
              rank of Class-I Gazetted Officer to preside
              over such meeting:
Provided further that when a non-
              confidence motion is lost, no such motion
              shall be allowed in the next six months.”
9.     On a plain reading of the said provision, it is crystal clear

that    the    meeting   has   to   be   convened   by   the   Deputy

Commissioner within a stipulated time and the said authority

has also been conferred the power to depute one Gazetted Officer

under him not below the rank of Class I Gazetted Officer           to

preside over the meeting. The said situation comes into existence

after the Deputy Commissioner is informed to convene the

meeting. The Division Bench has observed, placing reliance on

the communication of the Deputy Commissioner that he has not

really convened the meeting and that apart, he has not delegated
8
the power or authority to the BDO to preside over the meeting. It

has been further held that the BDO at the most could have

presided over the meeting when the Deputy Commissioner was

unable to preside over the meeting so convened by him. But as

the meeting was not convened, the whole thing was illegal.
10.   It may be noted that a ground has been taken in this appeal

before us that the beneficiary, namely, the respondent no. 6, had

attended the meeting. On a perusal of the judgment of the

learned single Judge, we do not notice that any such assertion

was made. The entire discussion, as we find, relates to what is

meant by the Deputy Commissioner by his communication dated

17.02.2014 and further, regarding the delegation of authority to

the BDO to preside over the meeting. The ultimate conclusion

that has been recorded by the learned single Judge is expressed

in para 22 of the judgment which reads thus:-
“22. In view of the above discussions, the
           resolution adopted expressing no confidence
           against the petitioner is set aside and
           declared null and void. But the matter does
           not rest here. This Court cannot remain
           oblivious of the fact that a requisition for No
           Confidence Motion was given against the
           petitioner and expression of no confidence
           was negatived for procedural irregularities
           as mentioned above and, therefore, this
           Court will be failing in its duty in exercising
           power under
Article 226
of the Constitution
9
of India if this Court does not direct the
           petitioner to hold a meeting to decide the No
           Confidence Motion brought against her.”
11.   Interpreting
Section 15
of the Act, the Division Bench

opined that the Deputy Commissioner has not acted as provided

under
Section 15
. The resolution passed on 31.03.2014 which

has been brought on record as Annexure P-6 records that the

respondent no. 6 was present in the meeting and signed. In such

a situation, the issue that emerges for consideration is whether

the ultimate resolution of the meeting could have been discarded.
12.   To appreciate the said aspect, it is appropriate to reproduce

the content of the resolution. It reads thus:-
“The meeting is presided over by Shri
           Kishore       Baruah,     BDO,      Borkhola
           Development Block as per
Assam Panchayat
           Act, 1994
. At the outset of the meeting BDO
           asked the Members any opinion if they
           have. They replied that they want voting
           then by secret ballot voting is done. Ballot
           box is open at 1.30 p.m. After opening the
           Ballot Box as found 9 G.P. Members casted
           their votes for No-Confidence motion and 1
           G.P. Member caste vote against the No-
Confidence      Motion.   As    per
Assam
           Panchayat Act
2/3rd (
section 15
) majority of
           the total G.P. members should caste votes
           either in support of No-Confidence motion
           or against the No-Confidence motion. In this
           connection 2/3rd i.e., 7 members out of 10
           members required. But after opening Ballot
           Box, it is found that 9 G.P. Members casted
           vote in favour of No-Confidence Motion and
10
1 G.P. Member casted vote against the No-
Confidence Motion. As a result of which Rita
           Rani Dusad, President, Masughat G.P. lost
           her Presidentship and as per Act, Vice
           President Masughat G.P. will act and
           perform and function as i/c, President,
           Masughat G.P. for the time being.”
13.   From the foregoing, it is quite vivid that the meeting was

held to discuss the Motion of No-Confidence. The respondent no.

6 who was a beneficiary attended the meeting and voting had

taken place. It is well settled in law that a mandatory provision

of law requires strict compliance but there are situations where

even if a provision is mandatory, non-compliance would not

result in nullification of the act. There are certain exceptions.

One such exception is, if a certain requirement or condition is

provided in a statute for the benefit or interest of a particular

person, the same can be waived by him if no public interest is

involved. The ultimate result would be valid even if the

requirement or condition is not performed. We are disposed to

think that in the obtaining fact situation, no public interest was

affected. The BDO presided over the meeting and every one knew

that the meeting was called for passing a resolution either in

favour of or against the No Confidence Motion. The respondent

no. 6 knowing fully well participated in the meeting and the
11
resolution was passed against her.     After losing in the voting

process, the assail was made to the procedure of calling the

meeting. We are inclined to think, had the respondent no. 6 not

participated in the meeting, the matter would have been

absolutely different. Having participated, it has to be held that

the respondent no. 6 had waived the condition precedent.
14.   In view of the aforesaid premises, the appeal is allowed and

the orders passed by the learned single Judge as well as the

Division Bench are set aside. The resolution passed against the

respondent no. 6 is treated as valid. The competent authority is

directed to carry out the consequences of the resolution. In the

facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to

costs.
.………………………….CJI.
(Dipak Misra)


                                     .…………………………….J.
                                     (A.M. Khanwilkar)


                                     ...………………….………..J.
                                     (Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud)

New Delhi;
September 27, 2018