[Cites
50
, Cited by
12
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Shriram Epc Limited vs Rioglass Solar Sa on 13 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 4539, (2018) 4 RECCIVR 317, (2019) 194 ALLINDCAS 146 (SC), (2018) 5 ARBILR 161, (2019) 132 ALL LR 780, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 172
Author:
R.F. Nariman
Bench:
Indu Malhotra
,
R. F. Nariman
1




                                                               REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9515     of 2018
                               (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO.13913 OF 2018)

     M/S SHRIRAM EPC LIMITED                                   …APPELLANT

                                                   VERSUS

     RIOGLASS SOLAR SA                                         …RESPONDENT


                                                JUDGMENT
R.F. NARIMAN, J.
1.                  Leave granted.
2.                  The present appeal arises from the judgment of a Single Judge of the

     High Court of Judicature at Madras, dated 09.02.2017, in which a petition

     filed to enforce a foreign award was allowed. Several grounds were taken

     before the learned single Judge. We are concerned with only one ground that

     has been argued before us, namely, that as the award has not been

     stamped, it cannot be enforced under
Sections 48
and
49
of the Arbitration

     and Conciliation Act, 1996 (“1996 Act”).
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
3.                  The brief facts that are necessary for determination of the present
SHASHI SAREEN
Date: 2018.09.13
17:07:45 IST
Reason:
controversy are as follows:
2
3.1. An ICC award was delivered in London on 12.02.2015 by Mr.

Christopher Style QC in the following terms:
“363. After consideration of all the factual and legal
         submissions which have been presented to me and for the
         reasons set out in full above, I award, declare and adjudge as
         follows:
(1) I declare that I have no jurisdiction over the Second and
         Third Respondents.
(2) I declare that Rioglass is not obliged to issue a Performance
         Bank Guarantee as provided for in clause 6 of the Agreement,
         as amended by Amendment No.1.
(3) I declare that Rioglass is entitled to sell as scrap the mirrors
         that it holds in storage in relation to Delivery Four.
(4) I declare that Shriram acted in breach of the Agreement in
         the respects set out above.
(5) I order Shriram to pay Rioglass €4,366,598.70, consisting of
         damages amounting to €4,151,570.52 and interest amounting
         to €215,028.18.”

3.2. Objections dated 21.07.2015 under
Section 34
of the Arbitration and

Conciliation Act, 1996 were filed by the Appellant which were dismissed on

27.09.2016, stating that a petition under
Section 34
would not be

maintainable as against a foreign award, citing this Court’s judgment in
Bharat Aluminium Co. v. Kaiser Aluminium Technical Services Inc.
,

(2012) 9 SCC 552. Meanwhile, the Respondent filed a petition under
Section

47
of the 1996 Act, dated 05.08.2015, to enforce the said award. As stated

hereinabove, all objections to the said award were rejected by the learned

Single Judge on 09.02.2017. An appeal to the Division Bench resulted in an

Order dated 14.03.2018, stating that in view of
Section 50
of the 1996 Act,
3
the said appeal would not be maintainable. This is how the present SLP has

been filed against the decision of the learned Single Judge.
4.   Shri K.V. Viswanathan, learned senior advocate, appearing on behalf of

the Appellant, has submitted before us, that given the provisions of the
Indian

Stamp Act, 1899
, it is clear that a foreign award would be covered by the said

Act. This being so, and stamp duty not having been paid, the said foreign

award cannot be enforced. He relied strongly on a judgment of the Punjab

and Haryana High Court reported in
Gujrals Co. v. M.A. Morris
, AIR 1962

P&H 167.
According to him, the contrary judgments of the Delhi High Court

reported in
Naval Gent Maritime Ltd. v. Shivanath Rai Harnarain (I) Ltd.
,

(2009) 163 DLT 391, and the Madhya Pradesh High Court judgment reported

in
Narayan Trading Co. v. Abcom Trading Pvt. Ltd.
, (2013) 2 MP LJ 252,

are incorrect. According to the learned senior advocate, the Delhi High Court

judgment is really a judgment on registration of a foreign award, even though

it purports to speak about stamp duty payable. The judgment of the Madhya

Pradesh High Court, on the other hand, is not correct in stating that a foreign

award would not be included within the term “award” under
Schedule I of the

Indian Stamp Act, 1899
.
He relied upon the Gujarat High Court judgment

reported in
Orient Middle East Lines Ltd., Bombay and Anr. v. Brace

Transport Corporation of Monrovia and Ors.
, AIR 1986 Guj 62, which

stated that Article III of the New York Convention would make it clear that

stamp duty, being in the nature of fees or charges for recognition and
4
enforcement of a foreign award, can be enforced in accordance with the rules

of procedure of the territory in which the award is sought to be enforced. This

being so, the New York Convention itself recognizes that foreign awards may

have to bear stamp duty for enforcement in the country in which they are

sought to be enforced. He further relied upon the 194 th Law Commission

Report, which had suggested changes insofar as stamp duty is concerned in

Part II of the 1996 Act.
5.    Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Respondent, on the other

hand, relied strongly upon the judgment of the Delhi High Court as well as

the Madhya Pradesh High Court referred to hereinabove. According to the

learned counsel, the expression “award” which occurs in
Schedule I of the

Indian Stamp Act, 1899
applies only to a domestic award and not a foreign

award. He relied on the fact that the
Indian Stamp Act
was enacted in 1899,

in which “award” has never been enlarged so as to include foreign awards

after the
Arbitration (Protocol and Convention) Act, 1937
and/or the
Foreign

Awards (Recognition and Enforcement) Act, 1961
were enacted. Also,

according to the learned counsel, the only requirement for the enforcement of

a foreign award is
laid down in
Section 47
of the Act, which does not require

the award to be stamped. A without prejudice argument was also made that

under
Section 48(2)(b)
, even if a foreign award were required to be stamped,

but is not stamped, enforcement of such award would not be contrary to the

fundamental policy of Indian law.
5
6.    Having heard learned counsel for the parties, it is important to first set

out the relevant provisions of the
Indian Stamp Act, 1899
.
Section 1
of the

Indian Stamp Act, 1899 as it originally stood, reads as follows:
“1. Short title, extent, and commencement.—(1)
This Act
may be called the
Indian Stamp Act, 1899
.
(2) It extends to the whole of British India inclusive of Upper
         Burma, British Baluchistan, the Santal Parganas, and the
         Pargana of Spiti; and

         (3) It shall come into force on the first day of July 1899.”
Section 2(14)
defines “instrument” as follows:
“2. Definitions.—

              xxx xxx xxx

              (14) “Instrument” includes every document by which any
              right or liability is or purports to be created, transferred,
              limited, extended, extinguished, or recorded:”


“Instruments chargeable with duty” are dealt with by
Section 3
.
Section 3
states as follows:
“3. Instruments chargeable with duty.—Subject to the
         provisions of this Act and the exemptions contained in
         Schedule I, the following instruments shall be chargeable with
         duty of the amount indicated in that Schedule as the proper
         duty therefore, respectively, that is to say—
(a) every instrument mentioned in that Schedule which, not
             having been previously executed by any person, is
             executed in India on or after the first day of July, 1899;
(b) every bill of exchange payable otherwise than on
             demand or promissory note drawn or made out of India on
             or after that day and accepted or paid, or presented for
             acceptance or payment, or endorsed, transferred or
             otherwise negotiated, in India; and
6
(c) every instrument (other than a bill exchange or
             promissory note) mentioned in that Schedule, which, not
             having been previously executed by any person, is
             executed out of India on or after that day relates to any
             property situate, or to any matter or thing done or to be
             done, in India and is received in India:
Provided that no duty shall be chargeable in respect of—
             (1) any instrument executed by, or on behalf of, or in
             favour of, the Government in cases where, but for this
             exemption, the Government would be liable to pay the duty
             chargeable in respect of such instrument;
             (2) any instrument for the sale, transfer or other
             disposition, either absolutely or by way of mortgage or
             otherwise, of any ship or vessel, or any part, interest,
             share or property of or in any ship or vessel, registered
             under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1894, or under Act 19 of
             1938, or the Indian Registration of Ships Act, 1841 (10 of
             1841) as amended by subsequent Acts.
(3) any instrument executed, by, or, on behalf of, or, in
             favour of, the Developer, or Unit or in connection with the
             carrying out of purposes of the Special Economic Zone.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, the expressions
        “Developer”, “Special Economic Zone” and “Unit” shall have
        meanings respectively assigned to them in clause (g), (za) and
        (zc) of
section 2
of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005.”


Under
Sections 33
and
35
, instruments that are not duly stamped in

accordance with the provisions of the Act are inadmissible in evidence, and

any such instrument which is not duly stamped is liable to be impounded as

provided in
Section 33
of the Act.
Item No.12 of Schedule I of the Indian

Stamp Act, 1899
reads as follows:
Description of Instrument       Proper Stamp-duty


        “12. AWARD, that is to say, any decision in writing by an
        arbitrator or umpire, not being an award directing a partition, on
        a reference made otherwise than by an order of the Court in
7
the course of a suit.—
(a) where the amount or      The same duty as a
          value of the property to     bond (No. 15) for such
          which the award relates      amount.
as set forth in such award
          does not exceed Rs.
1000;
(b) in any other case.       Five rupees.


                                    Exemption
Award under the Bombay District Municipal Act, 1873 (Bom. Act
         6 of 1873), Section 81, or the
Bombay Hereditary Offices Act,
         1874
(Bom. Act 3 of 1874),
Section 18
.”
7.   The main bone of contention in the present appeal is whether the

expression “award” would include a foreign award.
8.   In order to determine this question, it is important to see the state of the

law insofar as arbitration is concerned in the year of the
Indian Stamp Act,

1899
. At this point of time, there were two sets of laws dealing with

arbitration. The first was contained in
the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1882. In

Part V, Chapter XXXVII spoke of reference to arbitration. Under
Sections 506
to
522
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1882, parties to a suit may apply for an

order of reference to arbitration, in which case, the arbitrator or umpire, as

the case may be, may deliver an award which ultimately may be enforced by

a judgment which is to be according to the award and a decree to follow. By

Sections 523 to 526, agreements to refer disputes to arbitration may be filed

in Court, and awards delivered thereon. Needless to add, the Civil Procedure
8
Code, 1882 applied to British India.
9.    Close on the heels of the
Indian Stamp Act, 1899
, comes the Indian

Arbitration Act, 1899. As per
Section 1(2)
of this Act, this Act also extended to

the whole of British India, but
Section 2
made it clear that the Act will apply

only in cases where the subject matter submitted to arbitration, if it were the

subject of a suit, could be instituted in a Presidency Town.
Section 2
of this

Act states as follows:
“2. Application.—Subject to the provisions of
section 23
, this
         Act shall apply only in cases where, if the subject-matter
         submitted to arbitration were the subject of a suit, the suit
         could, whether with leave or otherwise, be instituted in a
         Presidency-town:
Provided that the Local Government, with the previous
         sanction of the Governor-General in Council, may, by
         notification in the local official Gazette, declare this Act
         applicable in any other local area as if it were a Presidency-
         town.”
Section 4
of the said Act states as follows:
“4. Definitions.—In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant
         in the subject or context,-
(a) “the Court” means, in the Presidency-towns, the High Court,
         and, elsewhere, the Court of the District Judge; and
(b) “submission” means a written agreement to submit present
         or future differences to arbitration, whether an arbitrator is
         named therein or not.”
Section 11
then states:
“11. Award to be signed and filed.—(1) When the arbitrators
9
or umpire have made their award, they shall sign it, and shall
         give notice to the parties of the making and signing thereof, and
         of the amount of the fees and charges payable to the
         arbitrators or umpire in respect of the arbitration and award.
(2) The arbitrators or umpire shall at the request of any party to
         the submission or any person claiming under him, and upon
         payment of the fees and charges due in respect of the
         arbitration and award, and of the costs and charges of filing the
         award, cause the award, or a signed copy of it, to be filed in the
         Court; and notice of the filing shall be given to the parties by
         the arbitrators or umpire.
(3) Where the arbitrators or umpire state a special case under
section 10
, clause (b), the Court shall deliver its opinion
         thereon; and such opinion shall be added to, and shall form
         part of, the award.”
Section 15
, which is important, states as follows:
“15. Award when filed to be enforceable as a decree.—(1)
         An award on a submission, on being filed in the Court in
         accordance with the foregoing provisions, shall (unless the
         Court remits it to the reconsideration of the arbitrators or
         umpire, or sets it aside), be enforceable as if it were a decree
         of the Court.
(2) An award may be conditional or in the alternative.”
10.   On a reading of the aforesaid provisions of these Acts, it becomes clear

that the only “award” that is referred to in the
Indian Stamp Act, 1899
is an

award that is made in the territory of British India provided that such award is

not made pursuant to a reference made by an order of the Court in the

course of a suit. At this point in time, it is important to note that there were

several princely states in India governed by sovereign rulers which had their

own laws. Arbitration laws, if any, in the aforesaid princely states, if they were

to culminate in awards, would not be “awards” under either the Civil
10
Procedure Code, 1882 or the Indian Arbitration Act, 1899. They would

therefore be foreign awards insofar as British India is concerned. An award

made in a princely state, or in a foreign country, if enforced by means of a

suit in British India, would not be covered by the expression “award”

contained in Item 12 of
Schedule I of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899
. Only

awards which are decisions in writing by an arbitrator or umpire, made in

British India, on a reference made otherwise than by an order of the Court in

the course of a suit would be included.
11.   This position continued even when
the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908

contained a Second Schedule, which substituted the arbitration provisions

contained in
the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1882. Here again, under the

Second Schedule, parties to a suit may apply for an order of reference to

arbitration and an award would follow.
Section 16
of the Second Schedule is

important, and states as follows:
“16. Judgment to be according to award.— (1) Where the
         Court sees no cause to remit the award or any of the matters
         referred to arbitration for re-consideration in manner aforesaid,
         and no application has been made to set aside the award, or
         the Court has refused such application, the Court shall, after
         the time for making such application has expired, proceed to
         pronounce judgment according to the award.
         (2) Upon the judgment so pronounced a decree shall follow,
         and no appeal shall lie from such decree except insofar as the
         decree is in excess of, or not in accordance with, the award.”


Under
Sections 20
and
21
, arbitration without the intervention of a Court is

referred to, and awards delivered in such cases are to be incorporated in a
11
judgment by a Court, after which a decree is to follow, which decree then

becomes enforceable.
12.   Next in line, chronologically speaking, is the
Arbitration (Protocol and

Convention) Act, 1937
, in which, certain foreign awards governed by the

Geneva Convention of 1923 were to be recognized and enforced in signatory

countries, India being one. In this Act, “foreign award” is defined as follows:
“2. Interpretation.—In this Act “foreign award” means an
         award on differences relating to matters considered as
         commercial under the law in force in India, made after the 28th
         day of July, 1924,—
(a) in pursuance of an agreement for arbitration to which
              the Protocol set forth in the First Schedule applies;
(b) between persons of whom one is subject to the
              jurisdiction of some one of such powers as the Central
              Government, being satisfied that reciprocal provisions
              have been made, may, by notification in the Official
              Gazette, declare to be parties to the Convention set forth
              in the Second Schedule, and of whom the other is subject
              to the jurisdiction of some other of the powers aforesaid;
              and
(c) in one of such territories as the Central Government
              being satisfied that reciprocal provisions have been may
              by like notification, declare to be territories to which the
              said convention applies,
         and for the purposes of this Act an award shall not be deemed to be
         final if any proceedings for the purposes of contesting the validity of
         the award are pending in the country in which it was made.”
13.
The Arbitration Act, 1940
then came into force, repealing both the

Arbitration Act, 1899 as well as the Second Schedule to
the Code of Civil

Procedure
, 1908.
This Act
, under
Section 1(2)
, extended to the whole of India
12
except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. Under this Act, “award” was defined

as follows:
“2. Definitions.—
              xxx xxx xxx
(b) “award” means an arbitration award;”


Under this Act, Chapter II dealt with arbitration without the intervention of a

Court.
Section 17
is important, and is set out as follows:
“17. Judgment is terms of award.— Where the Court sees no
         cause to remit the award or any of the matters referred to
         arbitration for reconsideration or to set aside the award, the
         Court shall, after the time for making an application to set aside
         the award has expired, or such application having been made,
         after refusing it, proceed to pronounce judgment according to
         the award, and upon the judgment so pronounced a decree
         shall follow and no appeal shall lie from such decree except on
         the ground that it is in excess of, or not otherwise in
         accordance with, the award.”


Under Chapter III, arbitration with intervention of a Court where there is no

suit pending is dealt with, and in Chapter IV, arbitration which arises in

references from suits is dealt with.
This Act
, like its predecessors, also

applied only to awards that were made first in British India, and later in the

territory of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
14.   In 1961, after the New York Convention of 1958, the
Foreign Awards

(Recognition and Enforcement) Act, 1961
, came into force to recognize and

enforce New York Convention Awards. Here again, such awards were

referred to as “foreign awards” in
Section 2
thereof which defines foreign
13
awards as follows:
“2. Definition.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise
           requires, “foreign award” means an award on differences
           between persons arising out of legal relationships, whether
           contractual or not, considered as commercial under the law in
           force in India, made on or after the 11th day of October, 1960—
(a) in pursuance of an agreement in writing for arbitration
               to which the Convention set forth in the Schedule applies;
               and
(b) in one of such territories as the Central Government
               being satisfied that reciprocal provisions have been made,
               may, by notification in the official Gazette, declare to be
               territories to which the said Convention applies.”
15.   As is well-known, the present
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
then came into force and repealed the
Arbitration (Protocol and Convention)

Act, 1937
,
The Arbitration Act, 1940
, and the
Foreign Awards (Recognition

and Enforcement) Act, 1961
bringing, with certain important changes,

domestic awards within Part I, foreign awards relatable to the New York

Convention within Chapter I of Part II, and foreign awards relatable to the

Geneva Convention within Chapter II of Part II. In the present Act, under
Section 2(1)(c)
, “arbitral award” is defined as follows:
“2. Definitions.—(1) In this Part, unless the context otherwise
           requires,—
               xxx xxx xxx
(c) “arbitral award” includes an interim award;”
Section 44
in Chapter I of Part II defines a New York Convention award as

follows:
14
“44. Definition.—In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise
           requires, “foreign award” means an arbitral award on
           differences between persons arising out of legal relationships,
           whether contractual or not, considered as commercial under
           the law in force in India, made on or after the 11th day of
           October, 1960—
(a) in pursuance of an agreement in writing for arbitration
               to which the Convention set forth in the First Schedule
               applies, and
(b) in one of such territories as the Central Government,
               being satisfied that reciprocal provisions have been made
               may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be
               territories to which the said Convention applies.”
Section 53
in Chapter II of Part II defines a Geneva Convention award as

follows:
“53. Interpretation.—In this Chapter “foreign award” means an
           arbitral award on differences relating to matters considered as
           commercial under the law in force in India made after the 28th
           day of July, 1924,—
(a) in pursuance of an agreement for arbitration to which
               the Protocol set forth in the Second Schedule applies, and
(b) between persons of whom one is subject to the
               jurisdiction of some one of such powers as the Central
               Government, being satisfied that reciprocal provisions
               have been made, may, by notification in the Official
               Gazette, declare to be parties to the Convention set forth
               in the Third Schedule, and of whom the other is subject to
               the jurisdiction of some other of the powers aforesaid, and
(c) in one of such territories as the Central Government,
               being satisfied that reciprocal provisions have been made,
               may, by like notification, declare to be territories to which
               the said Convention applies,
           and for the purposes of this Chapter an award shall not be
           deemed to be final if any proceedings for the purpose of
           contesting the validity of the award are pending in the country
           in which it was made.”
15
The other important sections which have a bearing on the controversy before

us are as follows:
“46. When foreign award binding.—Any foreign award which
         would be enforceable under this Chapter shall be treated as
         binding for all purposes on the persons as between whom it
         was made, and may accordingly be relied on by any of those
         persons by way of defence, set-off or otherwise in any legal
         proceedings in India and any references in this Chapter to
         enforcing a foreign award shall be construed as including
         references to relying on an award.
47. Evidence.—(1) The party applying for the enforcement of a
         foreign award shall, at the time of the application, produce
         before the Court—
(a) the original award or a copy thereof, duly authenticated
              in the manner required by the law of the country in which it
              was made;
(b) the original agreement for arbitration or a duly certified
              copy thereof; and
(c) such evidence as may be necessary to prove that the
              award is a foreign award.
(2) If the award or agreement to be produced under sub-section
         (1) is in a foreign language, the party seeking to enforce the
         award shall produce a translation into English certified as
         correct by a diplomatic or consular agent of the country to
         which that party belongs or certified as correct in such other
         manner as may be sufficient according to the law in force in
         India.
Explanation.— In this section and in the sections following
         in this Chapter, “Court” means the High Court having original
         jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the subject-matter
         of the arbitral award if the same had been the subject-matter of
         a suit on its original civil jurisdiction and in other cases, in the
         High Court having jurisdiction to hear appeals from decrees of
         courts subordinate to such High Court.”

         xxx xxx xxx

         “49. Enforcement of foreign awards.—Where the Court is
16
satisfied that the foreign award is enforceable under this
         Chapter, the award shall be deemed to be a decree of that
         Court.”
16.   It will thus be seen that “award” under Item 12 of
Schedule I of the

Indian Stamp Act, 1899
has remained unchanged till date. As has been held

by us hereinabove, in 1899, this “award” would refer only to a decision in

writing by an arbitrator or umpire in a reference not made by an order of the

Court in the course of a suit. This would apply only to such award made at

the time in British India, and today, after the amendment of
Section 1(2)
of

the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 by Act 43 of 1955, to awards made in the whole

of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. This being the case, we are

of the view that the expression “award” has never included a foreign award

from the very inception till date. Consequently, a foreign award not being

includible in
Schedule I of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899
, is not liable for stamp

duty. Shri Viswanathan also relied upon the
Tamil Nadu Amendment of the

Indian Stamp Act, 1899
. The Tamil Nadu Amendment contains the identical

definition of “award” as given in Item 12 thereof. The only difference is in the

figures contained for stamp duty. Consequently, this does not take the matter

very much further.
17.   Shri Viswanathan then argued, based on Senior Electric Inspector

and Ors. v. Laxminarayan Chopra and Anr., (1962) 3 SCR 146, that an Act

must be construed as on date, despite the fact that the definition contained in

an old Act may not literally fit the bill. We are afraid that this judgment is
17
wholly distinguishable in that, in the aforesaid case, the definition of

“telegraph line” in the
Indian Telegraph Act, 1885
, was construed as being

wide enough to include electric lines used for the purpose of wireless

telegraph. This Court held that in a modern progressive society, it would be

unreasonable to confine the intention of the legislature to the meaning

attributable to a word used at the time the law was made, and, unless a

contrary intention appeared, an interpretation should be given to the words

used in the statute to take in new facts and situations, if such words are

capable of comprehending them. As stated hereinabove, this judgment is

wholly distinguishable in that, given the factual scenario of 1899, and the fact

that foreign awards existed even then, in princely states as well as foreign

countries, no new fact situation has arisen subsequently in order to apply the

ratio of the said judgment. Further, we must not forget that the
Indian Stamp

Act, 1899
is a fiscal statute which must be construed literally. Any ambiguity

in the said statute would enure to the benefit of the assessee who has to pay

stamp duty. This being the case, Shri Viswanathan’s argument based on the

aforesaid judgment, must be rejected.
18.   We now come to some of the judgments referred to by counsel for the

parties. The Punjab and Haryana High Court judgment (supra), strongly

relied upon by Shri Viswanathan, referred to and relied upon
Section 3(c)
of

the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, and held that an instrument mentioned in the

Schedule which is executed out of India, being a foreign award, would relate
18
to a matter or thing done or not to be done in India, and that, therefore, stamp

duty would be payable on such an award. It is important to note that this

judgment does not refer to the definition of “award” in Item 12 of Schedule I

at all. For this reason alone, this judgment cannot take us very much further,

as it is clear that a foreign award, as has been held by us, is not contained

within the expression “award” in Item 12 of Schedule I and is, therefore, not

an “instrument” which is taxable under
Section 3(c)
of the Indian Stamp Act,

1899.
19.     The Delhi High Court judgment (supra), strongly relied upon by learned

counsel appearing on behalf of the Respondent also does not take us very

much further. As has been rightly pointed out by Shri Viswanathan, the said

judgment refers to the definition of “foreign award” contained in the 1996 Act,

but then goes on to rely upon a Supreme Court judgment, stating that such

foreign award would not require registration as it can be enforced as a

decree.
It further went on to rely upon the Supreme Court judgment in
M.

Anasuya Devi and Anr. v. M. Manik Reddy and Ors.
, (2003) 8 SCC 565, to

state that the Court, while deciding enforceability of a foreign award under
Sections 47
and
48
, cannot hold the award non-enforceable on the ground of

it being unstamped.
This also, strictly speaking, is incorrect, as
M. Anasuya
(supra) merely stated, in the context of a domestic award, that the question

as to whether an award is required to be stamped would be relevant only at

the enforcement stage under
Section 36
of the 1996 Act and not at the stage
19
of challenge, which is governed by
Section 34
of the 1996 Act. We cannot

forget that there is no challenge stage so far as a foreign award is concerned

– so long as none of the grounds in
Section 48
are attracted, the award

becomes enforceable as a decree.
The stage of enforceability, therefore, has

arisen in these cases, and it cannot be said that the ratio of
M. Anasuya
(supra) would apply so that stamp duty would become payable only at some

subsequent stage.
This judgment is equally incorrect in stating that
Fuerst

Day Lawson Ltd. v. Jindal Exports Ltd.
, (2001) 6 SCC 356, would apply.
One sentence in
Fuerst Day Lawson
(supra) reads, “[T]he only difference as

found is that while under the Foreign Awards Act a decree follows, under the

new Act the foreign award is already stamped as the decree.” This sentence

does not lead to the conclusion, following the judgment in
Thyssen

Stahlunion GMBH v. Steel Authority of India Ltd.
, (1999) 9 SCC 334, that

under the 1996 Act, a foreign award is considered to be stamped already. All

that this sentence means is that the foreign award is to be regarded as a

decree. The expression “stamped” means “regarded”. This judgment also

does not carry us much further.
20.   On the other hand, the Madhya Pradesh High Court judgment (supra)

hits nearer home. This judgment, in paragraph 12 thereof, states why foreign

awards do not have to suffer stamp duty in the following terms:
“12. The Law on Arbitration in India was substantially contained
         in three enactments namely,
The Arbitration Act, 1940
, The
20
Arbitration (Protocol and Convention) Act, 1937
and
The
         Foreign Awards (Recognition and Enforcement) Act, 1961
. It
         was widely felt the 1940 Act, which contains the General Law of
         Arbitration, has become outdated.
The Arbitration and
         Conciliation Act, 1996
came in force to consolidate and amend
         the Law relating to Domestic Arbitrations, International
         Commercial Arbitration, enforcement of foreign arbitral awards
         and to define the law relating to conciliation, commission on
         international trade in short (UNCITRAL) Model Law and Rules.
         Apart from other object, the object of the Act is to provide that
         every final arbitral award is enforced in the same manner as if it
         were a decree of the Court.
While Arbitration and Conciliation
         Act, 1996
was enforced, no amendment was made in the
         definition of award given in the
Indian Stamp Act
. Similarly, the
         Schedule which lays down the stamp duty payable on award
         was not amended by including the foreign award. It appears
         that law makers while enforcing the
Arbitration and Conciliation
         Act, 1996
was of the view that foreign award shall be
         enforceable as if it were a decree of the Court, no amendment
         was brought either in the definition of award or in the Schedule
         relating to payment of stamp duty on award. Since the
         definition of award given at Entry No. 11 of the
Schedule of the
         Indian Stamp Act
does not cover the foreign award and one of
         the objects to enforce the new Act was to enforce final award
         as if it was a decree and keeping in view the law
laid down by
the Hon'ble Apex Court in the matter of
Fuerst Day Lawson Ltd.
(supra), wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that
         under the new Act the foreign award is already stamped as
         decree, this Court is of the view that the petition filed by the
         petitioner has no merits and deserves to be dismissed. In view
         of this, the petition filed by the petitioner is disposed of holding
         that foreign award is already stamped and is enforceable as
         decree.”
21.   The reasoning contained in paragraph 12 has our approval, short of the

reasoning contained following
Fuerst Day Lawson
(supra) which, as we have

already stated above, did not indicate that foreign awards can never suffer

stamp duty.
22.   The other judgment heavily relied upon by Shri Viswanathan, namely
21
the Gujarat High Court judgment (supra), merely refers to Article III of the

New York Convention to state that so far as procedural aspects relatable to

foreign awards are concerned, we must go by
the Code of Civil Procedure
,

and going by
the Code of Civil Procedure
, the Court at Bhavnagar would

have no jurisdiction to enforce the foreign award in the facts of that case.

Since Article III of the New York Convention is strongly relied upon by Shri

Viswanathan, we need to set it out. It states:
“Article III
         Each Contracting State shall recognise arbitral awards as
         binding and enforce them in accordance with the rules of
         procedure of the territory where the award is relied upon under
         the conditions
laid down in
the following articles. There shall not
         be imposed substantially more onerous conditions or higher
         fees or charges on the recognition or enforcement of arbitral
         awards to which this Convention applies than are imposed on
         the recognition or enforcement of domestic arbitral awards.”
23.   There is no doubt whatsoever that if stamp duties are leviable in India

on foreign awards, the imposition should not be substantially more onerous

than the stamp duty that is imposed on recognition or enforcement of

domestic arbitral awards. For the said Article to apply, stamp duty must first

be leviable on a foreign award, which, as we have held earlier in this

judgment, is not the case. Equally, reliance upon the 194 th Law Commission

of India Report, insofar as stamp duty on domestic awards is concerned,

would again have little bearing, given our finding that under the present state

of the law, foreign awards are not liable to stamp duty under the
Indian

Stamp Act, 1899
.
22
24.   An argument was made by learned counsel for the Respondent that
Section 47
of the Act requires three things and only three things to be

produced before the Court for enforcement of a foreign award, and that

therefore, stamp duty not being one of the three things required, cannot ever

be levied. We are afraid that this again is an extreme argument. All that
Section 47
deals with is production before the Court of proof of the fact that a

foreign award is sought to be enforced. In no manner does
Section 47
interdict the payment of stamp duty if it is otherwise payable in law. This

argument must thus be rejected. Equally, the argument that under
Section

48(2)(b)
, even if stamp duty is payable on a foreign award, it would not be

contrary to the public policy of India, must be rejected. The fundamental

policy of Indian law, as has been held in
Renusagar Power Co. Ltd. v.

General Electric Co.
, 1994 Supp (1) SCC 644, and followed in
Associate

Builders v. Delhi Development Authority
, (2015) 3 SCC 49, makes it clear

that if a statute like the
Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973
dealing with

the economy of the country is concerned, it would certainly come within the

expression “fundamental policy of Indian law”.
The Indian Stamp Act, 1899
,

being a fiscal statute levying stamp duty on instruments, is also an Act which

deals with the economy of India, and would, on a parity of reasoning, be an

Act reflecting the fundamental policy of Indian law. This argument on behalf

of the Respondent must also, therefore, be rejected.
25.   We, therefore, hold that the learned Single Judge of the Madras High
23
Court is correct, and the fact that a foreign award has not borne stamp duty

under the
Indian Stamp Act, 1899
would not render it unenforceable for the

reasons given in our judgment. The appeal accordingly stands dismissed.
………..……………… J.
(R. F. Nariman)



                                       …..…………………… J.
(Indu Malhotra)
New Delhi.
September 13, 2018.
24
ITEM No. 1501           Court No. 9             SECTION  XII
(For Judgment)
                

          S U P R E M E   C O U R T   O F   I N D I A
                    RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Civil Appeal  No. 9515  of 2018
(Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 13913 of 2018)

M/S. SHRIRAM EPC LIMITED                        Appellant(s)

                                VERSUS

RIOGLASS SOLAR SA                                 Respondent(s)
Date :  13.09.2018   This matter  was called on for pronouncement 
                      of judgment today.
For Appellant(s)    Mr. Snehasish Mukherjee, Adv.
For Respondent(s)   Mr. Hiroo Advani, Adv.
Mr. Divyakant Lahoti, Adv.
Mr. Shashank Garg, Adv.
Ms. Amrita Grover, Adv.
Mr. Parikshit Ahuja, Adv.
Mr. Tariq Khan, Adv.
Hon'ble   Mr.   Justice     Rohtinton   Fali   Nariman
       pronounced the judgment of the Bench comprising His
       Lordship and Hon'ble Ms. Justice Indu Malhotra.
Leave granted 
         The   appeal   is   dismissed   in   terms   of   the   signed
       reportable judgment.
Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed
       of.
(Shashi Sareen)                (Tapan Kumar Chakraborty)
            AR­cum­PS                         Branch Officer
(Signed reportable judgment is placed on the file)