[Cites
5
, Cited by
48
]
Supreme Court of India
Uttaradi Mutt vs Raghavendra Swamy Mutt on 26 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 4796, 2018 (10) SCC 484, (2019) 142 REVDEC 736, (2018) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 638, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 258, (2019) 1 MAD LW 487, (2018) 4 RECCIVR 723, (2019) 1 PAT LJR 40, (2018) 13 SCALE 538, (2018) 4 JLJR 422, (2018) 131 ALL LR 769, (2018) 5 CAL HN 35, (2018) 6 ANDHLD 102, (2018) 4 CURCC 260, (2018) 192 ALLINDCAS 163 (SC), (2018) 3 ALL RENTCAS 465, (2018) 3 GUJ LH 456, 2018 (4) AKR 733, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 1060
Author:
A.M. Khanwilkar
Bench:
D.Y. Chandrachud
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
,
Dipak Misra
1

                                                                         REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9333 OF 2018
                                     (Arising out of SLP(C) No.229 of 2018)

                         Uttaradi Mutt                               …..Appellant(s)

                                                  :Versus:

                         Raghavendra Swamy Mutt                      ....Respondent(s)




                                               JUDGMENT
A.M. Khanwilkar, J.
1.   This appeal arises from the judgment and decree dated

                         14th November, 2017 passed by the High Court of Karnataka at

                         Bangalore in R.S.A. No.100446 of 2015, whereby the High

                         Court was pleased to set aside the judgment and decree

                         passed by the First Appellate Court and also that of the trial

                         Court and relegated the parties before the trial Court, by
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SUBHASH CHANDER
Date: 2018.09.26
16:01:11 IST
allowing three applications filed by the respondent/defendant
Reason:
under Order XLI Rule 27 of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 (for
2
short, “
CPC
”). The High Court directed the trial Court to decide

the suit afresh by giving its findings in light of the additional

evidence adduced. The operative part of the order passed by

the High Court reads thus:
“25. Therefore, this Court cannot decide the substantial
     questions of law on which the said present second appeal
     was admitted on 13.04.2016 at this stage and the matter
     deserves to go back to the trial Court by allowing the three
     applications filed under
Order 41 Rule 27 of the CPC
. All the
     three applications filed by the Defendant/Appellant-RSM
     under
Order 41 Rule 27 of the CPC
therefore, are allowed
     and setting aside the order dated 22.04.2015 passed by the
     FAC in its entirety, because even otherwise it appears to be
     self contradictory and vague partial injunction granted by
     FAC, the matter is restored back to the learned trial Court to
     allow the said additional evidences to be placed on record
     and allow the parties to prove and disprove the same in
     accordance with law and then re-decide the suit giving its
     findings in the light of such additional evidence.
In view of the long lapse of time, the trial Court is requested
     to expedite the matter and decide the suit again
     expeditiously.
The present appeal is accordingly disposed of. No costs. All
     I.As. are also disposed of.”
2.   The central issue in this appeal is whether the High

Court was justified in allowing the three applications filed by

the respondent/defendant under Order XLI Rule 27 before the

First Appellate Court. Furthermore, even if there was just and

sufficient reason for allowing the three applications, was the

High Court justified in relegating the parties before the trial
3
Court and directing the trial Court to re-decide the suit by

giving its findings in light of the additional evidence?
3.    This case has a chequered history. Shorn of unnecessary

details we propose to refer only to the facts relevant to decide

this appeal. In the first appeal filed by the appellant/plaintiff

before the Principal Senior Civil Judge & Chief Judicial

Magistrate, Dharwad bearing R.A. No.124 of 2014 (Original

R.A. No.14 of 2011 before the Court of Senior Civil Judge,

Gangawathi) against the dismissal of the suit by the Additional

Civil Judge, Gangawathi vide judgment and decree dated 18th

June, 2011 in O.S. No.74 of 2010 (Original O.S. No.193 of

1992), three applications under Order XLI Rule 27 for

permission to produce additional evidence came to be filed by

the   respondent/defendant.       The   First   Appellate   Court

considered the stated applications along with the first appeal

preferred by the appellant/plaintiff. The First Appellate Court

was pleased to dismiss the said applications preferred by the

respondent/defendant; and allowed the appeal filed by the

appellant/plaintiff on the basis of the evidence already
4
brought on record before the trial Court. The suit filed by the

appellant was decreed in part by the First Appellate Court. The

operative order passed by the First Appellate Court dated 22nd

April, 2015, reads thus:
“ORDER
     The Application filed by the Appellant under Order 41 Rule
     27 R/w
Section 151
of the Code of Civil Procedure is
     dismissed.
The Application filed by the Appellant filed by the Appellant
     under Order 14 Rule 5 R/w
Section 151
of the Code of Civil
     Procedure is dismissed.
The Application filed by the Respondent under Order 14 Rule
     5 R/w
Section 151
of the Code of Civil Procedure is
     dismissed.
The Applications filed by the Respondent under Order 41
     Rule 27 R/w
Section 151
of the Code of Civil Procedure are
     dismissed.
The Application filed by the Respondent under
Section 151
of the Code of Civil Procedure seeking survey of Sy.No.192 of
     Anegundi Village is dismissed.
The Application filed by the Respondent under
Section 340
of the Code of Criminal Procedure is dismissed.
     The Appeal filed by the Appellant under
Order 41 Rule 1 of
     the Code of Civil Procedure
is allowed in part. The Judgment
     and Decree dated 18-06-2011 passed by the Court of the
     Addl. Civil Judge, Gangavathi in O.S.No.74/2010 are set-
     aside.
The Suit of the Plaintiff is decreed in part. Subject to the
     right, if any, of the Defendant Mutt to perform Aradhanas
     and Poojas of the Vrindavanas in the Suit property, the
     Defendant is restrained by way of Perpetual Injunction from
     interfering with the Plaintiff Mutt’s possession and
     enjoyment of the Suit property. It is hereby clarified that the
     above said raider shall not be construed as declaring the
     right of the Defendant Mutt to perform Aradhanas and
     Poojas.
Costs are made easy.
The Office is directed to transmit a copy of the Judgment
     and Decree to the trial Court along with LCR.”
5
4.    Aggrieved     by         the   aforesaid      decision,     the

respondent/defendant preferred a second appeal before the

High Court, being R.S.A. No.100446 of 2015.
5.    As aforesaid, for the nature of the order that we propose

to pass and the issues to be answered in the present appeal,

suffice it to observe that the second appeal, being R.S.A.

No.100446 of 2015 filed by the respondent/defendant before

the High Court of Karnataka at Bangalore, was finally decided

vide impugned judgment dated 14th November, 2017. The High

Court reversed the opinion of the First Appellate Court

including the rejection of stated three applications filed by the

respondent/defendant under
Order XLI Rule 27 of CPC
. The

High Court instead allowed those applications and relegated

the parties before the trial Court, as noted in the operative

part of the impugned judgment extracted above.
6.    As regards the first issue as to whether the High Court

has   recorded    sufficient    reasons   for   allowing   the   three

applications for permission to produce additional evidence

filed by the respondent/defendant under Order XLI Rule 27 of
6
CPC
before the First Appellate Court, the High Court has

opined that the additional evidence sought to be brought on

record,   subject   to   proof,       by   the   respondent/defendant,

definitely, could have a material bearing on the issues involved

in the suit and determining the rights of the appellant/

plaintiff to claim injunction against the respondent/defendant

on the basis of the total land being in their ownership or

possession (whether it was 14 Acres 7 Guntas or 27 Acres 30

Guntas). The High Court was of the view that it could change

the entire basis of the rights of the respective parties and

therefore such additional evidence sought to be produced by

the respondent/defendant ought not to be shut out. The High

Court noted that the First Appellate Court delivered a

contrived   judgment      without          analysing   such   additional

evidence and otherwise also, it was a substantial cause for

reaching just conclusions and for correct evaluation of the

rights of the respective parties, satisfying the parameters of
Order XLI Rule 27 of CPC
. To buttress this conclusion, the

High Court relied on the dictum in paragraph 49 of the

decision of this Court in
Union of India Vs. Ibrahim Uddin
7
and Anr.1
. What essentially weighed with the High Court for

        showing indulgence to the respondent/defendant can be

        discerned from the observations in paragraph 17 of the

        impugned judgment which read thus:
“17. Prima facie, this Court finds that the additional evidence
               mostly in the form of Government letters and Orders could
               have a major impact on the issues involved before the Courts
               below and therefore deserved to be considered by the Court
               after being led and proved in accordance with law by
               concerned party. Merely because the order dated 07.09.1974
               passed by Superintendent of Land Records became the
               subject matter of order by the KAT and even this Court, it
               does not prevent the trial Court or the FAC to allow such
               additional evidence taken on record and allow it to be proved
               in accordance with law and then consider and weigh such
               evidence and then decide the issues in accordance with law.
               Most of these documents were Government communication
               and Orders and were not in the control and possession of the
               defendant-RSM and defendant-RSM being not a party before
               KAT in the appeal filed by Vyasraja Mutt, the FAC should
               have allowed these Additional evidence which could have
               helped it in completing the quest for truth and meet the ends
               of justice and deliver a correct judgment. The failure to do so
               has resulted in serious miscarriage of justice. Without the
               title and peaceful possession of the entire land of 27 Acres
               and 30 Guntas proved by the plaintiff/respondent-UM, in
               the face of such contradicting Additional Evidence, the self
               contradictory and vague injunction granted by FAC cannot
               be sustained.”

        For that reason, the High Court reversed the view taken by

        the First Appellate Court on the three applications preferred

        by the respondent/defendant under
Order XLI Rule 27 of CPC
1   (2012) 8 SCC 148
8
and deemed it appropriate to relegate the parties to the trial

Court.
7.   According to the appellant, the High Court ought not to

have interfered with the discretion exercised by the First

Appellate Court in dismissing the three applications for

permission to produce additional evidence preferred by the

respondent/defendant. Furthermore, the reasons weighed

with the High Court, in no case, satisfied the test for

production of additional evidence predicated in
Order XLI Rule

27 of CPC
.
8.   This objection need not detain us as we are of the

considered opinion that the First Appellate Court would have

been within its jurisdiction to permit the party to the

proceedings to produce additional evidence before it for full,

complete and effectual adjudication of the proceedings. The

purport of
Order XLI Rule 27 of CPC
has been considered by

this Court in
Union of India
(supra). The Court adverted to

the exposition made in earlier decisions of the Court from
9
paragraphs 36 to 46 and summed up the proposition in

paragraphs 47 and 48 as under:
“47. Where the additional evidence sought to be adduced
     removes the cloud of doubt over the case and the evidence
     has a direct and important bearing on the main issue in the
     suit and interest of justice clearly renders it imperative that
     it may be allowed to be permitted on record, such application
     may be allowed.
48. To sum up on the issue, it may be held that an
     application for taking additional evidence on record at a
     belated stage cannot be filed as a matter of right. The court
     can consider such an application with circumspection,
     provided it is covered under either of the prerequisite
     conditions incorporated in the statutory provisions itself. The
     discretion is to be exercised by the court judicially taking
     into consideration the relevance of the document in respect
     of the issues involved in the case and the circumstances
     under which such an evidence could not be led in the court
     below and as to whether the applicant had prosecuted his
     case before the court below diligently and as to whether such
     evidence is required to pronounce the judgment by the
     appellate court. In case the court comes to the conclusion
     that the application filed comes within the four corners of
     the statutory provisions itself, the evidence may be taken on
     record, however, the court must record reasons as on what
     basis such an application has been allowed. However, the
     application should not be moved at a belated stage.”
9.   In the present case, the High Court has opined that the

documents       proposed        to     be       produced      by       the

respondent/defendant        were     official   records    and     public

documents which, if proved, could enable the Appellate Court

to pronounce the judgment and do full, complete and effectual
10
justice to the parties. In other words, the proposed additional

evidence was required by the Court to answer the subject

matter and in particular, to pronounce the judgment on

material issues.
10.
In paragraphs 49-52 of the same reported decision of
Union of India
(supra), the Court dealt with the question of

stage of consideration of applications under
Order XLI Rule 27

of CPC
, in reference to earlier decisions of this Court. Be that

as it may, on analyising the reasons recorded by the First

Appellate Court for rejecting the three applications filed by the

respondent/defendant under
Order XLI Rule 27 of CPC
and

juxtaposing the same with the reasons recorded by the High

Court for allowing those applications, in our opinion, the

conclusion reached by the High Court on this count is

impregnable.
11. That takes us to the second contention raised by the

appellant that even if there was sufficient ground for allowing

the stated applications filed by the respondent/defendant for

production of additional evidence, the genuineness and the
11
contents of the additional documents would have to be proved

by the party placing reliance thereon. As regards this plea, we

find that the High Court has made it amply clear that the fact

that the applications are allowed per se is not to give any

direction to straightaway exhibit the additional documents,

but that it could be exhibited subject to proof. The High Court

has unambiguously observed that the documents will have to

be proved in accordance with law. We make it amply clear that

by   allowing    the    three    applications    filed   by   the

respondent/defendant under
Order XLI Rule 27 of CPC
, it

would not follow that the additional documents/additional

evidence can be straightaway exhibited rather, the respondent

would have to not only prove the existence, authenticity and

genuineness of the said documents but also the contents

thereof, as may be required by law.
12. The further grievance of the appellant, however, is that

the High Court, in any case, ought not to have relegated the

parties before the trial Court with a direction to the trial Court

to re-decide the suit. The respondent, however, would rely on
12
the provisions of the amended
Rule 23 of the CPC
“as

applicable to the State of Karnataka”. The same reads thus:
“23. Remand of case by Appellate Court:- “Where the
     Court from whose decree an appeal is preferred has disposed
     of the suit upon a preliminary point and the decree is
     reversed in appeal, or where the Appellate Court in
     reversing or setting aside the decree under appeal
     considers it necessary in the interests of justice to
     remand the case, the Appellate Court may by order remand
     the case, and may further direct what issue or issues shall
     be tried in the case so remanded and whether any further
     evidence shall or shall not be taken after remand, and shall
     send a copy of its judgment or order to the Court from whose
     decree the appeal is preferred, with directions to re-admit the
     suit under its original number in the register of civil suits,
     and proceed to determine the suit; the evidence, if any,
     recorded during the original trial shall subject to all just
     exceptions, be evidence during the trial after remand.”
                                                 (emphasis supplied)
13. Indeed, the provision as applicable to the State of

Karnataka is not limited to the decree disposing of the suit on

a preliminary point but also where the Appellate Court in

reversing or setting aside the decree under appeal, considers it

necessary, in the interest of justice, to remand the case.

Notably, the Karnataka amendment has been introduced vide

the Karnataka Gazette entry dated 5th November, 1959. The

effect of that provision is reinforced by Central Amendment Act
13
104 of 1976 which introduced Rule 23-A. The said Rule 23-A

reads thus:
“23-A. Remand in other cases.- Where the Court from
      whose decree an appeal is preferred has disposed of the case
      otherwise than on a preliminary point, and the decree is
      reversed in appeal and a re-trial is considered necessary, the
      Appellate Court shall have the same powers as it has under
rule 23.”
14.   We say so because under
Rule 23 of CPC
, the Appellate

Court could remand the case before it where the Court from

whose decree an appeal was preferred, had disposed of the

suit upon a preliminary point and that decree was reversed in

appeal.    Rule 23-A deals with other (residuary) category of

cases to be remanded by the Appellate Court in an appeal

against a decree which has been disposed of otherwise than on

a preliminary point. While exercising such discretion, the

Appellate Court is duty bound to keep in mind Rules 25 and

26 of
Order XLI of the CPC
, which read thus:
“25. Where Appellate Court may frame issues and refer
      them for trial to Court whose decree appealed from.-
      Where the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred
      has omitted to frame or try any issue, or to determine any
      question of fact, which appears to the Appellate Court
      essential to the right decision of the suit upon the merits,
      the Appellate Court may, if necessary, frame issues, and
14
refer the same for trial to the Court from whose decree the
               appeal is preferred and in such case shall direct such Court
               to take the additional evidence required;
And such Court shall proceed to try such issues, and shall
               return the evidence to the Appellate Court together with its
               findings thereon and the reasons therefor [within such time
               as may be fixed by the Appellate Court or extended by it from
               time to time].”

               “26. findings and evidence to be put on record –
               Objections to finding- (1) Such evidence and findings shall
               form part of the record in the suit; and either party may,
               within a time to be fixed by the Appellate Court, present a
               memorandum of objections to any finding.
(2) Determination of appeal.- After the expiration of the
               period so fixed for presenting such memorandum the
               Appellate Court shall proceed to determine the appeal.”
15. In other words, there are two options available to the

        Appellate Court. First, it may record the evidence itself by

        permitting the parties to produce evidence before it as per Rule

        27 of Order XLI or direct the Court from whose decree the

        appeal under consideration has arisen, to do so.
16. The         appellants    have     placed     reliance    on       H.P.

        Vedavyasachar Vs. Shivashankara and Anr.2, which has

        also considered the decision in
Shanti Devi Vs. Daropti

        Devi3
.
In the case of H.P. Vedavyasachar (supra), it was


2   (2009) 8 SCC 231
3   (2006) 13 SCC 775
15
specifically contended that no case was made out to adduce

additional evidence and in that event, the entire case could not

have been remanded to the trial Court for fresh disposal after

recording fresh evidence as it was not a case envisaged under
Order XLI Rule 23 of CPC
. This contention has been

considered in paragraphs 7 to 10 of the said decision, in the

following words:
“7. However, so far as the second contention raised by the
     learned counsel for the appellant is concerned, in our
     opinion, the same has substance. When an application for
     adducing additional evidence is allowed the appellate
     court has two options open to it. It may record the
     evidence itself or it may direct the trial court to do so.
8.
Order 41 Rule 28 CPC
reads as under:
“28. Mode of taking additional evidence.—Wherever
     additional evidence is allowed to be produced, the appellate
     court may either take such evidence, or direct the Court
     from whose decree the appeal is preferred, or any other
     subordinate court, to take such evidence and to send it when
     taken to the appellate court.”
     For the aforementioned purpose, in our considered
     opinion, the High Court could not have directed the trial
     court to dispose of the suit after taking evidence. Such
     an order of remand could be only in terms of Order 41
     Rule 23, Order 41 Rule 23-A or Order 41 Rule 25 of the
     Code. None of the said provisions have any application in
     the instant case.
9. This Court in
Shanti Devi v. Daropti Devi1
has held as
     under: (SCC p. 778, para 13)
     “13. But the same by itself could not be a ground for
     remitting the entire suit to the learned trial Judge upon
     setting aside the decree of the learned trial court. The
     power of remand vests in the appellate court either in
     terms of Order 41 Rules 23 and 23-A or Order 41 Rule 25
16
of the Code of Civil Procedure
. Issue 4 was held to have
      been wrongly framed. Onus of proof was also wrongly placed
      and only in that view of the matter the High Court thought it
      fit to remit it to the learned trial Judge permitting the parties
      to adduce fresh evidence. It, therefore, required the learned
      trial Judge to determine a question of fact, which according
      to it was essential, upon reframing the issue.”
10. None of the aforementioned provisions were available to
      the High Court. We, therefore, in modification of the order
      passed by the High Court direct as under:
(i) The learned trial court upon recording the evidence as
      directed by the High Court shall transmit the records to the
      first appellate court with a copy of its report annexed
      thereto.
(ii) Such an exercise by the learned trial court must be
      completed within a period of four weeks from the date of
      communication of this order.
(iii) The first appellate court must dispose of the first appeal
      on receipt of the said order as also the evidence as adduced
      as expeditiously as possible and not later than eight weeks
      from the date of receipt of the said report.
We are passing the order keeping in view the fact that the
      appellant is said to have been dispossessed as far back as in
      1993.”
                                              (emphasis supplied)
17.   In the present case, the High Court has not recorded any

special reasons as to why the parties should be relegated

before the “trial Court” to re-decide the suit. The only reason,

which, presumably, weighed with the High Court, is that it

was necessary to find out the truth, as it is the duty of the

Court. That could be done even by directing the First Appellate

Court to record evidence, which it was competent to do while
17
hearing the first appeal, had it allowed the applications under
Order XLI Rule 27 of CPC
by the respondent/defendant. For

that, as per Rule 25 of
Order XLI of the CPC
, the High Court

could   have   framed     the   issues    and    referred   them     for

adjudication before the First Appellate Court, against whose

decree the second appeal was preferred before the High Court.

It may be useful to advert to Rules 28 & 29 of
Order XLI of

C.P.C
. The same read thus:
“28. Mode of taking additional evidence.- Wherever
     additional evidence is allowed to be produced, the Appellate
     Court may either take such evidence, or direct the Court
     from whose decree the appeal is preferred, or any other
     subordinate Court, to take such evidence and to send it
     when taken to the Appellate Court.”
     “29. Points to be defined and recorded.- Where additional
     evidence is directed or allowed to be taken, the Appellate
     Court shall specify the points to which the evidence is to be
     confined, and record on its proceedings the points so
     specified.”


The High Court could have issued directions to the First

Appellate Court to determine any question of fact including the

existence and genuineness of the additional evidence or for

that matter, whether the contents of the said documents had

been duly proved by the party relying thereon. After recording

the evidence in support of such relevant matters as the High
18
Court may have directed, the First Appellate Court could

proceed to try such issues and return the evidence to the High

Court together with its findings thereon within the prescribed

time. Such a course was permissible in terms of Rule 28 of
Order XLI of CPC
. And on receipt of the report, the High Court

could then consider the substantial questions of law already

framed while admitting the second appeal and finally decide

the same on all issues.
18. Considering the chequered history of this litigation and

the fact that the suit was filed in the year 1992, and that the

writ petition against the order passed by the Superintendent of

Land Records is stated to be pending before the High Court, it

would be appropriate that the High Court frames the points on

which   additional    evidence   could   be   adduced   by   the

respondent/defendant and call upon the First Appellate Court

to record additional evidence and also consider the question

of genuineness and authenticity of the additional evidence,

including as to whether the contents thereof have been proved

by the party relying thereon, and thereafter, to return the
19
evidence to the High Court together with its findings thereon

and reasons thereof within the prescribed time. Such a course

would meet the ends of justice.
19. Accordingly, we set aside the impugned judgment and

order of the of the High Court in part, to the extent that it has

relegated the parties before the trial Court for re-deciding the

suit   after allowing the respondent/defendant to produce

additional evidence in accordance with law.        Instead, the

appeal is restored to the file of the High Court to its original

number.    The High Court shall frame points on which        the

additional evidence is allowed to be produced and direct the

First Appellate Court to take the additional evidence on record

in accordance with law and then return the evidence to the

High Court together with its findings thereon and the reasons

thereof, within the prescribed time. Such directions be issued

by the High Court expeditiously, preferably within two months

from today. On receipt of the said report from the First

Appellate Court, the High Court may then consider the Second

Appeal on the substantial questions of law already framed or
20
such other substantial questions of law that may arise for its

consideration.
20. The appeal and the accompanying application are

disposed of in the aforementioned terms with no order as to

costs.
.………………………….CJI.
(Dipak Misra)




                                    …………………………..….J.
                                    (A.M. Khanwilkar)




                                    …………………………..….J.
                                    (Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud)
New Delhi;
September 26, 2018.