[Cites
3
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Hiya Associates vs Nakshatra Properties Pvt. Ltd. on 26 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 757, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 1449, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 749
Author:
Abhay Manohar Sapre
Bench:
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
,
Abhay Manohar Sapre
REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CIVIL APPEAL Nos. 10010­10011 OF 2018
                              [Arising out of SLP (C) Nos.23260­23261 of 2017]


                         Hiya Associates & Ors.                         .. Appellant(s)


                                                  Versus


                         Nakshatra Properties Pvt. Ltd.          .. Respondent(s)


                                             J U D G M E N T


                         Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.
1)     Leave granted.

                         2)     These appeals arise from the final judgment and
Signature Not Verified
order dated  21.07.2017 & 26.07.2017 passed by the
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
High Court of Judicature at Bombay in Writ Petition
Date: 2018.09.26
17:19:48 IST
Reason:
1
No.6733 of 2017 whereby the High Court allowed the

writ petition filed by the respondent herein, set aside

the   order   dated   26.09.2016   passed   by   the   Small

Causes   Court,   Appellate   Bench,   Mumbai   in   R.A.

No.333/2015 and restored the order dated 28.10.2015

of   the   Executing   Court   in   Execution   Application

No.31/2013 in R.A.E. Suit No.872/2007.
3)    The issue involved in these appeals is short. Few

facts, however, need mention to appreciate the issue,

which is the subject matter of these appeals.
4)    The   appellants   are   the   defendants   and   the

respondent is the plaintiff in the civil suit out of which

these appeals arise.
5)    The   issue   arises   out   of   eviction   suit,   which

resulted in passing of a compromise decree followed by

its   execution.   So   far   as   the   present   appeals   are
2
concerned,   they   arise   out   of   an   order   passed   in   the

execution proceedings.
6)    The   Respondent(plaintiff)   filed   a   suit

(No.872/2007)   in   the   Court   of   Small   Causes   at

Mumbai   against   the   appellants(defendants)   for   their

eviction   from   the   suit   premises.   The   eviction   was

claimed  inter alia  on the ground of unauthorized user

of   the   suit   premises   by   the   appellants   (defendants)

which,   according   to   the   respondent   (plaintiff),

amounted to the change of user under the provision of
Section 16(1)(n)
of the Maharashtra Rent Control Act,

1999   (hereinafter   referred  to   as  “the  Act”).     It  is  not

necessary to set out the facts in the pleadings of the

parties.
7)    During the pendency of the suit, the parties, i.e.,

the   appellants   and   respondent,   compromised   the
3
matter   and   accordingly   filed   their   consent   terms   on

which the compromise was arrived at between them.
8)    The   Court   accordingly,   by   order   dated

05.09.2007, pronounced the judgment and disposed of

the   suit   in   accordance   with   the   consent   terms.   In

terms of the compromise, the defendants (appellants)

were   to   handover   the   vacant   possession   of   the   suit

premises   to   the   plaintiff   (respondent)   on   or   before

31.01.2009 and the defendants (appellants) were also

liable   to   pay   Rs.5000/­   per   day   by   way   of  mesne

profits  if  they  fail to handover possession of the suit

premises after 31.01.2009.
9)    Since   the   defendants   (appellants)   failed   to

handover the vacant possession of the suit premises to

the plaintiff (respondent) in terms of the compromise,

the plaintiff (respondent) filed an execution application

(No.31/2013) for execution of the consent decree dated
4
05.09.2007   and   prayed   therein   for   issuance   of

possession   warrant   in   respect   of   the   suit   premises

against the defendants (appellants).
10)   The defendants (appellants) filed their reply and

raised   several   objections   on   facts   and   law   including

maintainability of the execution application. By order

dated   28.10.2015,   the   Executing   Court   overruled   all

the   objections   on   merits   and,   in   consequence,   held

that   the   execution   application   filed   by   the   plaintiff

(respondent)   is   maintainable   in   law   and   the   consent

decree is, therefore, executable against the defendants

(appellants).   The   Executing  Court, therefore, directed

issuance   of   warrant   of   possession   against   the

defendants   (appellants)   in   relation   to   the   suit

premises.
11)   The   defendants   (appellants)   felt   aggrieved   and

filed   revision   before   the   Small   Causes   Court   at
5
Mumbai.   The   Revisionary   Court,   by   order   dated

26.09.2016,   allowed the revision, set aside the order

dated 28.10.2015 passed by the Executing Court and

remanded the case to the Executing Court for deciding

the   objection   raised   by   the   defendants(appellants)

against   the   execution   application   afresh   on   merits.

One   of   the   reasons   to   remand   the   case   to   the

Executing   Court   was   that   the   Revisionary   Court

allowed   the   defendants   (appellants)   to   file   additional

documents (Ex.22), which they had filed for the first

time in the revision petition.
12)   The   plaintiff   (respondent)   felt   aggrieved   by   the

order of the Revisionary Court and filed writ petition

under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India in the

High Court of Bombay. By impugned order, the High

Court allowed the writ petition, set aside the order of

the   Revisionary   Court   and   restored   the   order   of   the
6
Executing   Court,   which   gives   rise   to   filing   of   the

present   appeals   by   way   of   special   leave   by   the

defendants (appellants) in this Court.
13)   Heard Mr. D.N. Goburdhan, learned counsel for

the appellants and Mr. Gourab Banerji, learned senior

counsel for the respondent.
14)   Having heard the learned counsel for the parties

and   on   perusal   of   the   record   of   the   case,   we   are

inclined to allow the appeals in part and while setting

aside the impugned order as also the order passed by

the   Revisionary   Court   remand   the   case   to   the

Revisionary   Court   for   deciding   the   defendants’

(appellants)   revision   afresh   on   merits   in   accordance

with law.
15)   The   reasons   to   remand   the   case   to   the

Revisionary   Court   are   more   than   one   as   mentioned

hereinbelow.
7
16)   In our opinion, the Revisionary Court committed

two   errors.   In   the   first   place,   it   should   not   have

remanded the case to the Executing Court for its fresh

consideration on merits but it should have decided the

revision on merits in accordance with law.
17)   It is for the reason that the Executing Court had

already decided all objections raised by the defendants

(appellants) on merits and had found no merit therein.

The   Revisionary   Court   was,   therefore,   under   legal

obligation to decide the legality and correctness of the

findings recorded by the Executing Court on its merits

in its revisionary jurisdiction instead of remanding the

case to the Executing Court.   Indeed, we do not find

any   justifiable   reason,   which   could   justify   remand

having regard to the nature of the objections raised by

the   defendants   (appellants)   before   the   Executing

Court.   In   other   words,  this  was   not   the   case,   which
8
needed   remand   to   the   Executing   Court   for   its   fresh

decision on merits.
18)   In   our   opinion,   the   remand   of   a   case   to   the

Subordinate  Court is considered necessary when the

Superior   Court   while   exercising   its   appellate   or

revisionary   jurisdiction   finds   that   the   Subordinate

Court has failed to decide some material issues arising

in the case or there is some procedural lacuna noticed

in the trial, which has adversely affected the rights of

the parties while prosecuting the suit/proceedings or

when   some   additional   evidence   is   considered

necessary to decide the rights of the parties which was

not before the Trial Court etc. (See Order 41 Rules 23,

23­A, 24 and 25
of the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908).

Such was not the case here.
19)   Second error committed by the Revisionary Court

was   that   it   allowed   the   defendants   (revision
9
petitioners)   to   file   additional   documents   (Ex.22)   to

prove their case.
20)   In our opinion, the documents sought to be filed

by the   defendants (revision petitioners)   were neither

relevant and nor material for deciding the legality and

correctness   of   the   order   passed   by   the   Executing

Court.   The   legality   and   correctness   of   the   order

impugned in the revision could be decided one way or

the other without the aid of any additional document

but on the basis of material already on record keeping

in   view   the   law   laid   down   by   this   Court   in   several

decided cases on the issue in question.  Indeed, if the

Executing   Court   could   decide   the  issue   finally   at   its

level, the Revisionary Court too could do the same at

its level.
21)   In   our   view,   the   issue   in   question   was   not

required to be decided under Order 21 Rule 97 of the
10
Code   of   Civil   Procedure
but   it   should   have   been   so

decided   keeping   in   view   the   law   laid   down   by   this

Court  in the  case of  Roshanlal  vs.  Madan Lal  (AIR

1975   SC   2130)   which   lays   down   the   principle   as   to

how the issue of such a nature needs to be dealt with

by   the   Executing   Court   when   it   is   raised   by   the

judgment debtor in execution proceedings.
22)   It is due to these two aforementioned reasons, we

are of the considered view that the order passed by the

Revisionary Court is not legally sustainable.
23)   So far as the impugned order passed by the High

Court is concerned, in our view, the High Court having

noticed the aforementioned errors in the order of the

Revisionary Court should have remanded the case to

the Revisionary Court for deciding the revision afresh

on   merits   in   accordance   with  law.  Instead,   the   High

Court   itself   went   into   the   question   on   merits   and
11
upheld the order of the Executing Court.  This, in our

opinion, the High Court should not have done and left

it for the Revisionary Court to do.
24)   By these observations, we do not mean that the

High Court had no jurisdiction to decide the issue but

having   regard   to   the   nature   of   objections,   remedy

available to the parties to have finding on the question

arising   in   the   case   one   way   or   the   other   from   the

Revisionary   Court   and   to   put   the   record   straight,   it

was not called for in this case.
25)   It is  for  these reasons, we consider it proper to

set aside the impugned order and also the order of the

Revisionary   Court   and   remand   the   case   to   the

Revisionary   Court   to   decide   the   defendants’

(appellants’)   revision   afresh   on   merits   in   accordance

with law.
12
26)   The   Revisionary  Court would decide the legality

and correctness of the order passed by the Executing

Court dated 28.10.2015 on merits keeping in view the

law laid down by this Court in Roshanlal (supra) and

other cases on the subject.
27)   While   deciding   the   revision,   the   Revisionary

Court   would   not   be   influenced   by   the   observations

contained   in   impugned   order   and   also   of   this   Court

order   because   we   have   not   applied   our   mind   to   the

merits of the case having formed an opinion to remand

the case to the Revisionary Court.
28)   The   appeals   thus   succeed   and   are   accordingly

allowed in part.  Impugned order and the order of the

Revisionary   Court   are   set   aside   and   the   case   is

remanded   to   the   Revisionary   Court   to   decide   the

defendants’ (appellants’) revision (No.333/2015) afresh

on its merits in accordance with law.
13
29)    Since   the   matter   is   an   old   one,   we   direct   the

Revisionary   Court   to   decide   the   revision   within   six

months as an outer limit.
…………...................................J.
                               [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]

                                    
                               ..…...……..................................J.
                            [MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR]

New Delhi;
September 26, 2018
14