[Cites
19
, Cited by
16
]
Supreme Court of India
Gottumukkala Venkata Krishamraju vs Union Of India on 7 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 4197, (2019) 1 MAD LW 321 (2018) 3 SERVLJ 1, (2018) 3 SERVLJ 1, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 194, AIR 2018 SC 4197, 2018 (4) AKR 545
Author:
A.K. Sikri
Bench:
Ashok Bhushan
,
A.K. Sikri
REPORTABLE

                                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                   CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                             WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 732 OF 2018


                         GOTTUMUKKALA VENKATA KRISHAMRAJU                              .....PETITIONER(S)

                                                                             VERSUS

                         UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                        .....RESPONDENT(S)

                                                                      WITH

                                        TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 301 OF 2017

                                        TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 304 OF 2017

                                        TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 303 OF 2017

                                        TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 305 OF 2017

                                                                      AND

                                        TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 306 OF 2017




                                                            JUDGMENT
A.K. SIKRI, J.
Petitioners in these petitions were appointed as Presiding
Signature Not Verified
Officers of Debt Recovery Tribunal created under the Recovery of
Digitally signed by
SUSHIL KUMAR
RAKHEJA
Date: 2018.09.07
16:23:03 IST
Reason:
Debts due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 which is
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 732 of 2018 etc.                          Page 1 of 21
rechristened as Recovery of Debts and Bankruptcy Act, 1993

       (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’). The appointment was made

       under the provisions of the said Act. Chapter II of the Act deals

       with the establishment of Tribunal and Appellate Tribunal. The

       provisions relevant for our purposes are Sections 3 to 6. Section

       3 deals with establishment of the Tribunal by the Central

       Government to be known as the Debts Recovery Tribunal.

       Section 4 talks of composition of the Tribunal. Section 5 deals

       with the qualifications for appointment as Presiding Officers.

       Once appointed, the term of office of a Presiding Officer is

       stipulated in Section 6. There have been amendments to the

       various provisions of this Act in the year 2016. Also, the Act which

       was earlier known as the Recovery of Debts due to Banks and

       Financial Institutions Act, 1993 is given a new nomenclature and

       is now known as the Recovery of Debts and Bankruptcy Act, 1993

       by the
Finance Act, 2017
. Unamended
Sections 3
to
6
were as

       under:
“3. Establishment of Tribunal.—(1) The Central
                Government shall, by notification, establish one or more
                Tribunals, to be known as the Debts Recovery Tribunal, to
                exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on
                such Tribunal by or under this Act.
(2) The Central Government shall also specify, in the
                notification referred to in sub-section (1), the areas within
                which the Tribunal may exercise jurisdiction for entertaining
                and deciding the applications filed before it.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 732 of 2018 etc.                              Page 2 of 21
4. Composition of Tribunal.—(1) A Tribunal shall consist
                of one person only (hereinafter referred to as the Presiding
                Officer) to be appointed by notification, by the Central
                Government.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
                the Central Government may authorise the Presiding
                Officer of one Tribunal to discharge also the functions of
                the Presiding Officer of another Tribunal.
5. Qualifications for appointment as Presiding Officer.
                —A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the
                Presiding Officer of a Tribunal unless he is, or has been, or
                is qualified to be, a District Judge.
6. Term of Office. – The Presiding Officer of a Tribunal
                shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on
                which he enters upon his office or until he attains the age
                of sixty-two years, whichever is earlier.”
2)      As is clear from
Section 6
, after the appointment of a person as

        Presiding Officer to a Tribunal, he could hold office for a term of

        five years from the date on which he enters upon his office or

        until the attainment of 62 years of age, whichever is earlier. This

        Section is substituted by Act 44 of 2016 w.e.f. September 1, 2016

        and the amended provision read as under:
“6. Term of office of Presiding Officer – The Presiding
                Officer of a Tribunal shall hold office for a term of five years
                from the date on which he enters upon his office and shall
                be eligible for reappointment.
Provided that no person shall hold office as the
                Presiding Officer of a Tribunal after he has attained the age
                of sixty-five years.”
3)      Along with that, another provision in the form of Section 6A is also
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 732 of 2018 etc.                                Page 3 of 21
inserted which is to the following effect:
“6A. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of
                Presiding Officer – Notwithstanding anything contained in
                this Act, the qualifications, appointment, term of office,
                salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and the
                other terms and conditions of service of the Presiding
                Officer of the Tribunal appointed after the commencement
                of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017, shall be
                governed by the provisions of
section 184
of that Act:
Provided that the Presiding Officer appointed before
                the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the
                Finance Act, 2017, shall continue to be governed by the
                provisions of this Act, and the rules made thereunder as if
                the provisions of
section 184
of the Finance Act, 2017 had
                not come into force.”

                Some other provisions are also amended, but those are not

        relevant for the purposes of these cases.
4)      All the petitioners were appointed before the amendment to
Section 6
. Thus, at the time of their appointment, the term of

        their office was “five years or till attaining the age of 62 years,

        whichever is earlier”.               These officers have not completed five

        years of service. However, they are completing/or have attained

        62 years of age after coming into force amended
Section 6
. In

        the aforesaid backdrop, the question that arises for consideration

        in these petitions is as to whether the petitioners are entitled to

        complete the term of five years taking advantage of the amended

        provision which gives such Presiding Officers to continue until

        attaining the age of 65 years or to continue till they reach the age
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 732 of 2018 etc.                                Page 4 of 21
of 65 years, whichever is earlier.
5)      For the sake of convenience, we may give particulars in respect

        of Transfer Case (Civil) No. 301 of 2017 and, at the same time,

        take note of the progress in other cases as well.
Date                             Event
         27.12.1954 Date of birth of the petitioner. The petitioner turned 62
                    years on 26.12.2016 and will turn 65 years, on
                    26.12.2019.
27.08.1993 Enactment of the Recovery of Debts due to Banks and
                    Financial Institutions Act, 1993.
Section 6
of the Act
                    prescribed that a Presiding Officer of the Debt Recovery
                    Tribunal shall hold office for five years form the date he
                    enters office or 62 years, whichever is earlier.
         15.12.2014 Appointment notification of petitioner as Presiding
                    Officer, Debt Recovery Tribunal, Lucknow.
         06.01.2015 Petitioner took office as the Presiding Officer, Debt
                    Recovery Tribunal, Lucknow.
12.08.2016 Amendment to the Recovery of Debts due to Banks and
                    Financial Institutions Act, 1993.
Section 6
of the 1993
                    Act was substituted.         The amended
Section 6
contemplates that the Presiding Officer shall hold office
                    for five years from the date he enters office. The
                    proviso clarifies that the Presiding Officer shall not
                    continue beyond the age of 65 years.
01.09.2016 The 2016 amendment takes effect upon being so
                    notified, by the Central Government.
29.09.2016 The Union of India advertises anticipated vacancies for
                    Presiding Officer for Debt Recovery Tribunal, Lucknow
                    and other Debt Recovery Tribunals.
06.10.2016 By way of an interim order, the Central Administrative
                    Tribunal, New Delhi, stays the release of Presiding
                    Officer, Debt Recovery Tribunal, Guwahati (V.K. Garg),
                    having regard to the enhanced age of retirement, in the
                    O.A. filed by him.
07.12.2016 By way of an interim order, the Allahabad High Court,
                    Lucknow Bench stays the release of petitioner, having
                    regard to the enhanced age of retirement in the writ
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 732 of 2018 etc.                          Page 5 of 21
petition filed by him.
09.12.2016 The Bombay High Court dismissed WP(L) No.
                    3299/2016 filed by Vasant Narayan Lothey Patel,
                    Presiding Officer, DRT III, Mumbai, whereby the said
                    officer sought application of the amended
Section 6
, to
                    extend his tenure to 65 years or completion of five
                    years.
26.12.2016 The petitioner attained the age of 62 years.
         02.02.2017 By way of an interim order, the Madras High Court stays
                    the release of J.V. Raj, Debt Recovery Tribunal,
                    Coimbatore having regard to the enhanced age of
                    retirement in the writ petition filed by him.
         09.02.2017 By way of an interim order, the Jharkhand High Court
                    says the release of B.N. Dash, Debt Recovery Tribunal
                    having regrd to the enhanced age of retirement, in his
                    writ petition.
28.02.2017 By way of an interim order, the Madras High Court stays
                    the release of R. Ravindra Bose, Presiding Officer, Debt
                    Recovery Tribunal-II, Chennai having regrd to the
                    enhanced age of retirement.
04.10.2017 The Union of India filed five transfer petitions qua the
                    aforementioned petitions pending before the Central
                    Administrative Tribunal, Delhi and High Courts of
                    Allahabad, Madras, Jharkhand. A sixth transfer petition
                    was filed in respect of WP(L) No. 2358/2016 filed by
                    Mohd. Zafar Imam before the Bombay High Court. This
                    officer had already demitted office on 17.09.2016. On
                    04.10.2017, this Court issued notice in the
                    aforementioned transfer petitions being TP(C) Nos.
                    1315-1320/2017 and stayed further proceedings before
                    the courts concerned.
14.11.2017 This Court allowed all six transfer petitions (TP(C) Nos.
1315-1320/2017) and also passed an interim order
                    reinstating Mohd. Zafar Imam as Presiding Officer, DRT
                    II, Mumbai.
26.12.2019 The petitioner will be completing the age of 65 years.
         06.01.2020 The petitioner will be completing the term of five years
                    on this date.
6)      As per the provisions of unamended
Section 6
, the petitioner

        could continue only upto December 26, 2016 as he had
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 732 of 2018 etc.                         Page 6 of 21
completed 62 years of age on that date though he had not

        completed five years of term as the Presiding Officer. If amended
Section 6
is applicable, then he would be entitled to continue upto

        December 26, 2019 on which date he shall attain the age of 65

        years. Same is the fact situation in all these cases, though the

        dates on which they would be completing five years term or

        attaining 65 years of age, are different.
7)      In this backdrop, the issue that has arisen in these petitions is as

        to whether the petitioners would be governed by
Section 6
as

        amended or this provision is to be applied prospectively i.e., w.e.f.

        September 1, 2016 i.e. in respect of appointments which are

        made on or after September 1, 2016.
8)      The endeavour of the petitioners is to demonstrate that they

        would be governed by
Section 6
as amended and, therefore, they

        have right to continue upto the age of 65 years or till the time they

        complete five years tenure before they have attained the age of

        65 years.          The submission which are paraphrased by the

        petitioners in support of their aforesaid plea are the following:
(a)     By the Amendment Act, new
Section 6
stands ‘substituted’

        with the old
Section 6
. The legislature has used the expression

        ‘substituted’ with a definite purpose, namely, making this provision
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 732 of 2018 etc.                         Page 7 of 21
applicable also to those Presiding Officers who were holding the

        post as on September 1, 2016 when the amendment was brought

        into force. It was argued that the very expression ‘substituted’

        would mean that the old
Section 6
stands obliterated.
(b)     Purpose behind the amendment was to reduce the burden

        of pendency by enhancing the age of the Presiding Officers. This

        is categorically mentioned in the report of the Lok Sabha, Joint

        Committee and also in the Statement of Objects and Reasons to

        the amendment.
(c)     The provision needs to be given purposive interpretation

        and keeping in view the purpose and object behind the

        amendment, the said purpose would be sub-served only if it is

        applied to the incumbents in the service as well as on the date of

        the application. Reference is made to the judgment of this Court

        in
Reserve Bank of India v. Peerless General Finance and

        Investment Co. Ltd. & Ors.1
9)      In that very hue, it is argued that to interpret the provision as

        inapplicable to the incumbent would lead to assigning a perverse

        object to the amendment which would be totally illogical. For this

        proposition, judgment in
State of Madhya Pradesh v. Narmada

        Bachao Andolan & Anr.2
is relied upon.
Reliance is also placed
1 (1987) 1 SCC 424
2 (2011) 7 SCC 639
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 732 of 2018 etc.                      Page 8 of 21
on
Boucher Pierre Andre v. Superintendent, Central Jail,

        Tihar, New Delhi & Anr.3
10)     Contrasting the provisions of
Section 6
with
Section 6A
of the Act,

        it is argued that proviso to Section 6A categorically makes a

        provision to the effect that the Presiding Officer appointed before

        the commencement of
Finance Act, 2017
shall continue to be

        governed by the provisions of
Section 184
of the Finance Act,

        2017 as if the said provisions had not coming to force. It was

        submitted that there is no such proviso added to
Section 6
which

        makes the intention of the legislature very clear, namely, the

        Presiding Officers who were in office as on the date of

        amendment would be governed by the newly inserted
Section 6
.
11)     Mr. Banerjee, learned ASG appearing for the respondent Union of

        India contradicted the aforesaid arguments raised by the

        petitioners with the following submissions:
No right has accrued by virtue of amendment in
Section 6
to hold the office upto the age of 65 years. It was argued that

        unamended
Section 6
provided that the Presiding Officer shall

        hold office for a term of five years or ‘until he attains the age of 62

        years, whichever is earlier’. Amended provision, on the other


3 (1975) 1 SCC 192
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 732 of 2018 etc.                          Page 9 of 21
hand, does not state that the term of office would be five years or

        until the Presiding Officer attains the age of 65 years. On the

        other hand, this provision of 65 years was made in the proviso to
Section 6
which was couched in negative terms as it is stipulated

        that no person shall hold the office after he has attained the age

        of 65 years. Thus, no right accrues in favour of any person with

        such a proviso. It was also submitted that unless a provision is

        specifically given retrospective effect by the legislature, it only has

        prospective operation. Therefore, intentment behind
Section 6
was to make it applicable in respect of appointments which would

        be made on or after September 1, 2016 when this provision was

        inserted and the date from which it was specifically made

        effective.      It was also argued that the purpose was to infuse

        young blood by deputing fresh Presiding Officers and not to give

        benefit to the existing Presiding Officers. The learned ASG relied

        upon judgment of this Court in
C. Gupta v. Glaxo-Smithkline

        Pharmaceuticals Ltd.4
and, in particular, following portion in that

        judgment:
“21. In the present case, we find that for determining the
                nature of amendment, the question is whether it affects the
                legal rights of individual workers in the context that if they
                fall within the definition then they would be entitled to claim
                several benefits conferred by the Act. The amendment
                should be also one which would touch upon their
                substantive rights. Unless there is a clear provision to the
4 (2007) 7 SCC 171
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 732 of 2018 etc.                              Page 10 of 21
effect that it is retrospective or such retrospectivity can be
                implied by necessary implication or intendment, it must be
                held to be prospective. We find no such clear provision or
                anything to suggest by necessary implication or intendment
                either in the amending Act or in the amendment itself. The
                amendment cannot be said to be one which affects
                procedure. Insofar as the amendment substantially
                changes the scope of the definition of the term “workman” it
                cannot be said to be merely declaratory or clarificatory. In
                this regard we find that entirely new category of persons
                who are doing “operational” work was introduced first time
                in the definition and the words “skilled” and “unskilled” were
                made independent categories unlinked to the word
                “manual”. It can be seen that the
Industrial Disputes
                (Amendment) Act, 1984
was enacted by Parliament on 31-
8-1982. However, the amendment itself was not brought
                into force immediately and in sub-section (1) of
Section 1
of
                the amending Act, it was provided that it would come into
                force on such day as the Central Government may by
                notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. Ultimately, by a
                notification the said amendment was brought into force on
                21-8-1984. Although this Court has held that the
                amendment would be prospective if it is deemed to have
                come with effect on a particular day, a provision in the
                Amendment Act to the effect that amendment would
                become operative in the future, would have similar effect.
22. Therefore, by the application of the tests mentioned
                above, it is clear that the definition of workman as
                amended must, therefore, be presumed to be prospective.
12)     We have given our due consideration to the arguments advanced

        by the counsel for the parties on both sides and have also

        perused the relevant material. We find force in the arguments of

        the petitioners that the amended provisions of
Section 6
shall

        apply in their cases as well and, therefore, if they have not

        completed five years of tenure as Presiding Officers of the Debt

        Recovery Tribunal they are entitled to continue to work as
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 732 of 2018 etc.                              Page 11 of 21
Presiding Officers till they attain the age of 65 years or complete

        five years’ term before attaining the age of 65 years. In the first

        instance, we have to bear in mind the language/terminology

        which the Legislature used while inserting new
Section 6
with

        effect from September 01, 2016. This section stands ‘substituted’

        with the old section.                The word ‘substituted’   has its own

        significance.
In
Government of India & Ors. v. Indian Tobacco

        Association5
, this Court noted dictionary meaning of the word

        ‘substitute’ as can be seen from para 15 of
the said judgment
:
“15. The word “substitute” ordinarily would mean “to put
                (one) in place of another”; or “to replace”. In Black's Law
                Dictionary, 5th Edn., at p. 1281, the word “substitute” has
                been defined to mean “to put in the place of another
                person or thing”, or “to exchange”. In Collins English
                Dictionary, the word “substitute” has been defined to mean
                “to serve or cause to serve in place of another person or
                thing”; “to replace (an atom or group in a molecule) with
                (another atom or group)”; or “a person or thing that serves
                in place of another, such as a player in a game who takes
                the place of an injured colleague”.
13)     This expression has also come up for interpretation by the Courts

        in
Zile Singh v. State of Haryana and Others6
, the import and

        impact of substituted provision were discussed in the following

        manner:
“23. The text of Section 2 of the Second Amendment Act
                provides for the word “upto” being substituted for the word

5 (2005) 7 SCC 396
6 (2004) 8 SCC 1
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 732 of 2018 etc.                              Page 12 of 21
“after”. What is the meaning and effect of the expression
                employed therein — “shall be substituted”?
24. The substitution of one text for the other pre-existing
                text is one of the known and well-recognised practices
                employed in legislative drafting. “Substitution” has to be
                distinguished from “supersession” or a mere repeal of an
                existing provision.”
14)     Ordinarily wherever the word ‘substitute’ or ‘substitution’ is used

        by the legislature, it has the effect of deleting the old provision

        and make the new provision operative.                 The process of

        substitution consists of two steps: first, the old rule is made to

        cease to exist and, next, the new rule is brought into existence in

        its place. The rule is that when a subsequent Act amends an

        earlier one in such a way as to incorporate itself, or a part of

        itself, into the earlier, then the earlier Act must thereafter be read

        and construed as if the altered words had been written into the

        earlier Act with pen and ink and the old words scored out so that

        thereafter there is no need to refer to the amending Act at all. No

        doubt, in certain situations, the Court having regard to the purport

        and object sought to be achieved by the Legislature may

        construe the word "substitution" as an "amendment" having a

        prospective effect.            Therefore, we do not think that it is a

        universal rule that the word ‘substitution’ necessarily or always

        connotes two severable steps, that is to say, one of repeal and
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 732 of 2018 etc.                           Page 13 of 21
another of a fresh enactment even if it implies two steps.
However, the aforesaid general meaning is to be given effect to,

        unless it is found that legislature intended otherwise. Insofar as

        present case is concerned, as discussed hereinafter, the

        legislative intent was also to give effect to the amended provision

        even in respect of those incumbents who were in service as on

        September 01, 2016.
15)     The effect, thus, would be to replace
Section 6
as amended with

        the intention as if this is the only provision which exist from the

        date of introduction and the earlier provision was not there at all.

        The effect of this would be that all those incumbents who are

        holding the post of Presiding Officer on September 01, 2016

        would be governed by this provision.
16)     When we examine the matter in the aforesaid perspective, the

        question as to whether
Section 6
, as amended, is to be given

        retrospective effect or not, does not arise for consideration. The

        petitioners are right in submitting that persons who demitted the

        office prior to the amendment are not sought to be covered by the

        amendment. Had the provision been retrospective then it would

        have benefited those persons as well. No such case is set up by

        any of the petitioners or any other person, it is only the
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 732 of 2018 etc.                       Page 14 of 21
incumbents who are serving as on the date of the amendment

        are sought to be covered.
17)     Though in a different context, the judgment in Boucher Pierre

        Andre throws some light on the issue at hand, as can be

        discerned from the following discussion
in that case
:
“1. …..The petitioner was arrested on November 10, 1971
                in connection with an offence of theft which took place in
                the night between October 31, 1971 and November 1,
                1971 in Rajasthan Emporium at Ashoka Hotel, New Delhi.
                He was tried by the Additional Sessions Judge, Delhi and
                by an order dated July 16, 1973 he was convicted of the
                offence under
Section 380
of the Indian Penal Code and
                sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for four years and a
                fine of Rs 10,000 and in default of payment of fine, further
                rigorous imprisonment of one year. An appeal preferred by
                him to the High Court of Delhi failed and his conviction was
                confirmed but the substantive sentence of imprisonment
                was reduced to two years though the fine was enhanced to
                Rs 15,000 with one year's rigorous imprisonment in default.
                The order of the High Court in appeal was passed on April
                4, 1974. The petitioner did not pay the amount of fine and
                he was, therefore, liable under the order of the High Court
                to serve a maximum sentence of imprisonment for three
                years. Since the petitioner was continuing under detention
                from November 10, 1971 during the investigation, enquiry
                and trial of the case against him, the petitioner contended
                that by reason of Section 428 of the new
Code of Criminal
                Procedure
, which came into force from April 1, 1974, the
                period of detention from November 10, 1971 upto July 16,
                1973 was liable to be set off against the term of
                imprisonment imposed upon him and he could be required
                to undergo imprisonment only for the remainder of the term
                which, after taking into account the remission granted on
                account of good behaviour, expired on August 12, 1974.
                The petitioner claimed that he was, therefore, entitled to be
                freed on August 12, 1974 and his detention in jail since that
                date was illegal. The petitioner filed an application for a writ
                of habeas corpus in the High Court of Delhi challenging the
                validity of his detention since August 12, 1974 but the High
                Court took the view that since the conviction of the
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 732 of 2018 etc.                               Page 15 of 21
petitioner by the Sessions Court had taken place prior to
                the coming into force of the new
Code of Criminal
                Procedure
, Section 428 had no application and the
                petitioner was bound to suffer imprisonment for the full
                term of three years calculated from the date of conviction,
                namely, July 16, 1973. The habeas corpus application in
                the High Court having failed, the petitioner preferred the
                present writ petition directly in this Court under
Article 32
of
                the Constitution. This writ petition also claimed the same
                relief and the ground was also the same, namely, that by
                reason of Section 428, the term of imprisonment imposed
                on the petitioner came to an end on August 12, 1974 and
                his detention since that date was contrary to law.
2. The question which arises for determination in this
                petition is a narrow one and it rests on the true
                interpretation of Section 428. Is this section confined in its
                application only to cases where a person is convicted after
                the coming into force of the new
Code of Criminal
                Procedure
, or does it also embrace cases where a person
                has been convicted before but his sentence is still running
                at the date when the new
Code of Criminal Procedure
came into force? It is only if the latter interpretation is
                accepted that the petitioner would be entitled to claim the
                benefit of the section and hence it becomes necessary to
                arrive at its proper construction. Section 428 reads as
                follows:
“Where an accused person has, on conviction, been
                   sentenced to imprisonment for a term, the period of
                   detention, if any, undergone by him during the
                   investigation, inquiry or trial of the same case and
                   before the date of such conviction, shall be set off
                   against the term of imprisonment imposed on him on
                   such conviction, and the liability of such person to
                   undergo imprisonment on such conviction shall be
                   restricted to the remainder, if any, of the term of
                   imprisonment imposed on him.”

                This section, on a plain natural construction of its language,
                posits for its applicability a fact situation which is described
                by the clause “where an accused person has, on
                conviction, been sentenced to imprisonment for a term”.
                There is nothing in this clause which suggests, either
                expressly or by necessary implication, that the conviction
                and sentence must be after the coming into force of the
                new
Code of Criminal Procedure
. The language of the
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 732 of 2018 etc.                               Page 16 of 21
clause is neutral. It does not refer to any particular point of
                time when the accused person should have been convicted
                and sentenced. It merely indicates a fact situation which
                must exist in order to attract the applicability of the section
                and this fact situation would be satisfied equally whether an
                accused person has been convicted and sentenced before
                or after the coming into force of the new
Code of Criminal
                Procedure
. Even where an accused person has been
                convicted prior to the coming into force of the new
Code of
                Criminal Procedure
but his sentence is still running, it
                would not be inappropriate to say that the “accused person
                has, on conviction, been sentenced to imprisonment for a
                term”. Therefore, where an accused person has been
                convicted and he is still serving his sentence at the date
                when the new
Code of Criminal Procedure
came into force.
                Section 428 would apply and he would be entitled to claim
                that the period of detention undergone by him during the
                investigation, inquiry or trial of the case should be set off
                against the term of imprisonment imposed on him and he
                should be required to undergo only the remainder of the
                term. Of course, if the term of the sentence has already run
                out, no question of set off can arise. It is only where the
                sentence is still running that the section can operate to
                restrict the term. This construction of the section does not
                offend against the principle which requires that unless the
                legislative intent is clear and compulsive, no retrospective
                operation should be given to a statute. On this
                interpretation, the section is not given any retrospective
                effect. It does not seek to set at naught the conviction
                already recorded against the accused person. The
                conviction remains intact and unaffected and so does the
                sentence already undergone. It is only the sentence,
                insofar as it yet remains to be undergone, that is, reduced.
                The section operates prospectively on the sentence which
                yet remains to be served and curtails it be setting off the
                period of detention undergone by the accused person
                during the investigation, inquiry or trial of the case. Any
                argument based on the objection against giving
                retrospective operation is, therefore, irrelevant.”
                                                          (emphasis supplied)
18)     Our view is also in accord with the purport and objective behind

        the amendment which were reflected while carrying out the
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 732 of 2018 etc.                              Page 17 of 21
amendment itself. The purpose of amending
Section 6
was to

        reduce the burden of pendency by enhancement of age of the

        Judges concerned.                    The Report of the Lok Sabha Joint

        Committee qua the Amendment sets out the background to the

        amendment as follows:
“On the issue of pendency of cases in various DRTs, the
                Committee has been apprised by the Department of
                Financial Services that approximately 70,000 court cases
                pending in DRTs involving more than Rs. 5 Lakh Crore.
                One of the reasons mentioned in the memoranda
                submitted by various stakeholders for the pendency of
                cases is vacancies in various stakeholders for the
                pendency of cases is vacancies in various DRTs/DRATs. A
                number of suggestions in this regard have been made by
                the stakeholders. After detailed deliberations on the issue,
                the Committee decide(d) to insert the following new
                provision/substitute some of the provisions under the
                RDDB & FI Act….”
                                                        (emphasis supplied)
19)     Similarly, the Statement of Objects and Reasons to the

        amendment inter alia notes:
“The Recovery of Debts due to Banks and Financial
                Institutions Act, 1993 and the
Securitisation and
                Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of
                Security Interest Act, 2002
, were enacted for expeditious
                recovery of loans of banks and financial institutions.
                Presently, there are approximately seventy thousand cases
                pending in Debts Recovery Tribunals.          Though the
                Recovery of Debts due to Banks and Financial Institutions
                Act provides for a period of 180 days for disposal of
                recovery applications, the cases are pending for many
                years due to various adjournments and prolonged
                hearings. In order to facilitate expeditious disposal of
                recovery applications, it has been decided to amend the
                said Acts and also to make consequential amendments in
                the
Indian Stamp Act, 1899
and the
Depositories Act,
                1996
.”
                                                       (emphasis supplied)
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 732 of 2018 etc.                            Page 18 of 21
20)     In order to fulfill the aforesaid objective of reducing the arrears

        and tackle the issue of pendency of cases in various Debt

        Recovery Tribunals, ‘purposive interpretation’ is to be given. In

        Reserve Bank of India, the Court explained this principle in the

        following manner:
“33. Interpretation must depend on the text and the
                context. They are the bases of interpretation. One may well
                say if the text is the texture, context is what gives the
                colour. Neither can be ignored. Both are important. That
                interpretation is best which makes the textual interpretation
                match the contextual. A statute is best interpreted when we
                know why it was enacted. With this knowledge, the statute
                must be read, first as a whole and then section by section,
                clause by clause, phrase by phrase and word by word. If a
                statute is looked at, in the context of its enactment, with the
                glasses of the statute-maker, provided by such context, its
                scheme, the sections, clauses, phrases and words may
                take colour and appear different than when the statute is
                looked at without the glasses provided by the context. With
                these glasses we must look at the Act as a whole and
                discover what each section, each clause, each phrase and
                each word is meant and designed to say as to fit into the
                scheme of the entire Act. No part of a statute and no word
                of a statute can be construed in isolation. Statutes have to
                be construed so that every word has a place and
                everything is in its place……..”
                                                           (emphasis supplied)
21)     We are, thus, of the opinion that while carrying out the aforesaid

        amendment with the intention to substitute the amended

        provision with that of unamended, the Parliament desired that the

        benefit of this provision extended even to those who are serving

        as Presiding Officers on the date when the amendment became
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 732 of 2018 etc.                              Page 19 of 21
enforceable.         This seems to be just, reasonable and sensible

        outcome.
22)     This interpretation is contextual as well which can be discerned

        by contrasting amended
Section 6
with newly inserted
Section 6A
of the Act.
“…..There is a clear distinction between incumbent officers
                and the officers appointed in future. In contrast, there is no
                distinction, legislatively drawn, between incumbent or
                officers appointed in future for application of amended
Section 6
.”
23)     This view of ours would negate the contention of the learned ASG

        that
Section 6
as amended does not create any right. If such an

        interpretation is accepted, then even those persons appointed as

        Presiding Officers after September 01, 2016, can be denied the

        right to continue in service till 65 years. Judgment in Glaxo-

        Smithkline Pharmaceuticals Ltd., which was relied upon by the

        learned ASG would have no application. That was a case where

        there was an amendment to
Section 2(s)
of the Industrial

        Disputes Act, 1947 which was brought into force on August 21,

        1994 and the Court held the same to be prospective in nature. It

        was further held that the provision which was applicable as on the

        date of termination of the appellant
in that case
would apply.

        Obviously, such a
case has no application
to the instant case.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 732 of 2018 etc.                             Page 20 of 21
24)     The writ petition and the transferred cases filed by these

        petitioners, accordingly, stand allowed with no order as to costs.

        As a result, those petitioners in whose favour there is an interim

        stay would be allowed to continue. The petitioner in Writ Petition

        (Civil) No. 732 of 2018 shall be taken back in service forthwith,

        with continuity of service and salary of intervening period.
.............................................J.
                                                                         (A.K. SIKRI)



                                             .............................................J.
                                                           (ASHOK BHUSHAN)
NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 07, 2018.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 732 of 2018 etc.                                 Page 21 of 21