[Cites
2
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Coal India Ltd. vs Navin Kumar Singh on 25 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 4753, 2018 LAB IC 4633, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 151, (2018) 4 PAT LJR 150, (2018) 4 SCT 389, (2018) 13 SCALE 24, (2019) 1 SERVLR 262, (2019) 1 CURLR 601, (2019) 1 SERVLJ 46, (2019) 160 FACLR 95, (2019) 1 JCR 92 (SC), (2018) 4 JLJR 84, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 761
Author:
A.M. Khanwilkar
Bench:
D.Y. Chandrachud
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
,
Dipak Misra
1

                                                                        REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                  CIVIL APPEAL NOS.6491-6492 OF 2014

                         Coal India Ltd. & Anr.                     …..Appellant(s)

                                                        :Versus:

                         Navin Kumar Singh                          ....Respondent(s)




                                                  JUDGMENT
A.M. Khanwilkar, J.
1.   These appeals emanate from the judgment and order

                         dated 20th May, 2010 passed by the Division Bench of the

                         High Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi in L.P.A. No.546 of 2003

                         and order dated 11th December, 2013 passed in Civil Review

                         No. 68 of 2011, whereby the High Court upheld the decision of

                         the Single Judge, with minor modifications and declared that
Signature Not Verified   the past service of the respondent in the previous company of
Digitally signed by
SATISH KUMAR YADAV
Date: 2018.09.25
14:19:20 IST
the appellant could not be forfeited for all purposes in the
Reason:
2
event of an inter-company transfer on personal grounds at his

request and dismissed the review petition against the said

judgment on the ground of unexplained delay.
2.   The respondent, a graduate in Chemical Engineering,

was appointed on 27th June, 1990 in E-2 Grade and joined the

same on 4th August, 1990 in Dankuni Coal Complex (for short

„DCC‟), of the appellant company. On a request made by the

respondent, the Personnel Manager of the appellant company

issued a transfer order being No.C-5A(iii)/51434(Trans)/199

dated 23rd April, 1991 transferring the respondent from DCC

to Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Limited (for

short „CMPDIL‟),   a subsidiary of the appellant company, in

his existing capacity i.e. E-2 Grade. The transfer notice made

it clear that since the transfer had been made at the instance

of the respondent himself, his seniority in the E-2 Grade

would be reckoned from the date he joined the new

organisation, CMPDIL. Accordingly, the respondent joined

CMPDIL on 15th May, 1991. The prevailing policy for

determination of seniority of executives on inter-company
3
transfers at the time of the joining of the respondent, was as

follows:
“11. Determination of seniority of executives in E-1 to E-4
     grades on inter-company transfers
     This issue has two aspects:
(a)    Inter-company transfer effected on       administrative
     grounds:-
(b)    Inter-company transfer effected at the request of the
     executive concerned on personal grounds.
According to the existing system, the officers in E-1 to
     E-4 grades belong to the respective company cadres on as-
     in-where-is basis. Their career growth upto E-5 grade is
     within the company. When an executive in these grades
     moves from one company to the other, he gets absorbed in
     the appropriate cadre of that company.
11.1 The Committee recommends that:
(i) When an inter company transfer is         effected on
           administrative grounds the seniority of the executive
           shall be fixed in the company to which he is
           transferred taking into account his date of entry into
           the grade.
(ii) When the inter-company transfer is effected on
           personal grounds at the request of the executive
           concerned, his seniority in the company to which he is
           transferred, shall be fixed as if he entered the grade on
           the date of his assumption of charge in the new
           company. In other words, such executive will lose his
           past seniority in the grade.”

This policy was further clarified by way of an Office

Memorandum dated 5th June, 1985, issued by the General

Manager (Personnel) which read as follows:
“Under the present policy of the company, when the inter-
     company transfer is effected on personal grounds at the
     request of the executive concerned, his her seniority in the
     company to which he/she is transferred, is fixed as if he/she
4
entered the grade on the date of his/her assumption of
     charge in the new company and the executive loses his/her
     past seniority in the grade. An issue has been raised whether
     in such cases the period of service in a grade put in by the
     executive in the previous company will also count towards
     eligibility for promotion or not.
2.     In this connection, it is clarified that while the name of
     the officer transferred on request will be placed at the bottom
     of the seniority list in his/her grade in the new company
     when the officer immediately senior to his/her in the new
     company becomes eligible for promotion, say after one year,
     the transferee will also become eligible for consideration for
     promotion provided he/she put in the minimum prescribed
     grade in the previous company. However, if the Officer
     immediately senior to the transferee in the new company has
     put in less than the minimum prescribed period of service,
     say six months, in the grade the transferor becomes eligible
     for promotion even though the transferee might have put in
     more than the requisite service in the grade prior to his/her
     transfer.
3.     Pending cases may be disposed of on the basis of the
     above clarification. However, past cases will not be re-
opened.
This issues with the approval of Competent Authority.”
3.   The respondent claims that in September 1993, the

appellant company held its departmental promotion committee

after which several employees were promoted from the E-2

Grade to the E-3 Grade but the respondent was overlooked for

promotion. The reason given to the respondent was that his

transfer to CMPDIL was done at his own request and his

promotion would be considered only after he completed 3
5
(three) years of work experience at CMPDIL, which was the

requisite period for promotion from E-2 to E-3.
4.   Subsequently, the respondent was promoted to the „E-3‟

Grade vide order dated 12th December, 1994, which also

mentioned that his seniority would be decided separately,

since he had been promoted under the cluster concept in the

centralised cadre. This order was modified on 2nd January,

1995 to change his designation to Executive Engineer

(Chemical).
5.   Post-promotion,    the       respondent   challenged   the

appellant‟s decision to exclude his work experience at DCC

(i.e. 4th August, 1990 to 14th May, 1991) while considering his

eligibility for promotion, by filing a writ petition being CWJC

No.2074/1997 before the High Court of Jharkhand praying for

grant of notional seniority to him to the post of Executive

Engineer (Chemical) in the E-3 Grade with effect from 12th

November, 1993. The Single Judge disposed of the writ

petition vide order dated 18th November, 1998, by merely

directing the appellant company to consider the representation
6
of the respondent within 3 (three) months from the date of the

order.
6.   Thereafter, the Chief General Manager (Personnel) of the

appellant   company,      after    considering    the    respondent‟s

representation, issued an order on 16th February, 1999,

rejecting the same inter alia on the ground that the applicable

policy at the time of considering the respondent‟s seniority was

that an employee would lose his past seniority in his existing

Grade in the event of an inter-company transfer, if the request

for transfer was made by the employee himself and further, as

per the office memorandum of 5th June, 1985, since there was

no senior executive above the respondent‟s Grade, the

question of the application of the said office memorandum did

not arise. The said order reads thus:
“Shri Singh was transferred from Dankuni Coal Complex,
     Dankuni (West Bengal) to CMPDIL, Ranchi vide Order No.:C-
     5A(iii)51434(Trans)/109 dated 23rd April 1991 on his own
     request. In terms of policy followed prior to 1st April 1993
     (i.e. the date from which the career growth of all executives
     was centralized at CIL level), one had to lose his past
     seniority in his existing grade in the event of his transfer
     from one company to another on “request basis”. This policy
     was followed very strictly without any exception.
The Office Memorandum dated 5th June 1985 only
     clarifies with regard to procedure to be followed for
7
consideration of such transferred executive, when his
     immediate senior executive in the transferee company is
     considered for promotion. In the case of Shri Singh since
     there was no senior executive above him the question of
     application of the above O.M. dated 5th June 1985 could not
     arise. Moreover, Shri Singh having not been completed the
     requisite period in the transferee company was not eligible
     for consideration of his promotion as the period of service
     rendered in the previous company can not be taken into
     consideration for the purpose of eligibility for promotion.
In the premises, I am of the view that there is not
     merit in the representation of Shri Singh (the petitioner) and
     his request for the grant of Notional Seniority is rejected.”
7.   Aggrieved by the aforementioned decision, the respondent

filed a fresh writ petition being CWJC No.4177 of 2000 before

the High Court of Jharkhand, inter alia, seeking to quash the

order dated 16th February, 1999, and praying that he may be

granted notional     seniority with effect from 12th November,

1993 in the E-3 Grade with all consequential benefits. This

writ petition was allowed by the learned Single Judge vide

order dated 20th June, 2003 who observed that although the

respondent may have been at the top in the seniority list of

CMPDIL when he joined in that company, at the time of

consideration of promotion to E-3 Grade, his service at DCC

could not be overlooked and therefore, denial of promotion to

him in E-3 Grade at the time was incorrect and accordingly,
8
the appellant company was directed to revise the date of

promotion of the respondent.
8.   The appellant company challenged the order of the

learned Single Judge by way of LPA No.546/2003. Pending the

outcome, the respondent was promoted from E-3 to E-4 Grade

and then from E-4 to E-5 Grade. On 20th May, 2010, the

Division Bench disposed of the appellant‟s appeal, observing

that there was nothing in the policy to indicate that past

service in the previous company, from which transfer has been

sought, could be forfeited for all purposes, except that on the

strength of that past service he would not be entitled to

supersede the employees working in the new company in the

grade in which he had joined.
9.   Aggrieved, the appellant has approached this Court by

way of special leave, asserting that the claim of the respondent

is in the teeth of the policy under which he was    transferred

to   CMPDIL      at his    request    and    that    the Office

Memorandum dated 5th June, 1985 had no application to the

fact situation of the present case. Resultantly, the learned
9
Single Judge as well as the Division Bench committed

          manifest error in granting relief to the respondent. The

          respondent, on the other hand, has supported the reasons

          recorded by the learned Single Judge and the Division Bench.

          It is submitted that the High Court noted the distinction

          between the matter of seniority and that of the length of

          service. The policy invoked by the appellant merely governs the

          matter of seniority and does not affect the length of service as

          such. Reliance has been placed on the decisions of this Court

          in
Union of India and Ors. Vs. C.N. Ponnappan1
and
Scientific Advisor to Raksha Mantri and Anr. Vs. V.M.

          Joseph2
. It is submitted that the appeals are devoid of merit

          and ought to be dismissed.
10. We have heard Mr. Anip Sachthey, learned counsel for

          the appellants and Mr. Manish Kumar Saran, learned counsel

          for the respondent.
1
(1996) 1 SCC 524
2
(1998) 5 SCC 305
10
11. The indisputable position emerging from the chronology

of events, is that the respondent was appointed on 27th June,

1990 in E-2 Grade in DCC and joined that post on 4th August,

1990. He requested for a transfer from DCC to CMPDIL, which

is a subsidiary of the appellant company. That request was

considered favourably as a result of which the respondent

joined CMPDIL in existing E-2 Grade, pursuant to Office Order

dated 23rd April, 1991. The said Office Order reads thus:
“COAL INDIA LIMITED
                           “COAL BHAWAN”
           10-NETAJI SUBHAS ROAD, CALCUTTA-700001
     No.C-5A(iii)/51434 (Trans)/199    Dated: 23.04.1991
                              ORDER

           Shri Navin Kumar Singh, Chemical Engineer in E-2
     grade presently posted at Dankuni Coal Complex is hereby
     transferred in his existing capacity/grade to Central Mine
     Planning & Design Institute Limited, till further orders.
2.    On being released from Dankuni Coal Complex, Shri
     Singh will report to Director –in –Charge, CMPDI, Ranchi, for
     further assignment in that company.
3.    Since the transfer is being made at his own request
     Shri Singh will not be entitled to any transfer TA/Settling in
     Allowance etc. and his seniority in E-2 grade as Chemical
     Engineer will be reckoned from the date he joins in CMPDI.
4.    This issues with the approval of Competent Authority.
Sd/-
(A.K. Mukherjee)
                                    Personnel Manager (EE)”
11
12. Indeed, the office order makes it amply clear that the

seniority of the respondent will be reckoned from the date he

joins CMPDIL. It is also seen that when the respondent joined

CMPDIL on 15th May, 1991, there was no senior person

working in E-2 Grade. The question is: whether the policy

regarding the determination of inter-se seniority of the

executives on inter-company transfers would come in the way

of the respondent for reckoning his eligibility for promotion to

the higher Grade i.e. E-3 Grade, whilst in the new transferred

company (CMPDIL)? As the respondent was initially appointed

in E-2 Grade on 4th August, 1990 in DCC on completion of 3

years in September, 1993, he acquired the requisite eligibility

for being considered for promotion to the next grade i.e. E-3

Grade. However,     the   department   did   not consider   the

respondent‟s case for promotion to E-3 Grade in the

departmental promotional committee held at the relevant time.

Instead, he was considered and promoted to E-3 Grade only in

December, 1994.
12
13. On a fair reading of clause 11 of the policy, there is

nothing to indicate that the transferee would lose his past

service rendered in the parent company for all purposes. The

policy of forfeiture of seniority in the parent company,

however, is limited to the executives who seek inter-company

transfer on personal grounds. That is to ensure that no

prejudice is caused to the executives already working in the

transferred company. For that reason, the seniority of the

executives seeking inter-company transfer on personal request

is fixed as if he had entered the concerned Grade on the date

of assumption of charge in the transferred company. It has

been made explicitly clear that the executive seeking inter-

company transfer on personal grounds will lose his past

seniority in the Grade. No more and no less.
14. Indubitably, the respondent is not claiming seniority over

any person already working in the new company (CMPDIL)

before the date on which he assumed charge thereat on 15th

May, 1991. The limited claim of the respondent however, is

that the service rendered by him in the parent unit (DCC) from
13
4th August, 1990 in E-2 Grade be reckoned for the purpose of

determining his eligibility for promotion to the post of E-3

Grade whilst working in CMPDIL. The High Court justly

accepted the claim of the respondent that for determination of

his eligibility for promotion, his length of service in DCC must

be reckoned. That cannot be confused with the issue of

seniority in CMPDIL as they are two different and distinct

factors. The policy in the form of clause 11 deals with the

latter. There is no express stipulation in the policy – be it

clause 11 or any other official document – to even remotely

suggest that on seeking inter-company transfer on personal

grounds, the executive concerned would lose even his past

service rendered by him in the parent unit (DCC) for all

purposes. In absence of such a stipulation, the claim of the

respondent could not have been rejected by the department.

This proposition is reinforced from the dictum in
C.N.

Ponnappan
(supra), which has been noted with approval in
V.M. Joseph
(supra).
The two-Judge Bench of this Court in
C.N. Ponnappan
(supra), observed as follows:
14
“4. The service rendered by an employee at the place from
     where he was transferred on compassionate grounds is
     regular service. It is no different from the service rendered at
     the place where he is transferred. Both the periods are taken
     into account for the purpose of leave and retiral benefits. The
     fact that as a result of transfer he is placed at the bottom of
     the seniority list at the place of transfer does not wipe out
     his service at the place from where he was transferred. The
     said service, being regular service in the grade, has to be
     taken into account as part of his experience for the
     purpose of eligibility for promotion and it cannot be
     ignored only on the ground that it was not rendered at
     the place where he has been transferred. In our opinion,
     the Tribunal has rightly held that the service held at the
     place from where the employee has been transferred has to
     be counted as experience for the purpose of eligibility for
     promotion at the place where he has been transferred.”

                                                   (emphasis supplied)
15. This view has been restated by another two-Judge Bench

of this Court in
V.M. Joseph
(supra), in paragraph 6 which

reads as follows:
“6. From the facts set out above, it will be seen that
     promotion was denied to the respondent on the post of
     Senior Storekeeper on the ground that he had completed 3
     years of regular service as Storekeeper on 7-6-1980 and,
     therefore, he could not be promoted earlier than 1980. In
     coming to this conclusion, the appellants excluded the
     period of service rendered by the respondent in the Central
     Ordnance Depot, Pune, as a Storekeeper for the period from
     27-4-1971 to 6-6-1977. The appellants contended that, since
     the respondent had been transferred on compassionate
     grounds on his own request to the post of Storekeeper at
     Cochin and was placed at the bottom of the seniority list, the
     period of 3 years of regular service can be treated to
     commence only from the date on which he was transferred to
     Cochin. This is obviously fallacious inasmuch as the
     respondent had already acquired the status of a permanent
     employee at Pune where he had rendered more than 3 years
     of service as a Storekeeper. Even if an employee is
15
transferred at his own request, from one place to another
     on the same post, the period of service rendered by him
     at the earlier place where he held a permanent post and
     had acquired permanent status, cannot be excluded from
     consideration for determining his eligibility for
     promotion, though he may have been placed at the
     bottom of the seniority list at the transferred place.
     Eligibility for promotion cannot be confused with
     seniority as they are two different and distinct factors.”

                                        (emphasis supplied)
16. In the present case, there is no dispute that the

respondent had rendered service in E-2 Grade on regular basis

in DCC from where he was transferred to CMPDIL, on personal

grounds. The service rendered by him in DCC can be and

ought to be taken into account for all other purposes, other

than for determination of his seniority in E-2 Grade in the new

company i.e. CMPDIL. Indeed, his seniority in CMPDIL in E-2

Grade will have to be reckoned from the date of his

assumption of charge on 15th May, 1991, but that can have no

bearing while determining his eligibility criterion of length of

service in E-2 Grade for promotion to E-3 Grade. For

determining the eligibility for promotion to E-3 Grade, the

service rendered by him in DCC in E-2 Grade with effect from

4th August, 1990, ought to be reckoned. The view so taken by
16
the High Court commends to us. Hence, no fault can be found

with the direction given by the High Court to assign notional

date of promotion to the respondent in E-3 Grade with effect

from 12th November, 1993.
17. As regards the Office Memorandum dated 5th June, 1985,

the same does not militate against the respondent. It is a

different matter that it addresses the difficulty expressed

about the denial of opportunity of promotion to the executives

who opted for inter-company transfer. On a fair reading of this

Office Memorandum, it is discernible that the department has

clarified the position that if the concerned executive has

already completed service for a specified period including the

period of service with the old company, would become entitled

to be considered for promotion to the higher Grade. If so, not

granting similar advantage to the executive who opted for

inter-company   transfer    on   personal   request   and   who

incidentally enters at number one position in the seniority in

the new company would be anomalous. Concededly, what is

affected in terms of the policy for inter-company transfer on
17
personal request, is only the seniority position in the new

(transferred) company – which would commence from the date

of assuming office thereat. By no stretch of imagination, it can

affect the length of service in E-2 Grade in the parent

company.    The two being distinct factors, neither the policy

nor the office memorandum would be any impediment for

reckoning the period of service rendered by the respondent

from August, 1990 in DCC, albeit a case of inter-company

transfer on personal request. As a result, these appeals must

fail.
18. Accordingly, the appeals are dismissed with no order as

to costs.
.………………………….CJI.
(Dipak Misra)



                                     …………………………..….J.
                                     (A.M. Khanwilkar)




                                     …………………………..….J.
                                     (Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud)
New Delhi;
September 25, 2018.