[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Ministry Of Ayush vs Dr. Vanitha R on 27 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 746, 2019 (11) SCC 402, (2018) 13 SCALE 574, (2018) 191 ALLINDCAS 60, (2018) 4 SCT 567, 2019 (134) ALR SOC 29 (SC)
Author:
Arun Mishra
Bench:
Vineet Saran
,
Arun Mishra
1

                                                                                     REPORTABLE
                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO.10031 OF 2018
                                    (Arising out of S.L.P.(C) No.18979/2018)



                         MINISTRY OF AYUSH                                     Appellant(s)


                                                         Versus

                         DR. VANITHA R & ANR.                                  Respondent(s)


                                                       JUDGMENT
The singular question arises for consideration as to

                         interpretation of provisions contained in
Section 7
of the

                         Indian Medicines Central Council Act, 1970 (in short referred

                         to as ‘the Act of 1970’).             It is not in dispute that the

                         erstwhile member of Council was holding the office of the

                         President of the Central Council of Indian Medicine (in short

                         ‘CCIM’).     He   was   the     representative   of   the   State    of

                         Uttarakhand. His term expired on 27.8.2016.             He was also

                         holding the elected post of the President of the CCIM for the

                         tenure which would have expired on 4.7.2017 had he continued

                         as Member.
Notice for the purposes of holding an election for the
Signature Not Verified   post of President was issued on 27.2.2017 by the Returning
Digitally signed by
BALA PARVATHI
Date: 2018.10.08
17:21:14 IST
Reason:                  Officer/Secretary of CCIM. On 14.3.2017, the election was

                         held in which the respondent No.1, namely, Dr.Vanitha R. was

                         elected as the President.             Vd. Raghunandan Sharma, Jaipur
2
filed representation on 18.4.2017 to the Government, Ministry

of Ayush as to tenure for which election was held.              It was

decided on 24.8.2017 by the said Ministry and representation

was rejected on the ground that the provision under
Section 7

(3)
of the Act of 1970 is applicable to Members only and not

for the President and for Vice President.

    Thereafter, the Ministry had taken opinion from the Law

Department    and   the   fresh   order   came   to   be   passed   on

8.3.2018 in which it was observed that, the election for

the post of President was held for the remainder period

available to the erstwhile Member from Uttarakhand, to hold

the said office which came to an end on 4.7.2017.           As such,

a fresh election for the post of President was required to

be held.
The order dated 8.3.2018 had been questioned by the

appellant by way of filing writ petition in the High Court

of Delhi. The Writ Petition was dismissed by the Single

Bench.     However, in Writ Appeal, the Division Bench has set

aside the order passed by the Single Bench and also the

fresh election held for the post of President in March

2018.    Aggrieved thereby, the Ministry of Ayush and Central

Council both came to this Court. The Central Council had

withdrawn its Special Leave Petition(C) No.18329/2018 on

14.8.2018.     Hence, the surviving appeal by the Ministry of

Ayush.
Mr. Tushar Mehta, learned Additional Solicitor General

appearing on behalf of the appellant urged that a bare
3
reading of the provisions of
Section 7(3)
read with
Section

7(1)
of the Act of 1970 makes it clear that the election

held on 14.3.2017 was only for the remainder of the period

of   post   of    President    for       which    Member    from    Uttarakhand

would have held the office, who lost the membership and

consequently       the    office    of    the     President    of    CCIM,      had

fallen vacant.           He has also referred to the provisions

contained in
Section 3
of the Act of 1970.
Shri Pinaki Misra, learned senior counsel appearing on

behalf of the respondent No.1 contended that election had

been held, not under the provisions contained in
Section 7

(3)
but under
Section 7 (1)
, as apparent from the notice

issued by the Returning Officer for the purpose of holding

the election. It was not held for the remainder term, but

it was regular election and, as such, the term of elected

President would be for five years.                    He has also relied upon

the order passed by the Ministry of Ayush on 24.8.2017, in

which, it was opined that provisions contained in
Section

7(3)
of the Act of 1970 applies to the post of Members not

to the post of President or Vice President. Thus, election

was held for a period of five years.                    The Ministry is bound

by   its    own    order    and     cannot       be    permitted    to    take    a

different stand in this Court.                   Thus, the impugned order

dated 8.3.2018 passed by the Ministry had been quashed,

rightly     by    the    Division    Bench       while    allowing       the   writ

appeal.     Thus, no case for interference is made out.
The main question for consideration is interpretation of
4
the provisions contained in
Sections 7 (1)
and
7 (3)
of the

Act of 1970.        Before we advert to the same,
Section 3
of

the    Act    of   1970   provides       for   the   constitution   of   the

Council.
Section 3
is extracted hereunder:
“
Section 3
. Constitution of Central Council -(1)
      The Central Government shall, by notification in
      the Official Gazette constitute for the purposes
      of this Act a Central Council consisting of the
      following members, namely: -
(a) such number of members not exceeding five
             as   may  be    determined   by  the   Central
             Government in accordance with the provisions
             of the First Schedule for each of the
             Ayurveda,   Siddha   and   Unani  systems   of
             medicine from each State in which a State
             Register of Indian Medicine is maintained, to
             be elected from amongst themselves by persons
             enrolled on that Register as practitioners of
             Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani, as the case may
             be;
(b) one member for each of the Ayurveda,
             Siddha and Unani systems of medicine from
             each University to be elected from amongst
             themselves by the members of the Faculty or
             Department (by whatever name called) of the
             respective  system   of  medicine  of  that
             University;
(c) such number of members, not exceeding
             thirty percent of the total number of members
             elected under clauses (a) and (b), as may be
             nominated by the Central Government, from
             amongst persons having special knowledge or
             practical experience in respect of Indian
             medicine:
Provided that until members are elected under
      clause (a) or clause (b) in accordance with the
      provisions of this Act and the rules made
      thereunder, the Central Government shall nominate
      such number of members, being persons qualified
      to be chosen as such under the said clause (a) or
      clause (b), as the case may be, as that
      Government thinks fit; and references to elected
      members in this Act shall be construed as
      including references to members so nominated.
5
(2) The President of the Central Council shall be
     elected by the members of the Central Council
     from a amongst themselves in such manner as may
     be prescribed.
(3) There shall be a Vice-President for each of
     the Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani systems of
     medicine who shall be     elected from amongst
     themselves by members representing that   system
     of medicine, elected under clause (a) or clause
(b) of sub-section (1) or nominated under clause
(c) of that sub-section.”


      The term of the office of the President, Vice President

and Members of the Central Council is dealt with in Section
7.
Section 7
is extracted hereunder:
7. Term of office of President, Vice-
President and Members of Central Council (1)
         The President, a Vice-President or a member
         of the Central Council shall hold office for
         a term of five years from the date of his
         election or nomination, as the case may be,
         or until his successor shall have been duly
         elected or nominated, whichever is longer.

         (2) An elected or nominated member shall be
         deemed to have vacated his seat if he is
         absent without excuse, sufficient in the
         opinion of the Central Council, from three
         consecutive ordinary meetings of the Central
         Council or, in the case of a member elected
         under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of
Section 3
, If he ceases to be enrolled on
         the concerned State Register of Indian
         Medicine, or     in the case of a member
         elected under clause (b) of that subsection,
         if he ceases to be a member of the faculty
         or Department (by whatever name called) of
         Indian Medicine of the University concerned.

         (3) A casual vacancy in the Central Council
         shall be filled by election or nomination,
         as the case may be, and the person elected
         or nominated to fill the vacancy shall hold
         office only for the remainder of the term
         for which the member whose place he takes
         was elected or nominated.
6
(4) Members of the Central Council shall be
         eligible for re-election or re-nomination.

         (5) Where the said term of five years is
         about to expire in respect of any member, a
         successor may be elected or nominated at any
         time within three months before the said
         term expires but he shall not assume office
         until the said term has expired.”


      A bare reading    of    the       provisions    contained        in
Section 7
makes it clear that person has to be first elected

as Member of the CCIM for being elected as President or Vice

President.   By virtue of his holding the office as a Member,

he   holds   the   office    of   President    or    that   of   a   Vice

President.     Once he ceases to be a Member, he automatically

ceases to hold the office of the President or Vice President

as the case may be.
No doubt about it that the President, Vice President or

Member of a Central Council has to hold the office for a term

of five years as provided under
Section 7
read with
Section 3
from the date of his election or nomination as the case may

be or until his successor is duly elected or nominated,

whichever is longer.
Section 7 (3) of the Act of 1970 deals with the casual

vacancy in the Central Council and the person elected or

nominated to fill the vacancy has to hold the office only for

the remainder of the term for which the Member whose place he

takes was elected or nominated as the case may be.
The expression ‘casual vacancy’ in the Central Council

may arise that of a Member or in case Member was holding the
7
post of President or Vice President, the vacancy for the

post of President or Vice President along with Member may

also occur simultaneously.       In that event, in our considered

opinion, the provision of
Section 7 (3)
would come into play

and the expression ‘casual vacancy’ ‘would include in its

ambit’ the vacancy so created for the post of President and

Vice President.       The provisions of
Section 7 (3)
makes it

apparent     that   person   elected     or   nominated   to   fill   the

vacancy shall hold the office only for the remainder of the

term for which the Member whose place he takes was elected

or nominated.
In the instant case, Member from Uttarakhand lost his

membership to the CCIM.       He would have held the post of the

President for the period up to 4.7.2017, had he continued as

Member of the representative of the CCIM from Uttarakhand.

The casual vacancy of post of President had been caused.

Thus, the tenure for which election to the post of President

was to be, as provided under
Section 7 (3)
.               The provision

of
Section 7 (1)
provides for a term of five years however

the casual vacancy is dealt with under
Section 7 (3)
and

both   the     provisions    have       to    be   read   together    and

harmoniously interpreted.           It was not a case of regular

vacancy but a casual vacancy that has arisen during the term

of previous President.       Thus, in our considered opinion, the

period for which respondent No.1 was elected in March 2017

was confined for remainder of the term i.e. up to 4.7.2017,

not beyond that.
8
It   was   urged   by    the   learned      counsel    appearing    on

behalf of the respondent No.1 that once Ministry had taken

the   decision    under
Section      4   (2)
and   had    rejected    the

representation vide order dated 24.8.2017, it was not open

to the Ministry to review the order and to take inconsistent

view while passing the impugned order dated 8.3.2018, it

should be held bound by its own order.                 There is no power

of review with the Central Council.
In our opinion, it is not the order of the Central

Government    which   has      to   govern   the    tenure.      Tenure    is

governed by
Section 7 (3)
read with
Section 7(1)
.                  Even if

there is no power of review the period for which election

could be held was only up to 4th July, 2017.                  Whether there

is an order by the Central Government or no order it cannot

govern the tenure and the period for which the election was

held could not have been extended even by the Ministry of

Ayush by wrong interpretation of provisions and writ is not

issued to perpetuate an illegality, particularly to enable

holding the office unauthorizedly beyond period for which

election was held. Thus, it is on this count also, we are

not inclined to make any interference.
Shri Pinaki Misra, learned senior counsel appearing on

behalf of the respondent No.1 has placed reliance upon the

Central Council of General Medicine (General) Regulations,

1976 (in Short ‘Regulations of 1976'). He has pointed out on

the strength of
Regulation 5 (2)
of the Regulations of 1976

that if the office of the President is vacant or in the
9
circumstances    risen    is     unable    to   exercise     powers   or

discharge the function, his office is to be held by the Vice

President in rotation for one year at a time. Thus, the
Regulation 5 (2)
contemplates that office of the President

is to be held for a period of five years it cannot be cut

short.       The Regulation fortifies the stand taken by the

Central    Government    in    order      passed   earlier    i.e.    on

24.8.2017.    Thus, this Court should not interfere.
We have no hesitation in rejecting the submission as

firstly, for the reason that Regulations cannot govern the

provisions of the Act and secondly, we find that
Regulation

5 (2)
deals with powers of Vice President.                 The same is

extracted hereunder:
“5. Vice Presidents:
(1) The Vice Presidents shall exercise such
          powers and perform such duties as may be
          assigned to him by or under the provisions of
          the Act and Rules and Regulations made
          thereunder:
(2) If the office of the President is vacant
          or if the President for any reason is unable
          to exercise the powers or discharge the
          functions of his office, the Vice Presidents
          in rotation, for one year at a time shall act
          in his place and shall be exercise the powers
          and discharge the functions of the President.
The order of the rotation shall be as
          below:
(a) Vice President – Ayurveda
(b) Vice-President – Unani
(c) Vice-President – Sidha”


     It is provided in
Regulation 5 (1)
that the Vice

Presidents    shall   exercise    such    powers   and   perform   such

duties as may be assigned to him by or under the provisions

of the Act.     As per
Regulation 5 (2)
if the office of the
10
President is vacant or if the President for any reason is

unable to exercise the powers or discharge the functions of

his office, the Vice Presidents in rotation, for one year

of Ayurveda, Unani and Siddha branch and shall hold the

office.
The    provisions     of
Regulation    5
are   not   at   all

attributed as the election had been held under
Section 7(3)
for the remainder of the term on 14.3.2017 as a ‘casual

vacancy’   had   arisen.        In   case,   the   interpretation    as

suggested by learned senior counsel is accepted, in that

case no election could have been held in March 2017 and

vacancy would be required to be maintained till the period

the post of President would have been held by the Member

who represented from Uttarakhand which was came to an end

on 4th July 2017. Nonetheless, once election has been held

for such vacancy the tenure is to be for remainder of the

period only as provided specifically under
Section 7 (3)
.
It is apparent from the notice issued for holding

election that it was under
Section 7(1)
and it was clearly

with respect to the casual vacancy. As such provisions

contained in
Section 7(3)
would come into play.                     Non-

mention of provisions of
Section 7(3)
would not govern the

tenure for which election has to be held in the case of

casual vacancy.
Section 7(3)
clearly provides that in the

case of the casual vacancy the term of election is only for

the remainder of the period for which outgoing person would

have held the office. In our considered opinion, it has to
11
be held on the proper interpretation of the said provisions

that    the   term   of     election   of    the   person     who    had   been

elected in the casual vacancy is only for the remainder of

the period.
In case it is held that an election under
Section 7

(1)
will be for a period of five years, and period cannot

be curtailed then, if we read it with
Regulation 5(1)
,

ignoring provisions contained in
Section 7 (3)
no election

could    have   been      held    before    completion   of       five   years.

That    is    not    what    is    contemplated     by      the     provisions

contained in
Section 7
as and when vacancy arises in the

office of President, Vice President or Member, obviously,

an election has to be held not only for the post of the

Member and also for the post held by him for remainder of

the period.
Resultantly, we have no hesitation to set aside the

order passed        by the       Division Bench     of the        High Court.

We also hold that election for President held on 23.3.2018

is legal and valid.               Let the result be declared after

counting of the votes in accordance with law, within a

period of ten days.          Since we have decided the matter, any

order of stay passed by any court on declaration of results

shall cease to be operative and shall not come in the way

of declaration of result.
Accordingly, the appeal is allowed. No costs.
12
........................J.
                      (ARUN MISHRA)



                      ........................J.
                      (VINEET SARAN)

New Delhi,
September 27, 2018