[Cites
0
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Kalyan Singh vs Ravinder Kaur (D)Thru Lrs. And Anr on 11 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 181
Author:
R. Banumathi
Bench:
Indira Banerjee
,
R. Banumathi
1

                                                                          NON-REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9332 OF 2018
                                 (Arising out of SLP(C)No. 34460 of 2016)


     KALYAN SINGH                                                        Appellant(s)

                                                      VERSUS

     RAVINDER KAUR (D) THR. LRS.                                         Respondent(s)




                                                    O R D E R
R. BANUMATHI, J.
(1)                 Leave granted.

     (2)                 This appeal arises out of judgment dated 13th May, 2016
passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in

     Regular Second Appeal No.859 of 1988 in which the High Court

     has reversed the judgment of the First Appellate Court and

     restoring the judgment of the trial court thereby affirming the

     decree in favour of respondents/plaintiff for declaration and

     possession.
Signature Not Verified
(3)
Digitally signed by
MAHABIR SINGH
Date: 2018.09.14
The respondents-plaintiff has purchased the suit property
17:33:13 IST
Reason:
admeasuring an extent of 852-1/3 sq. yards by a sale deed dated

     6th September, 1978.                   Alleging that the appellant-defendant has
2
taken    forcible   possession       of       the   suit     property,      the

respondents-plaintiff has filed the suit for declaration and

possession.   The trial court decreed the suit in favour of the

respondents-plaintiff holding that the vendor of the plaintiff

had appeared and testified about sale deed dated 6 th September,

1978 that physical possession of the property covered under the

sale deed was delivered to them.
(4) Being aggrieved, the appellant herein filed appeal before

the Appellate Court which was allowed.              After referring to the

Report of the Local Commissioner that the respondents-plaintiff

is in actual possession of 955 sq. yards as against 852-1/3 sq.

yards purchased by them and that the consolidation records are

missing and also that there was no pucca burji, the First

Appellate   Court   reversed   the    judgment       of    the   trial    court

thereby dismissing the respondents-plaintiff’s suit.                     In the

second appeal, the High Court has reversed the judgment of the

First Appellate Court and held that the Local Commissioner has

not verified the available map with the Patwari and that based

on the Local Commissioner’s Report, the First Appellate Court

ought not to have reversed the judgment and decree of the trial

court.
(5)   We have heard Mr. Rakesh Kumar Khanna, learned senior

counsel appearing for the appellant and Mr. Sangram S. Saron,

learned counsel appearing for the respondents.
3
(6)   As seen from the sale deed filed (Annexure CA-1 of the

paper    book),   the       respondents-plaintiff             has   purchased     the

property, an extent of 852-1/3 sq. yards in Khasra No.316/1.
As per the evidence of the respondents-plaintiff-vendor, the

respondents-plaintiff was put in physical possession on the

land covered under the sale deed viz. an extent of 852-1/3 sq.

yards.    As pointed out by the First Appellate Court that after

the     local   inspection      of     the       suit     property     the      Local

Commissioner in his Report, Ex.D1/K, has observed that the

respondents-plaintiff is in possession of 955 sq. yards of the

land though she (Ravinder Kaur) actually purchased 852 sq.

yards    only   and   the    said    Report      was    not   challenged     by   the

respondents-plaintiff.         As pointed out by the First Appellate

Court when the Local Commissioner’s report was not challenged

by the plaintiff, the oral testimony of Sajjan Singh (PW-2),

vendor of the plaintiff, and her husband, Ripudaman Singh (PW-
1), does not substantiate           the claim of the plaintiff that the

appellants have encroached upon the suit property.                         The claim

of the respondents-plaintiff that the appellant has encroached

upon the property and took forcible possession under the garb

of    temporary       injunction      in      the       earlier     suit     remains

unsubstantiated.        Further there are no clear averments as to

the alleged date of encroachment and the steps then taken by

the respondents-plaintiff.            In our considered view the High

Court has not considered the findings recorded by the First

Appellate Court which is based upon the appreciation of the

evidence and Report of the Local Commissioner.
4
(7)   That apart in the second appeal, no question of law much

less substantial question of law arose and the substantial

question of law framed by the High Court is not a substantial

question   of   law   but   purely   a   question   of   fact   in   dispute

between the parties.        The impugned order of the High Court in

Regular Second Appeal No.859 of 1988 is not sustainable and is

accordingly set aside.
(8)   In the result, the appeal is allowed, the judgment of the

First Appellate court is restored and resultantly the suit of

the respondents-plaintiff is dismissed.
..........................J.
                                               (R. BANUMATHI)


                                              ..........................J.
                                               (INDIRA BANERJEE)
NEW DELHI,
SEPTEMBER 11, 2018.