[Cites
16
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Patel Ahmed Mohammad vs Balwant Singh Rajput on 26 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 4886, (2018) 192 ALLINDCAS 83 (SC), (2018) 11 SCALE 750, (2018) 192 ALLINDCAS 83, 2019 (134) ALR SOC 34 (SC), AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 1778
Author:
A.M. Khanwilkar
Bench:
D.Y. Chandrachud
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
,
Dipak Misra
1

                                                                            REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CIVIL APPEAL NOS.                        OF 2018
                                (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) Nos.13040-13042 OF 2018)

                         Patel Ahmed Mohammad                           ....Appellant

                                                   :Versus:

                         Balwant Singh Rajput & Ors.                    ....Respondents




                                                JUDGMENT


                         A.M. Khanwilkar, J.
                         1.   Leave granted.

                         2.   These appeals take exception to the judgment and order

                         dated 20th April, 2018 passed by the High Court of Gujarat at

                         Ahmedabad, in Election Application Nos.2, 3 and 6 of 2017 in

                         Election Petition No.1 of 2017. By the said order, the High

                         Court dismissed all the three applications preferred by the

Signature Not Verified
                         appellant seeking dismissal of Election Petition No.1 of 2017 at
Digitally signed by
SUBHASH CHANDER
Date: 2018.09.26
16:01:09 IST
Reason:
                         the threshold.
                            2

3.   Election Petition No.1 of 2017 has been filed by

respondent No.1 challenging the election of the appellant to

the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) held on 8th August, 2017,

by the members of the Legislative Assembly of Gujarat, on the

ground that the appellant had committed corrupt practices of

„bribery‟ and „undue influence‟ within the meaning of sub-

sections (1) and (2) of
Section 123
of the Representation of the

People Act, 1951 (for short “the Act”) and also on the ground

that two valid votes were illegally and improperly rejected by

the Returning Officer and at the same time, two invalid votes

were accepted by the said officer, which has materially affected

the results of the election. The election petition came to be

filed on 18th August, 2017 much before the last date of

limitation.


4.   The appellant was served with the summons on 7th

September, 2017 to appear in the election petition, pursuant

to the order of the High Court dated 21st August, 2017. The

appellant filed his written statement on 4th October, 2017 and

also filed the stated three applications for dismissal of the
                             3

election petition at the threshold. The first application was

numbered as Election Application No.2 of 2017, wherein the

appellant had prayed for dismissal of the election petition

primarily on the ground of non-compliance of Rules 282 (ii)

and (iii) of the Gujarat High Court Rules, 1993, as there was

no order to rectify such non-compliance as contemplated

under Rule 284 and the time provided therefor in the later

portion of Rule 283 had elapsed. In other words, the election

petition was required to be dismissed for non-removal of office

objections raised by the office/registry of the High Court, in

exercise of power under Rule 284 after recalling the order

dated   21st   August,   2017.   The   second   application   was

numbered as Election Application No.3 of 2017, praying for

dismissal of the election petition on the ground of non-

compliance of the provisions of the Act read with the Gujarat

High Court Rules, 1993, as well as the provisions of
Order XIX

Rule 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure
(“
CPC
”). The grounds

urged in the application were ascribable to dismissal of the

election petition under
Section 86(1)
read with
Sections 81(3)
,
83(1)(c)
and
83(2)
of the Act as well as the provisions
of CPC
4

and the High Court Rules. The third application, being

Election Application No.6 of 2017, was also for dismissal of the

election petition at the threshold under Order VII Rules 11(a)

and (d)
of CPC
, for non-disclosure of the cause of action in the

election petition and the petition being barred by law. As

aforesaid, all the three election applications have been rejected

by the High Court vide common impugned judgment.


5.   The appellant, being aggrieved by the said decision of the

High Court, has filed these appeals by special leave. We shall

deal with the challenge to the impugned judgment in reference

to the concerned application in seriatim.


6.   Reverting to the first application i.e. Election Application

No.2 of 2017, the High Court, in substance, opined that the

averments in the said application preferred by the appellant

were vague and unsubstantiated. It found that the appellant

was not sure as to whether the office objections had been

removed or not, when the application was filed by him.

Further, there was no specific averment in the application as

to which objection raised by the office/registry of the High
                            5

Court was not removed. All that had been stated in the

application was that the objections which were raised by the

office were not removed, as no noting was found in the official

record to indicate that the same were duly removed before the

expiry of the limitation period. The ground urged by the

appellant did not commend to the High Court. For, the High

Court found that the same was based on mere conjectures and

surmises. The High Court instead found that as per Rule 284,

the matter was required to be listed before the High Court only

if the objections were not removed within the time fixed

therefor or as per the order, if any, passed by the Court under

Rule 283. On the other hand, the subject petition was placed

before the Court under Rule 285 which presupposes that it

was so done only after the office objections were duly cured. It

noted that if the matter was placed before the Court under

Rule 285 by the Office, it had to be presumed that the Office

had done so after due scrutiny of the petition and on being

satisfied that office objections had been duly removed.

Further, it was only an administrative function of the High

Court and    could not be the basis to dismiss the election
                                6

petition at the threshold. The High Court also found that the

application under consideration was filed by the appellant one

month after the date of service of summons and that the plea

under consideration was not taken in the written statement

filed by the appellant on 4th October, 2017. The High Court

concluded that in the absence of any positive statement in the

application filed by the appellant, as to which of the office

objections   was    not   removed      by   the    election   petitioner

(respondent No.1) before the matter was placed before the

Court for consideration under Rule 285, the objection raised

by the appellant was replete with conjectures and surmises.

That could not be made the basis to dismiss the election

petition on the ground of non-removal of office objections. The

relevant extract of the impugned judgment dealing with this

aspect reads thus:


     “32…….In the opinion of the Court there is basic fallacy in
     the said submission. It appears that the applicant himself
     was not sure as to whether the office objections were, in fact,
     removed or not, when the Election Application No.2 of 2017
     was filed by him inasmuch as there is no specific allegation
     made in the application as to which objections raised by the
     office/registry of the High Court were not removed, and it is
     stated that “It appears that the objections which were raised
     by the office were not removed”. The application appears to
                           7

have been filed on mere conjectures and surmises. That
apart, the office was required to be place the matter before
the Court for appropriate orders under Rule 284 only if the
objections were not removed within the time fixed or as per
the order, if any, passed by the Court under Rule 283.

33. The petitioner in the reply to the said application, while
denying the said allegation, has stated on oath that the
petitioner had removed all the objections before the petition
was actually placed before the Court for consideration.
Pertinently, the petition could be placed before the
Court for consideration under Rule 285, only after the
removal of the office objections, otherwise the matter
would be placed for appropriate orders by the office for
non-removal of the objections as per Rule 284. No such
orders were sought by the office under Rule 284,
meaning thereby it has to be resumed that the office
after scrutiny of the petition, and after removal of office
objections by the petitioner had placed the matter for
consideration before the Court. As held by the Supreme
Court in case of Chandrakant Uttam (supra), the scrutiny
of election petition is one of the administrative
functions to be performed by the officers of the High
Court, and such an act would draw a presumption of
having been performed in terms of
Section 114(e)
of the
Evidence Act.

34. It is also pertinent to note that after the matter was
placed before the court as per the roster, the Court had
issued summons to the respondents on 21.08.2017,
directing the respondents to appear before the Court on
21.09.2017.      Thereafter   the   learned    Advocate    Mr.
Champaneri appearing for the Respondent No.1 had stated
that he had filed a separate application seeking further time
to file written statement. Thereafter the matter was directed
to be placed on 06.10.2017. In the meantime, the
respondent No.1 had filed the written statement and the
present applications on 4.10.2017. At no point of time after
the filing of the appearance, the learned Advocate for the
applicant (original respondent No.1) had raised such
contention to the effect that the petition was placed for
consideration before the Court without removing all office
objections. It is true that on presentation of the petition on
18.08.2017, the office had pointed out the office objections
i.e. No.19, 22 and 23 listed in the prescribed check-list in
Form B. office objection No.19 is as to whether paging is
                                8

     done; No.22 is as to whether copies are true, legible and
     whether typed copies of any written annexures are filed, and
     No.23a is as to whether copies are true copies signed by the
     Advocate. The matter was permitted to be circulated before
     the appropriate Bench on 21.08.2017. Hence, it is just
     possible that the petitioner had removed the said office
     objections before the matter was actually placed before the
     Court for consideration on 21.08.2017. In absence of any
     positive statement in the application filed by the applicant as
     to which office objections were not removed by the petitioner
     before the matter was placed before the court for
     consideration, such application No.2 of 2017 filed merely on
     conjectures and inferences could not be entertained for
     dismissal of the petition on the ground of non-removal of
     office objections.”

                                          (emphasis supplied)


7.   The view so taken by the High Court has been assailed by

the appellant on the argument that the High Court could not

have presumed that office objections noted by the Registry of

the High Court on 18th August, 2017, were duly removed.

Further, if the office objections had not been removed, it must

necessarily follow that the Registry could not have posted the

matter before the Court under Rule 285 but ought to have

proceeded under Rule 284 of the High Court Rules. In that

event, the office objections would remain valid and for which

reason the order passed on 21st August, 2017, issuing

summons to the appellant to appear in the proceedings ought
                                 9

to be recalled and the election petition dismissed for non-

removal of the office objections within the limitation period.

The respondent No.1, on the other hand, supported the view

expressed by the High Court in rejecting the application and

has reiterated the same argument before us.


8.   The question is: whether the view taken by the High

Court as regards the rejection of Election Application No.2 of

2017 is just and proper? For that, we may first turn to the

averments in the application to discern whether the finding

recorded by the High Court is a possible view. The relevant

averments can be traced to paragraphs 10, 11 and 14 in

particular. The same read thus:

     “10. It appears that after the election petition was filed, the
     office/Registry of this Hon‟ble Court has raised several
     objections which are more popularly referred to and known
     as „office objections‟. That in terms of Rule 282 (ii) read with
     Section 283, the same were bound to be removed by the
     petitioner or his advocate on the 3rd day from the date of
     presentation provided and stipulated under Rule 282 (ii). The
     3rd day from the date of filing of the petition would fall on the
     20th of August.

     11. It appears that the objections which were raised by the
     office were not removed and the election petition was placed
     pursuant to the request made on the 18th of August for
     circulation on the 21st of August. Thus, in the respectful and
     humble submission of the Applicant/Respondent No.1, there
     is non-compliance of Rules 282 (ii) and 283.”
                               10


     “14. In view of the office objections raised by this Hon‟ble
     Court and the procedure prescribed under Rule 282 (ii) & (iii)
     read with Rules 283a and 284 having not been adhered to, it
     is most humbly and respectfully submitted that the order
     passed by this Hon‟ble Court of the nature contemplated
     under Rule 285 (i) dated 21st of August, 2017 of issuance of
     summons was at a premature stage and, therefore, the
     Applicant/Respondent No.1 respectfully begs to submit that
     the said order be recalled and as the office objections, raised
     by the office in the above captioned petition after it being
     filed on 17th of August, 2017 not having been removed and
     no time having been either granted or extended, the petition
     ought to be and this hereby prayed to be dismissed for non-
     compliance of Rules 282 (ii) & (iii) read with Rule 283 for
     non-removal of office objections.”



9.   From     these    averments      in    the   application      under

consideration, it is not clear as to which of the office objections

remained to be cured when the matter was placed before the

Court on 21st September, 2017 under Rule 285 of the High

Court Rules. As aforesaid, the election petition was filed on

18th August, 2017, on the same day the office objections were

noted by the Registry, as is noticed from Page 411 of the paper

book. It is also noticed at the bottom of that document in the

column of office objections, the numbers notified are only

serial Nos.19, 22 and 23. The said office objections are:


     “19. Whether paging is done?
      22. Whether copies are true legible and whether typed
                              11

           copies of hand-written Annexure filed?
     23. Whether the copies are true copies signed by the
         Advocate?”


After mentioning the serial numbers of three office objections,

a further noting is found “(PC- with OO)”. In the first place,

this noting is evidently made on 18th August, 2017. What is

relevant for our purpose is that the matter was processed by

the office under Rule 285 of the Gujarat High Court Rules,

1993 and placed before the Court on 21st September, 2017.

On that date, the Court passed the following order:


                         “Date: 21/08/2017

                            ORAL ORDER
Having regard to the provisions contained in
Section 86(1)
of
     the Representation of Peoples Act, 1951 read with Rule 285
     of the Gujarat High Court Rules, 1993, office is directed to
     issue summons as per the provisions contained in the
     Rules, to the respondents to appear before the Court on
     21.9.2017.”
10. In this backdrop, while rejecting the objection taken by

the appellant, the High Court opined that since the appellant

had come to the Court with an assertion that the office

objections remained to be cured before the limitation period,

he should have expressly stated as to which objection
12
remained to be cured and the source of his information. The

        averments in the application, even if read as a whole and

        liberally, do not even remotely suggest that such a case has

        been made out. The High Court, therefore, relying on the

        exposition of this Court in the case of
Chandrakant Uttam

        Chodankar Vs. Dayanand Rayu Mandrakar and Ors.1
opined that the scrutiny of election petition is one of the

        administrative functions to be performed by the office of the

        High Court and such an official act would draw a presumption

        of all necessary steps having been duly taken by the office and

        being satisfied in that behalf, the matter was placed by the

        office before the Court for appropriate orders under Rule 285.
11. We may usefully refer to the Rules of the High Court

        which   may     have    some     bearing    on    the   issue    under

        consideration, namely, Rules 282, 283, 284 and 285.                  The

        same read thus:
““282. Petition.-
(i)   Every application invoking the jurisdiction of the High
             Court under
section 80A
of the Representation of the People


1   (2005) 2 SCC 188
13
Act, 1951, shall be by petition addressed to the Honorable
the Chief Justice and Judges of the High Court.
(ii)   The petition shall comply with the provisions of
sections 81
,
82
,
83
and
84
of the Act and the grounds on
which the relief are sought shall be clearly stated in the
petition which shall be arranged in suitable paragraphs
consecutively numbered. The relief sought should be set out
at the end of the petition.
(iii)  The full names and the full addresses of all the parties
to the petition for service of any process shall be stated in
the petition. In addition to the permanent residence and
addresses of the respondent the present address of the
respondent at which service of the notice may be effected,
shall be stated in the petition.”

“283. Examination of petition.-
The office shall examine the petition with a view to see
whether it is in conformity with the requirements of law and
rules applicable to the same, and if it is not in conformity
with law and rules, raise objections which should be
removed by the party or the Advocate concerned. The office
shall complete the examination within two days after filing of
the petition and shall bring the office objections to the notice
of the party or the Advocate on the date fixed for attendance
under rule 282(ii) and such objections shall be removed,
subject to the orders of the Court, if any, within three days
thereafter.”

“284. Petition to be placed for orders if objection not
removed.-
Immediately after the expiration of time fixed for the removal
of objections, the petition shall be placed before the Judge
for appropriate orders.”

“285. Petition to be placed for orders after removal of office
objections.-
(i)   After the removal of office objections, the petition shall
be placed before the Judge for consideration as to whether
the petition is liable to be dismissed under
section 86(1)
of
the Act. If the petition is not dismissed under
section 86(1)
of
the Act, the Judge shall direct issue of summons upon the
respondent; and the summons shall be issued to the
14
respondent to appear before the High Court on the date fixed
     and answer the claim or claims made in the petition.””
12. On a bare perusal of the said Rules, it is evident that the

election petition is required to be placed for orders before the

Court by the office only after removal of office objections as per

Rule 285. If the office objections are pending and not cured

within the prescribed period, the office is obliged to list the

matter before the Court for appropriate orders under Rule
284. For that reason, the High Court opined that in the

absence of any positive statement in the application filed by

the election petitioner and as the record would show that the

matter was placed by the office before the Court under Rule

285, it must follow that the grievance made in the application

under consideration was based on mere conjectures and

surmises and cannot be the basis to dismiss the election

petition at the threshold, as prayed.        We respectfully agree

with the said view taken by the High Court and as a result, the

order rejecting the application under consideration, being

Election Application No.2 of 2017, deserves to be upheld.
15
13. Reverting to the second application filed by the appellant,

being Election Application No.3 of 2017, the thrust of the

grievance was that the copy of the election petition served on

the appellant was not a true copy. It was not a copy attested

by the election petitioner under his own signature, much less

to be a “true copy” of the petition. Further, there were blanks

in the verification clause of the petition and the affidavit in

Form No.25 was not in conformity with the requirement of law.

Additionally, it was also urged that the election petitioner had

not filed as many copies of the election petition as there are

respondents mentioned in the election petition. The last point

raised by the counsel for the appellant came to be rejected by

the High Court on the finding that the same was not taken up

in the application filed by the appellant. In other words, it was

canvassed across the Bar for the first time. That being the

position, the High Court justly disallowed the said contention.
14. However, with regard to the other aspects raised in the

application, the High Court noted that the appellant did not

file the original copy of the election petition served on him, but
16
produced only a photocopy of the allegedly served copy of the

        election petition along with the application filed for that

        purpose, bearing Election Application No.3 of 2018. The High

        Court noted that the only grievance of the appellant was that

        the copy of the election petition served on him did not contain

        the words: “True Copy”. That contention was rejected by

        placing reliance on the exposition of the Constitution Bench of

        this Court in
Murarka Radhey Shyam Ram Kumar Vs.

        Roop Singh Rathore2
,
Ch. Subbarao Vs. Member
, Election

        Tribunal3 and in
T.M. Jacob Vs. C. Poulose and Ors.4
,

        wherein it has been held that the real test of whether the copy

        served is a “true one” is to find out whether any variation from

        the original is calculated to mislead an ordinary person and if

        there is substantial compliance with the requirements of
Section 81(3)
of the Act, the election petition cannot be

        dismissed at the threshold.
15. We must agree with the High Court that to test the

        arguments of the appellant as to whether the copy served on

2   (1964) 3 SCR 573
3   (1964) 6 SCR 213
4   (1999) 4 SCC 274
17
him was a true copy of the original election petition or

otherwise, it was imperative for him to produce the copy of the

petition actually served on him and not the photocopy thereof.

The grievance of the appellant that some blanks had been kept

in the verification clause or there were material discrepancies,

could be examined only if the copy of the petition actually

served on the appellant was produced before the Court. The

High Court could have non-suited the appellant on this sole

ground instead of examining the matter any further.
16. However, the grievance made before us by the appellant

is that the factual position recorded by the High Court in

paragraph 35 of the impugned judgment that the appellant

had not produced the copy actually served on him in the Court

is incorrect. In that, the appellant had submitted the

photocopy of the actually served copy along with Election

Application No.3 of 2018 and had also undertaken to produce

the original of the actually served copy at the time of hearing

and that the same was so produced at the time of hearing and

handed over to the High Court. This specific plea has been
18
taken in ground (u) of the special leave petition. In other

words, the High Court committed manifest error in that

regard. If that is so, it would be appropriate to relegate the

parties before the High Court for consideration of grievance

that the copy actually served on the appellant is not the true

copy within the meaning of
Section 81(3)
of the Act. We are

inclined to say so also because the plea taken by the appellant

before   us   is   that   the   appellant   had   pointed   out   20

discrepancies in the copy of the election petition served on him

and a chart whereof has been appended at Pages 855-867 of

Volume IV of the Special Leave Petition, which according to the

appellant, were material discrepancies warranting a finding

that the copy of the petition served on him was not a “True

Copy” within the meaning of
Section 81(3)
of the Act. We find

that the High Court has not dealt with this contention in the

impugned judgment at all. Even for this reason, the decision

of the High Court on the application under consideration,

being Election Application No.3 of 2017, will have to be set

aside and the parties will have to be relegated before the High

Court for its consideration afresh on its own merits in
19
accordance with law. In this view of the matter, we have

consciously avoided to advert to the rival pleadings and

submissions on the merits of this issue so that no prejudice is

caused to either party and the remanded Election Application

No.3 of 2017 can be decided de novo in accordance with law.

All contentions available to the respective parties in that

regard are kept open.
17. We may hasten to add that the question to be decided in

Election Application No.3 of 2017 for dismissal of the election

petition, will be limited to non-compliance of
Section 81(3)
and

the consequences flowing therefrom including under
Section

86(1)
of the Act. For, the dismissal of the election petition

under the latter provision is envisaged only on that count and

not in reference to some non-compliance of requirement under
Section 83
of the Act. This is the settled legal position.
18. As we are inclined to relegate the parties before the High

Court for consideration of Election Application No.3 of 2017

afresh in accordance with law, and in the event the appellant

is in a position to persuade the High Court to allow the said
20
application, the election petition will have to be dismissed at

the threshold under
Section 86(1)
read with
Section 81(3)
of

the Act. However, if that application fails, the appellant can be

permitted to reopen or revive the challenge to the issues raised

in Election Application No.6 of 2017 for dismissal of the

election petition under Order VII Rule 11(a) & (d)
of the CPC
,

on the ground that the election petition does not disclose a

cause of action or that it is barred by law. In that eventuality,

the appellant may challenge the judgment rendered in the

remanded Election Application No.3 of 2017 and also have the

liberty to file fresh special leave petition against the impugned

judgment and order passed by the High Court in Election

Application No.6 of 2017. Further, both such special leave

petitions can be heard together. All questions in that regard

are kept open, to be decided appropriately if and when

occasion arises. For the time being, we do not wish to burden

this judgment with the said issues and leave it open.
19. Accordingly, we allow this appeal in the following terms:
21
(I)    The judgment and order dated 20th April, 2018

       passed by the High Court of Gujarat in Election

       Application No.2 of 2017 in Election Petition No.1 of

       2017, is upheld and as a result thereof, the appeal

       against that decision is dismissed.
(II)   The judgment and order dated 20th April, 2018

       passed by the High Court of Gujarat in Election

       Application No.3 of 2017 in Election Petition No.1 of

       2017 is set aside and the parties are relegated

       before the High Court for de novo consideration of

       the said application which is restored to the file of

       the High Court to its original number in terms of

       this order. The High Court is requested to decide

       the remanded application expeditiously, preferably

       within one month. Hence, the appeal against the

       decision on the Election Application No.3 of 2017 is

       partly allowed.
(III) The appeal against the judgment and order dated

       20th April, 2018 passed by the High Court of

       Gujarat in Election Application No.6 of 2017 in
22
Election Petition No.1 of 2017 is disposed of with

          liberty to the appellant to challenge the selfsame

          decision afresh in the event his remanded Election

          Application No.3 of 2017 in Election Petition No.1 of

          2017 is rejected. That special leave petition be

          heard analogously with the special leave petition

          against   the   order   to   be   passed   on   Election

          Application No.3 of 2017, should the need arise.
20. The appeals and the accompanying application(s) are

disposed of in the aforesaid terms with no order as to costs.
.………………………….CJI.
(Dipak Misra)




                                       …………………………..….J.
                                       (A.M. Khanwilkar)




                                       …………………………..….J.
                                       (Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud)
New Delhi;
September 26, 2018.