[Cites
4
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Narayana Gramani And Ors. vs Mariammal And Ors. on 11 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 174
Author:
Abhay Manohar Sapre
Bench:
Vineet Saran
,
Abhay Manohar Sapre
REPORTABLE

                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CIVIL APPEAL No.5057  OF 2009


                         Narayana Gramani & Ors.                    ….Appellant(s)


                                                 VERSUS


                         Mariammal & Ors.                             …Respondent(s)



                                          J U D G M E N T

                         Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.
1.    This  appeal is filed by  the plaintiffs against the

                         final judgment and order dated 09.07.2007 passed by

                         the   High   Court   of   Judicature   at   Madras   in   Second

                         Appeal   No.652   of   1995   whereby   the   Single   Judge   of

                         the   High   Court   allowed   the   second   appeal   filed   by
Signature Not Verified   defendant Nos.2 to 5 and set aside the judgment and
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2018.09.11
decree   dated   05.08.1994   passed   by   the   Additional
17:44:37 IST
Reason:
1
Subordinate   Judge,   Chingalpattu   in   A.S.   No.72   of

1993   and   dismissed   the   suit   filed   by   the   appellants

herein.
2.       In order to appreciate the issues involved in the

appeal, which lie in a narrow compass, few facts need

mention hereinbelow.
3.       Appellant Nos. 1 and 2 are the plaintiffs whereas

appellant   No.   3   is   the   legal   representative   of   third

plaintiff­Thirunavukkarasu,   who   died   pending

litigation. The respondents are defendants in the civil

suit.
4.       The three plaintiffs claiming to be the members of

one family filed a civil suit against the defendants for a

declaration   and   permanent   injunction   in   relation   to

the   land   situated   at   No.   294/1   Vembanur   Village,

Kadapakkam Firka, (patta No. 491), Old Paimash No.

201/8   renumbered   as   S.   No   399/4,   Acs.   1.08

(hereinafter referred to as "suit land").
2
5.    The   plaintiffs   traced   the   title   to   the   suit   land

through   their   predecessor­in­title   coupled   with   Patta

issued   by   the   Estate  Manager  in  relation  to the suit

land.   According   to   the   plaintiffs,   there   had   been   a

family partition  inter se  the plaintiffs wherein the suit

land fell to their share. The plaintiffs alleged that they

have   been   in   possession   of   the   suit   land,   invested

money and paying revenue taxes. The plaintiffs alleged

that   the   defendants   are   trying   to   disturb   their

possession   over   the   suit   land   without   any   legal

authority and are also asserting their title over the suit

land, which they do not have in their favour and hence

there   arise   a   need   to   file   the   civil   suit   and   claim

declaration   and   permanent   injunction   in   relation   to

the suit land.
6.    The defendants filed their written statement and

denied   the   plaintiffs’   claim   over   the   suit   land.

According   to   them,     they   are   the   owners   of   the   suit

land having purchased the same vide sale deed dated
3
15.02.1967   for   Rs.200/­   from   one   Muthu   Mudaliar

and his son Rajaram  Mudaliar who, according to the

defendants,   were   the   owners   of   the   suit   land.

Defendant   No.   1   also  claimed  to   be  in  possession   of

the suit land and cultivating the same.
7.    The   Trial   Court   framed   two   issues,   viz.,   (1)

Whether   the   plaintiffs   are   entitled   for   seeking

declaration and permanent injunction; and (2) If so, for

what reliefs.  Parties adduced their evidence (oral and

documentary).   By   Judgment   and   decree   dated

23.11.1993, the Trial Court decreed the plaintiffs’ suit.

It was held that the plaintiffs are able to prove their

ownership   over   the   suit   land   on   the   basis   of   the

documents   filed   by   them;   that   the   plaintiffs   are   in

possession   of   the   suit   land;   that   they  are,   therefore,

entitled   to   claim   a   declaration   of   their   title   over   the

suit   land   as   its   owners   so  also   are   entitled   to   claim

permanent   injunction   against   the   defendants
4
restraining   them   from   interfering   in   their   (plaintiffs’)

peaceful possession over the suit land.
8.    The   defendants   felt   aggrieved   and   filed   first

appeal   before   the   Additional   Sub­Judge   (Appeal   Suit

No.   72/1993).   By   Judgment   dated   05.08.1994,   the

Appellate Court dismissed the defendants’ appeal and

affirmed the judgment and decree passed by the Trial

Court.
9.    The  defendants pursued the matter further and

filed second appeal in the High Court at Madras. The

High   Court   admitted   the   second   appeal   on   the

following substantial question of law:
“Whether   the   same   judge   can   dismiss
      an appeal on the ground that he has already
      rejected   the   appellants’   case   in   an   earlier
      appeal   against   different   parties   in   the
      absence of pleadings of rejudicata or estoppel
      by   judgment   by   neither   of   the   parties,
      especially   when   the   issue   is   pending   for
      decision   before   the   High   Court   by   way   of
      second appeal.”
5
10.   By impugned judgment, the High Court allowed

the appeal and set aside the judgment and decree of

the two courts below and, in consequence, dismissed

the  suit  giving rise to filing of the present appeal by

way of special leave in this Court by the plaintiffs.
11.   The   short   question,   which   arises   for

consideration in this appeal, is whether the High Court

was justified in allowing the defendants’ appeal and, in

consequence, dismissing the plaintiffs’ suit which was

decreed by the two Courts below.
12.   Mr. MSM Asaithambi, learned counsel appeared

for  the  appellants. Despite notice, none appeared for

the respondents.
13.   Having   heard   the   learned   counsel   for   the

appellants and on perusal of the record of the case, we

are inclined to allow the appeal and while setting aside

the impugned judgment remand the case to the High

Court   for   deciding   the   appeal   afresh   on   merits   in
6
accordance   with   law   after   framing   appropriate

substantial question of law as indicated below.
14.   Before   we   examine   the   facts   of   the   case,   it   is

necessary to see the scope of
Section 100
of the Code

of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as “the

Code”), which empowers the High Court to decide the

second   appeals.     Indeed,   it   is   explained   in   several

decisions of this Court and thus remains no more res

integra.
15.
Section 100
of the Code reads as under:
7
“100.   Second   appeal.­ (1)   Save   as   otherwise
      expressly provided in the body of this Code or
      by any other law for the time being in force, an
      appeal shall lie to the High Court from every
      decree   passed   in   appeal   by   any   Court
      subordinate   to   the   High   Court,   if   the   High
      Court   is   satisfied   that   the   case   involves   a
      substantial question of law.
(2) An appeal may lie under this section from
      an appellate decree passed ex parte.
(3)   In   an   appeal   under   this   section,   the
      memorandum   of   appeal   shall   precisely   state
      the substantial question of law involved in the
      appeal.
(4)   Where   the   High   Court   is   satisfied   that   a
      substantial question of law is involved in any
      case, it shall formulate that question.
(5) The appeal shall be heard on the question
      so formulated and the respondent shall, at the
      hearing of the appeal, be allowed to argue that
      the case does not involve such question:
Provided that nothing in this sub­section shall
      be deemed to take away or abridge the power
      of   the   court   to   hear,   for   reasons   to   be
      recorded, the appeal on any other substantial
      question   of   law   formulated   by   it,   if   it   is
      satisfied   that   the   case   involves   such
      question.”
16.    Sub­section   (1)   of
Section   100
says   that   the

second appeal would be entertained by the High Court

only   if   the   High   Court   is   "satisfied"   that   the   case
8
involves a "substantial question of law". Sub­ section

(3) makes it obligatory upon the appellant to precisely

state  in  memo of  appeal the "substantial question of

law"   involved   in   the   appeal.   Sub­section   (4)   provides

that   where   the   High   Court   is   satisfied   that   any

substantial question of law is involved in the case, it

shall formulate that question. In other words, once the

High Court is satisfied after hearing the appellant or

his   counsel,   as   the   case   may   be,   that   the   appeal

involves   a   substantial   question   of   law,   it   has   to

formulate   that   question   and   then   direct   issuance   of

notice to the respondent of the memo of appeal along

with   the   question   of   law   framed   by   the   High   Court.

Sub­section (5) provides that the appeal shall be heard

only   on   the   question   formulated   by   the   High   Court

under sub­section (4). In other words, the jurisdiction

of   the   High   Court   to   decide   the   second   appeal   is

confined   only   to   the   question   framed   by   the   High

Court under sub­section(4).  The respondent, however,
9
at   the   time   of   hearing   of  the   appeal  is  given   a   right

under   sub­section   (5)   to   raise   an   objection   that   the

question framed by the High Court under sub­section

(4) does not involve in the appeal. The reason for giving

this right to the respondent for raising such objection

at   the   time   of   hearing   is   because   the   High   Court

frames  the  question at the admission stage which is

prior   to   issuance   of   the   notice   of   appeal   to   the

respondent.
In   other   words,   the   question   is   framed

behind   the   back   of   respondent   and,   therefore,   sub­

section(5) enables him   to raise such objection at the

time of hearing that the question framed does not arise

in the appeal.  The proviso to sub­section (5), however,

also recognizes the power of the High Court to hear the

appeal on any other substantial question of law which

was not initially framed by the High Court under sub­

section (4).   However, this power can be exercised by

the   High   Court   only   after   assigning   the   reasons   for

framing such additional question of law at the time of
10
hearing   of   the   appeal.   (See
Sanatosh   Hazari  vs.

Purushottam   Tiwari
[(
2001)   3   SCC   179]   and  Surat

Singh vs. Siri Bhagwan & Ors.
[(2018) 4 SCC 562]
17.   Keeping   in   view   the   scope   and   ambit   of   the

powers   of   the   High   Court   while   deciding   the   second

appeal when we advert to the facts of the case, we find

that the High Court committed an error in allowing the

defendants’   second   appeal   and   further   erred   in

dismissing   the   plaintiffs’   suit   by   answering   the

substantial question of law. This we say for more than

one reason.
18.   First, mere perusal of the impugned order would

go   to   show   that   the   High   Court   had   admitted   the

second   appeal   by   framing   only   one   substantial

question   of   law,   namely,   whether   the   first   Appellate

Court was justified in dismissing the defendants’ first

appeal   by   taking   into   consideration   one   earlier
11
litigation   in   relation   to  the  suit  land,  which  was  not

between the same parties.
19.   The High Court held that the first Appellate Court

was not justified because the earlier litigation was not

between the present plaintiffs and the defendants but

it was between the different parties and, therefore, any

decision rendered in such litigation would not operate

as  res   judicata  in   the   present   litigation   between   the

parties.     This   resulted  in  allowing  of  the  appeal  and

dismissing the suit.
20.   The   High   Court   (Single   Judge),   in   our   opinion,

failed   to   see   that   even   if   the   said   question   was

answered in defendants’ favour, yet the plaintiffs’ suit

could   not   have   been   dismissed   much   less   in   its

entirety unless the High Court had further examined

the main issue of ownership of the plaintiffs over the

suit land, which was decided by the two Courts below

in plaintiffs’ favour on merits.
12
21.   In   other   words,   we   are   of   the   view   that   it   was

necessary   for   the   High   Court   to   have   proceeded   to

examine  the   issue relating  to the  plaintiffs’ title over

the suit land, which was decided by the two Courts in

plaintiffs’ favour holding that the plaintiffs were able to

prove   their   title   over   the   suit   land   on   the   basis   of

documentary   evidence   whereas   the   defendants   failed

to prove their title though asserted.
22.   Second, the High Court committed another error

when it failed to frame any substantial question of law

on the issue of the plaintiffs’ ownership over the suit

land.
23.   So   long   as   no   substantial   question   of   law   was

framed, the High Court had no jurisdiction to examine

the said issue in its second appellate jurisdiction. In

other words, the  High Court having framed only one

question, which did not pertain to issue of ownership

of   the   suit   land,   had   no   jurisdiction   to   examine   the

issue of ownership. It was not permissible in the light
13
of   Section   100   (5)   of   the   Code,   which   empowers   the

High Court to decide the appeal only on the question

framed and not beyond it.
24.   Third,   the   High   Court   could   invoke   its   powers

under   proviso   to   sub­section   (5)   of
Section   100
and

frame one or two additional questions, as the case may

be, even at the time of hearing of the second appeal.  It

would   have   enabled   the   High   Court   to   examine   the

issue   of   ownership   of   the   suit   land   in   its   correct

perspective.   It   was,   however,   not   done   by   the   High

Court.
25.   Fourth,   the   High   Court,   while   examining   the

question framed, also cursorily touched the ownership

issue which, in our opinion, the High Court could not

have   done   for   want   of   framing   of   any   substantial

question   of   law   on   the   ownership   issue.   That   apart,

the High Court also failed to see that the issue of  res

judicata and the issue of ownership were independent

issues   and   the   decision   on   one   would   not   have
14
answered   the   other   one.   In   other   words,   both   the

issues had to be examined independent of each other

on   their   respective   merits.   It   was,   however,   possible

only after framing of substantial questions on both the

issues as provided under
Section 100(4)
and (5) of the

Code. This was, however, not done in this case.
26.   In   the   light   of   aforementioned   four   reasons,   we

are   of   the   considered   opinion   that   the   impugned

judgment   is   not  legally  sustainable  and,  therefore, it

has to be set aside.
27.   Since the High Court failed to examine the issue

of ownership of the plaintiffs on its merits for want of

framing   of   the   substantial   question(s)   of   law,   the

matter   has   to   be   remanded   to   the   High   Court   for

deciding the question as to whether two Courts below

were   right   in   their   respective   jurisdiction   in   holding

that the plaintiffs were able to prove their title over the

suit land on the basis of evidence (oral/documentary)
15
adduced   by   them   and,   if   so,   whether   such   finding

should be upheld or not.
28.   In   view   of   the   foregoing   discussion,   the   appeal

succeeds and is allowed. Impugned order is set aside.

The case is remanded to the High Court for deciding

the second appeal afresh on merits in accordance with

law by properly framing the substantial question(s) of

law on the question of ownership of the plaintiffs over

the suit land and then to examine as to whether the

findings on the said question recorded by two Courts

suffer from any error(s) or not.
29.   We,   however,   make   it   clear   that   we   have   not

applied   our   mind   on   the   merits   of   the   controversy

having formed an opinion to remand the case to the

High Court for deciding the appeal afresh as observed

above   and,   therefore,   the   High   Court   will   decide   the

appeal strictly in accordance with law uninfluenced by

any of our observations.
16
30.     Since the matter is quite old, we request the High

Court to decide the appeal as expeditiously as possible

preferably   within   6   months   from   the   date   of   this

judgment.
………...................................J.
                                  [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]
           
                                                     
                                   ...……..................................J.
                                      [VINEET SARAN]

New Delhi;
September 11, 2018
17