[Cites
12
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Aseer Jamal vs Union Of India on 27 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 4612, 2018 (6) ALJ 793, 2019 (2) ADR 600, (2018) 192 ALLINDCAS 198 (SC), 2018 (10) SCC 437, (2018) 131 ALL LR 688, (2018) 13 SCALE 700, (2018) 192 ALLINDCAS 198, (2018) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 627, (2018) 4 CURCC 243, 2018 (4) KLT SN 18 (SC), (2018) 4 RECCIVR 684, (2018) 5 CAL HN 164, (2018) 6 ANDHLD 110, (2019) 1 ALL WC 550, (2019) 1 JCR 30 (SC), (2019) 3 MPLJ 7, (2019) 4 CIVLJ 207, (2019) 4 MAH LJ 29, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 585, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 741
Author:
Dipak Misra
Bench:
D.Y. Chandrachud
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
,
Dipak Misra
REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                         CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                       WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 137 OF 2018



                         Aseer Jamal                                 … Petitioner

                                                    Versus

                         Union of India & Ors.                       … Respondents



                                                 JUDGMENT
Dipak Misra, CJI


                              Almost a century back, Nobel Laureate T.S. Eliot had

                         disenchantingly written, “Where is the wisdom we have lost in

                         knowledge?     Where is the knowledge we have lost in

                         information?” Though the content of the statement cannot be

                         said to have lost its fragrance or flavour, yet today,
Signature Not Verified
information has become a strong sense of power.     Right to
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK GUGLANI
Date: 2018.09.27
12:26:56 IST
Reason:
information has been treated as a right to freedom of speech

                         and expression as contained in
Article 19(1)(a)
of the
2
Constitution of India. The right to acquire and to disseminate

    information has been regarded as an intrinsic component of

    freedom of speech and expression, as stated in
Secretary,

    Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, Government of

    India and others v. Cricket Association of Bengal
and

    others.1 and People’s Union for
Civil Liberties and another

    v. Union of India
and others.2
2.     Having stated about the right to information, we would

    advert to the assertions made in the writ petition.     It is set

    forth in the writ petition that India, which is a vast country

    having large population, has few millions of illiterate adults

    and certain States, as per the 2011 Census, have more

    illiterates.
3.     Referring to
Section 6(1)
of the Right to Information Act,

    2005 (for brevity, „the Act‟), it is urged that the illiterate

    persons and the visually impaired persons or persons afflicted

    by other kinds of disabilities are not in a position to get the

    information. It is contended that the provision contained in
1
(1995) 2 SCC 161
2
(2004) 2 SCC 476
3
Section 6
suffers from unreasonable classification between

visually impaired and visually abled persons and thereby

invites the frown of
Article 14
of the Constitution. It is further

contended that certain provisions of the Act are not accessible

to orthopaedically impaired persons, persons below the

poverty line and persons who do not have any access to the

internet. Though in the petition, it has been asseverated as

regards the violation of
Article 14
of the Constitution, yet the

prayer is couched in a different manner and we are obliged to

say so because we feel that there is no need or necessity to

deal with the constitutional validity of
Section 6
of the Act. In

fact, it is further necessary to mention that in the course of

hearing, the prayer was centered on getting the reliefs,

namely, to direct the Union of India, the States and the Union

Territories   to   provide   an   effective   machinery   for   the

enforcement of the fundamental right to have access to

information of illiterate citizens and to provide effective

machinery to visually impaired persons and such impaired

persons who are unable to have access to the internet. That
4
being the fact situation, we sought the assistance of Mr. K.K.

Venugopal, learned Attorney General for India in the matter.
4.   We have heard Mr. Aseer Jamal, the petitioner, who has

appeared in-person and Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney

General for India.   Though      the    chart     prepared     by

Mr. Venugopal indicates the objections and the response, yet

we intend to deal with it in a holistic manner.
5.   The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Act reads

as follows:-
“
An Act
to provide for setting out the practical
     regime of right to information for citizens to
     secure access to information under the
     control of public authorities, in order to
     promote transparency and accountability in
     the working of every public authority, the
     constitution of a Central Information
     Commission       and      State     Information
     Commissions and for matters connected
     therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS the Constitution of India has
     established democratic Republic;
AND WHEREAS democracy requires an
     informed citizenry and transparency of
     information which are vital to its functioning
     and also to contain corruption and to hold
5
Governments and their instrumentalities
     accountable to the governed;
AND     WHEREAS        revelation      of
     information in actual practice is likely to
     conflict with other public interests including
     efficient operations of the Governments,
     optimum use of limited fiscal resources and
     the preservation of confidentiality of sensitive
     information;
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to
     harmonise these conflicting interests while
     preserving   the  paramountcy      of  the
     democratic ideal;
Now THEREFORE, it is expedient to
     provide for furnishing certain information to
     citizens who desire to have it.”
6.
Section 2(j)
of the Act deals with “right to information”,

which reads thus:-
“(j) “right to information" means the right to
     information accessible under this Act which is held
     by or under the control of any public authority and
     includes the right to-
(i) inspection of work, documents, records;
(ii) taking notes, extracts or certified copies
           of documents or records;
(iii) taking certified samples of material;
6
(iv) obtaining information in the form of
            diskettes, floppies, tapes, video cassettes or
            in any other electronic mode or through
            printouts where such information is stored
            in a computer or in any other device”
7.
Section 6
of the Act that deals with „request for obtaining

information‟ stipulates as under :-
“6. Request for obtaining information.— (1) A
     person, who desires to obtain any information
     under this Act, shall make a request in writing or
     through electronic means in English or Hindi or in
     the official language of the area in which the
     application is being made, accompanying such fee
     as may be prescribed, to—
(a) the Central Public Information Officer or State
     Public Information Officer, as the case may be, of
     the concerned public authority;
(b) the Central Assistant Public Information Officer
     or State Assistant Public Information Officer, as
     the case may be, specifying the particulars of the
     information sought by him or her:
Provided that where such request cannot be made
     in writing, the Central Public Information Officer
     or State Public Information Officer, as the case
     may be, shall render all reasonable assistance to
     the person making the request orally to reduce the
     same in writing.
(2) An applicant making request for information
     shall not be required to give any reason for
     requesting the information or any other personal
7
details except those that may be necessary for
     contacting him.
(3) Where an application is made to a public
     authority requesting for an information,—
(i) which is held by another public authority;
or
(ii) the subject matter of which is more closely
           connected with the functions of another
           public authority,

     the public authority, to which such application is
     made. shall transfer the application or such part of
     it as may be appropriate to that other public
     authority and inform the applicant immediately
     about such transfer:
Provided that the tiansfer of an application
     pursuant to this sub-section shall be made as
     soon as practicable but in no case later than five
     days from the date of receipt of the application.”
8.   Mr.    Venugopal,     learned    Attorney    General,    has

emphasized the proviso to
Section 6(1)
to highlight that it is

obligatory on the part of the Central Public Information Officer

or State Public Information Officer to render all reasonable

assistance to the persons making the request orally to reduce

the same in writing. As we understand from the said proviso,
8
it will be the duty of the officer to listen to the persons and to

reduce it in writing and process the same.
9.
Section 6(3)
of the Act takes care of the apprehension of

the persons for whose cause the petitioner espouses, by

making the provision pertaining to appropriate competent

public authority. On a careful reading of the same, we do not

find that there can be any difficulty for any person to find out

the public authority as there is a provision for transfer.
10. As far as the grievance relating to visually impaired

persons is concerned, as stated earlier, assistance has to be

rendered under
Section 6(1)
of the Act to the persons who are

unable to write or have difficulty in writing.                Mr. K.K.

Venugopal has brought to our notice that several States

provide information in Braille since the year 2012. Every time

the authority receives an RTI application seeking information

in Braille, it prepares a reply in the printed format and

forwards   it   to   the   National   Institute   for   the    Visually

Handicapped where it is converted to Braille.           The visually

impaired citizens of Bihar were the first in the country to get
9
copies under the
Right to Information (RTI) Act
and the Rules

made by the State Government for its implementation in

Braille script. Audio files are also being prepared.
11. From the chart filed by Mr. Venugopal, it is vivid that

several   hotline   numbers       providing   toll   free   access   to

information are available on the RTI website. Furthermore, a

help desk is also available for any query or feedback related to

the portal. The contact number is 011-24622461.
12. The next thing that requires to be emphasized upon is

the plight of the people who are below the poverty line. It is

useful to mention that in exercise of the powers conferred by
Section 27
of the Act, the Central Government has framed a

set of rules, namely, the Right to Information Rules, 2012.

Rules 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the said Rules read as follows:-
“3. Application Fee.—An application under sub-
     section (1) of
Section 6
of the Act shall be
     accompanied by a fee of rupees ten and shall
     ordinarily not contain more than five hundred
     words, excluding annexures, containing address of
     the Central Public Information Officer and that of
     the applicant:
10
Provided that no application shall be
rejected only on the ground that it contains more
than five hundred words.
4. Fees for providing information.— Fee for
providing information under sub-section (4) of
Section 4
and sub-sections (I) and (5) of
Section 7
of the Act shall be charged at the following rates,
namely :—
(a) rupees two for each page in A-3 or smaller
     size paper;
(b) actual cost or price of a photocopy in large
     size paper;
(c) actual cost or price for samples or models;
(d) rupees fifty per diskette or floppy;
(e) price fixed for a publication or rupees two
     per page of photocopy for extracts from the
     publication;
(f)   no fee for inspection of records for the
     first hour of inspection and a fee of rupees 5
     for each subsequent hour or fraction thereof;
     and
(g) so much of postal charge involved in
     supply of information that exceeds fifty
     rupees.
5. Exemption from Payment of Fee.— No fee
under rule 3 and rule 4 shall be charged from any
person who, is below poverty line provided a copy
of the certificate issued by the appropriate
11
Government in this regard is submitted alongwith
     the application.
6. Mode of Payment of fee.— Fees under these
     rules may be paid in any of the following manner,
     namely:—
(a) in cash, to the public authority or to the
          Central Assistant Public Information Officer
          of the public authority, as the case may be,
          against a proper receipt; or
(b) by demand draft or bankers cheque or
          Indian Postal Order payable to the Accounts
          Officer of the public authority; or
(c) by electronic means to the Accounts
          Officer of the public authority, if facility for
          receiving fees through electronic means is
          available with the public authority.”
13. Rule 5 takes care of the situation that has been

highlighted by the petitioner. If an applicant belongs to below

poverty line (BPL) category, he/she has to submit a proof in

support of his/her claim that he/she belongs to the said

category and as far as the mode of payment is concerned,

various modes are provided and the criticism that it is

restricted is unacceptable.
12
14. In view of the obtaining situation, as has been brought

out by the learned Attorney General for India, as presently

advised, we are disposed to think that no further direction

needs to be issued except granting liberty to the petitioner to

submit a representation to the competent authority pointing

out any other mode(s) available for getting information under

the Act. If such a representation is submitted, the same shall

be dealt not only with sympathy but also with concern and

empathy.    We say so as differently abled persons, which

include visually impaired persons, should have the functional

facility to receive such information as permissible under the

Act.   They should not be deprived of the benefit of such a

utility. As indicated in the beginning, the information makes

one empowered. Additionally, we think it appropriate to ask

the authorities to explore any kind of advanced technology

that has developed in the meantime so that other methods can

be introduced.   We are absolutely sure that if the petitioner

would point out, the cognizance of the same shall be taken.

We are also certain that the authority shall, with all sincerity
13
and concern, explore further possibilities with the available

on-line application/mechanism.
15. The writ petition is, accordingly, disposed of. There shall

be no order as to costs.
.………………………….CJI.
(Dipak Misra)



                                 .…………………………….J.
                                 (A.M. Khanwilkar)



                                 ...………………….………..J.
                                 (Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud)
 New Delhi;
September 27, 2018