[Cites
9
, Cited by
7
]
Supreme Court of India
The Management Of Regional Chief ... vs Their Workmen Rep. By District ... on 20 September, 2018
Author:
Abhay Manohar Sapre
Bench:
S. Abdul Nazeer
,
Abhay Manohar Sapre
Reportable

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.9832 OF 2018
                              (Arising out of SLP (C) No.25965 of 2018)
                                      (Diary No.30368 of 2018)
                          The Management of Regional
                          Chief Engineer P.H.E.D. Ranchi            …..Appellant(s)

                                                  VERSUS

                          Their Workmen Rep. by 
                          District Secretary                           …..Respondent(s)

                                   
                                             J U D G M E N T


                          Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.
1.   Leave granted.
2.   This appeal is directed against the final judgment

                          and   order   dated   02.02.2017   of   the   High   Court   of
Signature Not Verified
Jharkhand   at   Ranchi   in   L.P.A.   No.484   of   2008
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2018.09.20
16:51:08 IST
Reason:                   whereby   the   Division   Bench   of   the   High   Court
1
dismissed   the   appeal   filed   by   the   appellant   herein

and   upheld   the   order   dated   08.07.2008   passed   by

the   Single   Judge   of   the   High   Court   in   W.P.(L)

No.3962 of 2006.
3.    Few facts need to be mentioned hereinbelow for

the   disposal   of   the   appeal,   which   involves   a   short

issue.
4.    The   short   question,   which   arises   for

consideration   in  this   appeal,  is  whether   the   Courts

below, namely, the High Court and the Labour Court

were justified in awarding full back wages to the 37

workmen   represented   by   Workmen   Union   after

setting   aside   their   dismissal   order   holding   it   to   be

bad in law being in contravention of Section 25­
F of

the   Industrial   Disputes   Act,   1947
(hereinafter

referred   to   as   “
I.D.   Act
”)   and,   in   consequence,

directing reinstatement of these workmen in services

of   the   appellant   in   their   Public   Health   and

Engineering Department (PHED).
2
5.    The appellant is the Department of the State of

Jharkhand   [Public   Health   and   Engineering

Department   (PHED)]   whereas   the   respondent   is   the

Workmen   Union   representing   the   interest   of   the

workmen   working   in   the   Public   Health   and

Engineering Department (PHED).
6.    The State made a reference under
Section 10
of

the   I.D.   Act   to   the   Labour   Court,   Ranchi   at   the

instance   of   the   respondent­Union   to   decide   the

following dispute:
“Whether the dismissal and non absorption of
      37   acting   daily   wages   Hastrashid   employees
      as   mentioned   in   schedule   “K”   in   work
      charged establishment by Public Health Engg.
Division, East Ranchi (Department of PHED,
      Jharkhand)   is   lawful.     If   not,   what   other
      reliefs their employees are entitled to?”
7.      By award dated 29.06.2005, the Labour Court

(Annex.P­1)   answered   the   reference   in   respondent­

Union’s   favour   and   directed   re­instatement   of   37

workmen   with   payment   of   full   back   wages   in

Reference Case No.6 of 2002.
3
8.    The   appellant   (employer),   felt   aggrieved   by   the

award of the Labour Court, filed  writ petition in the

High Court of Jharkhand.   The Single Judge of the

High   Court,   by   order   dated   08.07.2008,   dismissed

the writ petition filed by the appellant and affirmed

the award passed by the Labour Court.
9.    Being   aggrieved   by   the   order   of   the   Single

Judge,   the   appellant   filed   intra   court   appeal.   By

impugned   order,   the   Division   Bench   of   the   High

Court dismissed the appeal and upheld the order of

the   Single   Judge,   which   gave   rise   to   filing   of   this

appeal   by   way   of   special   leave   by   the   appellant­

employer in this Court.
10.   Having heard the learned counsel for the parties

and   on   perusal   of   the   record   of   the   case,   we   are

inclined   to   allow   the   appeal   in   part   and   while

modifying   the   impugned   order   award   50%   back

wages to the workmen in place of full wages.
4
11.   In   our   considered   opinion,   the   Courts   below

completely failed to see that the back wages could not

be awarded by the Court as of right to the workman

consequent   upon   setting   aside   of   his

dismissal/termination   order.   In   other   words,   a

workman has no right to claim back wages from his

employer as of right only because the Court has set

aside his dismissal order in his favour and directed

his reinstatement in service.
12.   It is necessary for the workman in such cases to

plead and prove with the aid of evidence that after his

dismissal   from   the   service,   he   was   not   gainfully

employed anywhere and had no earning to maintain

himself   or/and   his   family.   The   employer   is   also

entitled   to   prove   it   otherwise   against  the   employee,

namely,   that   the   employee   was   gainfully   employed

during the relevant period and hence not entitled to

claim any back wages.  Initial burden is, however, on

the employee.
5
13.   In some cases, the Court may decline to award

the back wages in its entirety whereas in some cases,

it   may   award   partial   depending   upon   the   facts   of

each case by exercising its judicial discretion in the

light  of   the   facts   and  evidence.  The questions, how

the back wages is required to be decided, what are

the   factors  to  be  taken into consideration awarding

back   wages,   on   whom   the   initial   burden   lies   etc.

were   elaborately   discussed   in   several   cases   by   this

Court wherein the law on these questions has been

settled.     Indeed,   it   is   no   longer  res   integra.    These

cases are,
M.P. State Electricity Board vs. Jarina

Bee(Smt.
),   (
2003)   6   SCC   141,  G.M.   Haryana

Roadways   vs.   Rudhan   Singh
,   (
2005)   5   SCC   591,

U.P. State Brassware Corporation vs. Uday Narain

Pandey
, (
2006) 1 SCC 479, J.K. Synthetics Ltd. vs.

K.P.   Agrawal   &   Anr.
,   (
2007)   2   SCC   433,

Metropolitan   Transport   Corporation   vs.   V.
6
Venkatesan
,   (2009)   9   SCC   601,  Jagbir   Singh   vs.

Haryana   State   Agriculture   Marketing   Board   &

Anr.,   (
2009)   15   SCC   327)   and  Deepali   Gundu

Surwase   vs.   Kranti   Junior   Adhyapak

Mahavidyalaya(D.Ed
.) & Ors., (2013) 10 SCC 324.
14.   The   Court   is,   therefore,   required   to   keep   in

consideration several factors, which are set out in the

aforementioned cases, and then to record a finding as

to whether it is a fit case for award of the back wages

and, if so, to what extent.
15.   Coming now to the facts of the case at hand, we

find that neither the Labour Court and nor the High

Court kept in consideration the aforesaid principles

of law.   Similarly, no party to the proceedings either

pleaded   or   adduced   any   evidence   to   prove   the

material facts required   for award of the back wages

enabling the Court to award the back wages.
7
16.   On   the   other   hand,   we   find   that   the   Labour

Court   in   one   line   simply   directed   the   appellant

(employer) to pay full back wages for a long period to

37   workmen   while   directing   their   reinstatement   in

service.
17.   We, however, find that the High Court in para 9

of   the   order   placed   reliance   on   the  decision  of   this

Court   in
Deepali   Gundu   Surwase
(supra)   for

holding that the question of back wages is covered by

this decision.  In our view, the High Court erred in so

observing.
It  should have  seen  that  in  the  case  of
Deepali   Gundu   Surwase
(supra)   itself,   this   Court

referred decisions, which we have mentioned in para

13   above   and   then   in   para   38   of  Deepali   Gundu

Surwase,   this   Court   culled   out   the   ratio   of   all   the

cited     cases.
Thereafter,   this   Court   in
Deepali

Gundu   Surwase’
case  granted   relief   to   the

concerned workers on the facts involved
in that case
.
8
In our opinion, the High Court did not apply the ratio

of the decision in
Deepali Gundu Surwase
(supra)

to the facts of this case properly and only quoted one

para   of   the   judgment   in
Deepali   Gundu

Surwase
(supra)            which        contained         general

observations.   Those observations had to be read in

juxtaposition with para 38 which culled out the ratio

of all the case law on the subject.
18.   We   cannot,   therefore,   concur   with   such

direction   of   the   Courts   below   awarding   full   back

wages   to   the   workman   which,   in   our   opinion,   has

certainly   caused   prejudice   to   the   appellant

(employer).
19.   However,   having   regard   to   the   facts   and

circumstances   of   the   case,   we   consider   it   just   and

proper and in the interest of justice to award to these

37 workmen 50% of the total back wages.
9
20.    This we award to the workmen in exercise of our

powers under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India

for doing substantial justice to the parties concerned

having   reiterated   the   legal   principles   which   govern

the question of award of back wages.
21.    In   the   light   of   the   foregoing   discussion,   the

appeal succeeds   and is   allowed in part. Impugned

order is modified to the extent indicated above.
22.    Let the amount be worked out and paid by the

appellant   to   the   respondent­workmen   after   proper

verification within three months from the date of this

judgment.
.……...................................J.
                                    [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]


                                     .……...................................J.
                                    [S. ABDUL NAZEER]

New Delhi,
September 20, 2018.
1
0