[Cites
10
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
Shri Ambadevi Sanstha vs Joint Charity Commissioner on 25 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 753
Author:
Arun Mishra
Bench:
Vineet Saran
,
Arun Mishra
1

                                                                      REPORTABLE

                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.9936 OF 2018
          ( @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION [C] NO.35049 OF 2013 )

SHRI AMBADEVI SANSTHA & ORS.                                 …  APPELLANT(S)

                                      VERSUS

JOINT CHARITY COMMISSIONER & ORS.                            … RESPONDENTS

                               WITH  
          C.A. NO.9938 OF 2018 @  S.L.P. [C] NO
                                                .35050
                                                       OF 2013

                                         AND

          C.A. NO.9937 OF 2018 @  S.L.P. [C] NO
                                                .35051
                                                       OF 2013


                                 J U D G M E N T

ARUN MISHRA, J.
1.    The   appellant­Shri   Ambadevi   Sanstha,   a   registered   Public   Trust

under the
Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950
(hereinafter referred as the

“Act of 1950”), has filed the instant appeals against the judgments and

orders   dated   3.5.2013   and   10.5.2013   passed   by   the   High   Court   of

Judicature   at   Bombay,   dismissing   the   writ   petitions   filed   by   the

appellant herein and confirming the order dated 8.10.1998 of the Joint

Charity Commissioner with respect to sale of the properties of the Trust.

The   Trust   had   been   permitted   to   execute   sale   deeds   of   field   Survey

No.270/A/1   of   village   Khar,   Talegaon,   admeasuring   11   acres   and   28
2
gunthas and field Survey No.11 of Chandpur, admeasuring 4 acres and

8  gunthas  to   Mr.   J.M.  Karwa,  field   Survey  No.202   of  Khar,  Talegaon,

admeasuring 16 acres to Mr. Manish Jaikishore Karwa and 15 acres and

33 gunthas out of field Survey No.202 of Khar, Talegaon to Shri Ashish

Jaikishore Karwa and 15 acres and 15 gunthas from Survey No.12 of

Chandpur to Shri Girish Jaikishore Karwa at the rate of Rs.7,651/­ per

acre.
2.      The   permission   had   also   been   granted   by   Joint   Charity

Commissioner to sell the immovable properties belonging to Trust i.e.,

House   No.210,   Plot   No.228,   Sheet   No.   92­A,   admeasuring   174.8   sq.

meters situated in Ward No.15 in Bhaji Bazar Mohalla at Amravati for

Rs.3,11,000.
3.      Permission   had   also   been   granted   by   the   Joint   Charity

Commissioner   to   sell   House   No.998   in   Ward   No.59   Taluka   Bedmaru,

District Amravati for sum of Rs.1,00,000/­ (Rupees One Lakh Only).
4.      The erstwhile Secretary of the old body of Trust had applied to the

Joint Charity Commissioner for grant of permission to sell the properties

of  Trust.    At least two  persons  had  raised   objections  before  the  Joint

Charity Commissioner that they were ready to purchase the land at a

much higher  price  up  to Rs.25,000/­ and  Rs.11,000/­  per acre.   The

newly   elected   body   of   the   Trust   approached   the   Joint   Charity
3
Commissioner and 15 trustees stated that Trust does not want to sell

the properties.   Despite the objection, the Joint Charity Commissioner

had  granted  permission  to   sell  the  properties.   Aggrieved  thereby,  the

writ petitions were filed before the High Court by the Trust.   The High

Court   vide   impugned   judgments   and   orders   has   dismissed   the   writ

petitions.  Hence, the appeals have been preferred.
5.   The Trust has raised the ground that Joint Charity Commissioner

did not act as per intendment of
Section 36
of the Act of 1950.   The

Joint Charity Commissioner has failed to observe that when the Trustees

have stated on behalf of Trust that the properties should not be sold, the

Joint Charity Commissioner ought not have passed the order directing

sale of the properties.  The principles governing exercise of power under
Section 36
had not been adhered to.  There was no necessity to sell the

Trust properties.   Apart from that, the permission for sale of properties

for a meagre amount was not at all in the interest of the Trust.   The

objections were rejected by the Joint Charity Commissioner for no good

reason.  The High Court has also committed illegality in dismissing the

writ petitions.
6.    It   was   contended   on   behalf   of   respondents   that   permission   was

granted to sell properties in the interest of the Trust as the Trust was

not having proper income.  The land is situated at a distance of 25 kms

from Amravati.  Three out of four lands are situated about 5 kms away
4
from   the   locality   of   Khar   Talegaon.     The   Trust   wanted   to   construct   a

hospital.  The Trust was in dire need of money and had decided to invite

tenders on 1.6.1994 by advertisement for the sale of land and only one

offer from Mr. Naresh Laxmanrao Bhatkar was received for purchase of

land   admeasuring   15   acres   15   gunthas   at   Chandpur   at   the   rate   of

Rs.4,500/­ per acre.   However, the said offer was not accepted by the

Trust in the meeting dated 9.8.1994.  Thereafter, second advertisement

was   published   in   the   local   newspapers   in   November   and   December,

1994.  Varying offers for land between Rs.6,000/­ to Rs.9,000/­ per acre

were received.  Late Mr. Jaikishore Karwa submitted offer of Rs.7,651/­

per   acre   for   purchase   of   the   entire   land   of   the   Trust  i.e.,   63   acres   4

gunthas,   whereas   the   offer  of   Mr.   M.K.   Lakde   was   for  Rs.9,000/­  per

acre for certain piece of land i.e., 11 acres 28 gunthas.  The offer of Late

Mr. Jaikishore Karwa, husband of respondent no.2­Smt. Tarabai, was

accepted. The entire land was sold as indicated by Mr. Jaikishore Karwa

in   the   names   of   several   persons.   The   Trust   in   its   meeting   dated

13.3.1995 passed a resolution and accepted earnest money also.
7.     It was further contended on behalf of respondents that the price

offered   was   proper   and   valuation   report   was   called   from   Talathi   with

respect to the land in question.   Talathi had indicated that the market

value   of   the   land   was   Rs.8,000/­   per   acre   at   Khar   Talegaon   and

Rs.5,000/­   per   acre   at   Chandpur,   at   the   time   of   issuance   of
5
advertisement in the year 1994.   The Joint Charity Commissioner has

considered the valuation report of the Talathi and the offer made by Mr.

Jaikishore Karwa was found to be proper.
8.    It   was   contended   by   the   respondents   that   Joint   Charity

Commissioner   did   not   grant   permission   in   a   mechanical   way.     Two

objectors namely Mr. Vinod Tank and Mr. Vijay Jaiswal had submitted

their   higher   offers   before   the   Joint   Charity   Commissioner   during   the

pendency of the application.  Mr. Vinod Tank had neither participated in

the tender process.   It was not proper for him to submit a higher offer

once the earnest money had been paid.  The offer of Mr. Vinod Tank was

rightly rejected.  Similarly, the offer made by Mr. Narayanprasad Jaiswal

and Mr. Shankarlal Jaiswal of Rs.25,000/­ per acre after 2 ½ years from

the date of acceptance of earnest money by the Trusts, was also rightly

rejected.   The Joint Charity Commissioner did not allow the objection

raised by 15 newly added trustees as there was a dispute between old

and the new trustees.   The land was sold by the previous body of the

Trust, as such the objection raised by the new body was rightly rejected.

The Trust, in fact, had not passed any resolution dated 27.9.2018 before

the decision was rendered by the Joint Charity Commissioner, not to sell

the  properties.    Resolution  dated  27.9.1998  was   not  submitted  before

the Joint Charity Commissioner.   The Trustees did not pray before the

Joint Charity Commissioner to withdraw the application filed for grant of
6
permission to sell the properties.   The Trust did not file the aforesaid

resolution   dated  27.09.1998  even  before  the  High  Court.    No  meeting

was   held   on   the   aforesaid   date.     It   was   also   contended   on   behalf   of

respondents   that   Trust   has   filed   false   and   fabricated   affidavit   dated

18.11.1997, which was not filed by the Trust before the Joint Charity

Commissioner.     The   objectors   Mr.   Vinod   Tank   and   others   have   not

approached   the   High   Court   against   the   order   of   Joint   Charity

Commissioner.     In   other  appeals   also,   it   was   contended   that  order   of

Joint   Charity   Commissioner   was   appropriate   and   in   accordance   with

law.
9.      This   Court   has   considered   the   duty   of   a   Charity   Commissioner

under
Section   36
of   the   Act   of   1950   in   the   recent   decision   in
Cyrus

Rustom   Patel   v.   Charity   Commissioner   Maharashtra
,   (2017)   13   SCALE
44.  This Court has observed that three classic requirements have to be

considered by the Charity Commissioner i.e., the  interest, benefit and

protection   of   Trust.     The   Charity   Commissioner   has   to   be   objectively

satisfied that there is necessity to dispose of the property in the interest

of public Trust.  The power of Charity Commissioner extends to inviting

offers from members of public and can also direct the trustees to sell or

transfer   the   trust   property   to   a   person   whose   bid   or  quotation   is   the

best.
7
10.
In
Chenchu Rami Reddy v. Govt. of Andhra Pradesh
, (1986) 3 SCC

391, it was observed that there has to be full application of mind while

granting permission to sell by the competent authority and the disposal

of   public   property   should   normally   be   done   by   public   auction.     The

public­minded   citizens   have   to   show   exemplary   vigilance   and   the

property of religious and charitable institutions or endowment must be

jealously   protected.     Property   should   be   sold   by   public   auction   after

fixing reserve price. This Court observed:
“10. We cannot conclude without observing that property of such
          institutions or endowments must be jealously protected. It must
          be   protected,   for,   a   large   segment   of   the   community   has
          beneficial interest in it (that is the raison d'etre of the Act itself).
          The   authorities   exercising   the   powers   under   the   Act   must   not
          only be most  alert  and vigilant  in such matters but also  show
          awareness of the ways of the present day world as also the ugly
          realities of the world of today. They cannot afford to take things
          at   their   face   value   or   make   a   less   than   the   closest­and­best­
          attention   approach   to   guard   against   all   pitfalls.   The   approving
          authority must  be aware that in such  matters the trustees, or
          persons authorized to sell by private negotiations, can, in a given
          case,   enter   into   a   secret   or   invisible   underhand   deal   or
          understanding with the purchasers at the cost of the concerned
          institution.   Those   who   are   willing   to   purchase   by   private
          negotiations can also  bid  at  a public auction. Why would they
          feel shy  or be deterred  from  bidding  at  a  public  auction? Why
          then permit sale by private negotiations which will not be visible
          to   the   public   eye   and   may   even   give   rise   to   public   suspicion
          unless   there   are   special   reasons   to   justify   doing   so?  And   care
          must be taken to fix a reserve price after ascertaining the market
          value for the sake of safeguarding the interest of the endowment.
          With these words of caution we close the matter.”

                                                                   (emphasis supplied)
11.
In
R. Venugopala  Naidu   v.  Venkatarayulu   Naidu   Chairities
,  1989

Supp (2) SCC 356, this Court has reiterated that sale should be free from
8
suspicion   and   reserved   price   should   be   fixed   after   ascertaining   the

market value. This Court has observed:
“13. The subordinate court and the High Court did not go into
          the merits of the case as the appellants were non­suited on the
          ground of locus standi. We would have normally remanded the
          case for decision on merits but in the facts and circumstances of
          this case we are satisfied that the value of the property which the
          trust   got   was  not  the  market   value.  Two   persons  namely   S.M.
          Mohamed   Yaaseen   ad   S.N.M.   Ubayadully   have   filed   affidavit
          offering   Rs.   9   lakhs   and   Rs.   10   lakhs   respectively   for   these
          properties. In support of their bona fides they have deposited 10
          per cent of the offer in this Court. This Court in
Chenchu Ram
          Reddy v. Government of Andhra Pradesh
, (1986) 3 SCC 391, has
          held that the property of religious and charitable endowments or
          institutions must be jealously protected because a large segment
          of the community has beneficial interest therein. Sale by private
          negotiations which is not visible to the public eye and may even
          give rise to public suspicion should not, therefore, be permitted
          unless   there   are   special   reasons   to   justify   the   same.   It   has
          further been held that care must be taken to fix the reserve price
          after ascertaining the market value for safeguarding the interest
          of the endowment.”
12.
In
Bhaskar   Laxman   Jadhav   v.   Karamveer   Kakasaheb   Wagh

Education Society
, (2013) 11 SCC 531, this Court took note of the fact

that   Trustees   and   petitioners   had   been   indulging   in   a   flip­flop   and

taking   advantage   of   the   absence   of   any   clear­cut   statutory   measures

designed   to   prevent   abuse   of   the   process   of   law.     The   Charity

Commissioner was justified in rejecting the application for permission to

sell for two reasons, firstly since the Trustees were not voluntarily selling

the   Trust   land   and   secondly,   in   the   given   circumstances,   the   sale

transaction was not for the benefit and in the interest of the Trust.   It

was  further  observed  that lack of bonafide of trustees  could  not have

been overlooked by the High Court.  Due to passage of time, the value of
9
the Trust land had increased considerably and it was necessary to have

made efforts for obtaining maximum price from the open market.   This

Court observed:
“53.
In
Mehrwan  Homi  Irani v. Charity  Commr.
, (2001) 5 SCC
         305,   it   was   categorically   held   that   the   Charity   Commissioner,
         while   granting   sanction   under
Section   36
of   the   Act,   must
         explore   the   possibility   of   getting   the   best   price   for   the   trust
         properties. In keeping with this, the Charity Commissioner was
         directed to issue a fresh advertisement for leasing out the trust
         property and "formulate and impose just and proper conditions
         so   that   it   may   serve   the   best   interests   of   the   Trust."   The
         observations of this Court and directions given are as follows:
“9.... In the best interests of the Trust and its objects, we
            feel it appropriate that Respondents 2 to 4 should explore
            the   further   possibility   of   having   agreements   with   better
            terms. The objects of the Trust should be accomplished in
            the best of its interests. Leasing out of a major portion of
            the land for other purposes may not be in the best interests
            of   the   Trust.   The   Charity   Commissioner   while   granting
            permission under
Section 36
of the Bombay Public Trusts
            Act   could   have   explored   these   possibilities.   Therefore,   we
            are   constrained   to   remit   the   matter   to   the   Charity
            Commissioner to take a fresh decision in the matter. There
            could be fresh advertisements inviting fresh proposals and
            the   proposal   of   the   5th   respondent   could   also   be
            considered.   The   Charity   Commissioner   may   himself
            formulate and impose just and proper conditions so that it
            may serve the best interests of the Trust. We direct that the
            Charity Commissioner shall take a decision at the earliest.”
13.
In
Cyrus  Rustom Patel
(supra),  the  Court  observed   that  previous

sanction of the Charity Commissioner has to be obtained for sale of the

Trust property:
“24.   It is apparent from the provisions of
Section 36
that  sale,
         exchange or gift of any immovable property or lease, extending
         beyond ten years in the case of agricultural land, or for a period
         exceeding three years in the case of non­agricultural land or a
         building, belonging to a public trust  shall not be valid without
         previous sanction of the Charity Commissioner.
10
25.  The   power   to   grant   sanction   has   to   be   exercised   by   the
          Charity   Commissioner,   taking   into   consideration   three   classic
          requirements   i.e.   "the   interest,   benefit,   and   protection"  of   the
          Trust. The expression that sanction may be accorded subject to
          such   conditions   as   Charity   Commissioner   may   think   fit   under
Section 31(1)(b)
and
Section 36(1)(c)
. The Charity Commissioner
          has to be objectively satisfied that property should be disposed of
          in the interest of public trust; in doing so, he has right to impose
          such   conditions   as   he   may   think   fit,   taking   into   account
          aforesaid   triple   classic   requirements.   It   is   also   open   to   the
          Charity  Commissioner,  in   exercise  of  power  of
Section   36(2)
of
          the Act, to revoke the sanction, given under clauses (a) and (b) of
Section 36
of the Act, on the ground that the sanction had been
          obtained   by   fraud   or   misrepresentation   or  those  material   facts
          have been suppressed while obtaining sanction. The intendment
          of   the   revocation   provision   is   also   to   sub­serve   the   interest,
          benefit, and protection of the Trust and its property.”

                                                                 (emphasis supplied)

      The Court has also observed that the trustees hold the property for

the   benefit   of   the   beneficiaries.     In   case   the   Charity   Commissioner

accepts   the   necessity   of   alienating   the   trust   property,   the   trustees

cannot insist that the property should be sold only to a person of their

choice, though the offer given by the person may not be the best offer.
The property may be vested in the trustees, but the vesting is for the

benefit of the beneficiaries.   Best available offer should be accepted in

the case of sale.
14.   When   we   consider   the   order   passed   by   the   Joint   Charity

Commissioner   on   8.10.1998   in   the   instant   case,   several   applications

were decided by common order.  The Joint Charity Commissioner noted

that objection was raised by 15 newly elected Trustees not to sell the

properties.   It was incumbent upon the Joint Charity Commissioner to
11
ascertain   the   proper   valuation   of   the   properties.     In   the   case   of   time

barred   transaction,   it   was   held   that   it   was   not   for   the   Joint   Charity

Commissioner   to   reject   the   offer   on   the   ground   that   transaction   had

become time barred, but it was for the Civil Court to consider the said

aspect   for   transaction   entered   into   in   1990   and   1994   for   which   the

applications for grant of permission were filed in 1997/1998.
15.    The reserved price of various properties was also not fixed in the

instant   matter   and   the   Joint   Charity   Commissioner   has   failed   to

consider what was the actual price as on the date of grant of permission

and  when  transactions  were  entered   into.     The  permission  to   sell  the

properties had been granted in mechanical manner ignoring illegality of

transactions.   The action of the Trust  seeking permission to  sell after

accepting  the   earnest   money   was   wholly   improper   and   impermissible.

The   transactions   could   not   have   been   finalised   nor   possession   could

have   been   handed   over   before   filing   application   to   Joint   Charity

Commissioner under
Section 36
of the Act of 1950.  Prior sanction was

necessary to create any right in the properties.
16.   The offers were invited for land in 1994 and the applications were

filed in the year 1997­98 for grant of permission to sell the properties of

the Trust.  The prices of 1994, thus, could not have been considered to

be the value as on the date the permission was applied for.  Apart from

that, no serious efforts were made by the Joint Charity Commissioner to
12
ascertain the value of the properties in the years 1990, 1994 or 1998.

After the advertisement inviting offer was issued in respect to lands, it is

apparent that the offer of Mr.M.K. Lakde was for Rs.9,000/­ per acre for

a part of land, nonetheless it was much more than the value accepted by

the Joint Charity Commissioner.   Merely on the ground that Trust had

accepted the earnest money from Mr. Jaikishore Karwa of Rs.21,000/­,

no equity was created in his favour to purchase the property. It was not

open to the Joint Charity Commissioner to permit the sale on the ground

of receipt of earnest money in illegal manner. Before permission to sell

no such agreement could have been entered into.   The same indicated

predisposition of Trust to sell it in illegal manner.  The valuation report

from Talathi was based on  ipse dixit  indicated the value of the land as

Rs.8,000/­ per acre.  The offer could not have been accepted in view of

the available higher offers.   The Joint Charity Commissioner has failed

to protect the interest of the Trust.
17.   Mere statement by the Trust that earnest money was received from

prospective   purchasers   of   house   in   the   year   1990,   thus,   it   should   be

sold to them, could not be said to be a legally permissible approach.  It

was   not   legally   permissible   to   receive   earnest   money   or  to   create   any

interest without grant of prior permission to sale.   Thus, no equitable

consideration could have arisen in favour of purchasers by the payment

of earnest money of Rs.1,60,000/­ in the year 1990.
13
18.    The   Joint   Charity   Commissioner   had   also   observed   in   its   order

that if the request of Trust to sell the land to prospective purchaser was

rejected,   the   Trust   was   likely   to   be   forced   to   face   litigation   at   the

instance   of   the   prospective   purchasers   as   they   claimed   to   be   in

possession of the land for which they have paid the earnest money.  This

kind of illegal transaction could not have been sanctioned by the Joint

Charity   Commissioner.     It   was   wholly   impermissible   and   violative   of

intendment of the provisions contained under
Section 36
of the Act of

1950.
19.    No effort was made to ascertain the valuation of the house and no

reserved   price   was   fixed,   thus,   the   sale   of   the   properties   was   wholly

impermissible.  The Joint Charity Commissioner has also observed that

it   was   not   for   him   to   consider   the   effect   of   enormous   delay   in

approaching for grant of permission.  No such delayed application could

have been entertained to validate illegal transaction.  The Joint Charity

Commissioner   has   failed   to   consider   the   interest,   benefit   and   the

protection   of   the   property   of   the   Trust.     The   permission   to   sale   with

respect to agricultural lands as well as the house was granted illegally.
20.    In view of the above, it is not necessary to go into the question that

newly   elected   body   of   the   Trust   had   opposed   the   sale   of   the   Trust

properties by old trustees.  When there was such a dispute between old
14
and new body, the Joint Charity Commissioner was required to be on

the   guard   and   in   view   of   the   objection   raised   by   15   Trustees   by

presenting themselves before the Joint Charity Commissioner that Trust

properties   should   not   be   sold   as   recorded   by   the   Joint   Charity

Commissioner   could   have   waited   and   should   have   ascertained   the

genuineness of the objection and need for sale of properties and whether

sale was in the interest of Trust.  The High Court had also recorded that

the   resolution   was   passed   on   27.9.1998   not   to   proceed   with   sale.

Though, it was disputed that it was not actually passed.   Be that as it

may.  Fact remains that Trustees themselves presented before the Joint

Charity   Commissioner   before   arguments   were   heard   and,   in   the

circumstances, it was not at all proper or justified to sell the properties

of   the   Trust.     No   necessity   for   sale   of   the   properties   was   made   out.

Thus, the sale of the Trust properties was wholly uncalled for.
21.    In view of the above, we direct the Trust not to fritter away with the

properties in the manner in which it has been done.  In future also, let

the properties of the Trust and its legacy be protected and guarded and

it   should   not   be   sold   away   in   the   manner   as   has   been   done   in   the

present case.   We allow the civil appeals and set aside the judgments

and   orders   passed   by   the   High   Court   and   that   of   the   Joint   Charity

Commissioner.  Transactions of sale are annulled.
15
22.   It was contended on behalf of purchasers that they have made the

land cultivable by spending the amount and have levelled it also.  As a

matter of fact, under an illegal sale, they have enjoyed the properties for

more   than   two   decades.     It   was   wholly   impermissible   and   they   have

earned more than the value of the land as in the
Land Acquisition Act
,

the compensation is granted in the absence of exemplar sale evidence on

the basis of usufruct of 10 years.  They have enjoyed the properties for

more than two decades, thus there is absolutely no equity in their favour

and they are not entitled to retain the possession of the same.   Let the

possession be restored forthwith within a period of two months, failing

which we direct the concerned authority to take the possession of land

and houses with the help of police authorities.  Let compliance of order

be reported to this Court within 10 weeks.
………………………….J.
                                                     (Arun Mishra)



New Delhi;                                           ……………………….…J.
September 25, 2018.                                  (Vineet Saran)