[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Venugopal Padayachi vs V. Pichaikaran(Dead) Through Lrs. on 18 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 246
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
1



                                                                                           Non-Reportable

                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO.4985/2010

     VENUGOPAL PADAYACHI (DEAD) THROUGH LRs.                                            Appellant(s)

                                                          VERSUS

     V. PICHAIKARAN (DEAD) THROUGH LRs.                                                 Respondent(s)




                                               J U D G M E N T
Uday Umesh Lalit, J.
1.                  On the basis of a document dated 20th March 1959, which was

     styled as ‘simple mortgage’, Original Suit No.2249 of 1981 was

     filed by the respondent/original plaintiff praying for redemption

     of mortgage and for recovery of possession.
2.                  The   appellant/original       defendant        in   his   written      statement

     pleaded that under the aforesaid simple mortgage, the defendant was

     not                 put   in   possession;     that           subsequently     a    document    dated

     12.11.1960 was entered into between the parties under which the

     original                  plaintiff    purported     to       convey   title   in    favour    of   the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
defendant;
MUKESH KUMAR
Date: 2018.09.20                 and,   that   it   was    in        pursuance    of     this   subsequent
17:33:59 IST
Reason:
document that the defendant was put in possession.
2
3.    It must be noted here that the document dated 12.11.1960 being

an unregistered document was not allowed to be exhibited and could

not be relied upon as a document of title.
4.    We need not advert to first round of the litigation whereafter

the matter stood remanded. The trial Court after remand accepted

the plea set-up by the defendant that with effect from the document

dated 12.11.1960, the possession of the defendant over the land in

question became adverse to the original plaintiff.         It was further

found that since the suit was filed more than 12 years after the

aforesaid document dated 12.11.1960, the defendant had perfected

his   title   by   adverse   possession.   The   suit   thus   came   to   be

dismissed.
5.    The findings rendered by the trial Court were affirmed by the

lower Appellate Court and the appeal preferred by the original

plaintiff was dismissed.
6.    The plaintiff, being aggrieved, carried the matter further by

filing Second Appeal No.209 of 1989 in the High Court at Madras.
The High Court framed the following substantial question of law:
“Whether the Courts below are right in law in finding
      adverse possession when the execution of the mortgage
      deed is not disputed by the Defendant?”

and, found as under:
“4. Admittedly, the plaintiff executed a mortgage on
      20.03.1959 in respect of the suit mentioned immovable
      property for a consideration of Rs.300/-, which he
      borrowed from the Defendant. What was all contended by
      the plaintiff before both the Courts below was that the
      Defendant was put in possession in lieu of interest on
      the mortgage but a reading of Ex.A1 mortgage would
3
indicate that it was a simple mortgage simplicitor and
     hence the said contention of the plaintiff/appellant
     that the Defendant was put in possession in lieu of
     interest was rightly rejected.        The case of the
     Defendant is that he purchased the property from the
     Defendant on 12.11.1960 for a consideration of Rs.750/-
in which the mortgage amount was adjusted.      Both the
     Courts have not looked into the document since it was
     necessarily a registrable one but remains unregistered
     and hence the contention of the Defendant that he got
     the sale of the property cannot be countenanced. But it
     is an admitted position that the Defendant has been in
     possession of the property.     Before both the Courts
     below, it was contended by the Defendant that he has
     also acquired title by prescription.     Both the Courts
     have also accepted the contention though the sale deed
     filed by the Defendant was not marked and relied on by
     the parties. Under the stated circumstances, the
     Defendant could have got into possession on some
     understanding between the parties.     However, from the
     available evidence, it would be quite clear that what
     was executed by the plaintiff in favour of the Defendant
     was a simple mortgage and the plaintiff has also filed a
     suit for redemption.”
7.   The High Court thus arrived at a finding that the defendant

could have got into possession on “some understanding”, which was

not the case set up by any of the parties.            Holding the arrangement

under the mortgage to be continuing, it accepted the appeal and

passed   a   decree   of     redemption   holding    that   the   plaintiff      was

entitled to deposit the mortgage amount with simple interest within

a time frame.
8.   The original defendant is presently in appeal by special leave

challenging    the    view   so   taken   by   the   High   Court.   It   must   be

mentioned here that during the pendency of this appeal, both the

plaintiff and the defendant have expired.               The heirs of original

plaintiff were brought on record and were served in the matter but

they have chosen not to appear in this Court.
4
9.     We   have    heard    Mr.    V.   Prabhakar,            learned    counsel    for       the

appellant/defendant.
10.    It   was     submitted       by   Mr.       Prabhakar       that       document    dated

12.11.1960,        being    an    unregistered          one,    could    certainly       not    be

relied upon to advance the proposition that under the said document

the title came to be vested in favour of the defendant but said

document could be relied upon for collateral purpose, in that to

support that on and with effect from that date, the defendant was

put in possession.          With the assistance of the learned counsel, we

have   gone   through       the    document        in    question       and   find   that      the

defendant was put in possession pursuant to said document.
11.    The question then arises is whether such possession of the

defendant under a document which otherwise is inoperative in law

could be held to be adverse to the original plaintiff. The issue is

no longer res integra as the matter has been decided by this Court

on few occasions.
12.    Mr. Prabhakar invited our attention to the decision of this

Court in Padma Vithoba Chakkayya v. Mohd. Multani, (1963) 3 SCR

229; and, Rukmani Ammal & Another v. Jagdesa Gounder, (2006) 1 SCC
65.
5
13.   In Rukmani Ammal (supra), this Court succinctly extracted the

law on the subject and observed as follows:
“18.
In
K. Gopalan Thanthri v. Ittira Kelan
, {AIR 1970
      Ker 305 : 1970 KLT 462 (FB)}, it was held by the Full
      Bench of the High Court of Kerala that after the sale of
      the mortgage property in favour of the mortgagee,
      possession of the mortgagee becomes adverse to tarwad and
      if a suit for redemption is not filed within the
      stipulated period of twelve years, it would become barred
      by limitation.
19. In the case in hand, Annamalai was the owner of the
      property. He mortgaged it to Defendant 1 in 1962 and since
      then Defendant 1 was in possession of the property as
      mortgagee. Annamalai then sold part of the property to the
      plaintiff in 1964 and the sale deed recited the factum of
      mortgage by the owner to Defendant 1. In a suit for
      recovery of money by Defendant 1 against Annamalai, a
      decree was passed and in execution proceedings, the
      property was purchased by the mortgagee (Defendant 1) in
      1966. The auction was confirmed and sale certificate was
      issued in favour of Defendant 1 on 5-9-1966. The
      submission of Defendant 1 is well founded that thereafter
      she did not continue to remain mortgagee but became
      absolute owner or claimed to be the absolute owner of the
      property. As held by this Court in the cases referred to
      hereinabove, once the mortgagee is claiming to be an
      absolute owner of the property, his/her status as
      mortgagee comes to an end and his/her possession becomes
      adverse to the original owner. Even if such sale is
      voidable (and not void), it will not alter the legal
      position and adverse title of the original mortgagee
      continues and if the period of twelve years expires,
      he/she   becomes  owner   of  the   property  by   adverse
      possession.”
                                       (Emphasis supplied by us)
14.   In the circumstances, the trial Court and the lower Appellate

Court   were    perfectly   right   and   justified   in   accepting   the

submission advanced on behalf of the defendant and in dismissing

the suit.      The High Court while exercising the Second Appellate

Court’s jurisdiction ought not to have interfered in the matter.
6
15.      We, therefore, allow this appeal, set-aside the judgment

under appeal and dismiss Original Suit No.2249 of 1981, with no

order as to costs.
...................................................J.
                                       (UDAY UMESH LALIT)




                                       ...................................................J.
                                       (SANJAY KISHAN KAUL)


New Delhi;
September 18, 2018