[Cites
33
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Swapnil Tripathi vs Supreme Court Of India on 26 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 4806, 2018 (10) SCC 639, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 194, (2018) 4 RECCIVR 632, (2018) 11 SCALE 475, (2018) 253 DLT 546, 2018 (4) KLT SN 46 (SC), AIRONLINE 2018 SC 242
Author:
A.M. Khanwilkar
Bench:
Chief Justice
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
,
D.Y. Chandrachud
1

                                                                         REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


                                WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1232 OF 2017

                         Swapnil Tripathi                             ….. Petitioner(s)
                                                    :Versus:

                         Supreme Court of India                      ....Respondent(s)
                                                  WITH
                                  WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 66      OF 2018
                         Indira Jaising                              …..Petitioner(s)
                                                    :Versus:
                         Secretary General & Ors.                    ....Respondent(s)
                                                     AND

                                WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 861 OF 2018
                         Mathews J. Nedumpara & Ors.              ….. Petitioner(s)
                                                    :Versus:
                         Supreme Court of India & Ors.            …..Respondent(s)
                                                     AND
                                 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 892 OF 2018
                         Centre for Accountability and Systemic
                         Change & Ors.                            ….. Petitioner(s)
                                                    :Versus:
                         Secretary General & Ors.                 …..Respondent(s)

Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
SUBHASH CHANDER
Date: 2018.09.26
16:01:06 IST
Reason:
                                      2

                                JUDGMENT
A.M. Khanwilkar, J.
1.     The petitioners and interventionists, claiming to be

        public spirited persons, have sought a declaration that

        Supreme Court case proceedings of “constitutional importance

        having an impact on the public at large or a large number of

        people” should be live streamed in a manner that is easily

        accessible for public viewing. Further direction is sought to

        frame guidelines to enable the determination of exceptional

        cases that qualify for live streaming and to place those

        guidelines before the Full Court of this Court. To buttress

        these prayers, reliance has been placed on the dictum of a

        nine-Judge     Bench   of   this   Court   in
Naresh   Shridhar

        Mirajkar and Ors.      Vs. State of Maharashtra and Ors.,1
which has had an occasion to inter alia consider the

        arguments of journalists that they had a fundamental right to

        carry on their occupation under
Article 19(1)(g)
of the

        Constitution; that they also had a right to attend the

        proceedings in court under
Article 19(1)(d);
and that their right

1   (1966) 3 SCR 744
3
to freedom of speech and expression guaranteed under
Article

19(1)(a)
included their right to publish a faithful report of the

proceedings which they had witnessed and heard in Court as

journalists. The Court whilst considering the said argument

went on to emphasise about the efficacy of open trials for

upholding the legitimacy and effectiveness of the Courts and

for enhancement of public confidence and support. It would be

apposite to reproduce the relevant extract from
the said

decision
propounding about the efficacy of hearing of cases in

open courts, in the following words:
“20….. It is well-settled that in general, all cases brought
     before the Courts, whether civil, criminal, or others, must be
     heard in open Court. Public trial in open court is
     undoubtedly essential for the healthy, objective and fair
     administration of justice. Trial held subject to the public
     scrutiny and gaze naturally acts as a check against judicial
     caprice or vagaries, and serves as a powerful instrument for
     creating confidence of the public in the fairness, objectivity,
     and impartiality of the administration of justice. Public
     confidence in the administration of justice is of such great
     significance that there can be no two opinions on the broad
     proposition that in discharging their functions as judicial
     Tribunals, courts must generally hear causes in open and
     must permit the public admission to the court room. As
     Bentham has observed :
„In the darkness of secrecy sinister interest, and evil in
         every shape, have full swing. Only in proportion as
         publicity has place can any of the checks applicable to
         judicial injustice operate. Where there is no publicity
         there is no justice. Publicity is the very soul of justice. It
4
is the keenest spur to exertion, and surest of all guards
         against improbity. It keeps the Judge himself while
         trying under trial (in the sense that) the security of
         securities is publicity‟. (Scott v. Scott [(1911) All. E.R. 1,
         30]) ”
2.   Indeed, the right of access to justice flowing from
Article

21
of the Constitution or be it the concept of justice at the

doorstep, would be meaningful only if the public gets access to

the proceedings as it would unfold before the Courts and in

particular, opportunity to witness live proceedings in respect

of matters having an impact on the public at large or on

section of people. This would educate them about the issues

which come up for consideration before the Court on real time

basis.
3.   As no person can be heard to plead ignorance of law,

there is corresponding obligation on the State to spread

awareness about the law and the developments thereof

including the evolution of the law which may happen in the

process of adjudication of cases before this Court. The right to

know and receive information, it is by now well settled, is a

facet of
Article 19(1)(a)
of the Constitution and for which
5
reason the public is entitled to witness Court proceedings

involving issues having an impact on the public at large or a

section of the public, as the case may be. This right to receive

information and be informed is buttressed by the value of

dignity of the people. One of the proponents has also

highlighted the fact that litigants involved in large number of

cases pending before the Courts throughout the country will

be benefitted if access to Court proceedings is made possible

by way of live streaming of Court proceedings. That would

increase the productivity of the country, since scores of

persons involved in litigation in the courts in India will be able

to avoid visiting the courts in person, on regular basis, to

witness hearings and instead can attend to their daily work

without taking leave.
4.    As the debate has actuated momentous issues, we had

requested the learned Attorney General for India, Shri K.K.

Venugopal to collate the suggestions given by him as well as

the   petitioners   and    interventionists    and    submit    a

comprehensive note for evolving a framework, in the event the
6
relief claimed in the writ petition(s) was to be granted. We shall

advert to the same a little later.
5.   We have heard Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney

General for India, Ms. Indira Jaising, learned Senior Advocate,

Mr. Virag Gupta learned counsel, Mr. Mathews J. Nedumpara,

learned Advocate and other petitioners/intervenors appearing

in-person.
6.   Indisputably, open trials and access to the public during

hearing of cases before the Court is an accepted proposition.

As regards the pronouncement of judgments by the Supreme

Court, there is an express stipulation in
Article 145(4)
of the

Constitution that such pronouncements shall be made in open

Court. Indeed, no such express provision is found in the

Constitution regarding “open Court hearing” before the

Supreme Court, but that can be traced to provisions such as
Section 327
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (
CrPC
)

and
Section 153-B
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (
CPC
)

which read thus:
7
Section 327
CrPC

“327. Court to be open.- (1) The place in which any
Criminal Court is held for the purpose of inquiring into or
trying any offence shall be deemed to be an open Court, to
which the public generally may have access, so far as the
same can conveniently contain them;
Provided that the presiding Judge or Magistrate may, if he
thinks fit, order at any stage of any inquiry into, or trial of,
any particular case, that the public generally, or any
particular person, shall not have access to, or be or remain
in, the room or building used by the Court.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
the inquiry into the trail of rape or an offence under
section
376
, section 376-A, section 376-B, section 376-C [section
376-D or
section 376-E
of the Indian Penal Code (45 of
1860)] shall be conducted in camera;
Provided that the presiding Judge may, if he thinks fit, or on
an application made by either of the parties, allow any
particular person to have access to, or be or remain in, the
room or building used by the Court;
[Provided further that in camera trial shall be conducted as
far as practicable by a woman Judge or Magistrate.]
(3) Where any proceedings are held under sub-section (2), it
shall not be lawful for any person to print or publish any
matter in relation to any such proceedings, except with the
previous permission of the Court:]
[Provided that the ban on printing or publication of trail
proceedings in relation to an offence of rape may be lifted,
subject to maintaining confidentiality of name and address
of the parties.]”
Section 153-B
CPC

“153-B. Place of trial to be deemed to be open Court.- The
place in which any Civil Court is held for the purpose of
trying any suit shall be deemed to be an open Court, to
which the public generally may have access so far as the
same can conveniently contain them:
Provided that the presiding Judge may, if he thinks fit, order
at any state of any inquiry into or trial of any particular case,
that the public generally, or any particular person, shall not
8
have access to, or be or remain in, the room or building used
     by the Court.”
7.   Notably, in
Naresh Shridhar Mirajkar
(supra), this

Court, in no uncertain terms, expounded that open trial is the

norm but, at the same time, cautioned that there may be

situations where the administration of justice itself may make

it necessary for the Courts to hold in-camera trials. Applying

the underlying principles, it may be appropriate to have a

proper and balanced regulatory framework before the concept

of live streaming of Court proceedings of this Court or any

other courts in India is put into action.
8.   Indubitably, live streaming of Court proceedings has the

potential of throwing up an option to the public to witness live

court proceedings which they otherwise could not have due to

logistical issues and infrastructural restrictions of Courts; and

would also provide them with a more direct sense of what has

transpired. Thus, technological solutions can be a tool to

facilitate actualization of the right of access to justice bestowed

on all and the litigants in particular, to provide them virtual
9
entry in the Court precincts and more particularly in Court

rooms. In the process, a large segment of persons, be it

entrants in the legal profession, journalists, civil society

activists, academicians or students of law will be able to view

live proceedings in propria persona on real time basis. There is

unanimity between all the protagonists that live streaming of

Supreme Court proceedings at least in respect of cases of

Constitutional and national importance, having an impact on

the public at large or on a large number of people in India,

may be a good beginning, as is suggested across the Bar.
9.   Live streaming of Court proceedings is feasible due to the

advent of technology and, in fact, has been adopted in other

jurisdictions across the world. Live streaming of Court

proceedings, in one sense, with the use of technology is to

“virtually” expand the Court room area beyond the physical

four walls of the Court rooms. Technology is evolving with

increasing swiftness whereas the law and the courts are

evolving at a much more measured pace. This Court cannot be

oblivious to the reality that technology has the potential to
10
usher   in   tangible   and   intangible   benefits   which    can

consummate the aspirations of the stakeholders and litigants

in particular. It can epitomize transparency, good governance

and accountability, and more importantly, open the vista of

the court rooms, transcending the four walls of the rooms to

accommodate a large number of viewers to witness the live

Court   proceedings.    Introducing    and    integrating     such

technology into the courtrooms would give the viewing public a

virtual presence in the courtroom and also educate them

about the working of the court.
10. We must hasten to add that our attention was invited to

the decision taken by the Advisory Council of the National

Mission of Justice Delivery and Legal Reforms on the proposal

to initiate audio video recording on an experimental basis in

the Courts. In its meeting held on 26th August, 2014, it was

noted that audio video recording of Court proceedings was

proposed in the Policy and Action Plan Document for Phase II

for the e-Courts Mission Mode Project. However, in the

meeting of the E-Committee held on 8th January, 2014, the
11
issue was taken up but was deferred as it required

consultation with Hon‟ble Judges of the Supreme Court and

the High Courts. Indeed, consultation with the Hon‟ble Judges

of the Supreme Court and the High Courts may become

essential for framing of rules for live streaming of Court

proceedings so as to ensure that the dignity and majesty of the

Court is preserved, and, at the same time, address the

concerns of privacy and confidentiality of the litigants or

witnesses, matters relating to business confidentiality in

commercial disputes including prohibition or restriction of

access of proceedings or trials stipulated by the Central or

State legislations, and, in some cases to preserve the larger

public interest owing to the sensitivity of the case having

potential to spring law and order situation or social unrest.

These are matters which may require closer scrutiny. While

doing so, the modules adopted by courts in other jurisdictions

may be useful. The position in some of the Courts in other

jurisdictions (arranged in alphabetical order) as culled out

from the material pointed out to us, is as follows:
12
I.     Australia
1. High Court: Allows recordings of its proceedings to be
          published on its website2.
Since 1st October, 2013, the High Court of Australia, which
            is its apex court, has made available on its website audio-
            visual recordings of all full-court hearings held in Canberra3.

            a. The content of the coverage is vetted and recordings are
               posted usually within day or two of the hearing;
            b. The High Court has issued certain terms for use of such
               recordings on its website, which include restrictions on
               recording or copying without prior permission of the
               Court and retention of copyright over the proceedings by
               the Court4;
c. The High Court permits members of the public to take
               photographs inside courtrooms when the Court is not in
               session, for private purposes. Audio-video recording of
               Court proceedings by private parties is expressly banned.
               The Court however, on certain occasions, permits film

2Available on the Australian High Court website at: http://www.hcourt.gov.au/cases/recent-
av-recordings
3 Media Release: Audio-Video Recordings of Full Court proceedings available on the

Australian High Court website at:
http://www.hcourt.gov.au/index.php?option=com_acymailing&ctrl=archive&task=view&listid=
6-judgment-delivery-notification&mailid=28-media-release
4 “Terms of use:
Access to the audio-visual recordings of the Court is subject to the following conditions:
(1) You will not record, copy, modify, reproduce, publish, republish, upload, post, transmit,
broadcast, rebroadcast, store, distribute or otherwise make available, in any manner, any
proceeding or part of any proceeding, other than with prior written approval of the Court.
However, schools and universities may broadcast/rebroadcast proceedings in a
classroom setting for educational purposes without prior written approval.
(2) The audio-visual material available via our web-site of Court proceedings does not constitute
the official record of the Court.
(3) Copyright of the footage of the proceedings is retained by the Court.
By clicking "I agree/play" (when available), you agree to be bound by these terms of use.”
Available on the Australian High Court website at: http://www.hcourt.gov.au/cases/recent-av-
recordings
13
crews to film parts of proceedings like the arrival of the
             Justices and them sitting at the bench, the Court staff
             positioned in the Court, and the barristers and solicitors
             at their tables in the courtroom. Such permission is
             granted on a case-to-case basis and subject to certain
             conditions imposed by the Court5;
2. Lower Courts6,7: There are no statutory restrictions on media
         coverage of lower court proceedings and permission for
         broadcast of hearings differs from court to court.

         a. Federal Court of Australia: Allows the media to broadcast
            proceedings on a regular basis and also publishes videos
            of certain judgment summaries on its website.
i. In the Federal Court of Australia (having appellate
                jurisdiction), television camera coverage is coordinated
                and supervised by the Court‟s Director of Public
                Information.
ii. The Court itself has not imposed any rigid conditions
                on recordings. Most recordings are permitted on an
                ad-hoc basis and on certain conditions, including that
                the proceedings are not disturbed, that no artificial
                lighting is used, that cameras remain in fixed
                positions once proceedings have commenced, and that
                the Court retains the right to veto the use of any part
                or of all footage recorded.
5  Photography and Recording available on the Australian High Court website at:
http://www.hcourt.gov.au/about/photography-and-recording
6 In-Court Media Coverage – a consultation paper available on the website of the New

Zealand Judiciary at: https://courtsofnz.govt.nz/In-Court-Media-Review/In-Court-Media-
Review/In-Court-Media-Coverage_-_consultation-paper_.pdf
7 Report to Chief Justice on In-Court Media Coverage available on the website of the New

Zealand Judiciary at: https://www.courtsofnz.govt.nz/In-Court-Media-Review/In-Court-Media-
Review/ReporttoChiefJusticeonincourtmediacoverageF6_7_15_20150720.pdf
14
iii.   The website of the Federal Court also contains a video
                   archive of certain judgment summaries, accompanied
                   by text versions8.
iv.   Rule 6.11 of the Federal Court Rules, 20119 seems to
                   indicate that private parties may also take recordings
                   of proceedings, subject to restrictions laid down
                   therein.
b. Supreme Courts: Permission                         for    broadcast         varies,
             depending on the court.
i.   The Supreme Courts (having trial jurisdiction) for the
                   various Australian districts differ on permission for
                   media broadcasting. For example, the Queensland
                   Supreme Court allows for a live or delayed broadcast



8  Available on the website of the Federal Court at: http://www.fedcourt.gov.au/digital-law-
library/videos
9 ―6.11 Use of communication device or recording device in place where hearing taking

place
(1) In this rule:
communication device includes a mobile telephone, audio link, video link or any other
electronic communication equipment.
recording device means a device that is capable of being used to record images or sound,
including a camera, tape recorder, video recorder, mobile telephone or digital audio recorder.
 (2) A person must comply with any directions made by the Court at the hearing of any
proceeding in the Court relating to the use of a communication device or recording device.
(3) A person must not use a recording device for the purpose of recording or making a transcript of
the evidence or submissions in a hearing in the Court.
(4) A person must not use a communication device or a recording device that might:
(a) disturb a hearing in the Court; or
(b) cause any concern to a witness or other participant in the hearing; or
(c) allow a person who is not present in the Court to receive information about the proceeding or
the hearing to which the person is not entitled.
Note 1 The Court may have regard to any relevant matter, including the following:
(a) why the person needs to use the device in the hearing;
(b) if an order has been given excluding one or more witnesses from the Court — whether there
is a risk that the device could be used to brief a witness out of court;
(c) whether the use of the device would disturb the hearing or distract or cause concern to a
witness or other participant in the hearing.
Note 2 The Court may dispense with compliance with this rule — see rule 1.34.
available       on      the      website       of      the     Australian      Government       at:
https://www.legislation.gov.au/Details/F2011L01551
15
of only „judgment remarks‟10 and has also issued
                  practice directions in that regard11.
ii.   Filming court proceedings is permitted in certain
                  situations in certain Supreme Courts like New South
                  Wales12, Northern Territory13, Western Australia14 and
                  Tasmania15, after an application is made to the
                  presiding Judge or to the registrar in some courts.
c. Trial Courts: Rarely admit cameras and when they do,
            allow recording mostly for ceremonial events or for stock
            footage.
10  For definitions and explanations, see Protocol for the Recording and Broadcasting of
Judgment Remarks available on the website of the Supreme Court of Queensland at:
https://www.courts.qld.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/485224/protocol-for-recording-
and-broadcasting-judgment-remarks.pdf
11Amended Practice Direction Number 8 Of 2014 available on the website of the Courts of

Queensland at:
https://www.courts.qld.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/225553/sc-pd-8of2014.pdf
12 See the following documents available on the website of the New South Wales Supreme

Court:
Recording and broadcasting of judgment remarks policy at:
http://www.supremecourt.justice.nsw.gov.au/Documents/Forms%20and%20Fees/Media%20
Forms/recording_and_broadcasting_of_judgment_remarks_policy_1014v2.pdf
and
Media Guidelines On Reporting Criminal Proceedings at:
http://www.supremecourt.justice.nsw.gov.au/Documents/Publications/Media%20Guidelines_
Reporting%20Criminal%20Proceedings%20in%20the%20NSW%20Supreme%20Court_April%2
02016.pdf
13 Media Guide available on the website of the Northern Territory Courts website at:
http://www.nt.gov.au/justice/ntmc/media/documents/Media_Guide.pdf
14 Transcripts and Videos available on the website of the Supreme Court of Western Australia

at:
https://www.supremecourt.wa.gov.au/T/transcripts_and_videos_2018.aspx?uid=9348-5501-
0341-3842
15 Media Guidelines available on the website of the Tasmanian Supreme Court at:
https://www.supremecourt.tas.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0014/414221/Media-
Guidelines-May-2018.pdf
16
II.    Brazil
1. Supreme Court: Allows live video and audio broadcast of
            Court proceedings, including the deliberations and voting
            process undertaken by the judges in court.
a. The Brazilian congress enacted a law, which was
               sanctioned by the President on 17th May, 2002, enabling
               the creation of a public television channel, TV Justiça,
               dedicated to the judiciary.
b. From 14th August, 2002 onwards, Supreme Court
               proceedings have been telecast live on TV Justica16. A
               separate radio channel, Radio Justica17 broadcasts audio
               proceedings.
c. Both the television and radio stations are owned by the
               Brazilian judicial branch and operated by the Supreme
               Court.
d. There are also two YouTube channels, one titled „Tv
               Justica‟18 which shows discussions and commentaries on
               the judicial system and the other titled „STF‟19, which
               broadcasts live proceedings of hearings before the
               Supreme Court.
2. Lower Courts:
a. Superior Court of Justice: This Court is the
                 highest appellate court in Brazil for non-constitutional
                 questions of federal law. Proceedings are broadcast on
                 the TV Justica channel;
b. Trial Courts: Do not show broadcast of proceedings.
16   TV Justica official website at: http://www.tvjustica.jus.br
17   Radio Justica official website at: www.radiojustica.jus.br/
18   Official Youtube channel at: https://www.youtube.com/user/TVJustica
19   Official Youtube channel at: https://www.youtube.com/user/STF
17
III.   Canada
1. Supreme Court20: Allows broadcast and live streaming of its
          proceedings.
a. The Canadian Supreme Court has permitted media
             coverage of its proceedings since 1994, on public
             broadcast service provided by the Cable Parliamentary
             Affairs Channel (CPAC)21. A formal agreement between
             the Court and the CPAC governs this media coverage.
          b. The Supreme Court retains copyright over the broadcast
             material, and has ultimate say in use of the coverage.
             Only the Court‟s own sound facilities can be used for
             recording, and permanently installed cameras within the
             courtroom are used for visual coverage. The agreement
             between the Supreme Court and CPAC also requires
             broadcast of proceedings to be accompanied by
             explanations of each case and the overall processes and
             powers of the Court.
c. The       Supreme      Court    has      also    started
             broadcasting/webcasting live video streams of court
             hearings on its website since 200922 and has an archive
             of its previous broadcasts23.
2. Lower Courts
          a. Federal Courts: Permit media coverage by broadcasters
             The Federal Court of Appeal allows audio-video media
             coverage of proceedings as per published guidelines24.

20 See In-Court Media Coverage – a consultation paper at footnote 6
21 Official website at: http://www.cpac.ca/en/programs/supreme-court-hearings/
22 Available on the website of the Supreme Court of Canada at: https://www.scc-csc.ca/case-

dossier/info/hear-aud-eng.aspx
23 Available on the website of the Supreme Court of Canada at: https://www.scc-csc.ca/case-

dossier/info/webcasts-webdiffusions-eng.aspx
24 ―Media coverage of proceedings with audio-visual equipment is only permitted in accordance

with the following guidelines:
a. A media request to cover a specific proceeding must be made sufficiently in advance to
         allow for necessary permissions to be obtained.
18
The Federal Court also has its own set of guidelines
               regulating coverage of proceedings25.
b. A decision as to whether to allow media coverage will be made by the Chief Justice, after
       consultation with the panel of judges hearing the particular case, as well as with the
       parties.
c. The Chief Justice or panel of judges hearing the proceeding may limit or terminate media
       coverage to protect the rights of the parties; to assure the orderly conduct of the
       proceedings; or for any other reason considered necessary or appropriate in the interest of
       the administration of justice.
d. Nothing in these guidelines shall prevent the Chief Justice from placing additional
       restrictions, or prohibiting altogether, media access to the Court's facilities.
   e. Only equipment which does not produce distracting sound or light shall be employed to
       cover proceedings.
f. The Chief Justice or his designate may limit or circumscribe the placement or movement of
       the media personnel and their equipment.‖
Guidelines on Public and Media available on the website of the Federal Court of Appeal of
Canada at: http://www.fca-caf.gc.ca/fca-caf_eng/media_eng.html
25  ―Electronic Media Coverage of Federal Court Proceedings
1. General
a. With reasonable advance notice in writing to the Chief Justice of the Federal Court, the media
may make an application for electronic media coverage of judicial review proceedings.
b. The Chief Justice will consult with the judge hearing the proceeding and counsel for the
parties.
c. The Chief Justice or the presiding judge may at any time impose conditions on, or terminate,
media coverage to protect the rights of the parties; to preserve the dignity of the Court; to assure
the orderly conduct of the proceedings; or for any other reason considered necessary or
appropriate in the best interest of justice.
d. No direct public expense is to be incurred for equipment, wiring or personnel needed to provide
media coverage.
e. There shall be no audio pickup or broadcast of conferences which occur in a court facility
between counsel and their clients, between co-counsel of a client, or between counsel and the
Court held at the bench.
2. Equipment and Personnel
a. Unless otherwise permitted, electronic media coverage is to be limited to:
i. two portable television cameras, each operated by one camera person;
ii. one still photographer;
iii. one audio system using existing court audio systems or unobtrusive microphones and wiring.
b. If two or more media representatives apply to cover a proceeding, their representatives are
expected to agree upon a pooling arrangement, including designation of pool operators,
procedures for cost sharing, access to and dissemination of material, and a pool representative.
c. The media must show that they will use only equipment that does not produce distracting
sound or light, or use flash attachments, other artificial light sources, signal lights or devices
indicating that it is activated.
d. The presiding judge may specify the location of equipment in the courtroom and require
modification of light sources at media expense.
e. Media personnel are expected to place, replace, move or remove equipment, or change film, film
magazines or lenses before court proceedings, after adjournment or during recesses.
3. Use of Materials
Within 10 days of publication or broadcast of any material generated through electronic media
coverage, media are to provide the Court with a copy.‖
19
A written application has to be made for permission to
              record proceedings but the general policy is to allow such
              applications if they are made within a reasonable time.
           b. Courts of Appeal26: Courts of Appeal in the provinces
              allow or deny permission to broadcast court proceedings
              based on their own guidelines27.
c. Courts of first instance/Trial Courts: Broadcast of
              proceedings is rare. Although each province maintains its
              own guidelines for coverage, in practice, approval for
              broadcast of proceedings is rarely given.
IV.     China:
Live streaming and recorded broadcasts of court proceedings
       are being implemented across the judiciary, from the trial
       courts right up till the Supreme People‟s Court of China.
1. Supreme People‟s Court:
a. The Supreme Court has allowed proceedings of its public
             hearings to be broadcast live28 from July 2016 onwards.
These    broadcasts    are    governed   by    the  2010
             regulations issued by the Supreme Court, „Provisions on
             the Live Broadcasting and Rebroadcasting of Court Trials
             by the People‟s Courts‟29. These regulations focus on the
             type of cases to broadcast.30

Policy on Public and Media Access available on the website of the Federal Court of Canada
at: http://www.fct-cf.gc.ca/fc_cf_en/MediaPolicy.html
26 See In-Court Media Coverage – a consultation paper at footnote 6
27For example, the Nova Scotia Court of Appeal has its own guidelines while the Ontario Court

of Appeal introduced a pilot for broadcast of court proceedings but permanent implementation
of such scheme was hampered by express prohibitions on broadcast of proceedings
laid down
in
Section 136 of the Ontario Court of Justice Act, 1990.
28 Official website for streaming at: http://tingshen.court.gov.cn/court/0
29Available at:
http://www.law-lib.com/law/law_view.asp?id=324868

30
Article 2:
The people‘s court may choose the openly tried cases of higher public attention,
greater social impact, and of legal publicity and education significance to make live broadcasts of
20
b. Additionally, cases involving matters like review of death
             sentences and review of decisions on foreign arbitral
             awards are not broadcast. Politically sensitive cases are
             broadcast at the discretion of the Court.
c. The 2010 Regulations have been supplemented by The
             People‟s Court Courtroom Rules, 201631. These new rules
             indicate that court proceedings can only be broadcast by
             the official Court machinery and that other parties are
             restrained from recording court proceedings in any
             manner32.
d. These regulations are rules are silent on taking consent
             from parties involved the matter.
and rebroadcast court trials. The live broadcasting and rebroadcasting of court trials are
prohibited for the following cases:
(1) Cases that are not openly tried in accordance with the law since any national secret, trade
secret, individual privacy, or juvenile delinquency, among others, is involved;
(2) Criminal cases on which procuratorial organs clearly require the non-live broadcasting and
rebroadcasting of court trials for justifiable reasons;
(3) Civil and administrative cases on which the parties clearly require the non-live broadcasting
and rebroadcasting of court trials for justifiable reasons; and
(4) Other cases of which the live broadcasting and rebroadcasting are inappropriate.
[Translated version]
31 English copy available at: https://www.chinalawtranslate.com/courtrules/?lang=en

Also see the official website for Chinese courts:
http://www.court.gov.cn/fabu-xiangqing-19372.html
32
Article 11:
In any of the following situations, for trial activities that are conducted openly in

accordance with law, the people's courts may use television, the internet or other public media to
broadcast or record images, audio or videos:
(1) a high degree of public concern;
(2) a larger social influence;
(3) the value for legal publicity and education is quite strong.
***
Article 17:
During court proceedings, all personnel shall follow the instructions of the chief
judge, or a judge hearing the case alone, respect judicial etiquette, abide by courtroom discipline,
and shall not conduct the following actions:
(1)***
(2) ***
(3) ***
(4) Taping, videotaping, or taking pictures of trial activities or using mobile communication tools to
propagate trial activities;
(5) ***
[Translated version]
21
2. Lower Courts:
a. Proceedings of several courts, including High Courts and
              family courts, have been made available on a centralised,
              official website, the Chinese Open Trial Network33 from
              September 2016 onwards, in consonance with the
              aforementioned People‟s Court Courtroom Rules, 2016.
              Majority of the cases being broadcast are civil in nature,
              with some criminal and administrative matters also being
              made available.
b. Proceedings of around 3500 lower courts have been made
              available on the website, with many videos available in
              High Definition (HD) format. In 2017 alone, more than
              1.27 million trials had been broadcast on the website.
c. Some High Courts also make their proceedings available
              on their own websites34.
V.    England:
1. Supreme Court: The media is permitted to broadcast court
           proceedings and hearings are live streamed and recorded.
           a. Till 2005, recording of court proceedings was a crime35
              and also amounted to contempt of court36.
33Available at: http://tingshen.court.gov.cn
34For example, see the Zhejiang High Court‟s website at:
http://www.zjsfgkw.cn/CourtHearing/Video and http://zj.sifayun.com/?courtId=5168;
35   Section 41 of the Criminal Justice Act, 1925 (as originally enacted):
“41. Prohibition on taking photographs, &c, in court
(1)No person shall—
(a)take or attempt to take in any court any photograph, or with a view to publication make or
attempt to make in any court any portrait or sketch, of any person, being a judge of the court or a
juror or a witness in or a party to any proceedings before the court, whether civil or criminal; or
(b)publish any photograph, portrait or sketch taken or made in contravention of the foregoing
provisions of this section or any reproduction thereof;
and if any person acts in contravention of this section he shall, on summary conviction, he liable
in respect of each offence to a fine not exceeding fifty pounds.
(2)For the purposes of this section—
(a)the expression " court" means any court of justice, including the court of a coroner :
(b)the expression "judge" includes recorder, registrar, magistrate, justice and coroner :
22
b. With the implementation                  of the Constitutional Reforms
             Act, 200537, the Supreme                 Court was exempted from the
             prohibition imposed under                the Criminal Justice Act, 1925.
             The Crime and Courts                      Act, 201338 also exempted
(c)a photograph, portrait or sketch shall be deemed to be a photograph, portrait or sketch taken or
made in court if it is taken or made in the court-room or in the building or in the precincts of the
building in which the court is held, or if it is a photograph, portrait or sketch taken or made of the
person while he is entering or leaving the court-room or any such building or precincts as
aforesaid.‖
Available on the website of the UK Legislature at:
https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/Geo5/15-16/86/
section/41
36
Section 9
of the Contempt of Court Act, 1981 (as originally enacted):
“9. Use of tape recorders
(1)Subject to subsection (4) below, it is a contempt of court—
(a)to use in court, or bring into court for use, any tape recorder or other instrument for recording
sound, except with the leave of the court;
(b)to publish a recording of legal proceedings made by means of any such instrument, or any
recording derived directly or indirectly from it, by playing it in the hearing of the public or any
section of the public, or to dispose of it or any recording so derived, with a view to such
publication ;
(c)to use any such recording in contravention of any conditions of leave granted under paragraph
(a).
(2)Leave under paragraph (a) of subsection (1) may be granted or refused at the discretion of the
court, and if granted may be granted subject to such conditions as the court thinks proper with
respect to the use of any recording made pursuant to the leave; and where leave has been
granted the court may at the like discretion withdraw or amend it either generally or in relation to
any particular part of the proceedings.
(3)Without prejudice to any other power to deal with an act of contempt under paragraph (a) of
subsection (1), the court may order the instrument, or any recording made with it, or both, to be
forfeited; and any object so forfeited shall (unless the court otherwise determines on application
by a person appearing to be the owner) be sold or otherwise disposed of in such manner as the
court may direct.
(4)This section does not apply to the making or use of sound recordings for purposes of official
transcripts of proceedings‖
Available on the website of the UK Legislature at:
https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1981/49

37  ―47. Photography etc
(1)In section 41 of the Criminal Justice Act 1925 (c. 86) (prohibition on taking photographs etc in
court), for subsection (2)(a) substitute—
―(a)the expression ―court‖ means any court of justice (including the court of a coroner), apart from
the Supreme Court;‖.
***‖
Available on the website of the UK Legislature at:
https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2005/4/section/47

38Sections 31, 32 and 33 of the Act, available at:
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2013/22/contents/enacted
23
recording of Supreme Court proceedings from the ambit of
             the
Contempt of Court Act
.
c. Since its inception, the Supreme Court has given
             broadcasters access to footage of its hearings. These
             hearings are governed by protocols with such
             broadcasters. The Supreme Court has also issued a
             practice note which broadly sets out the scope and
             structure of such broadcasts39.
d. The Supreme Court allows for hearings to be live
             streamed on its own website40 with a delay of around one
             minute and also has a Youtube channel which shows
             selected broadcasts from the live stream41. Broadcast of
             proceedings is subject to the discretion of the Law Lords,
             who reserve the right to withdraw coverage for sensitive
             appeals.
2. Lower Courts: The Crime and Courts Act, 2013 amended the
          existing laws to facilitate broadcasting in courts and
          tribunals by providing exceptions to the Criminal Justice
          Act, 192542 and prescribing conditions subject to which

39 Practice Note 8.17.1:
“Broadcasting
8.17.1. The President and the Justices of the Supreme Court have given permission for video
footage of proceedings before the Court to be broadcast where this does not affect the
administration of justice and the recording and broadcasting is conducted in accordance with the
protocol which has been agreed with representatives of several UK broadcasters. Permission to
broadcast proceedings must be sought from the President or the presiding Justice on each
occasion and requires his or her express approval. Where the President or the presiding Justice
grants permission, he or she may impose such conditions as he or she considers to be
appropriate including the obtaining of consent from all the parties involved in the proceedings.‖
Available at: https://www.supremecourt.uk/docs/practice-direction-08.pdf
40 See official website at: https://www.supremecourt.uk/live/
41 Official Youtube channel at: https://www.youtube.com/user/UKSupremeCourt
42 Amended Section 41 of Criminal Justice Act, 1925:
―41. Prohibition on taking photographs, etc., in court.
(1)No person shall—
(a)take or attempt to take in any court any photograph, or with a view to publication make or
attempt to make in any court any portrait or sketch, of any person, being a judge of the court or a
juror or a witness in or a party to any proceedings before the court, whether civil or criminal; or
(b)publish any photograph, portrait or sketch taken or made in contravention of the foregoing
provisions of this section or any reproduction thereof;
24
recordings could be made. Broadcast of court proceedings is
          allowed in a limited number of courts across the country.
          a. Court of Appeal for England and Wales43: The Court
             broadcasts its proceedings live with a 70-second broadcast
             delay system
             i. The broadcast system is operated by a specialist video
                journalist who takes orders from the court.
ii. The broadcast is conducted by cameras, some of which
                are operated completely wirelessly, and can be moved
                from court to court. Subject to the judges' approval, the
                video journalist can take his cameras into any of the
                courtrooms in which the Court of Appeal may sit.
           iii. Lawyers' arguments and judges' comments appear in
                the broadcast but defendants, witnesses and victims are
                not shown.
iv. Footage can be used for news and current affairs but
                not in other contexts such as comedy, entertainment or
                advertising.
b. Crown Court: The Crown Court (Recording) Order, 201644
             partially lifts the prohibition on recording proceedings in
             order to facilitate a pilot project of recording sentencing
             remarks in the Crown Courts. Since then, several Crown
             Courts have trialled broadcast of proceedings.

and if any person acts in contravention of this section he shall, on summary conviction, be liable
in respect of each offence to a fine not exceeding fifty pounds.
[F1(1A)See section 32 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013 for power to provide for exceptions.]
(2)For the purposes of this section—
[F2(a)the expression ―court‖ means any court of justice (including the court of a coroner), apart
from the Supreme Court;]
(b)the expression ―Judge‖ includes . . . F3, registrar, magistrate, justice and coroner:
(c)a photograph, portrait or sketch shall be deemed to be a photograph, portrait or sketch taken or
made in court if it is taken or made in the court–room or in the building or in the precincts of the
building in which the court is held, or if it is a photograph, portrait or sketch taken or made of the
person while he is entering or leaving the court–room or any such building or precincts as
aforesaid.‖

 See: https://www.theguardian.com/law/2013/oct/30/court-of-appeal-proceedings-televised
43
44Available
          on the website of the UK Legislature at:
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2016/612/pdfs/uksi_20160612_en.pdf
25
VI.     European Court of Human Rights (ECHR)
1. The ECHR allows for broadcast of court proceedings, as a
          corollary of its court rules, which set out that all hearings
          are public45.
2. All the Court‟s public hearings are broadcast on the Court‟s
          website46. Hearings held in the morning can be viewed in the
          afternoon while those held in the afternoon are available
          during the evening.
3. All the Court‟s public hearings since 2007 have been filmed
          and can be viewed, with interpretations available in French
          and English.
VII.    Germany:
Germany has passed legislation which allows for live
       broadcasting of court proceedings in the Federal and Supreme
       Courts, although actual instances of such broadcasts are rare
       owing to the strict restrictions imposed by the said legislation.
1. Federal Constitutional Court and Supreme Courts
          a. Section 169 of The Court Constitution Act forbade radio
             and television broadcasts of trials, and sound and film

45 ―Rule 63 – Public character of hearings
1. Hearings shall be public unless, in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Rule, the Chamber in
exceptional circumstances decides otherwise, either of its own motion or at the request of a party
or any other person concerned.
2. The press and the public may be excluded from all or part of a hearing in the interests of
morals, public order or national security in a democratic society, where the interests of juveniles
or the protection of the private life of the parties so require, or to the extent strictly necessary in
the opinion of the Chamber in special circumstances where publicity would prejudice the interests
of justice.
3. Any request for a hearing to be held in camera made under paragraph 1 of this Rule must
include reasons and specify whether it concerns all or only part of the hearing.‖
Available on the official website of the ECHR at:
https://www.echr.coe.int/Documents/Rules_Court_ENG.pdf
46 Available on the official website of the ECHR at:
https://www.echr.coe.int/Pages/home.aspx?p=hearings&c
26
recordings     made      for   the   purposes   of   public
               presentation47.
b.   In October 2017, the German parliament passed the „Act
               to Increase Media Access in Court Proceedings and to
               Improve Communication Aid for People with Speech or
               Hearing Impairments‟48. The amendment act provides for
               the possibility of broadcasting and recording the
               pronouncements of the judgments and the sentencing of
               the Federal Constitutional Court of Justice and the five
               Supreme Federal Courts. Such broadcast is permissible if
               the proceedings are deemed to be of historical
               significance for Germany but can be prohibited to protect
               the legitimate interests of parties to the proceedings or
               even of third parties.
c.   The recordings will not be made public but will be
               handed over to the German Federal Archives or a State
               Archive where they can be accessed subject to certain
               conditions.
d.   Broadcasts of proceedings will happen in separate media
               rooms. The decision to provide broadcasting in the media
               room or to even to permit broadcasting or recording at
               all, is the judge‟s discretion and cannot be appealed.
          e.   Since there are restrictions imposed by the law regarding
               broadcast of proceedings and owing to the strict privacy

47 ―Section 169
The hearing before the adjudicating court, including the pronouncement of judgments and rulings,
shall be public. Audio and television or radio recordings as well as audio and film recordings
intended for public presentation or for publication of their content shall be inadmissible.‖
English version of The Court Constitution Act available at:
https://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/englisch_gvg/englisch_gvg.html

48 English translation; In German, Gesetz zur Erweiterung der Medienöffentlichkeit in
Gerichtsverfahren und zur Verbesserung der Kommunikationshilfen für Menschen mit
Sprach- und Hörbehinderungen (Gesetz über die Erweiterung der Medienöffentlichkeit
in Gerichtsverfahren- EMöGG), available on the website of the German Judiciary at:
https://www.bmjv.de/SharedDocs/Gesetzgebungsverfahren/Dokumente/BGBl_EM%C3%B6G
G.pdf;jsessionid=B96F37ED7F0163627DB7B0BF3343C555.2_cid297?__blob=publicationFile&
v=1
27
protection granted to parties to proceedings, combined
              with the narrow scope of what constitutes a case of
              „historical significance‟, actual broadcasts of court cases
              in Germany rarely occur.
2. Lower Courts: The amendment act only mentions the
           possibility of broadcasting proceedings of the Federal
           Constitutional Court and Supreme Federal Courts and
           makes no mention about broadcast of proceedings in lower
           courts.
VIII.   International Criminal Court (ICC)
1. The ICC allows for live streaming of its proceedings with a
           30-minute delay to allow for any necessary redactions of
           confidential information49.
2. The ICC has an official Youtube channel where it publishes
           programmes concerning cases, proceedings, informative
           sessions, press conferences, outreach activities and other
           events at the Court50. The channel allows viewers to follow
           various cases before the ICC, in several languages, through
           the weekly postings of summaries of proceedings.



      IX.    International Criminal             Tribunal      for     the    former
             Yugoslavia (ICTY)
1. Court proceedings are available for viewing on the website of
           the ICTY51.
49 Official website for streaming at: https://www.icc-cpi.int
Also see „Understanding the International Criminal Court‟ available on the official ICC
website at: https://www.icc-cpi.int/iccdocs/pids/publications/uicceng.pdf
50Official Youtube channel: https://www.youtube.com/user/IntlCriminalCourt/featured
51 Available on the official website: http://icr.icty.org
28
2. ICTY also has a Youtube channel where selected clips
          of guilty pleas, witness testimonies and short documentaries
          are made available. Additionally, the ICTY has social media
          accounts in order to „bring the activities of the court closer
          to the public‟52.
3. The United Nations International Residual Mechanism for
          Criminal Tribunals (IRMCT), a court created to perform a
          number of remaining functions previously carried out by the
          ICTY, amongst others, also contains video recordings of ICTY
          proceedings on its website53 and official Youtube channel54.
X.     Ireland (Northern):
1. Supreme Court: The United Kingdom Supreme Court has
          jurisdiction over Northern Ireland and accordingly, hearings
          of cases which arise in respect of Northern Ireland are live
          streamed.
a. Just as in England, media coverage of courts in Northern
             Ireland was prohibited by the Criminal Justice (Northern
             Ireland) Act, 194555, which was similar to the original

52 Official press release by the ICTY available at: http://www.icty.org/en/press/tribunal-social-
media-channels-go-live
53 Official website: http://www.irmct.org/en/cases#all-cases
54 Official Youtube channel: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCNPOPvnINPwtfjwEnYtIvYw
55 “29 Prohibition on taking photographs, etc., in court.

(1)No person shall—
(a)take or attempt to take in any court any photograph, or with a view to publication make or
attempt to make in any court any portrait or sketch of any person, being a judge of the court or a
juror or a witness in or a party to any proceedings before the court, whether civil or criminal; or
(b)publish any photograph, portrait or sketch taken or made in contravention of the foregoing
provisions of this section or any reproduction of such photograph, portrait or sketch;
and if any person acts in contravention of this section he shall, on summary conviction, be liable
in respect of each offence to a fine not exceeding [F1 level 3 on the standard scale].
(2)For the purposes of this section—
[F2(a)the expression ―court‖ means any court of justice (including the court of a coroner), apart
from the Supreme Court;]
(b)the expression ―judge‖ includes recorder, registrar, resident magistrate, justice of the peace
sitting out of petty sessions and coroner;
(c)a photograph, portrait or sketch shall be deemed to be a photograph, portrait or sketch taken or
made in court if it is taken or made in the court-room or in the building or in the precincts of the
29
Criminal Justice Act, 1925, and which applied identical
             restrictions to photography or sketching in the courts of
             Northern Ireland.
Section 9
of the Contempt of Court Act,
             1981 also extended to Northern Ireland.
b. With the implementation of the Constitutional Reforms
             Act, 2005, the United Kingdom Supreme Court was
             exempted from the prohibition imposed under the
             Criminal Justice (Northern Ireland) Act. The Crime and
             Courts Act, 2013 exempted recording of Supreme Court
             proceedings from the ambit of the Contempt of Court
             Act56.
c. The UK Supreme Court has also sat in Northern Ireland
             and proceedings of the same have been live streamed on
             the website of the Court. During the session, the Supreme
             Court allowed proceedings to be broadcast live in a
             separate „overflow courtroom‟ within the Court premises.57
2. Lower Courts: Although the government has indicated its
          intention and willingness to allow court proceedings to be
          recorded58, actual broadcast of lower court proceedings
          remains restricted.
building in which the court is held, or if it is a photograph, portrait or sketch taken or made of the
person while he is entering or leaving the court-room or any such building or precincts as
aforesaid.‖
56 See position in England at Point V
57 A list of provisions made for broadcast of its hearings in Ireland is available on the official

website of the Supreme Court at: https://www.supremecourt.uk/news/access-to-supreme-
court-hearings-in-belfast.html
58 Research and Information Service Briefing Paper on Broadcasting in Courts, available

on the website of the northern Ireland Assembly at:
http://www.niassembly.gov.uk/globalassets/documents/raise/publications/2012/justice/381
2.pdf
30
XI.    Ireland (Republic):
Although there are no statutory provisions which prohibit
       photography or sound, television or video recordings in courts,
       broadcast of court proceedings, whether photography or
       audio-video recording, without permission, is restricted as a
       practice 59.
1. Supreme Court: Has allowed cameras into the Court on rare
          instances.
The first broadcast of Court proceedings was in October
          2017, when the delivery of two judgments of the Supreme
          Court was broadcast live on the state broadcaster, RTE,
          using small robotic cameras inside the court room60.
2. Lower courts: Do not appear to allow broadcasting of
          proceedings, as on date.
XII.   Israel61:
1. Supreme Court: Has approved of live-broadcasting court
          proceedings.
a. The Israeli Courts Act, 5744-198462 imposes criminal
             punishment for taking and publishing pictures in a court
             room unless the court grants permission. The media
             however can report on events occurring in most Israeli
             courts, subject to the limitations imposed by the audio-
             visual coverage mentioned in the Act.
59 See Report on Contempt of Court by the Law Reform Commission of Ireland, Chapter 4.43,
available at: http://www.lawreform.ie/_fileupload/Reports/rContempt.htm
60 See: https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-41732226
61 See Audio-Visual Coverage Of Court Proceedings In A World Of Shifting Technology by

Itay Ravid available at:
http://www.cardozoaelj.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/35.1-Ravid.pdf
62 Title 70(b) of Act, „Prohibited Publications‟; Israeli Courts Act available in Hebrew at:
http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=15289
31
b. Earlier, a legal presumption existed against audio-visual
               coverage of courts in Israel. In September 2014, a limited
               pilot was launched to allow live coverage of court hearings
               at the Supreme Court although there was no formal
               administrative legislation or regulation issued in that
               regard.
c. Thereafter, in November 2014, the Chief Justice of Israel
               approved of live broadcasting of Court proceedings63.
2. Lower Courts: Do not generally allow for broadcast of
            proceedings but exceptions have been made in cases of
            historical significance.
a. Reporting on court proceedings by media is allowed but
               broadcast of such proceedings is not. Certain courts allow
               the media to photograph the judges entering the
               courtrooms, but request the media to stop recording
               before hearings begin.
b. Permission has also been given to cover events in honour
               of retiring judges as also for hearings of quasi-judicial
               committees.
c. Permission to record and broadcast trial court hearings
               has been granted on five occasions in Israel‟s history. Two
               cases involved trials of Nazi personnel and were allowed
               because the trials were deemed to be of historical
               significance. One case involved a defamation lawsuit filed
               against an Israeli newspaper, another was the trial of a
               man charged with the assassination of the Israeli Prime
               Minister and the final instance was in 1999 when the
               Jerusalem District Court allowed the broadcast of the
               decision given in the criminal case of a former Israeli
               Minister.
63   See: https://www.ynetnews.com/articles/0,7340,L-4592208,00.html
32
XIII.   New Zealand:
1. Supreme Court: Allows for broadcast of its proceedings.
a. Media guidelines have been issued for regulating
              broadcast of Supreme Court proceedings64 which
              supplement the „In-Court Media Coverage Guidelines‟
              applicable to the various other courts of New Zealand.
2. Lower Courts: Broadcasting of proceedings is allowed in the
           lower courts, with several guidelines issued in that regard.
           a. Judges have a broad discretion as to the procedures in
              courtrooms over which they preside, subject to certain
              specific provisions such as the various rules of court, and
              statutory requirements.
b. Broadcast of court proceedings is allowed before the
              Court of Appeal, High Court, Employment Court, District
              Court and any other Tribunal which chooses to adopt the
              same, subject to the discretion of the presiding judge.

64 ―10.5 Appendix E: Supreme Court media guidelines
1. Subject to paragraph (5), all applications to televise or otherwise record proceedings of the
Supreme Court will be deemed to be approved unless a party indicates, within three days of
being advised by the registrar of the application, that the party objects to it.
2. Any such objection must be communicated to the registrar in written form and must include the
grounds upon which the objection is made.
3. The registrar must immediately communicate the objection to the news media applicant and to
all other parties to the proceedings. They must make any submissions they wish to make in
relation to the objection in writing within three days of receiving it. The court or a judge will then
determine the application.
4. An application under paragraph 1 must be made in sufficient time before the hearing of the
proceedings to which it relates to enable the steps referred to in paragraphs 1 and 3 to be taken.
The registrar may waive this requirement for good cause and may abridge any of the times
referred to accordingly.
5. If an application under paragraph 1 is made in circumstances in which the registrar considers
there is insufficient time to comply with paragraphs 1 and 3, or to enable the court properly to
consider the application, the registrar must refer the matter to a judge who may decline the
application or give such directions concerning the application as he or she thinks fit.
6. The physical arrangements for any televising or recording of proceedings shall be determined
by the registrar after such consultation with the applicant and otherwise as the registrar
considers appropriate.‖
Available on the official website of the New Zealand Ministry of Justice at:
https://www.justice.govt.nz/about/news-and-media/media-centre/media-information/media-
guide/appendices/appendix-e/
33
These broadcasts are guided by the In-Court Media
                  Coverage Guidelines, 201665.
c.    Members of the media make an application to the
                  Registrar of the concerned court atleast 10 days in
                  advance, setting out which aspect of the court process
                  they wish to film. A copy of the application is sent to the
                  other parties, and after submissions have been received,
                  the judge determines whether to approve or decline the
                  application. Whether to grant permission is a matter of
                  discretion for the judge, and the judge also has the power
                  to remove media at his/her discretion.
d.    These guidelines do not have legislative force nor do they
                  create any rights in that regard and merely ensure that
                  applications for media coverage are dealt with
                  expeditiously and fairly.
e.    They also set out that recordings must not be broadcast
                  until at least 10 minutes have elapsed, although there
                  are certain exceptions made for this rule as well.
            f.    In addition, there is a separate protocol for application of
                  the said guidelines to the District Court summary
                  jurisdiction66. There are also separate Environment Court
                  Media Coverage Guidelines67.
XIV.        Scotland:
1. Supreme Court: The United Kingdom Supreme Court has
          jurisdiction over Scotland and accordingly, hearings of the
          Court are live streamed on the Court‟s website.
65  Available on the official website of the New Zealand Ministry of Justice at:
https://www.justice.govt.nz/about/news-and-media/media-centre/media-information/media-
guide/appendices/appendix-c/
66 Available on the official website of the New Zealand Ministry of Justice at:
https://www.justice.govt.nz/about/news-and-media/media-centre/media-information/media-
guide/appendices/appendix-d/
67 Available on the official website of the New Zealand Ministry of Justice at:
https://www.justice.govt.nz/about/news-and-media/media-centre/media-information/media-
guide/appendices/appendix-f/
34
2. Lower Courts: Broadcast of court proceedings is permissible
         by law and both civil and criminal cases have been
         broadcast over the years.
a. There was no statutory ban on broadcasting of court
            proceedings in Scotland, since the Criminal Justice Act is
            not applicable to Scotland. However until 1992, the
            courts adopted a strict position banning electronic media
            from access to courts.
b. In 1992, the “Television in Courts” directions were
            issued68 (later quoted in the X v British Broadcasting
            Corporation and Lion Television Limited judgment69) which
            provided that filming could be permitted on the basis of
            “whether the presence of television cameras in the court
            would be without risk to the administration of justice.”
            These directions provided that the televising of
            proceedings was not permitted in criminal cases at first
            instance and that filming could only be done with
            consent of all parties involved in the proceedings and
            subject to approval by the presiding judge of the final
            product before it was televised. The conditions for such
            filming were varied for a trial period in 201270.
         c. As long as all key parties agree and conditions are met,
            full trials can, atleast in theory, be filmed for educational
            purposes and the juries‟ verdict or sentencing can be
            filmed for other purposes such as news broadcast. Both
            civil and criminal trials can be broadcast.
d. Cases of special public interest, like the trial of accused
            in the Lockerbie Bombings, have also been allowed to be

68  See Appendix III to the Cameras and live text-based communication in the Scottish
courts: a consultation issued by the Judicial Office for Scotland available on the official
website of the Scottish judiciary at:
http://www.scotland-judiciary.org.uk/Upload/Documents/ConsultationDocument.pdf
69 [2005] CSOH 80
70 See Appendix IV to the Cameras and live text-based communication in the Scottish

courts: a consultation link at footnote 68
35
broadcast, with guidelines for the same issued by the
              presiding judge in the matter.71
           e. Scotland is currently in the process of reforming its
              court-broadcasting process as per the suggestions of a
              Review Committee72.
XV.    South Africa:
1. Supreme Court of Appeal: The Supreme Court has allowed
         for the media to broadcast court proceedings in criminal
         matters, as an extension of the Constitutionally-guaranteed
         right to freedom of expression.
a. In its landmark judgment of The NDPP v Media 24 Limited
            & others and HC Van Breda v Media 24 Limited &
            others73, the Supreme Court allowed for broadcast of
            proceedings in criminal trials, holding that courts should
            not restrict the nature and scope of broadcast of court
            proceedings unless prejudice was demonstrable and
            there was a risk that such prejudice would occur.
         b. While refraining from laying down rigid rules on
            broadcast of such court proceedings, the Court set out
            general guidelines to assist in determining whether
            proceedings should be broadcast:
i. The trial court would exercise its discretion to allow
                broadcast of proceedings on a case-to-case basis, after
                balancing the degree of risk involved in allowing the



71 See Para 5.5 onwards of the Cameras and live text-based communication in the Scottish
courts: a consultation link referred to at footnote 68
72 See: Report of the Review of Policy on Recording and Broadcasting of Proceedings in

Court, and Use of Live Text-Based Communications available on the official website of the
Scottish judiciary at: http://www.scotland-judiciary.org.uk/25/1369/Report-of-the-Review-of-
Policy-on-Recording-and-Broadcasting-of-Proceedings-in-Court--and-Use-of-Live-Text-Based-
Communications
73 [2017] ZASCA 97 (21st June 2017)
36
cameras into the court room against the degree of risk
          that a fair trial might not ensue;
ii.   The trial court could always direct that some or all of
          the proceedings before it could not be broadcast or
          could only be broadcast in certain forms, like audio
          recording;
iii.   A judge could terminate coverage at any time upon a
          finding that the rules imposed by the judge had been
          violated or the substantial rights of individual
          participants or the rights to a fair trial would be
          prejudiced by such coverage if it was allowed to
          continue;
iv.    An accused person in a criminal trial could object to
          the presence of cameras in the courtroom. If the court
          determined that the objection raised by the accused
          was valid, it could exclude cameras from recording;
    v.    Witnesses could also raise objections to being filmed.
If the judge determined that a witness had a valid
          objection, alternatives to regular photographic or
          television coverage could be explored, like introducing
          special lighting techniques and electronic voice
          alteration, or merely by shielding the witness from the
          camera. Broadcast of testimony of an objecting
          witness could be delayed until after the trial is over;
   vi.    Cameras would be permitted to film or televise all non-
objecting witnesses.
vii.   There would be no coverage of:
 Communications between counsel and client or co-
              counsel;
 Bench discussions;
 In-camera hearings.
2. Lower Courts: In light of the Supreme Court decision in
   Breda, lower court criminal proceedings are also allowed to
37
be broadcast subject to conditions laid down by the
            presiding judge.
XVI.    United States of America
1. Supreme Court: The Supreme Court does not permit
          broadcasting of its proceedings for a variety of reasons74
          including that it could adversely affect the character and
          quality of the dialogue between attorneys and Justices75.
a. The Supreme Court has, over the years, consistently
             rejected pleas to broadcast oral arguments.76 It does not
             allow photography of proceedings or video recordings.
          b. The Court has, however, allowed audio recording of oral
             arguments since 1955. Presently, the Court releases
             same-day audio transcripts of oral arguments77 and
             audio recordings of all oral arguments at the end of each
             week that arguments are heard78.
2. Federal Appellate Courts: Certain Federal Courts allow for
          broadcast of court proceedings subject to guidelines laid
          down in that regard.
74 See Senate hearings on „A Bill To Permit The Televising Of Supreme Court Proceedings’
on the official website of the US Congress available at:
https://www.congress.gov/110/crpt/srpt448/CRPT-110srpt448.pdf
75 See Letter by Counselor to the Chief Justice, rejecting live broadcast of oral arguments,

available at:
https://arstechnica.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/scotusletter.pdf
76 See: Above Politics: Congress and the Supreme Court in 2017 by Jason Mazzone at Pg.

404, Footnote 208, 93 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 373 (2018) available at:
https://scholarship.kentlaw.iit.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=4207&context=cklawreview
77 Official website of the Supreme Court at:
https://www.supremecourt.gov/oral_arguments/argument_transcript
78 Official website of the Supreme Court:
https://www.supremecourt.gov/oral_arguments/argument_audio
38
a. Filming and broadcast of criminal proceedings in US
             Federal Courts were prohibited by Rule 53 of the Federal
             Rule of Criminal Procedure79 since 1946.
b. After various pilot runs involving limited number of
             courts, the Judicial Conference in 2010 authorised a pilot
             for three years, involving 150 first-instance civil courts.
             Cameras were to be operated by the court itself, no
             filming of jurors was to take place and the consent of
             parties was required. Proceedings could be recorded only
             with the approval of the presiding judge, and parties had
             to consent to the recording of each proceeding in a case.
             Unless the presiding judge decided not to make the
             recordings publicly available, they would subsequently be
             posted on the federal courts website, as well as on local
             participating court websites at the court's discretion.
             Judges would have a switch or be able to direct cessation
             of recording if deemed necessary80.
c. The Judicial Conference in 2016 decided not to alter the
             guidelines set out in the 2010 conference. Three districts
             that participated in the 2010 pilot programme were
             authorised to continue filming proceedings under the
             same terms and conditions as in 2010.
d. Federal Courts of Appeals have the option of providing
             audio or video recordings of appellate hearings, and rules
             are available on each circuit‟s website. The Ninth Circuit
             Court for example, live-streams oral arguments81.
79‗Rule 53. Courtroom Photographing and Broadcasting Prohibited
Except as otherwise provided by a statute or these rules, the court must not permit the taking of
photographs in the courtroom during judicial proceedings or the broadcasting of judicial
proceedings from the courtroom.‘
Available on the official website of the House of Representatives, Judiciary Committee at:
https://judiciary.house.gov/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Criminal2016.pdf
80 See: History of Cameras in Courts on the website of the United States Courts at:
http://www.uscourts.gov/about-federal-courts/cameras-courts/history-cameras-courts
81 See the     official website for the United States Court for the Ninth Circuit at:
https://www.ca9.uscourts.gov/media/index_video.php
39
3. Lower Courts/District Courts: Courts in all states have
          framed rules for broadcast of court proceedings, each
          varying in the degree and extent to which broadcasts are
          allowed.
a. In Estes v. Texas82, the US Supreme Court held that
            camera coverage of a trial inspite of the defendant‟s
            objection to the same violated the defendant's
            constitutional right, although the question of whether
            courtroom broadcasting was inherently prejudicial to a
            fair trial, remained open. This question was answered in
            Chandler v Florida83 where the Court was of the opinion
            that the restriction on camera coverage imposed in Estes
            was not an absolute, universal ban and left it to the
            states to frame rules for permitting televised recordings,
            since televising a criminal trial did not automatically
            make the trial unfair to the defendant.
b. In the aftermath of the decision in Chandler, all 50 US
            states have allowed for some form of televised broadcast
            of court proceedings and framed rules for the same84,
            with the applicability and extent of such broadcast
            varying from state to state. Some states permit visual and
            audio coverage in all types of court proceedings that are
            public, including civil and criminal trials of the first
            instance, at the discretion of the presiding judge, while
            other states allow such coverage only in appellate courts.



82 381 U.S. 532 (1965)
83 449 U.S. 560 (1981)
84 A complete list of rules enacted in different courts regulating broadcast of proceedings is

available   on    the   website   for   the    „National  Center    for  State   Courts‟   at:
https://www.ncsc.org/Topics/Media/Media-Relations/State-
Links.aspx?cat=Cameras%20in%20the%20Courtroom
40
11. We may now advert to the comprehensive guidelines for

live streaming of Court proceedings in Supreme Court, as

suggested by the learned Attorney General for India, which

read as follows:
“Comprehensive Guidelines for Live streaming of Court
                proceedings in Supreme Court

     Brief Background
1. That the Petitioner in the present Writ Petition seeks a
     declaration for permitting live streaming of Supreme Court
     case proceedings of constitutional and national importance
     having an impact on the public at large and a direction to
     make available the necessary infrastructure for live
     streaming and to frame guidelines for the determination of
     such cases which are of constitutional and national
     importance.
2. That, in this regard, it is submitted that Courts in India are
     open to all members of the public who wish to attend the
     court proceedings. However, in practice, many interested
     persons are unable to witness the hearings on account of
     constraints of time, resources, or the ability to travel long
     distances to attend hearing on every single date. This is
     especially true in the case of litigants who have to travel long
     distances from far off States such as Kerala and States in
     the North-East and therefore run the risk of being excluded
     from attending court hearings involving cases filed by them.
3. Furthermore, on miscellaneous days of hearing, the Apex
     Courts is highly congested, with practically no space
     available in the Courtrooms and in the public gallery to
     accommodate litigants, lawyers and law students and
     interns.
41
4. On account of such shortcomings, it may be advantageous to
   build an appropriate infrastructure for live-streaming or
   audio/video recording of court proceedings to enable the
   court proceedings to be viewed without the constraints of
   time or place. It would be ideal if a separate space is
   allocated by building a hall in the Court for lawyers, clients
   and interns to watch the live proceedings, so that, the
   crowds in the Court will be decongested. This will obviate the
   need for clients coming from far away distances and reduce
   their inconvenience in witnessing their case. This may also
   be one of the relevant factors for the Court to consider. Such
   a system would also enable the lawyers, law students and
   anyone interested in the workings of the highest court in the
   country to supplement their learning with practical study of
   cases of national importance, while ensuring that litigants
   have a true account of how decisions were made in their
   respective case. Such a system is in aid of the well accepted
   and respected tradition of „Open justice‟ i.e. justice should be
   administered in an open court.
Recommendations:
This Hon‟ble court may lay down the following guidelines to
   administer live streaming of Court proceedings:
5. At the outset, it is submitted that Live Streaming of Court
   proceedings should be introduced as a pilot project in Court
   No.1 and only in Constitution bench references. The success
   of this project will determine whether or not live streaming
   should be introduced in all courts in the Supreme Court and
   in Courts pan India.
6. To ensure that all persons including litigants, journalists,
   interns, visitors and lawyers are able to view the live
   streaming of the proceedings, a media room should be
   designated in the premises of the court with necessary
   infrastructural facilities. This will also ensure that courts are
   decongested. Provisions may also be made available for the
   benefit of differently abled persons.
42
7. Apart from live streaming, the Supreme Court may, in the
          future, also provide for transcribing facilities and archive the
          audio-visual record of the proceedings to make the webcast
          accessible to litigants and other interested persons who are
          unable to witness the hearings on account of constraints of
          time, resources, or the ability to travel long distances to
          attend hearing on every single date. Such webcasts will also
          allow students of law to supplement their academic
          knowledge and gain practical insights into cases of national
          importance.
8. It is pertinent that this Hon‟ble Court lay down guidelines to
          safeguard and limit the broadcasting and recording of its
          proceedings to ensure better access to justice. Some of the
          recommendations are:
a. The Court must have the power to limit, temporarily suspend
          or disallow filming or broadcasting, if in its opinion, such
          measures are likely to interfere with the rights of the parties
          to a fair trial or otherwise interfere with the proper
          administration of justice.
b. The Court may law down guidelines/criterion to determine
          what cases constitute proceedings of constitutional and
          national importance to seek permission for broadcasting.
c. As held famously in the case of Scott vs. Scott, (1913) AC 417,
          “While the broad principle is that the Courts must
          administer justice in public, the chief object of Courts of
          justice must be to secure that justice is done”, broadcasting
          must not be permitted in the cases involving:
i.        Matrimonial matters,
ii.       Matters involving interests of juveniles or the protection and
safety of the private life of the young offenders,
iii.      Matters of National security,
iv.       To ensure that victims, witnesses or defendants can depose
          truthfully and without any fear. Special protection must be
          given to vulnerable or intimidated witnesses. It may provide
43
for face distortion of the witness if she/he consents to the
          broadcast anonymously,
v.        To protect confidential or sensitive information, including all
          matters relating to sexual assault and rape, and
vi.       Matters where publicity would be antithetical to the
          administration of justice.
vii.      Cases which may provoke sentiments and arouse passion
          and provoke enmity among communities.
d. Use of the footage would be restricted for the purpose of
          news, current affairs and educational purposes and should
          not be used for commercial, promotion, light entertainment,
          satirical programs or advertising.
e. Without prior written authorization of the Supreme Court of
          India, live streaming or the webcast of the proceedings from
          the Supreme Court should not be reproduced, transmitted,
          uploaded, posted, modified, published or republished to the
          public.
f. Any unauthorized usage of the live streaming and/or
          webcasts will be punishable as an offence under the
Indian
          Copyright Act, 1957
and the
Information Technology Act,
          2000
and any other provisions of the law in force. The law of
          contempt should apply to such proceedings. Prohibitions,
          fines and penalties may be provided for.
g. The Courts may also lay down rules of coverage to provide
          for the manner in which the filming may be done and the
          equipment that will be allowed in court.
h. Case management techniques should be introduced to
          ensure that matters are decided in a speedy manner and
          lawyers abide by time limits fixed prior to the hearing. A
          skeleton of arguments/Written submissions should be
          prepared and submitted to the Court by the lawyers prior to
          their arguments.
i. The Court of Appeal in England, in November 2013,
          introduced streaming its proceedings on YouTube. The
          telecast is deferred by 70 seconds with the Judge having the
44
power to mute something said in the proceedings if he feels
     they are inappropriate for public consumption.
j. Like the Court of Appeal in England, the Supreme Court
     should also lay guidelines for having only two camera angles,
     one facing the judge and the other- the lawyer. The camera
     should not focus on the papers of the lawyer.”
12. As aforesaid, Courts in India are ordinarily open to all

members of public, who are interested in witnessing the court

proceedings.    However,      due     to   logistical    issues      and

infrastructural restrictions in courts, they may be denied the

opportunity to witness live Court proceedings in propria

persona. To consummate their aspirations, use of technology

to relay or publicize the live court proceedings can be a way

forward. By providing “virtual” access of live court proceedings

to one and all, it will effectuate the right of access to justice or

right to open justice and public trial, right to know the

developments of law and including the right of justice at the

doorstep of the litigants. Open justice, after all, can be more

than just a physical access to the courtroom rather, it is

doable even “virtually” in the form of live streaming of court

proceedings and have the same effect.
45
13. Publication of court proceedings of the Supreme Court is

a facet of the status of this Court as a Court of Record by

virtue of
Article 129
of the Constitution, whose acts and

proceedings are enrolled for perpetual memory and testimony.
Further, live streaming of court proceedings in the prescribed

digital format would be an affirmation of the constitutional

rights   bestowed upon    the public and     the   litigants   in

particular. While doing so, regard must be had to the fact that

just as the dignity and majesty of the Court is inviolable, the

issues regarding privacy rights of the litigants or witnesses

whose cases are set down for hearing, as also other

exceptional category of cases of which live streaming of

proceedings may not be desirable as it may affect the cause of

administration of justice itself, are matters which need to be

identified and a proper regulatory framework must be provided

in that regard by formulating rules in exercise of the power

under
Article 145
of the Constitution. It must be kept in mind

that in case of conflict between competing Constitutional

rights, a sincere effort must be made to harmonise such
46
conflict in order to give maximum expression to each right

while minimizing the encroachment on the other rights. We

are conscious of the fact that in terms of
Section 327
of CrPC

and
Section 153-B
of CPC, only court-directed matters can be

heard in camera and the general public can be denied access

to or to remain in the court building used by the Court. Until

such direction is issued by the Court, the hearing of the case

is deemed to be an open court to which the public generally

may have access. The access to the hearing by the general

public, however, would be limited to the size and capacity of

the court room. By virtue of live streaming of court

proceedings, it would go public beyond the four walls of the

court room to which, in a given case, the party or a witness to

the proceedings may have genuine reservations and may claim

right of privacy and dignity. Such a claim will have to be

examined by the concerned Court and for which reason, a just

regulatory   framework   must   be   provided   for,   including

obtaining prior consent of the parties to the proceedings to be

live streamed.
47
14. We generally agree with the comprehensive guidelines for

live streaming of Court proceedings in the Supreme Court

suggested by the learned Attorney General for India Shri K.K.

Venugopal. The project of live streaming of the court

proceedings of the Supreme Court on the “internet” and/or on

radio     and       TV      through      live     audio-visual

broadcasting/telecasting universally by an official agency,

such as Doordarshan, having exclusive telecasting rights

and/or official website/mobile application of the Court, must

be implemented in a progressive, structured and phased

manner, with certain safeguards to ensure that the purpose of

live streaming of proceedings is achieved holistically and that

it does not interfere with the administration of justice or the

dignity and majesty of the Court hearing the matter and/or

impinge upon any rights of the litigants or witnesses. The

entire project will have to be executed in phases, with certain

phases containing sub-phases or stages. Needless to observe

that before the commencement of first phase of the project,

formal rules will have to be framed by this Court to

incorporate the recommendations made by the learned
48
Attorney General for India as noted in paragraph 11 above,

while keeping in mind the basic issues, such as:-
(i)     To begin with, only a specified category of cases or cases

        of constitutional and national importance being argued

        for final hearing before the Constitution Bench be live

        streamed as a pilot project. For that, permission of the

        concerned Court will have to be sought in writing, in

        advance, in conformity with the prescribed procedure.
(ii)    Prior consent of all the parties to the concerned

        proceedings must be insisted upon and if there is no

        unanimity between them, the concerned Court can take

        the appropriate decision in the matter for live streaming

        of the court proceedings of that case, after having due

        regard to the relevancy of the objections raised by the

        concerned party. The discretion exercised by the Court

        shall be treated as final. It must be non-justiciable and

        non-appealable.
(iii)   The concerned court would retain its power to revoke the

        permission at any stage of the proceedings suo motu or
49
on an application filed by any party to the proceeding or

       otherwise, in that regard, if the situation so warrants,

       keeping in mind that the cause of administration of

       justice should not suffer in any manner.
(iv)   The discretion of the Court to grant or refuse to grant

       such permission will be, inter alia, guided by the

       following considerations:
(a)   unanimous consent of the parties involved,
(b)   even after the parties give unanimous consent the

             Court will consider the sensitivity of the subject

             matter before granting such permission, but not

             limited to case which may arouse passion or social

             unrest amongst section of the public,
(c)   any      other   reason   considered    necessary    or

             appropriate in the larger interest of administration

             of justice, including as to whether such broadcast

             will affect the dignity of the court itself or interfere

             with/prejudice the rights of the parties to a fair

             trial,
50
(v)   There must be a reasonable time-delay (say ten minutes)

      between the live court proceedings and the broadcast, in

      order to ensure that any information which ought not to

      be shown, as directed by the Court, can be edited from

      being broadcast.
15. Until a full-fledged module and mechanism for live

streaming of the court proceedings of the Supreme Court over

the “internet” is evolved, it would be open to explore the

possibility of implementation of Phase-I of live streaming in

designated areas within the confines of this Court via

“intranet” by use of allocated passwords, as a pilot project. The

designated areas may include:
(a)    dedicated media room which could be accessible to

             the litigants, advocates, clerks and interns. Special

             provisions must be made to accommodate differently

             abled people;
(b)   the Supreme Court Bar Association room/lounge;
(c) the Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association

             room/lounge;
51
(d) the official chambers of the Attorney General,

            Solicitor General and Additional Solicitor Generals in

            the Supreme Court premises;
(e) Advocates‟ Chambers blocks.
(f)    Press Reporters room.
16. It may be desirable to keep in mind other measures to be

taken for efficient management of the entire project such as:
(i)   Appoint a technical committee comprising the

            Registrar (IT), video recording expert(s) and any

            other members as may be required, to develop

            technical   guidelines    for   video   recording   and

            broadcasting    court    proceedings,   including   the

            specific procedure to be followed and the equipment

            to be used in that regard.
(ii)   Specialist video operator(s) be appointed to handle

            the live broadcast, who will work under the

            directions of the concerned Court. The coverage

            itself will be coordinated and supervised by a Court-
appointed officer.
52
(iii)   The focus of the cameras in the courtroom will be

        directed only towards two sets of people:
a. The Justices/Bench hearing the matter and at such

        an angle so as to only show the anterior-facing side

        of the Justices, without revealing anything from

        behind the elevated platform/level on which the

        Justices sit or any of the Justices‟ papers, notes,

        reference material and/or books;
b. The arguing advocate(s) in the matter and at such

        an angle so as to not to reveal in any way the

        contents of notes or reference material being relied

        upon by the arguing advocate(s). This will also apply

        to parties-in-person arguing their own matter.
c. There shall be no broadcast of any interaction

        between the advocate and the client even during

        arguments.
(iv)    Subject to any alteration of camera angles for the

        purpose of avoiding broadcast of any of the

        aforestated   papers,   notes,   reference   materials,
53
books and/or discussions, the camera angles will

        remain fixed over the course of the broadcast.
(v)    This Court shall introduce a case management

        system to ensure inter alia that advocates are

        allotted and adhere to a fixed time limit while

        arguing their matter to be live streamed.
(vi)    This     Court     must   retain   copyright     over   the

        broadcasted material and have the final say in

        respect of use of the coverage material.
(vii)   Reproduction,        re-broadcasting,         transmission,

        publication, re-publication, copying, storage and/or

        modification of any part(s) of the original broadcast

        of Court proceedings, in any form, physical, digital

        or otherwise, must be prohibited. Any person

        engaging in such act(s) can be proceeded under, but

        not limited to, the
Indian Copyright Act, 1957
, the
Indian     Penal     Code
,   1860,      the
Information

        Technology Act, 2000
and the
Contempt of Courts

        Act, 1971
.
54
17. We reiterate that the Supreme Court Rules, 2013 will

have to be suitably amended to provide for the regulatory

framework as per the contours delineated hereinabove. We

may hasten to add that it would be open to frame such

regulatory measures as may be found necessary for holistic

live streaming of the court proceedings, without impinging

upon the cause of administration of justice in any manner.
18. In conclusion, we hold that the cause brought before this

Court by the protagonists in larger public interest, deserves

acceptance so as to uphold the constitutional rights of public

and the litigants, in particular. In recognizing that court

proceedings ought to be live streamed, this Court is mindful of

and has strived to balance the various interests regarding

administration of justice, including open justice, dignity and

privacy of the participants to the proceedings and the majesty

and decorum of the Courts.
19.   As   a   result,   we   allow   these   writ   petitions   and

interventionists‟   applications      with    the    aforementioned

observations and hope that the relevant rules will be
55
formulated expeditiously and the first phase project executed

in right earnest by all concerned. Ordered accordingly.
20. While parting, we must place on record our sincere

appreciation   for   the   able   assistance   and   constructive

suggestions given by the learned counsel and the parties in-

person appearing in this case.
.………………………….CJI.
(Dipak Misra)



                                      …………………………..….J.
                                      (A.M. Khanwilkar)

New Delhi;
September 26, 2018.
REPORTABLE


            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
              CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

          WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1232 OF 2017




SWAPNIL TRIPATHI                         .....PETITIONER


                      VERSUS

SUPREME COURT OF INDIA                    .....RESPONDENT
(THROUGH SECRETARY GENERAL)




                           WITH

           WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 66 OF 2018



                          WITH


          WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 861 OF 2018


                          AND
                          WITH


          WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 892 OF 2018
1
J U D G M E N T




Index to the judgment


A     Open Justice

B     Indian Jurisprudence

C     Technology and Open Court

      C.1    ICT in Indian courts
      C.2    Technology and Implementation
      C.3    Platforms created for service delivery
      C.4    National Judicial Data Grid
      C.5    Other facilities created to speed up justice delivery
      C.6    Concept of Video Streaming/Web Cast
      C.7    Virtual reality as an extension of the open court


D     Comparative Law

E     Model guidelines for broadcasting of the proceedings and other Judicial events of
      the Supreme Court of India
2
PART A



Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J




A      Open Justice



1      The issue in this batch of cases is whether there should be live
dissemination of proceedings before this Court with the aid of Information and

Communications Technology (ICT). The basis of the petitions is that this would

enable litigants and society to have wide access to judicial proceedings. It is

urged that cases of constitutional and national importance have a significant

impact on the social fabric. Citizens have a right to know about and to follow

court proceedings. It has been submitted that live or online transmission of court

proceedings with the aid of ICT enabled tools will subserve the cause of access

to justice.
2      Our legal system subscribes to the principle of open justice. The prayer

for live-streaming of courtroom proceedings has its genesis in this principle.

Live-streaming will allow real time access to courtroom proceedings to litigants

and to every member of the society.
3
PART A


3       Open justice is a long-established principle of common law systems. It

rests on a high pedestal in a liberal democracy as ‘a sound and very sacred part

of the Constitution of the country and the administration of justice…’1

Jeremy Bentham propounded the idea of open justice in the late eighteenth

century while designing principles for establishments in which persons are to

be kept under inspection:
“...the doors of all public establishments ought to be, thrown
                wide open to the body of the curious at large- the great open
                committee of the tribunal of the world.”2
4       Although Bentham wrote these words in the larger context of public

institutions, they apply on equal terms to the theory of open justice. Bentham in

his “Draught of Code for the Organization of the Judicial Establishment”

codified the principle of open justice as:
“Article XVIII- Judicial proceedings, from the first step to the
                last inclusive, shall, in all cases but the secret ones herein
                specified, be carried out with the utmost degree of publicity
                possible.”3



According to Bentham, secret (or in-camera) proceedings were to be carried

out in the judge’s chamber.4 He also prescribed open justice for trials by the

National Assembly Courts, (which, in his Code, were courts constituted to hear

complaints against any metropolitan judge):
1 House of Lords in Scott v Scott, [1913] A.C. 417 at 473.
2 Jeremy Bentham, The Works of Jeremy Bentham, published under the Superintendence of his Executor, John
   Bowring (Edinburgh: William Tait, 1838-1843). 11 volumes, volume 4, at page 46.
3 Ibid at page 288.
4 Ibid at page 303.
4
PART A


                 “Article III- Such trial shall be conducted from beginning to end,
                 with open doors and with the utmost possible degree of
                 publicity.”5



The principle underlying open justice was formulated by Lord Chief Justice

Hewart:
“Justice should not only be done, but should manifestly and
                 undoubtedly be seen to be done.”6




In R (Binyam Mohamed) v Secretary of State for Foreign and

Commonwealth Affairs, Lord Judge CJ draws a link between open justice and

democratic values:
“...the principle of open justice represents an element of
                 democratic accountability, and the vigorous manifestation of
                 the principle of freedom of expression. Ultimately it supports
                 the rule of law itself.”7
5       Legal scholars indicate that the principle of open justice encompasses

several aspects that are central to the fair administration of justice and the rule

of law.8 It has both procedural and substantive dimensions, which are equally

important. Open justice comprises of several precepts:
(i)     The entitlement of an interested person to attend court as a spectator;
5 Ibid at page 300.
6 King’s Bench, Division Court in R v Sussex [1923], All ER Rep 233.
7 Court of Appeal, England and Wales in R (Binyam Mohamed) v Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth

  Affairs, [2010] 3 WLR 554.
8 Cunliffe Emma, "Open Justice: Concepts and Judicial Approaches", (2012) 40 Fed L Rev 385.
5
PART A
(ii)     The promotion of full, fair and accurate reporting of court proceedings;
(iii)    The duty of judges to give reasoned decisions; and

(iv)     Public access to judgments of courts.9
The principle of an open court is a significant procedural dimension of the

broader concept of open justice. Open courts allow the public to view courtroom

proceedings. Black’s Law Dictionary defines an “open court” as follows:
“… a court to which the public have a right to be admitted…
                  This term may mean either a court which has been formally
                  convened and declared open for the transaction of its proper
                  judicial business, or a court which is freely open to
                  spectators…”10



The idea of open courts is crucial to maintaining public confidence in the

administration of justice:
“The public must be able to enter any court to see that justice
                  is being done in that court, by a tribunal conscientiously doing
                  its best to do justice according to law.”11



Open courts ensure a check on the process of adjudication in judicial

proceedings. Bentham regarded publicity about courtroom proceedings as a

mechanism to prevent improbity of judges:
9  Ibid.
10 Black’s Law Dictionary, 6th Edition, 1990, page 1091. The Black’s Law Dictionary, 10th Edition, 2014, page 1263
defines an “open court” thus: “1. A court that is in session, presided over by a judge, attended by the parties and
their attorneys, and engaged in judicial business… The term is distinguished from a court that is hearing evidence
in camera or from judge that is exercising merely magisterial powers. 2. A court session that the public is free to
attend…”
11 Supra note 7.
6
PART A


                 “Publicity is the very soul of justice. It is the keenest spur to
                 exertion, and the surest of all guards against improbity. It keeps
                 the judge himself, while trying, under trial.
... It is through publicity alone that justice becomes the mother
                 of security. By publicity, the temple of justice is converted into
                 a school of the first order…”12



6       Lord Diplock, speaking for the House of Lords in AG v Leveller

Magazine, remarked that open courts are a safeguard against judicial

arbitrariness or idiosyncrasy. 13 Open courts, in his view, help build public

confidence in the administration of justice. 14 The public’s trust in the judicial

system depends on their perception of how courts function. Open courts make

it possible for the public to develop reasonable perceptions about the judiciary,

by enabling them to directly observe judicial behaviour, and the processes and

outcomes of a case.
In the decision of the High Court of Australia, in Grollo v Palmer, Gummow J

dwelt on the idea of open courts:
“An essential attribute of the judicial power of the
                 Commonwealth is the resolution of such controversies ... so as
                 to provide final results which are delivered in public after a
                 public hearing, and, where a judge is the tribunal of fact as well
                 as law, are preceded by grounds for decision which are
                 animated by reasoning. An objective of the exercise of the
                 judicial power in each particular case is the satisfaction of the
                 parties to the dispute and the general public that, by these
                 procedures, justice has both been done and been seen to be
                 done.” 15




12 Supra note 2 at page 316-317.
13 House of Lords, as per Lord Diplock in AG v Leveller Magazine, [1979] AC 440, at page 450.
14 Ibid.
15 High Court of Australia, as per Gummow J in Grollo v Palmer, [1995] HCA 2.
7
PART A


The Ministry of Justice in the UK, in its proposal to permit broadcasting of court

proceedings, has succinctly articulated the need for open courts:
“Few people have direct experience of court proceedings, and
                  overall public understanding of the criminal justice system is
                  limited. Most court sittings take place when many people are
                  at work. Many people, therefore, currently base their views on
                  how the system is portrayed on television, or in films. These
                  dramatised accounts rarely portray what happens in court
                  accurately. With the range of technology now available, it
                  should be easier for people to access better information on
                  court proceedings.” 16



In the decision of the US Supreme Court in Richmond Newspapers, Inc. v

Virginia, Burger CJ observed:
“The early history of open trials in part reflects the widespread
                  acknowledgment, long before there were behavioural
                  scientists, that public trials had significant community
                  therapeutic value…
                  … People in an open society do not demand infallibility from
                  their institutions, but it is difficult for them to accept what they
                  are prohibited from observing.”17
7        Public confidence in the judiciary and in the process of judicial decision

making is crucial for preserving the rule of law and to maintain the stability of

the social fabric. Peoples’ access to the court signifies that the public is willing

to have disputes resolved in court and to obey and accept judicial orders. Open

courts effectively foster public confidence by allowing litigants and members of




16 Ministry of Justice, UK, Proposals to allow the broadcasting, filming, and recording of selected court proceedings,
   making recommendations, 2012. Available at:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/217307/broa
   dcasting-filming-recording-courts.pdf
17 Supreme Court of United States in Richmond Newspapers, Inc. v Virginia, 448 US 555 (1980).
8
PART B


the public to view courtroom proceedings and ensure that the judges apply the

law in a fair and impartial manner.
B     Indian Jurisprudence



8     The concept of open courts is not alien to the Indian legal system. The
Constitution adopts the concept in
Article 145(4)
, which states that the Supreme

Court shall be an open court:
“(4) No judgment shall be delivered by the Supreme Court save
             in open Court, and no report shall be made under
Article 143
save in accordance with an opinion also delivered in open
             Court.”




The
Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 (“
CPC
”) and the
Code of Criminal

Procedure
, 1973 (“
CrPC
”) extend the principle of open courts to all civil and

criminal courts in India.
Section 153-B
of the CPC provides that every civil court

which tries a suit shall be deemed to be an open court:
“Section 153-B. Place of trial to be deemed to be open
             court.-
The place in which any Civil Court is held for the purpose of
             trying any suit shall be deemed to be an open Court, to which
             the public generally may have access so far as the same can
             conveniently contain them:
Provided that the presiding Judge may, if he thinks fit, order at
             any stage of any inquiry into or trial of any particular case, that
             the public generally, or any particular person, shall not have
             access to, or be or remain in, the room or building used by the
             Court.”
9
PART B


Similarly,
Section 327
of the CrPC also mandates criminal courts to be open:
“Section 327. - Court to be open.-
“[(1)] The place in which any Criminal Court is held for the
                   purpose of inquiring into or trying any offence shall be deemed
                   to be an open Court, to which the public generally may have
                   access, so far as the same can conveniently contain them:
Provided that the presiding Judge or Magistrate may, if he
                   thinks fit, order at any stage of any inquiry into, or trial of, any
                   particular case, that the public generally, or any particular
                   person, shall not have access to, or be or remain in, the room
                   or building used by the Court.”



Hence, all courts in India are open to the public and function as open courts,

except when the administration of justice requires public access to the court to

be restricted. The principle of open courts in India recognises exceptions which

are in the interest of fair administration of justice.
9          Various judgments of this Court have reinforced the importance of open

courts. The earliest and most significant judgment on this aspect is the decision

of a nine-judge Bench in Naresh Shridhar Mirajkar v State of Maharashtra18

(“Mirajkar”). While upholding an oral order of the High Court prohibiting the

media to publish the evidence of a witness in a defamation suit, the majority

emphasised the importance of open courts. Chief Justice Gajendragadkar,

speaking for the majority observed:
“20... It is well settled that in general, all cases brought before
                   the courts, whether civil, criminal, or others, must be heard in
                   open court. Public trial in open court is undoubtedly essential
                   for the healthy, objective and fair administration of justice. Trial
18   (1966) 3 SCR 744.
10
PART B


                     held subject to the public scrutiny and gaze naturally acts as a
                     check against judicial caprice or vagaries, and serves as a
                     powerful instrument for creating confidence of the public in the
                     fairness, objectivity, and impartiality of the administration of
                     justice. Public confidence in the administration of justice is of
                     such great significance that there can be no two opinions on
                     the broad proposition that in discharging their functions as
                     judicial tribunals, courts must generally hear causes in open
                     and must permit the public admission to the court-room.”



Justice Gajendragadkar then quoted from Bentham (as noted in Scott v

Scott19):
“20... In the darkness of secrecy sinister interest, and evil in
                     every shape, have full swing. Only in proportion as publicity
                     has place can any of the checks applicable to judicial injustice
                     operate. Where there is no publicity there is no justice. Publicity
                     is the very soul of justice. It is the keenest spur to exertion, and
                     surest of all guards against improbity. It keeps the Judge
                     himself while trying under trial (in the sense that) the security
                     of securities is publicity.”




Even in his dissenting opinion, Justice Hidayatullah (as the learned judge then

was) agreed with the majority on the importance of an open court system:
“90. …As we have fortunately inherited the English tradition of
                     holding trials (with a few exceptions to which I shall refer later)
                     in public, I shall begin with the English practice. It has always
                     been the glory of the English system as opposed to the
                     Continental, that all trials are held ostiis apertis, that is, with
                     open doors. This principle is old… it is a direct guarantee of
                     civil liberty and it moved Bentham to say that it was the soul of
                     Justice and that in proportion as publicity had place, the checks
                     on judicial injustice could be found.…”
19   Supra note 1.
11
PART B


Justice J C Shah elaborated on open justice but also recognised the need to

restrict access to protect the administration of justice, in cases where it

becomes necessary:
“129...Hearing in open court of causes is of the utmost
             importance for maintaining confidence of the public in the
             impartial administration of justice: it operates as a wholesome
             check upon judicial behaviour as well as upon the conduct of
             the contending parties and their witnesses. But hearing of a
             cause in public which is only to secure administration of justice
             untainted must yield to the paramount object of administration
             of justice. If excessive publicity itself operates as an instrument
             of injustice, the court may not be slow, if it is satisfied that it is
             necessary so to do to put such restraint upon publicity as is
             necessary to secure the court's primary object...”




Quoting Hegel in “Philosophy of Right,” Justice Bachawat added that:
“140 … A court of justice is a public forum. It is through
             publicity that the citizens are convinced that the court renders
             even-handed justice, and it is, therefore, necessary that the
             trial should be open to the public and there should be no
             restraint on the publication of the report of the court
             proceedings. The publicity generates public confidence in the
             administration of justice. In rare and exceptional cases only,
             the court may hold the trial behind closed doors, or may forbid
             the publication of the report of its proceedings during the
             pendency of the litigation.
141. ...Hegel in his Philosophy of Right maintained that judicial
             proceedings must be public, since the aim of the Court is
             justice, which is a universal belonging to all.”



Key takeaways emerge from the opinions in Mirajkar:
(i)    Open courts serve as an instrument of inspiring public confidence in

          the administration of justice;
(ii)   Open courts act as a check on the judiciary;
12
PART B
(iii)     Publicity of the judicial process is the soul of justice;
(iv)      Open justice must yield to the paramount object of the administration

                of justice, in case it becomes necessary to restrict access in the facts

                of a particular case; and
(v)       Open courts are essential for the objective and fair administration of

                justice.
10            Almost two decades later, in
Olga Tellis v Bombay Municipal

Corporation,20
a Constitution Bench of this Court held that eviction of slum-

dwellers violated their right to earn a livelihood. Chief Justice Y V Chandrachud

reiterated the value of a hearing, in emphasising the principle that justice must

also be seen to be done:
“47...justice must not only be done but must manifestly be seen
                   to be done… The appearance of injustice is the denial of
                   justice. It is the dialogue with the person likely to be affected
                   by the proposed action which meets the requirement that
                   justice must also be seen to be done...
...Whatever its outcome, such a hearing represents a valued
                   human interaction in which the affected person experiences at
                   least the satisfaction of participating in the decision that vitally
                   concerns her, and perhaps the separate satisfaction of
                   receiving an explanation of why the decision is being made in
                   a certain way. Both the right to be heard from, and the right to
                   be told why, are analytically distinct from the right to secure a
                   different outcome; these rights to interchange express the
                   elementary idea that to be a person, rather than a thing, is at
                   least to be consulted about what is done with one. Justice
                   Frankfurter captured part of this sense of procedural justice
                   when he wrote that the “validity and moral authority of a
                   conclusion largely depend on the mode by which it was
                   reached…No better instrument has been devised for arriving
                   at truth than to give a person in jeopardy of serious loss notice
                   of the case against him and opportunity to meet it. Nor has a

20   (1985) 3 SCC 545.
13
PART B


                   better way been found for generating the feeling, so important
                   to a popular government, that justice has been done.”



These observations have been made in the context of analysing the importance

of the right to be heard. But Olga Tellis emphasised that not only the ends, but

also the means of justice are important. The purpose behind an open court

system is to grant the affected party and the public an opportunity to observe

justice being dispensed. The process by which justice is rendered has an

important bearing on the confidence which it inculcates in society. Knowledge

of the process is a confidence builder.
11         In
Life Insurance Corporation of India v Prof. Manubhai D. Shah,21
this Court examined the right claimed by a citizen to contribute to an in-house

magazine published by an instrumentality of the State. Writing for the two-judge

Bench, Justice A.M. Ahmadi (as the learned Chief Justice then was) dwelt on

the significance of disseminating information in a democracy:
“8. ...The print media, the radio and the tiny screen play the
                   role of public educators, so vital to the growth of a healthy
                   democracy...
...It cannot be gainsaid that modern communication mediums
                   advance public interest by informing the public of the events
                   and developments that have taken place and thereby
                   educating the voters, a role considered significant for the
                   vibrant functioning of a democracy. Therefore, in any set-up,
                   more so in a democratic set-up like ours, dissemination of
                   news and views for popular consumption is a must and any
                   attempt to deny the same must be frowned upon unless it falls
                   within the mischief of
Article 19(2)
of the Constitution...”




21   (1992) 3 SCC 637.
14
PART B


12         More recently, in
Mohd. Shahabuddin v State of Bihar,22
a two-judge

Bench of this Court was examining a challenge to a notification by the Patna

High Court declaring the premises for conducting a trial. Justice M K Sharma, in

his concurring opinion, described open courts:
“215... In my considered view an “open court” is a court to
                   which general public has a right to be admitted and access to
                   the court is granted to all the persons desirous of entering the
                   court to observe the conduct of the judicial proceedings...”




Through these judicial decisions, this Court has recognised the importance of

open courtrooms as a means of allowing the public to view the process of

rendering of justice. First-hand access to court hearings enables the public and

litigants to witness the dialogue between the judges and the advocates and to

form an informed opinion about the judicial process.
13         The impact of open courts in our country is diminished by the fact that a

large segment of the society rarely has an opportunity to attend court

proceedings. This is due to constraints like poverty, illiteracy, distance, cost and

lack of awareness about court proceedings. Litigants depend on information

provided by lawyers about what has transpired during the course of hearings.

Others, who may not be personally involved in a litigation, depend on the

information provided about judicial decisions in newspapers and in the




22   (2010) 4 SCC 653.
15
PART C


electronic media.              When the description of cases is accurate and

comprehensive, it serves the cause of open justice. However, if a report on a

judicial hearing is inaccurate, it impedes the public’s right to know. Courts,

though open in law and in fact, become far removed from the lives of individual

citizens. This is anomalous because courts exist primarily to provide justice to

them.
C          Technology and Open Court



14         In the present age of technology, it is no longer sufficient to rely solely on
the media to deliver information about the hearings of cases and their

outcomes. Technology has become an inevitable facet of all aspects of life.

Internet penetration and increase in the use of smart phones has revolutionised

how we communicate. As on 31 March 2018, India had a total of 1,206.22

million telecom subscribers and 493.96 million internet users.23 Technology can

enhance public access, ensure transparency and pave the way for active citizen

involvement in the functioning of state institutions. Courts must also take the aid

of technology to enhance the principle of open courts by moving beyond

physical accessibility to virtual accessibility.




23   Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, The Indian Telecom Services Performance Indicators January-March,
     2018. Available at: https://trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/PIReport27062018_0.pdf
16
PART C


15      The importance of making justice accessible to the common citizen in its

truest sense was explained by Lord Neuberger in his Judicial Studies Board

speech (2011):
“…if justice is seen to be done it must be understandable.
                 Judgments must be open not only in the sense of being
                 available to the public, but, so far as possible given the
                 technical and complex nature of much of our law; they must
                 also be clear and easily interpretable by lawyers. And also to
                 non-lawyers. In an age when it seems more likely than ever
                 that citizens will have to represent themselves, this is
                 becoming increasingly important.”24
16      This Court and the High Courts in India have pro-actively adopted

technology to make the judicial process more accessible, organised,

transparent, and simple. For instance, many courts in the country, including this

Court, now have display boards in the court premises and on their official

websites which enable legal practitioners and the public to view the progress of

the cause list. This Court and the High Courts maintain websites where they

upload cause lists, daily orders, and judgments. They also maintain an archive

of previous judgments, allowing users to search for a specific judgment using

various inputs.
17      Recent judgments of this Court also indicate the willingness of this Court

to adapt to modern technology for the advancement of justice.
In
Krishna Veni
25
Nagam v Harish Nagam
,                          this Court had taken into consideration


24 Neuberger, Lord of Abbotbury (Master of Rolls) 2011, ‘Open justice unbound?’, Judicial Studies Board Annual
   Lecture, 16 March 2011. Available at: http://netk.net.au/judges/neuberger2.pdf
25 (2017) 4 SCC 150.
17
PART C


technological developments to regulate the use of video conferencing for

certain categories of cases. Justice A.K. Goel on behalf of himself and Justice

Lalit directed:
”16. The advancement of technology ought to be utilised also
                   for service on parties or receiving communication from the
                   parties. Every District Court must have at least one e-mail ID.
                   Administrative instructions for directions can be issued to
                   permit the litigants to access the court, especially when litigant
                   is located outside the local jurisdiction of the Court. A
                   designated officer/manager of a District Court may suitably
                   respond to such e-mail in the manner permitted as per the
                   administrative instructions. Similarly, a manager/information
                   officer in every District Court may be accessible on a notified
                   telephone during notified hours as per the instructions. These
                   steps may, to some extent, take care of the problems of the
                   litigants.”




In
Santhini v Vijaya Venketesh
, 26 where this Court was re-considering the

issue of permitting video-conferencing for matrimonial disputes, one of us (D Y

Chandrachud, J.) in his dissenting opinion, discussed the importance of using

technology to enhance the delivery of justice:
“89. Technology must also be seen as a way of bringing
                   services into remote areas to deal with problems associated
                   with the justice delivery system. With the increasing cost of
                   travelling and other expenses, videoconferencing can provide
                   a cost-effective and efficient alternative. Solutions based on
                   modern technology allow the court to enhance the quality and
                   effectiveness of the administration of justice. The use of
                   technology can maximise efficiency and develop innovative
                   methods for delivering legal services. Technology-based
                   solutions must be adopted to facilitate access to justice...
                   Repeated adjournments break the back of the litigant. We must
                   embrace technology and not retard its application, to make the
                   administration of justice efficient.”
26   (2018) 1 SCC 1.
18
PART C


C.1        ICT in Indian courts27
Technology has made modernity possible. The interplay between technology

and law has allowed dissemination of legal information with a veritable click of

a button. We have designed processes and systems to suit the unique

requirements of our judicial system. The Indian judiciary has incorporated

Information and Communication Technology (ICT) under the aegis of the e-

Courts Integrated Mission Mode Project (e-Courts Project). This has been a

part of the National e-Governance Plan (NeGP) which has been implemented

in all High Courts and the District Courts of India. It was based on the 'National

Policy and Action Plan for Implementation of Information and Communication

Technology’ prepared by the e-Committee of the Supreme Court of India in

2005.         The      2005       e-Committee          Report        proposed         three     phases   for

implementation of the e-Courts Project.
The e-Committee of the Supreme Court of India and the Department of Justice,

Government of India, through a proper management of the e-Courts Project

have ensured efficiency in the judicial process across 21,000 courts in the

district judiciary in India. Phase-I of the e-Courts Project was approved in 2010

and enabled computerisation of 14,249 courts in the district judiciary by 2015.

The objective of the ongoing Phase—II of this project is to enhance judicial



27   The websites of Department of Justice, Government of India (doj.gov.in/) and E-courts services
     (ecourts.gov.in/) contains fair amount of information on the ongoing e-Courts Project.
19
PART C


service delivery for litigants and lawyers by improving infrastructure and

providing technology-enabled judicial processes. It involves improved ICT

infrastructure, videoconferencing, improved access across seven platforms

including a web portal, app, judicial service centers and kiosks. The e-Courts

Project also includes capacity building of officers, ICT provisioning of District

Legal Service Authorities, Taluka Legal Service Committees, State Judicial

Academies and judicial process re-engineering. Currently, the e-Courts project

caters to more than 21,000 courts and has been implemented in more than 600

districts, 3,000 court complexes and 6,400 establishments.




C.2   Technology and Implementation




One of the objectives of the e-Courts Project is to make the ICT infrastructure

comprising of computer hardware, Local Area Network (LAN), Wide Area

Network (WAN), information kiosks, UPS, renewable energy-based power

backup and other peripherals available in the district judiciary.




The e-Courts Project is developed on Open Source Technology by the National

Informatics Centre (NIC), a Central Government department under the Union

Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology. A single unified Case

Information System (CIS) Software has been developed and made available to

the entire district judiciary in India, for catering to the diversified requirements

of the country in terms of local procedures, practices and languages. CIS
20
PART C


 Version 3.0 has been made available in all the district and taluka courts. 15

 High Courts are already equipped with CIS Version 1.0.




 The e-Committee carried out extensive capacity building exercises to train

 judicial officers and administrative staff. The project is manned and managed

 by the court staff and the staff is trained in the use of computers. Some of them

 are also selected to be trained as system administrators.
C.3         Platforms created for service delivery



(i)       e-Courts Portal: Online mechanisms 28 (websites) are available for
stakeholders such as litigants, advocates, government agencies, and

          the police to track case status, view cause lists, judgments and daily

          orders. The services.ecourts.gov.in portal is a one stop access point

          where a person can locate a case from any court across the country by

          using different search criteria available on the website. Data is available

          on the portal for disposed of and pending civil and criminal cases across

          the country. The portal also contains judgments and orders of the district

          judiciary.
(ii)      Mobile App: e-Courts Services mobile app available on Android and iOS

          provides facility for all stakeholders including advocates and parties, to



 28   Online services are available at –(i) ecourts.gov.in, (ii) services.ecourts.gov.in and (iii) districts.ecourts.gov.in
21
PART C


       create a portfolio of cases in which they are associated and track them for

       future alerts. A facility to search the case by a QR Code is also provided

       and the App has been downloaded multiple times.
(iii) SMS Push: Litigants and advocates get an SMS alert on their cell phones,

       in case of any adjournment, scrutiny, registration, transfer of case,

       disposal, uploading of orders, etc.
(iv) SMS Pull: This facility allows advocates and litigants to send the CNR

       number (which is a unique number tagged for every single case in the

       country) and receive a response with the current status of the case.
(v)    Automated e-Mails: Litigants, advocates and police stations receive

       information on regular e-mails in relation to the cause lists, transfer of

       cases, disposal, copies of orders and judgments.
(vi)   Touch Screen Kiosks and Service Centre: Dissemination of case status

       has been made simple with the installation of touch screen kiosks in

       various court complexes across the country. This allows litigants and

       advocates to view their case status at the touch of a button. The same

       information can also be obtained from Judicial Service Centres established

       in court complexes.
(vii) E-Payment: In order to facilitate ease of payments, online payment of court

       fees, fines, penalties and judicial deposits through the epay.ecourts.gov.in

       has been facilitated. Citizens can make payments online without the use

       of cheques, cash or stamps, with the help of this portal.
22
PART C
(viii) E-Filing: For convenience, facility for online filing of cases and case papers

      with the court registry has been provided. This facility is integrated with

      standard application software across all the districts and subordinate

      courts.
C.4    National Judicial Data Grid



The NJDG is a public portal that provides a database of pending and disposed

of cases in various High Courts and District Courts across India. The NJDG

portal njdg.ecourts.gov.in provides transparency in the judicial system to all

citizens by allowing them to view statistics of cases pending before various

courts. The World Bank has also acknowledged NJDG as a significant

innovation. It serves as a national judicial data warehouse that may be used to

shape legislative policy.
C.5    Other facilities created to speed up justice delivery
(i)   NSTEP: National Software and Tracking of Electronic Process, is a

      mechanism that consists of a centralised service tracking application and

      a mobile app for court bailiffs. NSTEP has been created for speedy delivery

      of process and to reduce inordinate delays in judicial procedures. The

      mobile app, equipped with GPS location tracking assists the bailiffs in real-

      time and transparent tracking of services. The mobile app also has the
23
PART C


      facility to record the photo and signature of the receiver. In case of non-

      service of notice or communication, the mobile application instantly

      communicates it to the central NSTEP server.
(ii) Video Conferencing: In an effort to speed up the judicial process, video-
conferencing facilities connecting courts and jails have been established

      in 488 courts and 342 jails across India.
C.6    Concept of Video-Streaming/Web-Cast




Advancement in technology and increased internet penetration has facilitated

transmission of live or pre-recorded video feed to devices like computers, tabs

and mobiles. Live-webcast or streaming of court proceedings in real time can

be implemented through available technological solutions. Live-webcast or

streaming is the fastest method for communicating and is most suited for

connecting geographically dispersed audiences.



C.7    Virtual reality as an extension of the open court


The time has come for this Court to take a step further in adopting technology

and to enable live-streaming of its proceedings. Live-streaming of courtroom

proceedings is an extension of the principle of open courts. Live-streaming will

have the ability to reach a wide number of audiences with the touch of a button.
24
PART C


It will enable litigants and members of the public to have a virtual experience of

courtroom proceedings even outside the courtroom premises.



18    There are multiple reasons why live-streaming will be beneficial to the

judicial system:
a.    The technology of live-streaming injects radical immediacy into

      courtroom proceedings. Each hearing is made public within seconds of

      its occurrence. It enables viewers to have virtual access to courtroom

      proceedings as they unfold;
b.    Introduction of live-streaming will effectuate the public’s right to know

      about court proceedings. It will enable those affected by the decisions of

      the Court to observe the manner in which judicial decisions are made. It

      will help bring the work of the judiciary to the lives of citizens;
c.    Live-streaming of courtroom proceedings will reduce the public’s reliance

      on second-hand narratives to obtain information about important

      judgments of the Court and the course of judicial hearings. Society will

      be able to view court proceedings first hand and form reasoned and

      educated opinions about the functioning of courts. This will help reduce

      misinformation and misunderstanding about the judicial process;
d.    Viewing court proceedings will also serve an educational purpose. Law

      students will be able to observe and learn from the interactions between
25
PART C


     the Bar and the Bench. The archives will constitute a rich source for

     aspiring advocates and academicians to study legal advocacy

     procedures, interpretation of the law, and oratory skills, among other

     things. It will further promote research into the institutional functioning of

     the courts. Live-streaming and broadcasting will also increase the reach

     of the courts as it can penetrate to every part of the country;
e.   Live-streaming will enhance the rule of law and promote better

     understanding of legal governance as part of the functioning of

     democracy;
f.   Live-streaming will remove physical barriers to viewing court proceedings

     by enabling the public to view proceedings from outside courtroom

     premises. This will also reduce the congestion which is currently plaguing

     courtrooms. It will reduce the need for litigants to travel to the courts to

     observe the proceedings of their cases;
g.   Live-streaming is a significant instrument of enhancing the accountability

     of judicial institutions and of all those who participate in the judicial

     process. Delay in the dispensation of justice is a matter of serious

     concern. Live-streaming of court proceedings will enable members of the

     public to know of the causes of adjournments and the reasons why

     hearings are delayed; and
26
PART D


h.      Above all, sunlight is the best disinfectant. Live-streaming as an

        extension of the principle of open courts will ensure that the interface

        between a court hearing with virtual reality will result in the dissemination

        of information in the widest possible sense, imparting transparency and

        accountability to the judicial process.
Major common law jurisdictions across the globe have already embraced the

concept of live-streaming and broadcasting courtroom proceedings. It may be

useful to look at the evolution of the concept in a few jurisdictions, and the

practices followed by them.
D       Comparative Law



19      This section takes a measured look at the development of the principle
of open justice in common law and other jurisdictions. It examines how courts

in other countries have addressed concerns of privacy, confidentiality and

sensitivity of litigants, witnesses and cases.
(i) United Kingdom


The Supreme Court of UK permits broadcasting of its courtroom proceedings.29

The Eighth Practice Direction of the Supreme Court permits “video footage of


29 The live-streaming proceedings of Supreme Court of United Kingdom. Available at:
https://www.supremecourt.uk/live/court-01.html
27
PART D


proceedings before the Court to be broadcast where this does not affect the

administration of justice.” 30 Three national broadcasters- BBC, ITN, and Sky

News31 are permitted to film and broadcast the Supreme Court proceedings, “in

accordance with the protocol which has been agreed with.” 32 The protocol

prohibits recording of certain types of proceedings like private discussions

between litigants and their counsel.33 The footage is only allowed to be used for

informational purposes in programs like news, current affairs, education, and

legal training. 34 However, any broadcasting which may detract from the

seriousness or integrity of the proceedings, like entertainment programmes,

satirical programmes, political party broadcasts, and advertising or promotion,

is not permitted.35 Further, any still images are always required to be used “in a

way that has regard to the dignity of the Court and its functions as a working

body.”36




Sky News airs live broadcasts of the UK Supreme Court’s hearings. 37 By the

end of 2011, the UK Supreme Court permitted journalists to use live text-based

communications, including social media platform Twitter, during court

hearings.38 The presiding judge, however, retains full discretion to prohibit such




30   The Supreme Court of United Kingdom, Practice              Direction   8,   para   8.17.1.   Available   at
   https://www.supremecourt.uk/docs/practice-direction-08.pdf
31 Supra note 16.
32 Supra note 30.
33 Ibid.
34 Supra note 16.
35 Ibid.
36 Ibid.
37 Ibid.
38 Ibid.
28
PART D


communications in the interest of justice.39 The UK Supreme Court has its own

Twitter handle (@UKSupremeCourt) which it uses to update the public about

its judgments. 40 It also has a YouTube channel where it showcases short

summaries of judgments read out by the judges.41




In 2013, the UK permitted audio-visual coverage of the Court of Appeals (Civil

and Criminal).42 The broadcast is subject to certain limitations - (a) only the

judgments and lawyers’ arguments are permitted to be filmed. Victims and

witnesses are not recorded; and (b) live broadcasts are delivered with a seventy

seconds delay.43 According to British legal commentator, Joshua Rozenberg,

the seventy seconds delay is favourable and necessary because:
“That gives everyone involved just over a minute to work out
                 that something should not be heard or seen in public before the
                 recording leaves the courtroom. The problem could be mild
                 profanity…Somebody might quote information that is protected
                 by a court order or is unreportable for some other reason.
                 Perhaps the cameras might catch a glimpse of someone
                 whose face must not be included in court broadcasts, such as
                 the appellant or a witness.”44



The court retains control over the live broadcast. A single video-journalist is

authorised to record and regulate the live proceedings 45 and is bound by the




39 Ibid.
40 The official Twitter handle of UK Supreme Court. Available at: https://twitter.com/uksupremecourt
41 The official YouTube handle of UK Supreme Court. Available at:
https://www.youtube.com/user/UKSupremeCourt
42 Ravid, Itay, Tweeting #Justice: Audio-Visual Coverage of Court Proceedings in a World of Shifting Technology

 (March 9, 2017). 35(1) Cardozo Arts and Entertainment Law Journal 41 (2017).
43 Ibid.
44 Joshua Rozenberg, Televising the Courts: The Time Has Come, The Guardian, 23 October 2013. Available at

 https://www.theguardian.com/law/2013/oct/23/televising-courts-live-broadcasting-joshua-rozenberg
45 Ibid.
29
PART D


court’s orders.46 Only the appointed journalist or his substitute is permitted to

take pictures in court.47 The appointed journalist is jointly employed by the four

media groups which are funding the project- Sky News, ITN, BBC and the Press

Association news agency.48 Only the appointed journalist or his substitute is

permitted to take pictures in court.49 Although the appointed journalist has the

permission to film any of the fifteen courtrooms in which the Court of Appeals

may sit, practically, the media organisations pick only one court at a time for live

broadcast.50



The Court of Appeals was opened for broadcasting upon the recommendations

of the Ministry of Justice, in its 2012 Report. 51 Making a case for extending

technological change to the remaining courts in the UK, the Ministry of Justice

had reasoned that:
“In principle the majority of our courts are open to all members
                    of the public who wish to attend, but in practice very few people
                    have the time or opportunity to see what happens in our courts
                    in person. In addition, the extent of press coverage of court
                    cases, particularly in local courts has declined in recent years.
                    In cases of particular interest to the public, there may not be
                    sufficient space in the public gallery for all those who wish to
                    attend.” 52




46 Ibid.
47 Ibid.
48 Ibid.
49 Ibid.
50 Ibid.
51 Supra note 16.
52 Ibid.
30
PART D


The Ministry had recommended broadcasting the Court of Appeals’

proceedings as they do not involve victims or witnesses:
“Cases in the Court of Appeal normally deal with complex
                    issues of law or evidence, and victims and witnesses rarely
                    appear in order to provide new evidence. Given the complexity
                    of legal issues in Court of Appeal cases, we believe that
                    allowing advocates’ arguments to be filmed in addition to
                    judgments would be more likely to improve public
                    understanding than judgments alone. We are therefore
                    proposing to allow judgments and legal arguments from cases
                    before the Court of Appeal to be broadcast.”53




Live-streaming of the Court of Appeals’ hearings opened the doors to other

courts in the UK for broadcasting. The UK Parliament enacted the Crime and

Courts Act, 2013, which, inter alia, enables recording of court proceedings with

the approval of the Lord Chancellor and the Lord Chief Justice. This was

enacted as a primary legislation to empower the Lord Chancellor, with the Lord

Chief Justice, “to set out in secondary legislation the specific circumstances in

which the prohibition on cameras in courts…will be disapplied.”54




In 2016, the Ministry of Justice launched a three-month pilot program to

experiment with broadcasting the proceedings of eight England and Welsh

Crown Courts.55 This was limited to judges’ sentencing remarks and the footage

was not made available to the public.56 The question of broadcasting the Crown




53 Ibid.
54 Ibid.
55 Supra note 42.
56 Ibid.
31
PART D


Court’s hearings is currently pending consideration before the Ministry of

Justice, as it involves larger issues of safeguarding witnesses and victims.57
(ii)    South Africa

In South Africa, the presence of cameras in the courtroom is a recent

development and is at a relatively nascent stage. In 2017, the Supreme Court

of Appeal (which is the highest court of appeal in South Africa) set a precedent

permitting broadcasting of proceedings in all courts of South Africa.58 Now, the

media is permitted to live broadcast the proceedings of all South African courts.

While permitting the media to live broadcast the court proceedings, Ponna JA

made an interesting observation that it was time for courts to ‘yield to a new

reality:’


                 “It is thus important to emphasise that giving effect to the
                 principle of open justice and its underlying aims now means
                 more than merely keeping the courtroom doors open. It means
                 that court proceedings must where possible be meaningfully
                 accessible to any member of the public who wishes to be
                 timeously and accurately apprised of such proceedings.
                 Broadcasting of court proceedings enables this to occur.”59




Witnesses are granted the freedom to object to broadcasting their testimony,

subject to the court’s final discretion. This discretion, Ponna JA (speaking for

the bench) emphasised, must be exercised by the courts on a case-by-case




57 The Telegraph, Crown Court sentencing being recorded for pilot projects that could bring judges’ comments to
   TV, 27 July 2016. Available at https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/07/27/crown-court-sentencing-being-
   recorded-for-pilot-project-that-cou/
58 The NDPP v Media 24 Limited & others and HC Van Breda v Media 24 Limited & others (425/2017) [2017]

   ZASCA 97.
59 Ibid at para 46.
32
PART D


basis, by conducting an individualised enquiry.60 Where the judge finds that the

objections of the witness are valid, the court considers alternatives to regular

photographic or television coverage.61
(iii)   Canada


The Canadian Supreme Court is considered a pioneer for adapting itself to

technology and permitting audio-visual broadcasting of its proceedings. 62 In

1993, the Canadian Supreme Court conducted a successful pilot project, live

televising the hearings of three high profile cases. The broadcasts were

governed by the following guidelines:
“(a) The case to be filmed will be selected by the Chief Justice.
(b) The Chief Justice or presiding Justice may limit or terminate
                media coverage to protect the rights of the parties; the dignity
                of the court; to assure the orderly conduct of the proceedings;
                or for any other reason considered necessary or appropriate.
(c) No direct public expense is to be incurred for wiring, or
                personnel needed to provide media coverage.”63




The Canadian Supreme Court permits the Canadian Parliamentary Press

Gallery to live broadcast all appeals before it.64 The Canadian Parliamentary

Affairs Channel (CPAC) is also allowed to televise the appeal hearings of the

Court, but at a later date. 65 The broadcasts are subject to guidelines which
60 Ibid at para 72.
61 Ibid at para 73.
62 Kyu Ho Youm, Cameras in the Courtroom in the Twenty-First Century: e U.S. Supreme Court Learning From

   Abroad?, 2012 BYU L. Rev. 1989 (2012).
63 Ibid.
64 Supreme Court of Canada, Access to the Court. Available at https://www.scc-csc.ca/media/acc-eng.aspx
65 Daniel Stepniak, ‘Audio Visual Coverage of Courts, A Comparative Analysis,’ Cambridge University Press

(2008).
33
PART D


ensure that the Court retains control over the filming process.66 Although the

CPAC decides which cases to broadcast, the Supreme Court has the discretion

to prohibit the filming of specific appeals. 67 The CPAC is permitted to share the

broadcast feed with other television networks, for use as snippets in news

programs.68




At present, four cameras are installed in the Supreme Court. 69 The appeal

hearings have been broadcast since 2009 and are archived on the Court’s

website. 70 The cameras are installed by the Court and are operated by the

Court’s employees. Outside cameras are not permitted except for special

events.71 The copyright over the proceedings is retained by the Court.72 Before

any case can be filmed, the Supreme Court requires parties to consent to the

recording and televising of the proceedings.73 Any party seeking to exclude their

case from the broadcast must convey the same to the Registrar at least two

weeks prior to the hearing date. 74




66 Ibid.
67 Supra note 62.
68 Ibid.
69 Ibid.
70 Ibid.
71 Ibid.
72 Supra note 65.
73 Ibid.
74 Ibid.
34
PART D


(iv)    Australia
Australia follows an open court system, with courts in all Australian jurisdictions

admitting television cameras into courtrooms. 75 Since 2013, audio-visual

recordings of the High Court of Australia have been made available to the

public.76 The entire process of filming and broadcasting is carried out by the

Court staff.77 Transcripts of the hearings are made available within a day or two

of most hearings. 78 The High Court has stated that initially the recordings will

be available after a few business days, however, the Court will endeavour to

reduce the number of days.79




Apart from the High Court, most Australian courts do not maintain a consistent

policy on admitting television cameras into the courtroom.80 Filming is permitted

on an ad hoc basis and is usually restricted to the recording of file and overlay

footage or ceremonial sittings.81




75 See supra note 65.
76 High Court of Australia, Press Release, 01 October 2013. Available at:
http://www.hcourt.gov.au/assets/news/MR-audio-visual-recordings-Oct13.pdf.
77High Court of Australia, Photography and Recording Guidelines. Available at:
http://www.hcourt.gov.au/about/photography-and-recording
78 Ibid.
79 Ibid.
80 Supra note 65 at page 210-211.
81 Ibid.
35
PART D
(v)     New Zealand


New Zealand allows wide access to the media in courts and has one of the most
82
progressive live broadcast policies among common law countries.

Traditionally, members of the media were only permitted to make hand-written

notes of court proceedings, without the use of any electronic device.83 From

1996 to 1998, New Zealand conducted a three year pilot project which covered

more than twenty cases.84 All courts in New Zealand were covered under the

pilot, contingent on two main rules:
“1. Material obtained from expanded media coverage which is
                 broadcast shall be presented in a way which gives an accurate,
                 impartial and balanced coverage of the proceedings and of the
                 parties involved. Any such broadcast is to be without editorial
                 comment and to be of at least two minutes duration per news
                 item.
2. There shall be no use of material obtained from expanded
                 media coverage otherwise than for normal news programmes
                 or articles unless prior approval for that use has been given by
                 the trial judge or, where that judge is unavailable, another
                 judge of the relevant court.”85



New Zealand permits media houses to broadcast court proceedings with the

approval of the court.86 The broadcast is governed by a set of guidelines which

balance the principle of open justice with the need for a fair trial. They impose

upon the media the responsibility to provide “an accurate, fair and balanced



82  See supra note 65.
83  New Zealand, Report to Chief Justice on In-Court Media Coverage (2015), at para 7. Available at
   https://www.courtsofnz.govt.nz/In-Court-Media-Review/In-Court-Media-
   Review/ReporttoChiefJusticeonincourtmediacoverageF6_7_15_20150720.pdf
84 Ibid, at para 15.
85 Ibid, at para 14.
86 New Zealand, In-Court Media Coverage Guidelines (2016). Available at: https://www.courtsofnz.govt.nz/going-
to-court/media/rules-and-resources/INCOURTMEDIACOVERAGEGUIDELINES2016T.pdf
36
PART D


report of the hearing” without publishing anything out of context.87 They also

provide for a ten minute delay in broadcasting audio and video recordings. 88

Under the guidelines, any media outlet wishing to film and broadcast court

proceedings is required to seek prior written permission from the court for each

case.89 The discretion of the court to grant permission is guided by the following

considerations:
“a. the need for a fair trial;
b. the desirability of open justice;
c. the principle that the media have an important role in the
                 reporting of trials as the eyes and ears of the public;
d. court obligations to the victims of offences; and

                 e. the interests and reasonable concerns and perceptions of
                 the parties, victims and witnesses.”90



The Supreme Court permits recording of its proceedings in majority of the

cases, unless specifically objected to by the parties. 91 The Supreme Court’s

media guidelines, published upon its establishment in 2004, indicate that audio-
visual covering is to be considered as the norm, rather than the exception:
“Subject to paragraph (5), all applications to televise or
                 otherwise record proceedings of the Supreme Court will be
                 deemed to be approved unless a party indicates, within 3 days
                 of being advised by the registrar of the application, that the
                 party objects to it.”92




87 Ibid.
88 Ibid, at para 2.1.
89 Ibid, at para 5.5.
90 Ibid at para 2.3.
91 Supra note 65, at page 347.
92 New Zealand Ministry of Justice, Supreme Court Media Guidelines (2004). Available at:
https://www.justice.govt.nz/about/news-and-media/media-centre/media-information/media-
guide/appendices/appendix-e/
37
PART D


(vi)    United States
The US Supreme Court does not permit video recording or photography of its

proceedings. It releases audio transcripts of the oral arguments on the same

day. Audio recordings of each week’s oral arguments are released on the

court’s website93 at the end of the week.
Each Federal Court of Appeals has the discretion to provide audio or video

recordings of its proceedings, subject to guidelines framed by the court. Since

2014, the US Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit has approved video

broadcasting of all cases before it, except those prohibited by law through

guidelines.94 The media needs to take prior approval of the court to record the

proceedings. 95 The presiding judge is granted absolute discretion to limit or

terminate media coverage, or direct the removal of camera coverage personnel

when necessary, in order to protect the rights of the parties or aid the conduct

of proceedings.96 The video and audio recordings of the federal judiciary are

hosted on YouTube and are also available on the court’s official website.97 The

district and lower courts in each state permit some form of audio or video

broadcasting and recording of its proceedings, subject to guidelines and rules.98




93 The official website of the Supreme Court of the United States. Available at:
https://www.supremecourt.gov/oral_arguments/argument_audio/2017
94 The United States Court of Appeals for Ninth Circuit, Guidelines for Broadcasting, Recording, and Still

   Photography in the Courtroom. Available at:
https://cdn.ca9.uscourts.gov/datastore/uploads/news_media/camera.guidelines. pdf
95 Ibid.
96 Ibid.
97 The official YouTube handle of US Courts. Available at: https://www.youtube.com/user/uscourts
98 As held by the Supreme Court of the United States in Chandler v Florida, 449 U.S. 560 (1981).
38
PART D
(vii)    Brazil


In 2002, the President of Brazil sanctioned a law enabling the creation of a

public television channel dedicated to the judiciary and to the Supreme Court. 99

The court sessions of the Supreme Court (Supremo Tribunal Federal) are

broadcast online100 on either ‘TV Justica’101 or ‘Radio Justica’102 and operated

by the Supreme Court. Aside from being aired on television and radio, the

proceedings can also be streamed online as the Court maintains a Twitter

account 103 and a YouTube channel. 104 The unique feature of the Brazilian

Supreme Court is that cameras are permitted into the conferences where the

judges deliberate.105
(viii) International Courts


International courts have also embraced the idea of broadcasting their court

proceedings. The International Criminal Court (ICC) permits televising of its

cases, although with a thirty minute delay.106 The ICC has a YouTube channel

where it broadcasts case proceedings, press conferences, and informative

videos in different languages. 107 In the European Court on Human Rights

(ECHR), all hearings are permitted to be made public, unless specifically


99 Meet the Justice TV. Available at official website: http://www.tvjustica.jus.br/index/conheca
100 Supra note 62.
101 TV Justica. Available at official website: http://www.tvjustica.jus.br/
102 Radio Justica. Available at official website: www.radiojustica.jus.br/
103 The official Twitter handle of Supreme Court of Brazil. Available at: https://twitter.com/stf_oficial
104 The official YouTube handle of Supreme Court of Brazil. Available at: https://www.youtube.com/user/stf
105 Supra note 62.
106 Official website of International Criminal Court. Available at: https://www.icc-cpi.int/
107Official YouTube Channel of International Criminal Court. Available at:
https://www.youtube.com/user/IntlCriminalCourt/videos
39
PART D


disallowed by the Court.108 The broadcast is available on the Court’s website

on the same day. Broadcast of morning sessions is put up by the afternoon,

and the afternoon sessions by evening. The ECHR states that all hearings are

filmed and broadcast of the court’s website on the day itself, from 14:30 (local

time) onwards.109



20      On examining the practices followed by the jurisdictions discussed

above, it appears that broadcasting of courtroom proceedings emerged in

several countries through judicial decisions. Further, most jurisdictions follow

certain common practices such as (i) a minimal delay in live broadcast; (ii)

retention of the copyright with the court; (iii) conducting a pilot project before

introducing broadcasting for all cases; (iv) excluding certain categories of cases

where the interests of justice warrant that the hearings should not be webcast

or streamed; and (v) conferment of power on the presiding judge to regulate the

live transmission. Every jurisdiction has a set of limitations to which the

broadcast is subject. Broadcast is usually not permitted when it impedes the

administration of justice.
21      Live-streaming of court proceedings is manifestly in public interest. It is

important to re-emphasise the significance of live-streaming as an extension of

the principle of open justice and open courts. However, the process of live-
108 Rule 63, Rules of Court, ECHR, 01 Aug 2018. Available at:
https://www.echr.coe.int/Documents/Rules_Court_ENG.pdf
109 ECHR, Webcast of hearings. Available at: https://www.echr.coe.int/Pages/home.aspx?p=hearings&c=
40
PART D


streaming should be subjected to carefully structured guidelines. Initially, a pilot

project may be conducted for about three months, by live-streaming only cases

of national and constitutional importance in the Chief Justice’s Court.

Progressively, as and when the infrastructure is ready, this Court can expand

the ambit of live-streaming to cover all cases (except for the ones which are

excluded).
22    The need for live-streaming of proceedings applies with equal and, in

some respects, greater force to proceedings of cases in the district judiciary and

the High Courts. The pattern of litigation in our country resembles a pyramid.

The courts within the district judiciary represent the large base of the pyramid

where citizens have the greatest interface. It is to the Courts comprised in the

district judiciary that citizens turn as a point of first access for remedying

injustice. At the tip of the pyramid is the jurisdiction of this Court. In terms of

volume, the largest amount of litigation emanates in the district judiciary,

followed by the High Courts. The engagement of the district judiciary in

resolving injustices faced by citizens requires that every citizen should have full

access to and knowledge about the proceedings before those courts. Equally,

the principle of an open court which has been espoused in this judgment would

merit that proceedings before the High Courts should also be live-streamed.



23    Live-streaming of proceedings is crucial to the dissemination of

knowledge about judicial proceedings and granting full access to justice to the
41
PART D


litigant. Access to justice can never be complete without the litigant being able

to see, hear and understand the course of proceedings first hand. Apart from

this, live-streaming is an important facet of a responsive judiciary which accepts

and acknowledges that it is accountable to the concerns of those who seek

justice. Live-streaming is a significant instrument of establishing the

accountability of other stake-holders in the justicing process, including the Bar.

Moreover, the government as the largest litigant has to shoulder the

responsibility for the efficiency of the judicial process. Full dissemination of

knowledge and information about court proceedings through live-streaming

thus subserves diverse interests of stake holders and of society in the proper

administration of justice.
24    For lawyers and judges familiar with the cocoon of a physical court room,

live-streaming would require attitudinal changes. They include the maintenance

of order and sequencing of oral arguments. Judges in charge of their courts

would have to devote attention to case management. But these demands are

necessary incidents of the challenges of our time. Slow as we have been to

adapt to the complexities of our age, it is nonetheless necessary for the judiciary

to move apace with technology. By embracing technology, we would only

promote a greater degree of confidence in the judicial process. Hence, the Chief

Justices of the High Courts should be commended to consider the adoption of

live-streaming both in the High Courts and in the district judiciaries in phases,

commensurate with available resources and technical support. The High Courts
42
PART D


would have to determine the modalities for doing so by framing appropriate

rules.
25       Comprehensive guidelines for live-streaming of Court proceedings have

been submitted by Mr K K Venugopal, learned Attorney General of India, Ms

Indira Jaising, learned Senior Counsel, Mr Virag Gupta, learned Counsel and

Mr Mathews J Nedumpara, learned Counsel. These have been duly considered

in framing the model guidelines below. The model guidelines are based on the

following broad principles:
a.
Article 145 (1)
of the Constitution provides:
“Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the
               Supreme Court may from time to time, with the approval of the
               President, make rules for regulating generally the practice and
               procedure of the Court...”



     Determining the modalities for live-streaming of the proceedings of this Court

     can appropriately be dealt with under the Rules which should be framed in

     pursuance of
Article 145(1).
Regulating, generally, the practice and

     procedure of the Court would extend to formulating Rules for live-streaming.
b. Not all cases may be live-streamed. Certain sensitive cases like matrimonial

     or sexual assault cases should be excluded from the process of live-
streaming;
43
PART D


c.   Live-streaming will be carried out with a minimal delay to allow time for

     screening sensitive information or any exchange which should not be

     streamed;
d.   The final authority to regulate suspension or prohibition of live-streaming in

     a particular case where the administration of justice so requires, must be

     with the presiding judge of each court;
e.   Live-streaming will be carried out only by persons or any agency authorized

     under the directions of the Chief Justice of India, or as contemplated in the

     Rules. The streaming and broadcasting will be hosted by this Court on its

     website with the assistance of the National Informatics Centre and the

     Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology;
f.   The copyright over all the material recorded and broadcast in this Court shall

     vest with this Court only; and


g.   The recordings and broadcast may not be used by anyone for commercial

     purposes.
h.    Archives shall be maintained of all live-streaming, to be hosted on the

      web-site of the Court.
26     The model guidelines are of a suggested nature and will not detract from

the authority of the Court to frame Rules under
Article 145(1)
in order to

determine all the modalities, including (i) the phases in which live-streaming
44
PART E


shall be introduced; (ii) the types of cases for which live-streaming of cases will

be provided; (iii) authorising the use of appropriate technology; (iv) the agencies

through which live-streaming will be implemented; (v) other facets for

implementation; and (vi) laying down norms for the use of the feed.
E     Model guidelines for broadcasting of the proceedings and other
      judicial events of the Supreme Court of India



A.    Kind of matters to be live-streamed
1.    Proceedings involving the hearing of cases before the Supreme Court

      shall be live-streamed in the manner provided below:
a) Cases falling under the following categories shall be excluded as a

         class from live-streaming:
(i)    Matrimonial matters, including transfer petitions;
(ii)    Cases involving sensitive issues as in the nature of sexual

                  assault; and
(iii)   Matters where children and juveniles are involved, like

                  POCSO cases.
b) Apart from the general prohibition on streaming cases falling in the

            above categories, the presiding judge of each courtroom shall have

            the discretion to disallow live-streaming for specific cases where, in

            his/her opinion, publicity would prejudice the interests of justice. This
45
PART E


          may be intimated by the presiding judge in advance or live-streaming

          may be suspended as and when a matter is being heard; and
c) Where objections are filed by a litigant against live-streaming of a

          case on grounds of privacy, confidentiality, or the administration of

          justice, the final authority on live-streaming the case shall lie with the

          presiding judge.
2.   In addition to live-streaming of courtroom proceedings, the following

     events may also be live-streamed in future subject to the provisions of the

     Rules:
(a) Oath ceremonies of the Judges of the Supreme Court and speeches

          delivered by retiring judges and other judges in the farewell

          ceremony of the respective Supreme Court Judges; and
(b) Addresses delivered in judicial conferences or Full Court References

          or any event organized by the Supreme Court or by advocate

          associations affiliated to the Supreme Court or any other events.
B.   Manner of live-streaming
1.   Live-streamed and archived videos of the broadcast shall be made

     available on the official website of the Supreme Court. The recorded
46
PART E


     broadcast of each day shall be made available as archives on the official

     website of the Supreme Court by the end of the day;
2.   Live-streaming shall commence as soon as the judges arrive in the

     courtroom and shall continue till the Bench rises;
3.   The presiding judge of the courtroom shall be provided with an

     appropriate device for directing the technical team to stop live-streaming,

     if the Bench deems it necessary in the interest of administration of justice;
4.   Live-streaming of the proceedings should be carried out with a delay of

     two minutes;
5.   Proceedings shall only be live-streamed during working hours of the

     court;
6.   Courtroom proceedings will continue to be live-streamed unless the

     presiding judge orders the recording to be paused or suspended;
7.   To give full effect to the process of live-streaming, advocates addressing

     the Bench, and judges addressing the Bar, must use microphones, while

     addressing the Court;
8.   Recording of courtroom proceedings shall be done by the Registry with

     the technical support of National Informatics Centre or any other public/
47
PART E


     private agency authorised by the Supreme Court or the Ministry of

     Information and Technology; and
9.   The portions of proceedings which are not broadcast online, on the

     direction of the presiding judge of the Bench shall not be made part of the

     official records and shall be placed separately as ‘confidential records’.



C.   Technical specifications for live-streaming
1.   Live-streaming shall be conducted by the Supreme Court with its own

     camera-persons or by an authorized agency. No person who is not

     authorized by the Supreme Court will be permitted to record any

     proceeding;
2.   Cameras should be focused only on the judges and advocates pleading

     before the Bench in the matter being live-streamed;
3.   Cameras shall not film the media and visitor’s galleries;
4.   Cameras may zoom in on the Bench when any judge is dictating an order

     or judgment or making any observation or enquiry to the advocate; and
5.   The following communications shall not be filmed:
a)   Discussions among the judges on the Bench;
48
PART E
b)       Any judge giving instructions to the administrative staff of the

              courtroom;
c)       Any staff member communicating any message to the judge or

              circulating any document to the judge;
d)       Notes taken down by the judge during the court proceedings; and
e)       Notes made by an advocate either on paper or in electronic form for

              assistance while making submissions to the court.
D.        Archiving
1.        The audio-visual recording of each day’s proceedings shall be

          preserved in the Audio-Visual Unit of the Supreme Court Registry;
2.    Archives of all broadcasts of courtroom proceedings which have been

      live-streamed should be made available on the website of the Supreme

      Court; and
3.    Hard copies of the video footage of past proceedings may be made

      available according to terms and conditions to be notified by the

      Supreme Court Registry. The video footage shall be made available for

      the sole purpose of fair and accurate reporting of the judicial proceedings

      of the Supreme Court.
49
PART E


E.     Broadcast Room
1.    The Registry will make one or more rooms or a hall available within the

       premises of the Supreme Court for the purpose of broadcasting the

       proceedings. Multiple screens along with the other necessary

       infrastructural facilities shall be installed, for enabling litigants,

       journalists, interns, visitors and lawyers to view the courtroom

       proceedings in the broadcast room(s). Special arrangements will be

       made for the differently abled.
F.    Miscellaneous
1.    The Supreme Court shall hold exclusive copyright over videos streamed

      online and archived with the Registry; and
2.    Re-use, capture, re-editing or redistribution, or creating derivative works

      or compiling of the broadcast or video footage, in any form, shall not be

      permitted except as may be notified in the terms and conditions of use

      and without the written permission of the Registry.
50
PART E


I would like to acknowledge and appreciate the efforts and assistance rendered

by Mr K K Venugopal, the learned Attorney General for India, Ms Indira Jaising,

learned Senior Counsel, Mr Mathews Nedumpara, learned Counsel and by the

law student, Mr Swapnil Tripathi, who also moved a petition under
Article 32.
…….…..........................................J
                                           [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




New Delhi;
September 26, 2018.
51