[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Punjab Urban Plann. vs Kanwaljit Singh Ahluwalia . on 25 September, 2018
Author:
Abhay Manohar Sapre
Bench:
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
,
Abhay Manohar Sapre
Non­Reportable

                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CIVIL APPEAL No.4639 OF 2010


                         Punjab Urban Planning  & 
                         Development Authority & Anr.        ….Appellant(s)

                                                 VERSUS

                         Kanwaljit Singh Ahluwalia & Anr.    …Respondent(s)


                                          J U D G M E N T

                         Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.
1.    This appeal is directed against the final judgment

                         and   order   dated   05.01.2009   passed   by   the   National

                         Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, New Delhi

                         in   Revision   Petition   No.   3268   of   2008   whereby   the

                         National   Consumer   Commission   dismissed   the

                         Revision Petition.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2018.09.26
11:20:20 IST
Reason:
1
2.    Facts   of   the   case  and  the  issue  involved  in  the

appeal lie in a narrow compass as would be clear from

the narration of the facts stated infra.
3.    The   Punjab   Urban   Planning   and   Development

Authority (for short called “Authority”)­appellant No.1

is the statutory authority created under the Act for the

State of Punjab.
4.    The   respondents   purchased   one   plot   on

12.08.1998   bearing   No.   795   Phase   ­I   Urban   Estate

Patiala from the appellant­Authority pursuant to one

scheme for the construction of their residential house.

The respondents, after purchase, ensured compliance

of   all   necessary   formalities   and   started   construction

work   on   the   plot.   The   construction   work   had   to   be

stopped   by   the   respondents   at   the   instance   of   the

appellant half way.
5.    It is the case of the respondents that but for no

fault  of   theirs,   the construction remained incomplete

for more than one year and despite repeated  requests
2
made by the respondents to allow them to start and

complete   the   construction   work,   the   appellant   did

nothing.
6.    This   gave   rise   to   filing   of   the   complaint   by   the

respondents against the appellant­Authority under the
Consumer   Protection   Act
before   the   District   Forum

seeking  monetary compensation as follows:­
1.     Due to escalation                       Rs. 50,000/­
2.     Due to material loss                    Rs. 17,000/­
3.     Charges paid to architect               Rs. 2,500/­
4.     Interest accrued on housing             Rs. 28,976/­
       loan
5.     Compensation   for   mental             Rs. 25,000/­
       pain and agony
                                               Rs. 1,13,476/­
7.   The respondents inter alia complained that it was

a clear case of deficiency in service on the part of the

Authority as a result of which the respondents had to

suffer losses, but for no fault of theirs and, therefore,

they are entitled to claim the aforementioned monetary

claim   under   specified   heads   from   the   Authority

(appellant   No.1   herein).   The   appellant­Authority

contested the complaint.
3
8.    By   order   dated   12.06.2001,   the   District   forum

allowed   the   respondents’   complaint   by   recording   the

following finding against the appellants and awarded a

sum   of   Rs.1,13,476/­   to   the   respondents   under

various heads mentioned above:
“……The  whole  procedure  and  exercise
      of rejection of the previously sanctioned site
      plan   (29.11.97)   and   subsequently   again
      reverting   to   the   same   (29.11.97)   and
      subsequently passing of the second site plan
      on  29.12.98  was nothing but  only  to harass
      the consumer. It is the responsibility of the
      respondent   to   pay   the   loss   which   were
      suffered   by   the   complainant.   The
      respondents   themselves   admitted   that   the
      delay was cause due to their inefficient and
      improper   decisions.   It   is   because   of   this
      reason,   they   are   ready   to   waive   of   non­
      construction   fee   for   1999.   It   is   thus   clear
      proof of deficiency in service on the part of
      Respondent.”
9.    The   appellant   felt   aggrieved   and   filed   appeal

before the State forum. The appeal was dismissed and,

therefore, they filed revision before the National forum.

By impugned order, the National forum also dismissed

the   revision  and   confirmed the orders passed by the
4
District  and   State  forum  which  gives  rise to  filing  of

this appeal by way of special leave in this Court.
10.   Heard Mrs. Rachana Joshi Issar, learned counsel

for the appellants and Mr. Lav Kumar Agrawal, learned

counsel for the respondents.
11.   Having heard the learned counsel for the parties

and on perusal of the record of the case, we find no

merit in the appeal.
12.   In our considered view, the concurrent findings of

three forums, namely, District forum, State Appellate

forum   and   lastly,   the   National   revisionary   forum   do

not   call   for   any   interference.   These   findings   are

binding on this Court. It is more so because we have

not   noticed   any   kind   of   perversity   or   illegality   or

arbitrariness in these findings.
13.   All the three forums categorically, on facts, held

that the respondents were never at fault at any stage

after purchasing the plot from the appellant­ Authority

but   it   was   the   Authority,   who   was   at   fault   due   to
5
which the respondents caused loss, inconvenience and

mental   harassment   while   completing   construction   of

their   residential   house   on   the   plot   which   remained

incomplete for more than one year.
14.   It   was   found   that   there   was   absolutely   no

justification   on   the   part   of   the   Authority   to   create

obstacles once they cleared every thing to enable the

respondents   to   go   ahead   with   the   work   of

construction. Indeed, as per the finding, the Authority

too admitted undue delay on their part in permitting

the   respondents   to   complete   the   work.   The

respondents were compelled to stop the work half way

for   a   long   time   due   to   which   their   time,   money   and

material were lost and they were deprived of living in

their   house.   The   finding   quoted   above,   which   was

rightly upheld by the Appellate and  revisionary forum,

justifies their conclusion.
15.   Learned   counsel   for   the   appellant­Authority,

however, argued with vehemence that the respondents’
6
complaint   itself   was   misconceived   and   that   in   any

event,   it   was   incapable   of   being   entertained   and

eventually   being   allowed on  facts  and in  law  but we

were not impressed by her submissions.
16.     Once the three forums, on facts, held against the

appellant­Authority (a finding quoted above), then we

are   not   inclined   to   go   into   any   issue   which,   even

otherwise, does not arise for consideration.
17.     In the light of   the foregoing discussion, we find

no merit in the appeal, which fails and is accordingly

dismissed   with   costs   quantified   at   Rs.10,000/­

payable by the appellant­Authority to the respondents.
………...................................J.
                               [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]

                                    
                               …...……..................................J.
                            [MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR]

New Delhi;
September 25, 2018
7