[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
In Re : T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad vs Union Of India And Ors. on 14 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 178
Author:
S.Abdul Nazeer
Bench:
Deepak Gupta
,
S. Abdul Nazeer
,
Madan B. Lokur
1


                                                                       REPORTABLE
                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
                                    I.A. Nos. 1424-1425 of 2005

                                                    IN
                           WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 202 OF 1995


         T.N. GODAVARMAN THIRUMULPAD                              … PETITIONER

                                                  VERSUS

         UNION OF INDIA AND ORS.                                  … RESPONDENTS



                                           JUDGMENT
S.ABDUL NAZEER, J.
I.A. Nos. 1424-1425 of 2005
1.              Mr. Bhupesh Baghel, M.L.A., has filed I.A. Nos. 1424-1425 of

         2005 in the above writ petition seeking the following reliefs:
Signature Not Verified
(i)   Direct the respondents 1 to3 herein to ensure that
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
no    non-forest   activities   including   mining
Date: 2018.09.14
18:01:39 IST
Reason:
operations are carried out by the respondents 4 to
                               7 herein in the forests under the garb of lease
2
executed     by     the    State   of    Chhattisgarh     or
       permission granted by the State of Chhattisgarh in
       their favour;
(ii)   Direct the respondents 1 to 3 to initiate criminal
       prosecution of the respondents 4 to 7 herein as
       also other officials of the State of Chhattisgarh
       with whose connivance, the respondents 4 to 7
       herein have carried out and/or are carrying on
       non-forest activities in the forests;
(iii) Direct the C.B.I. to make an enquiry with regard to
       violation   of      the    provisions    of    the
Forest
       Conservation Act
even after the order dated
       12.12.1996 of this Hon'ble court by the State of
       Chhattisgarh after it came into existence on
       01.11.2000 and to fix the responsibility of the
       officials who are responsible for granting lease or
       to permit non-forest activities in contravention of
       the provisions of
Forest Conservation Act
in forests
       in   the    State     of   Chhattisgarh       and    to   fix
       responsibility and then to intimate departmental
       proceeding and/or their criminal prosecution;
(iv) Direct        determination          and     recovery       of
       compensation from respondents 4 to 7 herein for
       causing environmental losses by carrying on non-
3
forest activities in the forest area for commercial
           purposes;
(v)   Direct the respondents 2 & 3 to take immediate
           steps for forest protection and rehabilitation of
           mined area by planting sufficient number of trees
           and    by      taking   immediate   measures     for
           compensatory afforestation of the area; and
(vi) Pass such other order or orders as this Hon'ble
           Court may deem fit and proper in the facts &
           circumstances of the case as well as in the interest
           of justice."
2.   In this case we are concerned with the illegal mining

activities of by Mr. Anil Lunia (respondent No.4) in the State of

Chhattisgarh.      According to     the applicant, Anil Lunia,    an

industrialist, on 31.10.1998 applied for a mining prospecting

license in Bhainsakanhar, District Kanker, to mine iron ore at

Bhainsa Kankar, District North Bastar Kanker. The Government of

Chhattisgarh, Mining Department, accorded prospecting license

on an area of admeasuring 18.27 hectares vide Khasra Nos. 123,

125, 127, 129, 130 and 139 vide letter dated 25.1.2002. Written

permission was also accorded on 29.5.2002 along with certain
4
conditions for the prospecting. A lease deed was executed on

26.5.2003 by the Collector, North Bastar Kanker in favour of Anil

Lunia.   In this deed it has been, inter alia, mentioned that the

lessee shall not cut any tree without the sanction of authorities

and shall not enter reserved forest or use forest roads for

transporting purpose without the written sanction of DFO. It was

also mentioned that the lessee has to allow inspection by

State/Central authorities at any point of time.   In the month of

June-July 2003, Anil Lunia started mining operations but not as

per the approved plan of IBM. He did not adhere to the conditions

of lease and started cutting trees without permission. In a

complaint made by one NGO, it was stated that thousands of

trees have been chopped off by the licensee in violation of the
Forest Conservation Act
. Conservator of Forest Kanker constituted

a 3-member inquiry team which gave its report on the basis of

which Sub-Divisional Officer issued a letter dated 18.9.2003, inter

alia, mentioned that how the notified protected forest was shown

as non-forest revenue land just to facilitate the mining lease

without complying with the provisions of
Forest Conservation Act
.
5
The subsequent proceedings would show how a part of the State

machinery     was     involved     in       allowing     violation   of
Forest

Conservation Act
.       The applicant has also referred to certain

judicial proceedings initiated by Anil Lunia. That is how the

aforesaid applications have been filed by him seeking the said

reliefs herein.
3.   Anil   Lunia   has   filed    his      reply   affidavit    denying    the

allegations/averments made in the application. On the basis of

the order of this Court, a Central Empowered Committee (for short

'CEC') was constituted. The CEC after examining the matter

during various dates of hearing and after site visit, filed its report

on 25.9.2008. It has examined at length the documents in relation

to grant of mining on various land in favour of Anil Lunia in

violation of
Forest Conservation Act
and has come to a conclusion

that iron ore have been extracted and transported in blatant

violation of the approved mining plan. The mining lease was

executed     in   violation   of   the       statutory    requirements.     The

irregularities/illegalities noted by the CEC are as under:
6
i)     the prospecting license was granted even through
       Mr. Lunia was found to be involved in illicit felling
       of trees in the applied area. The recommendations
       of the Collector, Kanker against the grant of the
       prospecting license and thereafter for cancellation
       of      the      prospecting        license       were
       disregarded/ignored;
ii)    iron ore mineral areas in District Bastar are
       reserved for Public Sector Undertakings. As an
       exception, permission of the Central Government
       under
section 5(1)
of the MMRD Act for grant of
       prospecting license as well as for mining license in
       favour of Mr. Lunia were obtained on the ground
       that iron ore will be captively used in the crushing
       – screening and sponge Iron Plant being set up by
       Mr. Lunia. In flagrant violation of the above, the
       iron ore extracted by Mr. Lunia was allowed to be
       sold;
iii)   the mine till its closure operated without the
       requisite environmental clearance.        This is in
       violation of the Environmental Impact Assessment
       Notification   issued   by   the   MoEF   under    the
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986
;
iv)    as per the approved mining plan the permissible
       annual production was 6000 tonnes.        As against
7
this, 69,000 MT iron ore was extracted during
      2003-2004. During 2004-2005 & 2005-2006 35400
      MT & 18281 MT of iron ore respectively were
      extracted.     Out of the above, 99,913 MT was
      transported.      At     no   stage    did    the    Mining
      Department object to these brazen violations;
v)    at the time the extraction from the mine had just
      commenced,        the     Three       Member        Enquiry
Committee set up by the Forest Department held
      that   the     mining    lease    area       was     in   an
      undemarcated protected forest. In spite of the
      above, the Collector, Kanker did not put a stop to
      the mining.      Instead, after keeping the matter
      pending for eight months, he took a baffling
      decision that it is only after the State agrees with
      the proposal of the Forest Department to notify a
      "new   forest"   (i.e.   reserved     forest),     that   the
      cancellation of the mining lease will be considered;
vi)   even after the Enquiry Committee constituted by
      the State Government held that the said area is a
      forest land, the mining was allowed to continue.
What is more one Member of the Committee, after
      a gap of more than four months and out of the
      blue without giving any reasons, made a number
8
of    adverse     observations    against     the     earlier
            unanimously agreed report;
vii)   no action for the cancellation of the mining lease
            was taken even after Mr. Lunia was found to be
            involved in illicit felling in the adjoining reserved
            forest;
viii) the     detailed    directions    given   in   the       State
            Government's circular dated 12.1.2000 were not
            adhered to. Before grant of the mining lease the
            report of the Forest Department was required to
            be taken into consideration and which was not
            done. Significantly, the letter signed for this
            purpose was not dispatched on the request of Mr.
            Lunia.     The      procedure    prescribed     for     field
            verification at the time of permitting mining in the
            area was not followed; and
ix)    though in the enquiry conducted by the State, the
            then Collector, Kanker has been held responsible
            for   committing     a   number    of    illegalities    and
            irregularities no action has been taken against him
            on the ground that he has already retired.
4.   The recommendations made by the CEC are as under:
a)     The State of Chhattisgarh should be directed to
            recover the entire sale proceeds of the iron ore
9
extracted and transported by Mr. Lunia at the then
            prevalent rates. An equal amount should be
            directed   to     be   deposited    by     the   State     of
            Chhattisgarh as compensation for its failure to
            enforce the law of the land and comply with the
            orders of the Hon'ble Supreme Court;
b)     The iron ore confiscated by the State should be
            immediately sold by inviting tenders after giving
            wide publicity;
c)     Criminal proceedings should be initiated against
            the then Collector, Kanker for criminal breach of
            trust and other provisions of the Indian Panel
            Code;
d)     Mr. Anil Lunia should be blacklisted by the State
            Government and debarred for at least a period of
            ten years and should be held ineligible for any
            public office.
5.   The respondent-State of Chhattisgarh has filed affidavits on

30.9.2008     which    detailed    actions     taken   by    the     State   of

Chhattisgarh in response to the recommendations of the CEC.

This was followed by a further affidavit dated 24.11.2008.
6.   Pursuant to the replies filed to these affidavits, the State of

Chhattisgarh has filed another affidavit giving latest position and
10
steps that have been taken pertaining to this case. The contents

of this affidavit are as under:
i)    The State Government issued a demand notice
           dated 23.9.2008 for the recovery of the entire sale
           proceeds of the 1,22,686.16 CMT of iron ore that
           was mined and transported by Mr. Anil Lunia from
           Khasra Nos.123, 125, 127, 129, 130 & 139 of
           village Bhaisan Kanhar, Bastar. The said demand
           notice required Mr. Anil Lunia to deposit a sum of
           Rs.6,66,75,633.75/-. However, Mr. Anil Lunia failed
           to deposit said amount. Therefore, the Collector,
           North Bastar, Kanker issued a Revenue Recovery
           Certificate (RRC) to the Collector, Durg (where Mr.
           Anil   Lunia   resides),      who   then   directed   the
           Tehsildar, Durg to register a case for the recovery
           of revenue on 11.02.2010. The Tehsildar, Durg
           accordingly registered a revenue recovery case no.
01A/76/2009-10 against Mr. Anil Lunia and issued
           a   summons      dated     08.10.2010      to   him   for
           appearance in Court.            The Tehsildar's Court
           thereafter issued a demand note on 29.12.2010
           which was challenged by Mr. Anil Lunia by filing a
           civil suit (no. 46 A/2011) in the Court of the Ld.
           Eighth Civil Judge, Class II, Durg. The Ld. Eighth
           Civil Judge, Class II, Durg issued an injunction
11
order on 04.04.2011, and the case is currently
       pending before that Court. A true translated copy
       of the order dated 04.04.2011 of the Ld. Eighth
       Civil Judge, Class II, Durg is annexed and marked
       as Annexure RCG-1.
ii)    The Hon'ble High Court of Chhattisgarh had
       passed an order dated 16.12.2008 (in W.P. No.
       6355/2005) directing the parties (i.e. the State of
       Chhattisgarh and Mr. Anil Lunia) to maintain status
       quo with regard to the confiscation proceedings
       against Mr. Anil Lunia. The said writ petition has
       subsequently been transferred to this Hon'ble
       Court vide order dated 24.12.2008 and has been
       re-numbered as Transferred Case No. 16 of 2018.
       The confiscated iron ore is currently lying at site
       and natural vegetation has grown over it. This can
       be observed from the latest photographs of the
       site, copies of which are being annexed and
       marked as Annexure RCG-2.
iii)   That,     the   State   Government     also    initiated
       disciplinary proceedings against certain officials of
       the     State   Government,   which   are     described
       below:-
A.      A disciplinary enquiry was ordered against Mr.
               R.A. Pathak, the then SDO, Bhanupratappur,
12
by the Forest Department of the Government
     of Chhattisgarh under the Chhattisgarh Civil
     Service Rules, 1966.              Mr. R.A. Pathak was
     found guilty of professional misconduct after
     giving    him      opportunity          of    being       heard.
Accordingly,         and          pursuant           to      the
     recommendation of the Chhattisgarh Public
     Service Commission, the State Government
     issued an order dated 30.01.2010 pursuant to
     Rule 10(5) of the Chhattisgarh Civil Service
     Rules, 1966, penalising Mr. R.A. Pathak by
     fixing his pay to the minimum pay scale.
B.   A   disciplinary      enquiry       was       also       ordered
     against      Mr.    M.     Kalyani      (the       then     Joint
     Collector,         Kanker),        by        the         General
     Administration             Department               of       the
Government of Chhattisgarh. Mr. M. Kalyani
     was      also      found     guilty      of    professional
     misconduct,         and     the    State       Government
     issued an order dated 09.12.2011 pursuant to
     Rule 12 of the Chhattisgarh Civil Service
     Rules, 1966, which penalised him by fixing
     his pay at the minimum pay scale for three
     years.
13
C.   A   disciplinary   enquiry   was   also   ordered
           against Mr. S.K. Pandey, the then Assistant
           Mining Officer, by the Mining Department of
           the Government of Chhattisgarh under Rules
           47 and 48 of the Chhattisgarh Civil Service
           Pension Rules, 1976. Mr. S.K. Pandey however
           filed a Writ Petition (No. 5748/2009) in the
           Hon'ble High Court of Chhattisgarh assailing
           the aforesaid action of the State Government
           and was granted injunctive relief vide order
           dated 24.10.2009.
D.   By an order dated 28.9.2010, Mr. P.N. Naik,
           the then Assistant Grade II, was also found
           guilty of professional misconduct by the
           Directorate of Mining & Geology of the
           Government of Chhattisgarh, pursuant to a
           hearing granted to him.      Mr. P.N. Naik was
           penalised by withholding two increments.
iv)   The Department of Commerce and Industry of the
      Government of Chhattisgarh had blacklisted Mr.
      Anil Lunia by an order dated 22.9.2008. The order
      of blacklisting continued for six (6) years until
      08.09.2014. However, the order dated 08.09.2014
      stated that Mr. Anil Lunia could be blacklisted
14
again in the event a Court of Law ruled against
          him in future.
7.   Having heard learned counsel for the parties, we accept the

Report of the CEC. From a reading of this Report of the CEC, it is

apparent that Mr. Anil Lunia had flagrantly violated the law and

had carried out mining in the forest areas. The affidavit of the

State Government reveals that the State Government itself was

alive to these violations and has taken necessary steps in the

matter. The State has taken action not only to stop mining but

also to initiate proceedings against the erring officials.   A bare

reading of the affidavit of the State shows that all mining

activities in the forest areas have been stopped long time back. It

is clear that steps have been taken to recover the entire sale

proceeds of the CMT of iron ore that was mined and transported

by Mr. Anil Lunia from Khasra Nos. 123, 125, 127, 129, 130 and

139 of Village Bhaisan Kanhar, Bastar. It is also clear that State

Government has initiated disciplinary proceedings against its

officials who have found to be guilty of professional misconduct.

Disciplinary enquiry has also been ordered against Mr. S.K.
15
Pandey, the then Assistant Mining Officer, by the Mining

Department of the Government of Chhattisgarh. The Department

of Commerce and Industry of the Government of Chhattisgarh had

already blacklisted Mr. Anil Lunia. It is clear from the records that

the confiscated iron ore has been mined from the adjoining forest

land. The authorities concerned are free to auction the aforesaid

confiscated iron ore in accordance with law. Therefore, it is not

necessary to direct the CBI enquiry as prayed for in the

applications. The applications are accordingly disposed of insofar

as Anil Lunia is concerned.
8.   There shall be no order as to costs.
…….……………………………J.
                                      (MADAN B. LOKUR)


                                       …….……………………………J.
                                      (S. ABDUL NAZEER)


                                        …….……………………………J.
                                      (DEEPAK GUPTA)
New Delhi;
September 14, 2018.