[Cites
32
, Cited by
65
]
Supreme Court of India
Janabai vs Additional Commissioner on 19 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 5068, 2019 (1) ABR 1, (2018) 5 MAH LJ 921, (2018) 11 SCALE 275, (2019) 1 ALL WC 126, (2018) 6 ALLMR 930 (SC), (2019) 1 JCR 59 (SC), (2019) 1 ICC 170, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 199
Author:
Dipak Misra
Bench:
D.Y. Chandrachud
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
,
Dipak Misra
1

                                                                         REPORTABLE


                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6832 OF 2018
                              (Arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No. 24212 of 2017)


         Janabai                                                        …Appellant

                                                 VERSUS


         Additional Commissioner and Others                           …Respondent(s)



                                              JUDGMENT
Dipak Misra, CJI


                         The singular question that emanates for consideration in this

         appeal is whether the forums below as well as the High Court is justified

         in disqualifying the appellant for continuing as a member of the Gram

         Panchayat Kalamba (Mahali) on the ground that there has been

         encroachment upon the government land since 1981 by her

         father-in-law and husband and she is using the said land. There are
Signature Not Verified
concurrent findings of fact that the father-in-law and the husband of the
Digitally signed by
SUBHASH CHANDER
Date: 2018.09.19
16:01:52 IST
Reason:
appellant have encroached upon the government land and despite
2
notice, they have not vacated the same on one pretext or the other. As

far as these findings are concerned, we are not inclined to interfere with

the same as we are of the considered opinion that it is based on

apposite analysis of the materials on record.
2.   The pivotal issue that we have to address is whether the appellant

incurs disqualification under the
Maharashtra Village Panchayat Act,

1958
(for short, ‗the Act‘).
Section 14
of the Act deals with the said

disqualification. The relevant part of
Sections 14(1)
and
14(1)
(j-3) reads

as under:-
―14. Disqualifications.- (1) No person shall be a
     member of a Panchayat continue as such, who-
(a) to (j-2)      xxx        xxx           xxx

     (j-3) has encroached upon the Government land or
     public property.‖
3.   The High Court, by the impugned order, has ruled:-
―The learned Additional Commissioner has independently
     examined the material on record and has found that Gram
     Panchayat had issued notice in 2012 to father-in-law of
     the petitioner to remove the encroachment. However, it
     was not complied with and then again Gram Panchayat
     had sent another communication asking for removal of
     encroachment to which Shri Kashiram Gaikwad-husband
     of the petitioner gave reply on 29th June, 2012, accepting
     that there was an encroachment and justified. The
     petitioner has not been able to point out any perversity in
     the findings of fact recorded by the subordinate
     authorities.    I see no reason to interfere with the
     impugned order‖.
3
4.     The order passed by the High Court is seriously criticised by the

learned counsel for the appellant on two counts, namely, it is absolutely

laconic and further, on a proper interpretation of the provisions, by no

stretch of imagination, it can be concluded that the appellant, as a

person, has encroached upon the government land or public property.
5.     Learned counsel for the appellant has placed heavy reliance on a

two-Judge Bench decision in
Sagar Pandurang Dhundare v. Keshav

Aaba Patil
and others1. In the said case, there was no allegation that

the appellants were encroachers, inasmuch as their father/grand father

had encroached the property and they were only the beneficiaries of the

encroachment and the beneficiary of an encroachment was treated as

an encroacher by the authorities.        The Division Bench of this Court

referred to the decisions of the High Court of Bombay.         We think it

appropriate to refer to the same to appreciate the scenario in entirety.
6.
In
Ganesh Arun Chavan v. State of Maharashtra2
, decided on

24.09.2012, the petitioner therein had taken the stand that the

encroachment was by his father and the house was constructed with the

income of his father. The High Court, in the said factual matrix, held as

follows:-
1 (2018) 1 SCC 340
2 2012 SCC OnLine Bom 1393
4
―10. There is nothing in the Act by which the concept of
family or joint residence could be imported as far as the
subject of disqualification is concerned. The said
provision contemplates encroachment upon the
Government land or public property by a person, as in this
case, who is a Member of the Panchayat.
x           x            x           x            x
12. The Legislature has taken care and wherever the
concept of family or joint residence has to be applied,
specific provision in that behalf has been made either
substantively or by way of an Explanation. For illustration,
if the disqualification is under
section 14(1)(h)
for failure to
pay any tax or fee due to the panchayat or the Zilla
Parishad, then, by virtue of Explanation 2, what the
Legislature has done is to provide that failure to pay any
tax or fee due to the panchayat or Zilla Parishad by a
member of HUF or by person belonging to a group, then,
that shall be deemed to disqualify all members of such
family or as the case may be of the group or unit. Equally
in case of clause 14(1)(g) where a person is said to be
disqualified for having any interest either by himself
directly or indirectly through or his partner, any share or
interest in any work done by order of the panchayat or in
any contract with by or on behalf of or employment with or
under the panchayat, the Legislature by Explanation IA
has clarified that a person shall not be disqualified under
clause (g) by reason of only such person having a share
or interest in any newspaper in which any advertisement
relating to the affairs of the panchayat is inserted; or
having a share or interest in the occasional sale to the
panchayat of any article in which he regularly trades and
having an occasional share or interest in the letting out or
on hire to the panchayat of any article and equally having
any share, interest in any lease for a period not exceeding
ten years of any immovable property. Therefore, once the
Legislature itself has clarified that an act of the member
alone incurs or invites disqualification, then, by
interpretative process it will not be possible to include in
section 14(1)
(j-3), the act of encroachment by members
of his family and for that purpose, disqualify the elected
5
representative. It is the act of the person seeking to
        contest election or functioning as a member which alone
        will attract the provision in question.‖
7.      Reference has been made to the decision in Yallubai Maruti

Kamble v. State of Maharashtra3 wherein the petitioner was elected

as the Sarpanch of the Gram Panchayat and the allegation against him

was that her husband and brother-in-law had made encroachment upon

gairan land and constructed a house thereon. The stand of the petitioner

was that the provision was not attracted and she could not be

disqualified.
Placing reliance on the decision in
Ganesh Arun Chavan
(supra), the Court held thus:-
―14. However, when it comes to encroachment upon
        Government Land or Public Property, the Legislature is
        aware that ordinarily and normally such act "is gaining
        upon the rights or possession of another". That may be an
        individual or a concerted act. Thus, it envisages acting
        either by himself or herself or jointly with others.
        Therefore, the extent of participation and the role of a
        person therein assumes importance and significance. It
        may amount to entering upon a land and remaining there,
        occupying and possessing it or construction thereon.
        Equally, it may mean not just possessing a land but a
        Structure, Building, House thereon or a part thereof.
        Hence, which act, when committed, by whom are all
        relevant matters together with the time factor, namely,
        prior to or after Petitioner's marriage. Hence, in its wisdom
        if the Legislature disqualifies a person or a member only if
        the act is committed by him, then, it is not for this Court to
        probe it further. It is for the Legislature to take remedial
        steps if this is providing an escape route to wrongdoers
        and lawbreakers. This Court cannot legislate nor can it

3 WP No. 8497 of 2012, decided on 5.10.2012 (Bom)
6
step in to fill up an alleged lacuna or defect in law. It has
       been recognized by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that if a
       matter, provision for which may have been desirable, has
       not been really provided for by the Legislature, the
       omission or defect in law is of the nature which cannot be
       cured or supplied by a mode of construction which
       amounts to ironing out the creases. (See Petron Engg.
Construction (P) Ltd. v. CBDT4
). True it is that the
       character and conduct of the representative of the people
       should be exemplary and setting a high standard. He will
       not be a true representative of the people if he indulges in
       acts which are immoral, illegal and wrongful but the
       grievance should be raised before some other forum.‖
8.     The two-Judge Bench has also dwelled upon the authority in
Kanchan Shivaji Atigre v. Mahadev Baban Ranjagane5
, wherein the

disqualification was on the ground of encroachment. The High Court

has opined that as per the provision, it is the act of the person who is

elected and that alone is to be considered. The High Court, in that

context, held thus:-
―13. … Therefore, it is the act of the person contesting the
       poll as a candidate or the act of elected member himself
       as the case may be, that (sic) would disqualify them. It
       cannot be that somebody else commits an act of
       encroachment even if he is a Member of the same family
       but the consequences are visited on an elected
       representative or a person desiring to contest the election
       to Gram Panchayat. Even if such person is a Member of
       that family by marriage or otherwise, still, it will not be
       permissible to disqualify him or her as that would create a
       vacancy in the Gram Panchayat. It would not be possible
       to give broad based, wide and comprehensive
       representation of the public in a unit of local self
4
1989 Supp (2) SCC 7
5 2012 SCC OnLine Bom 1537
7
government. The Gram Panchayat is envisaged to be a
       unit of local self-government in terms of Part IX of the
       Constitution of India. Therefore, the provisions with regard
       to disqualification will have to be construed in a manner
       so as not to create a vacuum or make it impossible for the
       villagers to choose their representative and constitute a
       Gram Panchayat. That will then create difficulties and
       obstacles in constituting a Panchayat. If that is equally not
       intended by the Statute in question, then, by interpretative
       process, I cannot do so and import or insert something in
       the provision, which is not there.‖
9.     In Devidas Surwade v. Commissioner, Amravati6, a Division

Bench of the High Court took a different view. It ruled that the

encroachment by a member of the family of the elected person would

tantamount to encroachment by the elected candidate. The reasoning of

the said decision is as follows:-
―6. We find that there is a definite object in making the
       said amendment to the provisions of disqualification and
       the object is that one, who encroaches upon the
       Government land or the Government property, cannot
       make any claim to represent the people by becoming an
       elected, member of the Gram Panchayat. The term
       person in the said amended provision has to be
       interpreted to mean the legal heirs of such person, who
       has encroached and continues to occupy the Government
       land or the Government property, his agent, assignee or
       transferee or as the case may be. If such an interpretation
       is not made in the said provision, the result would be
       absurd in the sense that the Government land would
       continue to remain encroached and the legal heirs or the
       assignees or the transferees remaining on such
       encroached government land shall claim the right to get
       elected as a member of democratically elected body. In
       no case our conscious permits such type of interpretation

6 2012 SCC OnLine Bom 2126
8
to defeat the very object of the Bombay Village
        Panchayats (Amendment) Act, 2006.‖
                                           [Emphasis added]
10.     It is worthy to note here that a similar issue came up for

consideration before a Division Bench in
Parvatabai v. Commissioner,

Nagpur7
. A contention was advanced that the house in question was

standing in the name of the father of the petitioner and she could not

have been disqualified under
Section 14(1)
(j-3) of the Act. An argument

was advanced that the encroachment should have been made by the

person elected so as to attract disqualification and not encroachment

made by member of the family.
The learned single Judge, placing

reliance on the Division Bench decision in Devidas Surwade (supra),

came to hold that the contention raised by the petitioner was not

acceptable.
11.     Be it noted, a special leave petition8 challenging the aforesaid

order was dismissed by this Court stating thus:-
―We do not find any merit in this petition. The special
        leave petition is, accordingly, dismissed. Pending
        application, if any, stands disposed of. Stay granted by
        this Court on 15-10-2015, stands vacated.‖




7 2015 SCC OnLine Bom 6141
8 Parvatabai @ Shobha Kakde v. Additional Commissioner, SLP (C) No. 29255 of 2015, order dated 4.1.2016
9
With the aforesaid expression of law, the controversy should have

been put to rest but the fate of the proposition, as it seems, rose like a

phoenix.
12.
In
Sandip Ganpatrao Bhadade v. Commissioner, Amravati9
,

the authorities below had held that the elected candidate was an

encroacher being in occupation of the government land.            The High

Court, elaborating the scheme of the Act and the purpose of the

provision, ruled thus:-
―16. In view of the aforesaid meaning of the terminologies
       "to encroach", "encroachment", "encroacher" and
       "encroached", whoever resides in the property or any
       portion thereof, which is an encroachment upon the
       Government land or public property, can be said to have
       "encroached" upon it and becomes an "encroacher".
       Whether such an encroachment is jointly with others
       and/or individually, either at one time or at different times
       remains hardly of any significance as he becomes liable
       to be removed and prosecuted under
Section 53
of the
       said Act. Whether a person has become liable to be
       removed and/or prosecuted under
Section 53
of the said
       Act from the Government land or public property,
       becomes a real test of attracting disqualification under
Section 14(1)
(j-3) of the said Act. If the answer is in the
       affirmative, the disqualification is incurred.
17. In view of the aforesaid position, the provision of
Section 14(1)
(j-3) of the said Act is attracted even in a
       case where a member of a Panchayat resides in the
       property or any portion thereof, which is an encroachment
       upon the Government land or public property. The
       question as to whether any other person or a member of

9 2016 SCC OnLine Bom 8991
10
a family has already made an encroachment, loses its
          significance and as soon as a member or proposed
          member joins such act, he cannot escape from the
          clutches of disqualification under
Section 14(1)
(j-3) of the
          said Act. The question framed is answered accordingly.
18. If an intention of the Legislature is to prevent an
          encroachment upon the Government land or public
          property by a person, who is deemed to be a "public
          servant" under
Section 184
entitled to enjoy all privileges
          attached to it under
Section 180
of the said Act, can it be
          said that such an intention of the Legislature be defeated
          by adopting circuitous way of occupying the property,
          which is an encroachment on the Government land or
          public property. The answer would obviously be in the
          negative, for two main reasons - (i) the act, which is
          prohibited directly, cannot be promoted or encouraged
          indirectly to defeat the object and purpose of such
          prohibition, and (ii) it would amount to promoting or
          encouraging the conflicting interest, necessarily resulting
          in the disqualification under
Section 14(1)
(j-3) of the said
          Act.‖
13.
In the same year, that is, 2017, the High Court in
Anita Laxman

Junghare v. Commr., Amravati10
ruled thus:-
―6. … For attracting disqualification under
section
          14(1)
(j-3), in a case like this, the crucial question to be
          answered is: Does the legal representative or member of
          the original encroacher's family continue to occupy the
          government land or property. If he does, he attracts the
          disqualification under
Section 14(1)
(j-3). It is not an
          answer then for such person that the original
          encroachment was by his predecessor or family member
          and not by himself. If that encroachment is continued by
          him, he attracts the disqualification. That was the case in
          Devidas Surwade. The original encroachment may have
          been by the petitioner's father, but after the death of his
          father, he continued to occupy the property and thereby
10
2017 SCC OnLine Bom 9102
11
attracted the disqualification of
section 14(1)
(j-3). On the
         other hand, in
Kanchan
's case, it was the petitioner's
         father-in-law, who was the encroacher; she had nothing to
         do with it. It was not the case of the State that she
         continued to occupy the property either as a legal heir of
         her father-in-law or as a member of her husband's family.
         The emphasis is really on the continued encroachment
         and not so much on the original act of encroachment.
         Encroachment, after all, is not a one-time act. It is a
         continuous act. If someone's encroachment is continued
         by another, that other is equally an encroacher, as much
         as the original encroacher.‖
14.      Analysing the concept of removal from an elected post, the two-

Judge Bench of this Court in
Sagar Pandurang Dhundare
(supra) held

thus:-
―11. Thus, under the statutory scheme, an encroacher is
         liable to be evicted by the Panchayat and if the Panchayat
         fails, the Collector has to take action. The encroacher is
         also liable to be prosecuted. Encroachment is certainly to
         be condemned, the encroacher evicted and punished.
         Desirably, there should not be a member in the
         Panchayat with conflicting interest. But once a person is
         elected by the people, he can be unseated only in the
         manner provided under law. Even with the best of
         intention, if there is no statutory expression of the
         intention, the court cannot supply words for the sake of
         achieving the alleged intention of the law maker. It is
         entirely within the realm of the law maker to express
         clearly what they intend. No doubt, there is a limited
         extent to which the court can interpret a provision so as to
         achieve the legislative intent. That is in a situation where
         such an interpretation is permissible, otherwise feasible,
         when it is absolutely necessary, and where the intention is
         clear but the words used are either inadequate or
         ambiguous. That is not the situation here.
In the Act
,
         wherever the law-makers wanted to specify family, they
         have done so. As noted by some of the judgments of the
         High Court, in Explanation 2 for
Section 14(1)(h)
, the
12
failure to pay any tax or fee due to the Panchayat or Zila
        Parishad by a member of a Hindu Undivided Family
        (HUF) or by a person belonging to a group has been
        expressly mentioned as a disqualification on others in the
        family or group. It is, therefore, evident that when the
        intent of the legislature was to disqualify a member for the
        act of his family, it has specifically done so. The Court, in
        the process of interpretation, cannot lay down what is
        desirable in its own opinion, if from the words used, the
        legislative intention is otherwise discernible.‖
15.     Be it noted, reference was made to
Abhiram Singh v. C.D.

Commachen11
, wherein the Constitution Bench dealt with the

interpretation of
Section 123
of the Representation of the People Act,

1951 (for short, ‗the 1951 Act‘).
The conflict that was sought to be

resolved related to Section 123(3) of the 1951 Act that had been dealt

with by another Constitution Bench in
Jagdev Singh Sidhanti v. Pratap

Singh Daulta12
wherein the Court had held thus:-
―25. … The corrupt practice defined by clause (3) of
        Section 123 is committed when an appeal is made either
        to vote or refrain from voting on the ground of a
        candidate‘s language. It is the appeal to the electorate on
        a ground personal to the candidate relating to his
        language which attracts the ban of Section 100 read with
        Section 123(3). Therefore it is only when the electors are
        asked to vote or not to vote because of the particular
        language of the candidate that a corrupt practice may be
        deemed to be committed. Where, however for
        conservation of language of the electorate appeals are
        made to the electorate and promises are given that steps
        would be taken to conserve that language, it will not
        amount to a corrupt practice.‖

11 (2017) 2 SCC 629
12 (1964) 6 SCR 750 = AIR 1965 SC 183
13
16.   Various other decisions were also referred to in
Abhiram Singh
(supra). Analysing certain aspects, namely, the legislative history, the

provisions contained in
Section 153-A
IPC, amendment to sub-section

(3) of Section 123 of the 1951 Act, literal versus purposive interpretation

and the constitutional validity of Section 123(3) of the 1951 Act, Madan

B. Lokur, J., held as under:-
―50.1. The provisions of sub-section (3) of
Section 123
of
      the Representation of the People Act, 1951 are required
      to be read and appreciated in the context of simultaneous
      and contemporaneous amendments inserting sub-section
      (3A) in
Section 123
of the Act and inserting Section 153A
      in the
Indian Penal Code
.
50.2. So read together, and for maintaining the purity of
      the electoral process and not vitiating it, sub-section (3) of
Section 123
of the Representation of the People Act,
      1951 must be given a broad and purposive interpretation
      thereby bringing within the sweep of a corrupt practice
      any appeal made to an elector by a candidate or his
      agent or by any other person with the consent of a
      candidate or his election agent to vote or refrain from
      voting for the furtherance of the prospects of the election
      of that candidate or for prejudicially affecting the election
      of any candidate on the ground of the religion, race,
      caste, community or language of (i) any candidate or (ii)
      his agent or (iii) any other person making the appeal with
      the consent of the candidate or (iv) the elector.‖
17.   T.S. Thakur, C.J., concurred with the view expressed by Madan B.

Lokur, J. and did not agree with the view expressed by D.Y.

Chandrachud, J. The learned Chief Justice in his concurring opinion

stated:-
14
―There is thus ample authority for the proposition that
      while interpreting a legislative provision, the Courts must
      remain alive to the constitutional provisions and ethos and
      that interpretations that are in tune with such provisions
      and ethos ought to be preferred over others. Applying that
      principle to the case at hand, an interpretation that will
      have the effect of removing the religion or religious
      considerations from the secular character of the State or
      state activity ought to be preferred over an interpretation
      which may allow such considerations to enter, effect or
      influence such activities. Electoral processes are
      doubtless secular activities of the State. Religion can
      have no place in such activities for religion is a matter
      personal to the individual with which neither the State nor
      any other individual has anything to do. The relationship
      between man and God and the means which humans
      adopt to connect with the almighty are matters of
      individual preferences and choices. The State is under an
      obligation to allow complete freedom for practicing,
      professing and propagating religious faith to which a
      citizen belongs in terms of
Article 25
of the Constitution of
      India but the freedom so guaranteed has nothing to do
      with secular activities which the State undertakes. The
      State can and indeed has in terms of
Section 123(3)
forbidden interference of religions and religious beliefs
      with secular activity of elections to legislative bodies.‖
18.   S.A. Bobde, J., in his concurring opinion, expressed thus:-
―It is settled law that while interpreting statutes, wherever
      the language is clear, the intention of the legislature must
      be gathered from the language used and support from
      extraneous sources should be avoided. I am of the view
      that the language that is used in
Section 123(3)
of the Act
      intends to include the voter and the pronoun ―his‖ refers to
      the voter in addition to the candidate, his election agent
      etc. Also because the intendment and the purpose of the
      statute is to prevent an appeal to votes on the ground of
      religion. I consider it an unreasonable shrinkage to hold
      that only an appeal referring to the religion of the
      candidate who made the appeal is prohibited and not an
      appeal which refers to religion of the voter. It is quite
15
conceivable that a candidate makes an appeal on the
      ground of religion but leaves out any reference to his
      religion and only refers to religion of the voter. For
      example, where a candidate or his election agent,
      appeals to a voter highlighting that the opposing
      candidate does not belong to a particular religion, or caste
      or does not speak a language, thus emphasizing the
      distinction between the audience‘s (intended voters)
      religion, caste or language, without referring to the
      candidate on whose behalf the appeal is made, and who
      may conform to the audience‘s religion, caste or speak
      their language, the provision is attracted. The
      interpretation that I suggest therefore, is wholesome and
      leaves no scope for any sectarian caste or language
      based appeal and is best suited to bring out the
      intendment of the provision. There is no doubt that the
      section on textual and contextual interpretation proscribes
      a reference to either.‖
19.   This being the majority opinion, we have focussed on the same.

The two-Judge Bench in Sagar Pandurang Dhundare‘s case has

distinguished
the said decision
by holding thus:-
―Abhiram Singh v. C.D. Commachen (D) By Lrs
. and
      others is a recent Constitution Bench judgment of this
      Court dealing with corrupt practices. Appeal on the
      grounds of religion, race, caste, community, language,
      etc. of the candidates and the electorate, and canvassing
      votes accordingly, has been held to be a corrupt practice.
      The Court, to hold so, adopted a purposive interpretative
      process declaring that the
Representation of the People
      Act, 1951
should be interpreted in that context to be
      electorate centric rather than candidate centric. That is
      not the situation in the present case. The appellants were
      elected by the people to the Panchayat. There is no case
      that they are original encroachers on the public property.
And this is not the case where the alleged act of
      encroachment has influenced the will of the people in
      which case, going by
Abhiram Singh
(supra), the court
16
would have been justified in attempting a purposive
        interpretation to achieve a laudable object.‖
20.     It also distinguished the decision in
Hari Ram v. Jyoti Prasad
and

another13. In
the said decision
, the issue that arose for consideration

was whether the defendants had made illegal/unauthorized construction

over the public street by way of illegal encroachment.           The Court

addressed the issue relating to limitation and referred to
Section 22
of

the Limitation Act, 1963, that deals with continuing breaches and torts.
In this context, the Court, placing reliance on
Sankar Dastidar v.

Banjula Dastidar14
, held that the suit was not barred by limitation and,

ultimately, did not find any substance in the appeal and dismissed the

same with costs and directed the appellant to remove the unauthorized

encroachment within sixty days from the date of the judgment. The

two-Judge Bench, while distinguishing
the said decision
, opined that it

did not relate to interpretation of a statute pertaining to disqualification.

Frankly speaking
,
the said judgment
has nothing to do with

interpretation.
21.     Proceeding further, the Court in Sagar Pandurang Dhundare

opined that:-
―14. As we have already noted above, the duty of the
        court is not to lay down what is desirable in its own

13 (2011) 2 SCC 682
14 (2006) 13 SCC 470
17
opinion. Its duty is to state what is discernible from the
      expressions used in the statute. The court can also
      traverse to an extent to see what is decipherable but not
      to the extent of laying down something desirable
      according to the court if the legislative intent is otherwise
      not discernible. What is desirable is the jurisdiction of the
      law-maker and only what is discernible is that of the
      court.‖

And again:-
―16. In case, the appellants suffer from any of the three
      situations indicated above, they shall be unseated. The
      rest is for the State to clarify by way of a proper
      amendment in case they really and truly want to achieve
      the laudable object of preventing persons with conflicting
      interest from becoming or continuing as members of the
      Panchayat. The extent of conflicting interest is also for the
      Legislature to specify.‖
22.   If we follow the principle stated in Sagar Pandurang Dhundare,

indubitably the appeal has to be allowed and the impugned judgment

and order are to be set aside. It is apt to mention here that in Sagar

Pandurang Dhundare, there has been reference to
Section 53(1)
, (2)

and (2-A). For the sake of completeness, it is profitable to reproduce

the said provision:-
―53. Obstructions and encroachments upon public
      streets and open sites.-(1) Whoever, within the limits of
      the gaothan area of the village,—
(a) builds or sets up any wall, or any fence, rail, post, stall,
      verandah, platform, plinth, step or structure or thing or
      any other encroachment or obstruction, or
(b) deposits, or causes to be placed or deposited, any
      box, bale, package or merchandise or any other thing, or
18
(c) without written permission given to the owner or
occupier of a building by a Panchayat, puts up, so as to
protect from an upper storey thereof, any verandah,
balcony, room or other structure or thing.
in or over any public street or place, or in or over upon
any open drains, gutter, sewer or aqueduct in such street
or place, or contravences any conditions, subject to which
any permission as aforesaid is given or the provisions of
any byelaw made in relation to any such projections or
cultivates or makes any unauthorised use of any grazing
land, not being private property, shall, on conviction, be
punished with fine, which may extend to fifty rupees and
with further fine which may extend to five rupees for every
day on which such obstruction, deposit, projection,
cultivation or unauthorised use continues after the date of
first conviction for such offence.
(2) The Panchayat shall have power to remove any
such obstruction or encroachment and to remove any
crop unauthorisedly cultivated on grazing land or any
other land, not being private property, and shall have the
like power to remove any unauthorised obstruction or
encroachment of the like nature in any open site not being
private property, whether such site is vested in the
Panchayat or not, provided that if the site be vested in
Government the permission of the Collector or any officer
authorised by him in this behalf shall have been first
obtained. The expense of such removal shall be paid by
the person who has caused the said obstruction or
encroachment and shall be recoverable in the same
manner as an amount claimed on account of any tax
recoverable under Chapter IX.
It shall be the duty of the panchayat to remove such
obstruction or encroachment immediately after it is
noticed or brought to its notice, by following the procedure
mentioned above.
(2-A) If any Panchayat fails to take action under sub-
section (2), the Collector suo motu or on an application
19
made in this behalf, may take action as provided in that
sub-section, and submit the report thereof to the
Commissioner. The expense of such removal shall be
paid by the person who has caused the said obstruction
or encroachment or unauthorised cultivation of the crop
and shall be recoverable from such person as an arrear of
land revenue.
(3) The power under sub-section (2) or sub-section (2A)
may be exercised in respect of any obstruction,
encroachment or unathorised cultivation of any crop
referred to therein whether or not such obstruction,
encroachment or unauthorised cultivation of any crop has
been made before or after the village is declared as such
under this Act, or before or after the property is vested in
the Panchayat.
(3-A)       Any person aggrieved by the exercise of the
powers by the panchayat under sub-section (2) or (3)
may, within thirty days from the date of exercise of such
powers, appeal to the Commissioner and the
Commissioner, after making such enquiry as he thinks
necessary shall pass such orders as he deems necessary
after giving such person a reasonable opportunity of
being heard.
(3-B)       Any order made by the Collector in exercise of
powers conferred on him under sub-section (2A) or (3)
shall be subject to appeal and revision in accordance with
the provisions of the Maharashtra Land Revenue Code,
1966 (Mah. XLI of 1960).
(4) Whoever, not being duly authorised in that behalf
removes earth, sand or other material from, or makes any
encroachment in or upon an open site which is not private
property, shall, on conviction, be punished with fine which
may extend to fifty rupees, and in the case of an
encroachment, with further fine, which may extend to five
rupees for every day on which the encroachment
continues after the date of first conviction.‖
20
23.      Interpreting the said provision, the two-Judge Bench has opined

that:-
―15. From the Statements of Objects and Reasons for the
         amendment introduced in 2006, it is seen that the
         purpose was ―to disqualify the person who has
         encroached upon the Government land or public property,
         from becoming member of the Panchayat or to continue
         as such‖. The person, who has encroached upon the
         Government land or public property, as the law now
         stands, for the purpose of disqualification, can only be the
         person, who has actually, for the first time, made the
         encroachment. However, in view of
Section 53(1)
of the
         Act, in case a member has been punished for
         encroachment, he shall be dismissed. Similarly, a
         member against whom there is a final order of eviction
         under
Section 53(2)
or (2A), shall also not be entitled to
         continue as a member.‖
24.      As we understand from the above paragraph, the two-Judge

Bench has been guided by the word ‗person‘ as used in
Section 14(1)
and further influenced by the language employed in
Section 53
. That

apart, the analysis made by the two-Judge Bench, as we notice, has

given a restricted meaning to the word ‗person‘ who has encroached

upon the government land or public land. It has also ruled that such a

person is one who has actually for the first time encroached upon the

government or public land. In Devidas Surwade (supra), the Division

Bench of the Bombay High Court, placing reliance on the Statement of

Objects and Reasons and laying stress on the word ‗person‘, noted that

the legal heirs of an encroacher who continue to occupy the government
21
land or government property are to be treated as encroachers. It has

been held that if such an interpretation is not adopted, the result would

be absurd, for the government land would continue to remain

encroached and the legal heirs or the assignees or the transferees

remaining on the encroached government land shall claim the right to

get elected as a member of a democratically elected body. According to

the Division Bench of the Bombay High Court, such an interpretation

would defeat the very object of the Bombay Village Panchayat

(Amendment) Act, 2006.
25.   First, we are obliged to remind ourselves that the view expressed

by the Bombay High Court in Devidas Surwade (supra) has been

affirmed by this Court in Special Leave Petition. It is worth noting here

that this Court, while dismissing the special leave petition, had observed

that it had not found any merit in the petition. Whether such an order

would tantamount to be a binding precedent or not is another matter.
26.   We may hasten to add here that we do not intend to take the said

route. We think it appropriate to analyse the provision, understand the

purpose and the contextual relevance and also appreciate the nature of

the provision in the backdrop of the democratic set-up at the grass root

level. Having said that, we shall now analyse the statutory scheme.
Section 53
that occurs in Chapter III deals with obstruction and
22
encroachment upon public streets and upon sites. It confers power on

the Panchayat to remove such obstruction or encroachment or to

remove any unauthorizedly cultivated grazing land or any other land.

That apart, it also empowers the Panchayat to remove any unauthorized

obstruction or encroachment of the like nature in or upon a site not being

private property.   The distinction has been made between private

property and public property. It has also protected the property that vests

with the Panchayat. If the Panchayat does not carry out its responsibility

of removing the obstruction or encroachment after it has been brought to

its notice in accordance with the procedure prescribed therein, the

higher authorities, namely, the Collector and the Commissioner, have

been conferred with the power to cause removal. There is a provision for

imposition of fine for commission of offence.
27.   On a schematic appreciation of the Act including
Sections 10
,
11
and
53
, it is quite vivid that the Members elected in Panchayat are duty

bound to see to it that the obstruction or encroachment upon any land,

which is not a private property but Government land or a public property,

should be removed and prosecution should be levied against the person

creating such obstruction or encroachment.
28.
Section 184
of the Act provides that every Member of the

Panchayat and every officer and servant maintained by or being
23
employed under the Panchayat shall be deemed to be a public servant

for the purpose of
Section 21
of the Indian Penal Code. Analysing the

various provisions, the learned Single Judge in
Sandip Ganpatrao

Bhadade
(supra) has opined:-
―11. It is in the background of the aforesaid provisions of
     law, that the provisions of qualifications and
     disqualifications to vote, contest the election and being
     continued as a member of Panchayat, are required to be
     considered.
Section 13
of the said Act deals with the
     persons qualified to vote and be elected. The persons
     incurring any disqualification under the provisions of the
     said Act are neither qualified to vote nor to be elected as
     a member of a Panchayat. Section 14 deals with different
     kinds of disqualifications, as stipulated in clauses (a) to
(k) under sub-section (1), which operate against two kinds
     of persons – (i) who proposes to become a member of a
     Panchayat, and (ii) who has become a member of a
     Panchayat. If a person has incurred any one or more
     disqualifications, then he is prohibited from becoming a
     member of a Panchayat, and if becomes a member of a
     Panchayat, then his is not entitled to continue as such.
The disqualification under
Section 14
is in respect of the
     acts, events, deeds, misdeeds, transactions, etc, which
     have not been done, happened or occurred before
     entering into the office as a member of a Panchayat as
     well as those which take place during continuance as a
     member of a Panchayat.‖

And again:-
―13. The very object of introducing the provision of
     disqualification under
Section 14 (1)
(j-3) of the said Act is
     to avoid the conflict of interest by prohibiting the persons,
     who are the encroachers upon the Government land or
     public property to get elected or continued as a member
     of the Panchayat, which is democratically elected body of
     the villagers. It is beyond comprehension to assume that
     a person under statutory obligation or a duty to protect the
24
Government land or public property from encroachment,
      commits an act of such encroachment. To permit person,
      who proposes to become a member or becomes a
      member of the Panchayat to be the encroacher upon the
      Government land to public property, would be
      anathematic, acting in breach of statutory duty, exposing
      himself to prosecution under sub-sections (1) and (4) of
Section 53
, resulting ultimately in losing the protection
      under Section 180 read with Section 184 of the said Act. It
      is in this context that the text of disqualification under
Section 14(1)
(j-3) of the said Act is required to be
      analyzed and interpreted.‖

      In the case of Devidas Surwade (supra), it has been clearly

stated, as noticed earlier, that the term ‗person‘ has to include the legal

heirs, if any, of the encroacher who continue to occupy the government

land. Emphasis has been laid on encroachment and continued

encroachment.      After the said Division Bench judgment, number of

learned Single Judges have adopted a different approach without

noticing the judgment which is against judicial discipline.
29.   We may note here with profit that the word ‗person‘ as used in
Section 14 (1)
(j-3) is not to be so narrowly construed as a consequence

of which the basic issue of ―encroachment‖ in the context of

disqualification   becomes      absolutely    redundant.     The     legislative

intendment, as we perceive, is that encroachment or unauthorized

occupation has to viewed very strictly and
Section 53
, therefore,

provides for imposition of daily fine. It is also to be borne in mind that it is

the Panchayat that has been conferred with the power to remove the
25
encroachment. It is the statutory obligation on the part of the Panchayat

to protect the interest of the properties belonging to it. If a member

remains in occupation of an encroached property, he/she has a conflict

of interest. If an interpretation is placed that it is the first encroacher or

the encroachment made by the person alone who would suffer a

disqualification, it would lead to an absurdity. The concept of purposive

interpretation would impel us to hold that when a person shares an

encroached property by residing there and there is continuance, he/she

has to be treated as disqualified. Such an interpretation subserves the

real warrant of the provision. Thus analysed, we are of the view that the

decision in
Sagar Pandurang Dhundare
(supra) does not lay down the

correct position of law and it is, accordingly, overruled.
30.   In view of the aforesaid analysis, we do not find any substance in

the appeal and the same stands dismissed accordingly. There shall be

no order as to costs.
..………………………….CJI.
(Dipak Misra)


                                            ..…………………………….J.
                                            (A.M. Khanwilkar)


                                            ..…..……………….………..J.
                                             (Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud)
New Delhi;
September 19, 2018