[Cites
9
, Cited by
10
]
Supreme Court of India
Maj. Amod Kumar vs Union Of India on 6 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 148
Author:
Rohinton Fali Nariman
Bench:
Indu Malhotra
,
R.F. Nariman
1

                                                                             REPORTABLE

                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                           WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 918 OF 2017 

     Maj. Amod Kumar                                                      …Petitioner

                                                Versus

     Union of India & Anr.                                             …Respondents
WITH

                            WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 965/2017

                                                  AND

                            WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1077/2017

                                         J U D G E M E N T 


      INDU MALHOTRA, J.
1. The   above­mentioned   Writ   Petitions   were   heard   together   as   they

              raise   common   issues,   and   are   being   disposed   of   by   the   present

              common Judgement.
2. The   facts   material   for   the   purposes   of   deciding   the   present   Writ

              Petitions have been set out hereinbelow.
Signature Not Verified
3. The Petitioners are personnel belonging to the Army Service Corps
Digitally signed by
SHASHI SAREEN
Date: 2018.09.06
17:07:40 IST
Reason:
(“ASC”).   The   Petitioners   in   Writ   Petition   (Civil)   Nos.   918   and

              1077/2017 are Officers holding the ranks of Major and Lieutenant
2
Colonel respectively, while the Petitioner in Writ Petition (Civil) No.

  965/2017 is holding the rank of Sepoy.
The   Petitioners   have   impugned   Posting   Orders   issued   by   the

  Respondents, posting them to operational units/operational areas.

  The Petitioner in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 918/2017 – Major Amod

  Kumar, who was serving as an Officer of the ASC, was posted to 44

  Rashtriya Rifles as a Mechanical Transport Officer vide Order dated

  July 20, 2017. The Petitioner in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 965/2017 –

  Sepoy Prahalad Singh was serving in the ASC, having being trained

  for driving special vehicles. He was posted to 4 Rashtriya Rifles vide

  Order   dated   September   4,   2017.   The   Petitioner   in   Writ   Petition

  (Civil)   No.   1077/2017   –   Lieutenant   Colonel   Shubhankar   Mishra,

  who was serving as an Officer of the ASC, was posted to 694 Coy

  ASC   (Tank   and   Transport) as an Officer  Commanding  vide  Order

  dated September 15, 2017.
4.   S  UBMISSIONS OF THE PETITIONERS 

  The Petitioners were represented by Ms. Meenakshi Arora, Learned

  Senior   Advocate.   The   Petitioners  inter   alia  made   the   following

  submissions:
4.1.   The Petitioners submitted that they belong to the ASC, and

          have   been   posted   to   ‘operational’   areas/formations   despite
3
the findings of this Court in
Union of India & Anr.  v.  Lt. Col
.

           P.K. Choudhary & Ors.1 (“Lt. Col. P.K. Choudhary’s Case”).
   4.2.    The   Petitioners   submitted   that   this   Court   in  Lt.   Col.   P.K.

           Choudhary’s  Case   had   held   that   the   ASC,   EME   and   other

           Minor Corps are ‘non­operational’ units/formations based on

           the stand taken by the Union of India.
The Petitioners submitted that even though the findings of

             this Court in  Lt. Col. P.K. Choudhary’s  Case that the ASC

             are ‘non­operational’ were rendered while adjudicating the

             issue  of  distribution of vacancies which had been created

             for   the   rank   of   Colonel  amongst the various Corps of the

            Indian Army, the same would apply in the present case.
   4.3.    The Petitioners claim that as a consequence of the Judgement

           in Lt. Col. P.K. Choudhary’s Case wherein the Petitioners have

           been   classified   to   be   ‘non­operational’   for   promotional

           avenues, the same classification should apply as a necessary

           corollary for the purposes of deployment and postings also.
   4.4.    It   was   submitted   that   the   preference   given   to   ‘operational’

           Corps   in   the   matter   of   promotions   was   unjustified,

           particularly since personnel of the ASC move alongside with

           personnel belonging to the other Corps in operational areas.

           Thus,   they   are   as   vulnerable   as  the   personnel  of   the   other

           Corps.
1(2016) 4 SCC 236.
4
On   this   basis,   the   Posting   Orders   issued   by   the

         Respondents directing the Petitioners to serve in operational

         units/areas   were   challenged   as   being   in   gross   violation   of

         their Fundamental Rights and principles of natural justice.
5.  SUBMISSIONS OF THE RESPONDENTS 

  The   Respondents   –   Union   of   India,   and   the   Military   Secretary

  Branch   were   represented   by   Mr.   R.   Balasubramanian,   Learned

  Advocate. The Respondents made the following submissions:
5.1. The   present   Writ   Petitions   under
Article   32
are   not

         maintainable, since there is no violation of their Fundamental

         Rights whatsoever. Hence, the Writ Petitions are liable to be

       dismissed at the threshold on this count alone.
  5.2. It was further submitted that if the Writ Petitioners have any

         grievance,   the   alternate   remedy   of   challenging   the   Posting

         Orders before the Armed Forces Tribunal is available. Hence,

         the Writ Petitions are liable to be dismissed on this ground

         also.
5.3.   On   merits,   it   was   submitted   that   transfers   are   not   only   a

         necessary   incident   of   service,   but   an   essential   condition   of

         service.   An   employee   has   no   legal   right,   much   less   a

         Fundamental Right, to be posted in a particular place, or to

         be   transferred   to   a   place   of   his/her   choice.   The   competent
5
authority is empowered to determine the place of posting of

           the personnel concerned.
In this regard, reliance was placed on the decision of this

           Court in
Major General J.K. Bansal v. Union of India & Ors.2
to

           submit that the scope of interference in matters of transfer of

           members   of   the   armed   forces   is   very   limited,   and   courts

           should  be  slow  to interfere with the decisions of competent

           authorities, in the absence of an exceptionally strong case.

   5.4.    It   was   further   submitted   that   the   reliance   placed   by   the

           Petitioners   on   the   observations   made   in  Lt.   Col.
P.K.

           Choudhary’s Case (supra) is misplaced.
In   that   case,   this   Court   was   considering   the   issue   of

           allocation   of   additional   vacancies   created   in   the   Selection­

           Grade rank of Colonel pursuant to the implementation of the

           recommendations   of the Ajai Vikram  Singh  Committee. The

           decision in Lt. Col. P.K. Choudhary’s Case was not rendered in

           the context of transfers or posting orders.

   5.5. The Respondents submitted that the Army has no personnel

           who   are   ‘non­combatants’   or   ‘non­operational’,   with   the

           exception of personnel belonging to the medical organisation


2(2005) 7 SCC 227.
6
who have a distinct status under International Humanitarian

       Law. The Combat Arms, Combat Support Arms, Army Service

       Corps,   and   other   Minor   Corps   are   all   ‘operational’   entities

       having a distinct ‘operational’ role.
5.6. The   posting   of   the   Petitioners   is   a   part   of   their   Regimental

       Duty, and is not based on their willingness to occupy such

       posts.
5.7. The   postings   of   the   Petitioners   are   in   accordance   with   the

       policies and instructions of career planning, and management

       issued   from   time   to   time,   and   do   not   violate   any   statutory

       rules.
The   Petitioners   have   not   referred   to   any   statutory   rules,

       executive   policies,   or   instructions   which   debar   them   from

       being posted to such areas.
5.8.   It was further submitted that the Petitioners have not alleged

       any  mala fides  or vindictiveness on the part of the authority

       which   has   issued   the   Posting   Orders.   Hence,   the   Writ

       Petitions cannot be entertained on this ground also.

5.9.   The Respondents submitted that the claim of the Petitioners

       that   they   are   ‘non­operational’   or   ‘non­combatants’   is

       untenable as it strikes at the very root of the organisational
7
effectiveness of the Army. If the grievance of the Petitioners

          was to be entertained, it would generate disaffection amongst

          personnel, and directly impact the morale of the forces.
6.  DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 

  In light of the submissions advanced by the parties, the following

  issues arise for consideration:
 Whether the present Writ Petitions filed under
Article 32
of the

    Constitution are maintainable?
 Whether the action of the Respondents in posting the Petitioners

     and members of the ASC to ‘operational’ areas/units are valid in

     view   of   the   decision   of   this   Court   in  Lt.   Col.   P.K.   Choudhary’s

     Case (supra)?

   Whether the postings of the Petitioners to operational areas are

     violative of statutory rules, executive policies or instructions?

  The aforesaid issues will be addressed seriatim hereinbelow.

   6.1. Before   adverting   to   the   issues   at   hand,   a   reference   to   the

          composition of the Army would provide the contextual matrix

          of the case.
The   Army   is   comprised   of   eleven   major   streams  viz.  –   1)

          Armoured   Corps,   2)   Infantry,   3)   Mechanised   Infantry,   4)

          Artillery,   5)   Air   Defence,   6)   Engineers,   7)   Signals,   8)   Army

          Service Corps, 9) Army Ordnance Corps, 10) Electronics and
8
Mechanical   Engineers,   and   11)   Other   Corps   including

      Intelligence, Aviation and other Minor Corps.

        Each stream has a distinct and specialised role. Personnel

      are imparted specialised training in their designated field. All

      streams   work   and   co­operate   in   order   to   form   a   cohesive

      organisation.
The ASC is a vital stream which is primarily responsible for

      ensuring   provisioning,   procurement,   and   distribution   of

      supplies. ASC personnel provide the logistical support in the

      form   of   transportation,   maintenance   of   vehicles,   driving   in

      difficult   terrain,   preserving   equipment,   and   conserving   fuel

      expended.
6.2. The   Petitioners   have   contended   that   the   Posting   Orders

      passed   by   the   Respondents   posting   them   to   operational

      areas/units   is   violative   of   their   Fundamental   Rights

      guaranteed   by
Articles   14
and
21
of   the   Constitution.   The

      Petitioners   have,   however,   failed   to   substantiate   how   their

      Fundamental   Rights   have   been   violated.   Postings   and

      transfers   are   a   necessary   incident   of   service.   Hence,   the

     grievance, if any, cannot be entertained under
Article 32.
6.3. The Petitioners cannot assail posting/transfer orders directly

      before   the   Supreme   Court   by   way   of   Writ   Petitions   under
9
Article   32
of   the   Constitution.   If   the   Petitioners   have   any

       genuine   grievance,  they  have an alternate statutory  remedy

       available   by   challenging   the   same   before   the   Armed   Forces

       Tribunals.
Hence, the Writ Petitions under
Article 32
are liable to be

       rejected on the ground of availability of an alternate remedy.

6.4.   The decision of this Court in  Lt. Col. P.K. Choudhary’s  Case

       (supra) was rendered while adjudicating an Order passed by

       the   Armed   Forces   Tribunal   on   a   Policy   Circular   dated

       January 20, 2009 issued by the Government of India which

       had been quashed, and directions were issued to the Union of

       India to consider the personnel belonging to the Arms, Arms

       Support,   and   ASC   for   promotion   to   the   rank   of   Colonel   by

       creating supernumerary posts.
This   Court   was   considering   the   issue   of   distribution   of

       vacancies   which   had   been   created   for   the   rank   of   Colonel

       amongst   the   various   Corps   of   the   Indian   Army.   This   Court

       considered the findings of the Ajai Vikram Singh Committee,

       and   noted   that   Armoured   Corps,   Infantry,   Mechanised

       Infantry,   Artillery,   AD,   Engineers   and   Signals   were

       ‘operational   formations’,   while   the   ASC,   Army   Ordnance
10
Corps, and Electronics and Mechanical Engineers were not. 3

             The Officers belonging to the ASC, Army Ordinance Corps,

           and   Electronic   and   Mechanical   Engineers,   i.e.   the   services

           stream, do not constitute a common cadre with those serving

           in   the   Arms,   and   Arms   Support   for   the   purposes   of

           promotion.4

             As   a   result,   they   were   not   entitled   to   be   considered   for

           promotion   to   the   rank   of   Colonel   against   the   vacancies

           created   in   pursuance   of   the   implementation   of   the   AVS

           Committee Report.
This Court was not concerned with the issue of posting of

           personnel   belonging   to   the   ASC,   and   the   findings   therein

           cannot be said to apply to the present case.

             This   Court   was   cognisant   of   the   differential   treatment

           accorded to personnel belonging to the ASC, amongst other

           streams,   in   the   matter   of   promotions.   The   following

           observations made by this Court in Lt. Col. P.K. Choudhary’s

           Case are pertinent, and are reproduced here under:
“…The   true   position   is   that   allocation   of   officers   to
                different Arms and Services puts them in distinct cadres
                with the result that those comprising a particular cadre
                will   have   his   or   her   promotional   avenues   available

3(2016) 4 SCC 236, at paragraph 22.
4(2016) 4 SCC 236, at paragraph 36.
11
against   the   posts   comprising   that   cadre   alone
                 notwithstanding the  fact  that  the  Government  of  India
                 may, as a policy, attempt to ensure as far as possible
                 that officers of a given batch pick up their ranks around
                 the   same   time   or   within   a   reasonable   span   of   their
                 counterparts in other cadres or that the disparity in time
                 frame for promotion is  removed  by making promotions
                 retrospective from the dates officers in other cadre have
                 been promoted .”5
                                                            (Emphasis supplied)

             The   contention   of   the   Petitioners   claiming   parity   with   a

           different   arm   of   the   service,   is   misconceived   and   meritless,

           and is liable to be dismissed.
Different streams of the Army have distinct, and specialised

           roles.   They   work   in   co­ordination   with   each   other.   The

           personnel   of   the   ASC   are   imparted   specialised   training   to

           provide logistical support to the other streams in the form of

           maintenance   of   vehicles,   availability   of   trained   drivers,

           preservation of equipment, and conservation of fuel.

             To accept the prayers of the Petitioners merely on the basis

           of the contention that the ASC have been referred to as ‘non­

           operational’   for   the   purposes   of   promotion,   would   be   to

           disturb the entire structure and operations of the Army.

   6.5. The   Petitioners   have   not   made   any   submission   that   the

           postings   are   in   violation   of   any   statutory   rules,   executive


5(2016) 4 SCC 236, at paragraph 38.
12
policies or instructions.
In this regard, reliance can be placed on the decision of this

           Court in
Major General J.K. Bansal  v.  Union of India
(supra),

           which was cited by the Counsel for the Respondents during

           the hearing. In
the said decision
, this Court had referred to a

           number   of   its   precedents6  on   the   scope   of   interference   of

           Courts under
Article 226
of the Constitution in cases where

           transfer   orders   had   been   challenged.   The   Court   held   that

           matters   of   transfers   are   best   left   to   the   discretion   of   the

           competent authority, and should not be tinkered with, in the

           absence of a demonstrable violation of statutory rules, or an

           instance of mala fide on the part of the competent authority.

           This Court noted as follows:
“12…The scope of interference by the courts in regard to
                 members   of   the   armed   forces   is   far   more   limited   and
                 narrow. It is for the higher authorities to decide when
                 and   where   a   member   of   the   armed   forces   should   be
                 posted.   The   courts   should   be   extremely   slow   in
                 interfering with an order of transfer of such category of
                 persons   and   unless   an   exceptionally   strong   case   is
                 made out, no interference should be made.”

              The Petitioners have not alleged any  mala fide  against the

           Respondents.   Hence,   the   contentions   of   the   Petitioners

           cannot be entertained.
6Shilpi Bose v. State of Bihar
, 1991 Supp (2) SCC 659;
Union of India v. S.L. Abbas
, (1993) 4 SCC
357; and,
National Hydroelectric Power Corpn. Ltd. v. Shri Bhagwan
, (2001) 8 SCC 574.
13
6.6. The   Respondents   have   made   a   reference   to   the   Oath

        administered   to   Officers   and   Sepoys   alike   at   the   time   of

        commissioning. The said Oath is reproduced hereinbelow for

        reference:
“I   (Name)  hereby  solemnly  swear  that  I  will   bear  true
            faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India, as by
            law   established   and   that   I   will,   as   in   duty   bound
            honestly and faithfully, serve in the regular Army of the
            Union of India and go wherever ordered, by land, sea or
            air, and that I will observe and obey all the commands
            of the President of the Union of India and the commands
            of any officer set above me, even to the peril of my life.”
                                                       (Emphasis supplied)
          This   Oath  is   administered to  all  personnel, irrespective  of

        the Arm or Service to which they are commissioned. As per

        the Oath, personnel are duty bound to serve wherever they

        are ordered to.
6.7. In view of the above discussion, the Petitioners have failed to

        make out any case for interference by this Court.
7. In light of the aforesaid findings, the Writ Petitions are dismissed,

  with no order as to costs.
..........................J.
                                                         (R.F. NARIMAN)




                                                           ..........................J.
                                                           (INDU MALHOTRA)
14
New Delhi
September 6, 2018.
15
ITEM No. 1501          Court No. 9                SECTION  X
(For Judgment)
                

          S U P R E M E   C O U R T   O F   I N D I A
                    RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
              
             WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 918  of 2017

MAJ. AMOD KUMAR                              Petitioner(s)

                                VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA AND ANR.                           Respondent(s)

WITH

W.P.(CIVIL) NO. 965 OF 2017

W.P.(CIVIL) NO. 1077 OF 2017
Date : 06.09.2018  These matters were called on for pronouncement 
                    of judgment today.
For Appellant(s)    Ms. Meenakshi Arora, Sr. Adv.
Ms. Neela Gokhale, Adv.
Mr. Ilam Paridi, Adv.
Ms. Shradha Agrawal, Adv.
Ms. Kamakshi S.Mehlwal, Adv.
For Respondent(s)   Mr. Mukesh Kumar Maroria, Adv.
Mr. Arvind Kumar Sharma, Adv.
Hon'ble Ms. Justice   Indu Malhotra pronounced the
       judgment of the Bench comprising Hon’ble Mr. Justice
       Rohinton   Fali   Nariman   and   Hon'ble   Ms.   Justice   Indu
       Malhotra.
These   petitions   are   dismissed   in     terms   of   the
       signed reportable judgment.  There shall be no order
       as to costs.
(Shashi Sareen)                (Tapan Kumar Chakraborty)
            AR­cum­PS                         Branch Officer
(Signed reportable judgment is placed on the file)