[Cites
0
, Cited by
24
]
Supreme Court of India
Una Nagar Palika vs Kaliben Balubhai Makwana . on 20 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 1243, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 383
Author:
Abhay Manohar Sapre
Bench:
S. Abdul Nazeer
,
Abhay Manohar Sapre
REPORTABLE

                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                               CIVIL APPEAL No.5529 OF 2016


                         UNA NAGAR PALIKA                   ….Appellant(s)


                                              VERSUS


                         KALIBEN BALUBHAI 
                         MAKWANA & ANR.                         …Respondent(s)

                                                WITH

                                   CIVIL APPEAL No.5530/2016
                                   CIVIL APPEAL No.5531/2016 
                                   CIVIL APPEAL No.5532/2016 
                                   CIVIL APPEAL No.6490/2016 


                                       J U D G M E N T

                         Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.
1)   These   appeals   are   directed   against   the

                         common final judgment and order dated 06.10.2015

                         passed by the High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2018.09.20
16:51:13 IST
Reason:
in Letters Patent Appeal No.1122 of 2015 in Special
1
Civil   Application   No.3699   of   2014   with   Letters

Patent   Appeal   No.1065   of   2015   in   Special   Civil

Application   No.30402   of   2007   with   Letters   Patent

Appeal No.1066 of 2015 in Special Civil Application

No.4757   of   2012   with   Letters   Patent   Appeal

No.1067   of   2015   in   Special   Civil   Application

No.6137 of 2012 and Letters Patent Appeal No.1124

of   2015   in   Special   Civil   Application   No.11100   of

2014 whereby the Division Bench of the High Court

disposed of the Letters Patent Appeals filed by the

appellant   herein   on   the   basis   of   the   judgment

rendered by the Division Bench of the High Court in

the   matter   of  Chief   Officers  vs.  Mohmad   Irshad

Husenbhai Baloch & Ors. (2011 (1) GCD 569 (Guj)

(D.B.).
2)    In   order   to   appreciate   the   issues   involved   in

these appeals, few relevant facts need mention infra.
3)    The   appellant   herein   was   the   respondent

whereas the five contesting respondents herein were
2
the   petitioners   in   the   special   civil

applications(petitions) filed before the High Court.
4)    The appellant is the “Municipality” also called

Nagar Palika for the place called “Una” in the State

of Gujarat. The five contesting respondents, out of

them   four   have   expired   and   now   represented   by

their   legal   representatives,   were   the   employees   of

the appellant­Municipality.  One of the respondents

was   appointed   in   the   year   1990   whereas   others

were appointed in 1996 and 1998.
5)    On  their  attaining  the age of superannuation

in the appellant’s services on different dates, all the

five   respondents   requested   the   appellant   to   settle

their claims for payment of pension and pensionery

benefits.
6)    The appellant declined to grant any pensionery

benefits (pension) to all the five respondents stating

that   they   were   neither   eligible   and   nor   entitled   to

claim   the   pension   or/and   any   pensionery   benefits

from the appellant.
3
7)    This   gave   rise   to   filing   of   the   special   civil

applications   (petitions)  by   the   respondents   against

the   appellant   in   the   High   Court   of   Gujarat   being

S.C.A.   No.   3699   of   2014   and   four   others.     The

appellant as respondent contested the petitions.
8)    The Single Judge of the High Court by passing

separate   orders   on   different   dates   allowed   the

petitions and held that the petitioners (respondents

herein)   are   eligible   and   thus   entitled   to   claim

pension and pensionery benefits from the appellant

being their employees and accordingly issued a writ

of   mandamus   against   the   appellant­Municipality

directing   payment of pension to all the petitioners

therein (respondents herein) from the date of their

retirement.
9)    The appellant (Municipality) felt aggrieved and

filed intra court appeals before the Division Bench

in the High Court.  By common impugned order, the

Division Bench dismissed the appeals giving rise to
4
filing of these appeals by way of special leave in this

Court by the Una Nagar Palika(Municipality).
10)   It   is   apposite   to   mention   that   the   very

question,   namely,   whether   an   employee   of   a

Municipality is entitled to claim pension/pensionery

benefits   from   his   employer­Municipality   was   the

subject   matter   of   one   litigation   in   Gujarat   High

Court.   The   leading   judgment   was   passed   by   the

Division Bench in LPA No. 214/2011 entitled  Chief

Officer  vs.  Mohamed   Irshad   Husenbhai   Baloch

and   Others  (supra)   along   with   other   connected

matters on 31.01.2013.
11)   The   Division   Bench   held   that   the   employees

are   eligible   and   thus   entitled   to   claim   the

Pension/Pensionery   benefits   provided   they   render

qualifying   service   while   in   the   employment   of   the

Municipality in terms of the Rules.   The concerned

Municipality   felt   aggrieved   by   the   said   order   and

filed   special   leave   to   appeal   (SLP   Nos.15691   to
5
15700   of   2003)   in   this   Court.   It   was,   however,

dismissed by this Court by order dated 16.09.2013.
12)   The   order   was   accordingly   given   effect   to   by

sanctioning   the   pension   to   those   employees,   who

were parties in the said litigation.
13)   It is with this background, when the petitions

out   of   which   these   appeals   arise   came   up   for

hearing,   the   Single   Judge   (writ   court)   essentially

placed reliance on the decision of Chief Officer vs.

Mohamed Irshad Husenbhai Baloch and Others

(supra) and allowed the petitions finding no material

distinction in the case at hand and in the case of

Chief   Officer  vs.  Mohamed   Irshad   Husenbhai

Baloch and Others (supra).
14)   When   the   matter   came   up   in   appeals,   the

Division   Bench   also   placed   reliance   on   the   view

taken   in  Chief   Officer  vs.  Mohamed   Irshad

Husenbhai   Baloch   and   Others  (supra)   and

dismissed the appeals.
6
15)   The writ court and the Division Bench were of

the   view   that   the   issue   in   question   has   attained

finality by the decision rendered in the case of Chief

Officer  vs.  Mohamed   Irshad   Husenbhai   Baloch

and   Others  (supra)   and   affirmed   by   the   order   of

this Court dated 16.09.2012.
16)   It is with this background facts, the question

arises   for   consideration   in   this   appeal   is   whether

the view taken by the writ court and the Appellate

Court requires any interference.
17)   Heard Mr. S.P. Hasurkar, learned counsel for

the   appellant   and   Ms.   Anushree   Prashit   Kapadia,

learned counsel for the respondents.
18)   Having   heard   the   learned   counsel   for   the

parties and on perusal of the record of the case, we

find no case to interfere in the impugned order.
19)   In our considered opinion, the High Court was

right in holding that the question involved in these

appeals   is   covered   by   the   earlier   decision   of   the
7
Gujarat High Court rendered in the case of  Chief

Officer  vs.  Mohamed   Irshad   Husenbhai   Baloch

and Others (supra) which was upheld by this Court

by   order   dated   16.09.2013   and   thus   attained

finality.
20)   We find that in order to show that the decision

rendered in the case of Chief Officer vs. Mohamed

Irshad Husenbhai Baloch and Others (supra) has

no application  to the facts of the case and that it

does not lay down the correct principle and be held

as  per   curium,   the   appellant   (Municipality)   made

attempts and contended before the Division Bench

that there lies a distinction between the employees,

who were originally working with the Panchayat and

later   on   convergence   of   Panchayat   into   the

Municipality   became   the   employees   of   the

Municipality   by   virtue   of   its   merger   and   the

employees,   who   were   directly   appointed   by   the

Municipality.
8
21)   It was contended that the employees, who fall

in former category of case, were held entitled for the

grant of pension but not those employees, who fall

in the latter category of the case. It was pointed out

that   since   the   employees   in   the   case   of  Chief

Officer  vs.  Mohamed   Irshad   Husenbhai   Baloch

and Others (supra) fell in the former category of the

case and, therefore, they were held entitled to claim

the   benefit  of  pension whereas the respondents of

this   case   fall   in   the   latter   category   of   cases,   the

benefit   of   decision   rendered   in   the   case   of  Chief

Officer  vs.  Mohamed   Irshad   Husenbhai   Baloch

and   Others  (supra)   could   not   be   granted   to   the

respondents   because   they   were   appointed   directly

by the appellant (Municipality).
22)   The   Division   Bench   while   repelling   the

aforementioned   submission   took   note   of   the

following four undisputed facts arising in this case:
“1.   The   original   petitioners­respondent   No.1
      herein   in   the   respective   appeals   were
9
appointed by the municipality and they were
      in service of the municipality.
2.   After   the   appointment,   the   employee
      concerned   continued   in   service   until   he
      reached to the age of superannuation, so far
      as   LPA   No.1066/15   is   concerned.     Whereas,
      in the rest of the Letters Patent Appeals, the
      services of the employees concerned came to
      an end on account of death of the employees.
3.    It   is   an   undisputed   position   that   the
      total length of service in respect of all cases
      has exceeded 10 years which is the minimum
      requirement for eligibility of pension.
4.    In   respect   of   all   employees,   which   is
      subject   matter   of   the   present   group   of
      appeals, they were member of GPF and GPF
      contributions   were   being   deducted   by   the
      municipality   from   their   salary   from   time   to
      time until their services came to an end.”
23)   The Division Bench was of the view and, in our

view, rightly that the distinction sought to be made

between the two groups of employees, namely, one

coming from the Panchayat and then becoming the

Municipal   employees   and   the   other   directly

becoming the Municipal employees was held to be of

no   significance   because   the   appellant   made   the

respondents members of the GPF contributions and
1
0
went   on   to   deduct   regular   contribution   from   their

salary till the date of their retirement.
24)   In our view, the case at hand is covered by the

earlier   decision   rendered   in   the   case   of  Chief

Officer  vs.  Mohamed   Irshad   Husenbhai   Baloch

and   Others  (supra)   which   stands   upheld   by   this

Court by order dated 16.09.2013. We are also of the

view that the aforementioned distinction pointed out

by the appellant for coming out of the clutches of

the decision of Chief Officer vs. Mohamed Irshad

Husenbhai   Baloch   and   Others  (supra)   was   also

rightly   found   untenable   by   the   High   Court   by

assigning the proper reasons.
25)   Keeping   in   view   the   aforementioned   four

undisputed   facts   arising   in   the   case   coupled   with

the decision rendered in the case of  Chief Officer

vs.  Mohamed   Irshad   Husenbhai   Baloch   and

Others (supra), which has attained finality, and was

then   given   effect   to   in   relation   to   concerned
1
1
Municipal   employees   holding   them   eligible   and

entitled   to   claim   the   pension   and   the   pensionery

benefits, we find no good ground to take any other

view than the one taken by the writ court and the

Division Bench in the impugned order.
26)   Learned   counsel   for   the   appellant

(Municipality),   however,   placed   reliance   on   one

State   Government’s   Circular   dated   28.11.1994

(Annexure   P­1)   and   contended   that   in   the  light  of

this   circular,   the   respondents   are   neither   eligible

and nor entitled to claim the benefit of pension. We

find no merit in this submission.
27)   Firstly, we find that it was not filed before the

High   Court   (writ   court/Division   Bench);   Secondly,

the writ court and the Division Bench did not refer

it to;  Thirdly,  in any event, it is of no significance

to decide the present controversy.
28)   Its perusal shows that it applies to the cases of

Panchayat   employees,   who   later   became   the

Municipal employees.
1
2
29)   In the light of the foregoing discussion, we find

no merit in these appeals. The appeals thus fail and

are accordingly dismissed.
30)   The   appellant   (Municipality)   is   directed   to

finalize the pension cases of the respondents herein

and   release   the   amount   of   pension   after   proper

verification within four months from the date of this

order.
…...……..................................J.
                           [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]


                        ………...................................J.
                            [S. ABDUL NAZEER]
New Delhi;
September 20, 2018
1
3