[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Bangalore Development Authority vs B.N. Ramalingaswamy on 20 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 364
Author:
Abhay Manohar Sapre
Bench:
S. Abdul Nazeer
,
Abhay Manohar Sapre
Non­Reportable

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.6492 OF 2008



                          Bangalore Development Authority     …..Appellant(s)



                                                  VERSUS



                          B.N. Ramalingaswamy & Ors.         …..Respondent(s)

                                   
                                             J U D G M E N T

                          Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.
1.  This appeal is directed against the final judgment

                          and   order   dated   05.09.2007   of   the   High   Court   of

                          Karnataka at Bangalore in Writ Appeal No. 3390 of
Signature Not Verified
2005(LA)   whereby   the   Division   Bench   of   the   High
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2018.09.20
16:51:10 IST
Court dismissed the writ appeal filed by the appellant
Reason:
1
herein   and   affirmed   the   order   dated   06.07.2005   of

the Single Judge in Writ Petition No.28293 of 1991.
2.    Few   facts   need   to   be   mentioned   infra   for   the

disposal of this appeal, which involves a short point.
3.    The dispute, which is the subject matter of this

appeal, relates to land bearing No. 15/4, 16/4 and

16/8   situated   in   Jedahalli   Village,   Bangalore   North

Taluk,   Bangalore   measuring   around   6   acres   3

guntas. The dispute is between the appellant herein,

which   is   a   statutory   body   called­Bangalore

Development Authority (hereinafter referred to as “the

Authority”)   on   the   one   hand   and   the   private

respondent Nos. 1 to 4 and two others on the other

hand.
4.    Respondent Nos. 1 to 4 and two others filed a

writ   petition   (No.28293   of   1991)   before   the   High

Court of Karnataka (Bangalore) against the Authority,

some   private   respondents,   State   of   Karnataka   and
2
the Bangalore City Corporation. The writ petition was

filed   challenging   the   entire   acquisition   proceedings

initiated   by   the   Authority   by   issuance   of   the

Notification   dated   19.02.1976   by   which   the

aforementioned land in question was acquired by the

Authority   and   also     Resolution   No.   1051   dated

16.01.1976 passed by the Authority as being illegal,

void and bad in law. The Authority contested the writ

petition and supported the acquisition proceedings.
5.    By   order   dated   06.07.2005,   the   writ   Court

(Single Judge), in substance, allowed the writ petition

and, therefore, the Authority felt aggrieved and filed

an intra Court appeal before the Division Bench. By

impugned   order,   the   Division   Bench   dismissed   the

appeal   and   affirmed   the   order   of   the   writ   Court.

Aggrieved by the said order, the appellant­Authority

has filed the present appeal by way of special leave in

this Court.
3
6.    Having heard the learned counsel for the parties

and   on   perusal   of   the   record   of   the   case,   we   are

constrained   to   allow   the   appeal   and   while   setting

aside   the   impugned   order   remand   the   intra   court

appeal to the Division Bench of the High Court for its

disposal afresh on merits in accordance with law.
7.    In our considered view, the need to remand the

appeal to the Division Bench for its decision afresh

on   merits   has   occasioned  inter   alia  for   the   reason

that it did not deal with any of the issues arising in

the case and nor it seemed to have dealt with any of

the submissions urged by the parties and, especially,

the   submissions   urged   by   the   Authority   as   an

appellant   in   the   said   intra   court   appeal   except   to

discuss   the   issue   in   Para   5   of   the   order   which

resulted in dismissal of the Authority’s appeal.
8.    In   our   considered   opinion,   the   intra   court

appeal   did   involve   factual   and   legal   issues,   which
4
were   decided   by   the   Single   Judge,   therefore,   once

they   were   carried   in   intra   court   appeal   by   an

aggrieved party and pressed in service while assailing

the order of the Single Judge, it was incumbent upon

the Division Bench to deal with all such issues urged

and   then   record   its   findings   one   way   or   the   other

keeping   in   view   the   submissions   urged   and   legal

provisions applicable to the issues.
9.    It was, however, not done by the Division Bench

and   in   a   cursory   manner,   the   Division   Bench

disposed of the appeal.
10.   We  find   ourselves unable to concur  with  such

disposal and feel inclined to set aside the impugned

order and remand the case to the Division Bench of

the High Court with a request to decide the appeal

afresh on merits in accordance with law.
11.   Having formed an opinion to remand the case in

the light of our reasoning mentioned above, we do not
5
consider  it proper to go into the merits of the case

and, therefore, leave all the issues to be dealt with by

the Division Bench for its decision on merits.
12.    In view of the foregoing discussion, the appeal

succeeds and is accordingly allowed. Impugned order

is   set   aside.   The   case   (intra   court   appeal)   is

remanded to the Division Bench of the High Court for

its   decision   on   merits   uninfluenced   by   any   of   our

observations in this order. We request the High Court

to dispose of the appeal as expeditiously as possible

preferably within 6 months.
……...................................J.
                                     [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]
                               


                                     .……...................................J.
                                    [S. ABDUL NAZEER]

New Delhi,
September 20, 2018.
6