[Cites
6
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Orissa vs Dasarathi Meher on 27 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 4998, (2018) 13 SCALE 639, (2018) 4 SCT 514, (2019) 106 ALLCRIC 660, (2019) 194 ALLINDCAS 169, (2019) 1 ANDHLD 119, (2019) 1 JCR 98 (SC), AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 2034, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 744
Author:
Deepak Gupta
Bench:
Deepak Gupta
,
Madan B. Lokur
1



                                                                          REPORTABLE


                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.  7362  OF 2013




          STATE OF ORISSA                                             …APPELLANT(S)

                                                   Versus

          DASARATHI MEHER                                               …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                    WITH

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10066 OF 2018
                                     (@SLP (C) No. 13172 OF 2015)

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10061 OF 2018
                                     (@SLP (C) No. 13169 OF 2015)

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO.7363 OF 2013

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.10065 OF 2018
                                     (@SLP (C) No. 13171 OF 2015)


                                             J U D G M E N T


          Deepak Gupta, J.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2018.09.27
16:28:37 IST
Reason:
Leave   granted   in   SLP  (C) No.  13172 of  2015, SLP  (C)  No.

          13169 of 2015 and SLP (C) No. 13171 of 2015.
2
2.    Whether   the   tribe   mentioned   as   “Kulis”   in   the
Scheduled

Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act, 1976
in

Schedule II in Part XII at Item No. 42 includes persons belonging

to the “Kuli” community, is the issue which needs to be decided

in the present group of cases.
3.
Article 342
of the Constitution of India reads as follows:
“342. Scheduled Tribes.­ (1) The President may with
            respect to any State or Union territory, and where it is
            a State, after consultation with the Governor thereof,
            by   public   notification,   specify   the   tribes   or   tribal
            communities   or   parts   of   or   groups   within   tribes   or
            tribal communities which shall for the purposes of this
            Constitution   be   deemed   to   be   Scheduled   Tribes   in
            relation  to  that  State   or   Union   territory,  as  the  case
            may be.
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from
            the list of Scheduled Tribes specified in a notification
            issued under clause (1) any tribe or tribal community
            or   part   of   or   group   within   any   tribe   or   tribal
            community, but save as aforesaid a notification issued
            under   the   said   clause   shall   not   be   varied   by   any
            subsequent notification.”
4.    It would be pertinent to mention that the aforesaid article is

almost identical to
Article 341
relating to Scheduled Castes.  The

only difference being that
Article 341
deals with “castes, races or

tribes   or   parts   of   or   groups   within   castes,   races   or   tribes”

whereas
Article 342
deals only with “tribes or tribal communities
3
or parts of or groups within tribes or tribal communities”.   This

small difference will not have any effect while interpreting the two

articles on the facts of these cases.
5.    The   stand   of   the   appellant,   the   State   of   Odisha   (formerly

known   as   ‘Orissa’)   and   the   intervenor   is   that   since   in   the

Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Order, the tribe which

has   been   declared   to   be   a   Scheduled   Tribe   is   “Kulis”,   the

members   of  the   “Kuli” community  cannot  take benefit of being

declared   as   Scheduled   Tribes.     It   is   further   submitted   that   no

court   including   this   Court   has   the   power   to   change   or   modify

what is stated in the Presidential Order and later in the Act of

Parliament and, therefore, the High Court erred in holding that

“Kulis” would include “Kuli”.
6.    Before dealing with the factual aspect of the matter it would

be pertinent to reiterate the legal position and the limits of the

power   of   the   court   while   dealing   with   these   issues.     A   bare

perusal   of   clause   (1)   of
Article   342
of   the   Constitution   clearly

shows   that   the   President   with   respect   to   any   State,   after

consultation   with   the   Governor   thereof,   may   by   public

notification specify the tribes or tribal communities or parts of or
4
groups thereof, which shall for the purposes of the Constitution,

be deemed to be Scheduled Tribes in relation to that State.  After

the President issues an Order under
Article 341
or 342, the said

Order   cannot   be   amended,   modified,   added   to   or   any   caste   or

tribe deleted therefrom by the State or by any court or tribunal.

It  is   only   the   Parliament,  which  can  enact  a law  to  include or

exclude from the lists of Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes

any caste, race or tribe.  The power to alter the Presidential Order

lies only with Parliament and no other authority.  Therefore, the

notification issued by the President is final for all purposes and

for all times except if modified by a law made by Parliament.
7.       These   provisions   have   been   considered   in   a   number   of

cases.  We need not refer to all, except three Constitution Bench

judgments of this Court.  The first Constitution Bench judgment

was rendered in
B. Basavalingappa v. D. Munichinnappa1
.  In

this   case   the   issue   was   whether   a   person   belonging   to   the

“Voddar” caste could claim that he belonged to the “Bhovi” caste

which had been notified as a Scheduled Caste.  This Court held

that normally it is not open for any court or tribunal to go into

this question or to take evidence that “Voddar” caste is the same
1
(1965) 1 SCR 316
5
as “Bhovi” caste.  The Court held it to be a settled position of law

that   it   is   not   open   to   any   court   or   tribunal   to   make   any

modification in the Presidential Order by referring to evidence to

show that though caste “A” alone is mentioned in the order, caste

“B” is also part of caste “A” and, therefore, must be deemed to be

included in caste “A”.   It was noted by this Court that wherever

there is one caste or one tribe having more than one name then

in   the   Presidential   Order,   the   other   name(s)   is   normally

mentioned in brackets.  Having held so, this Court, in the facts of

the   case,   found   that   it   was   necessary   to   go   into   the   question

because it was not disputed that there was no caste known as

“Bhovi”   in   the   Mysore   State   before   its   reorganisation   in   1956.

Following observations of the Court are relevant:
“.........The difficulty in the present case arises from the
             fact   (which   was   not   disputed   before   the   High   Court)
             that   in   the   Mysore   State   as   it   was   before   the   re­
             organisation   of   1956   there   was   no   caste   known   as
             Bhovi  at   all.     The   Order   refers   to   a   scheduled   caste
             known as  Bhovi  in the Mysore State as it was before
             1956 and therefore it must be accepted that there was
             some   caste   which   the   President   intended   to   include
             after consultation with the Rajpramukh in the Order,
             when   the   Order   mentions   the   caste  Bhovi  as   a
             scheduled   caste.     It   cannot   be   accepted   that   the
             President included the caste Bhovi in the Order though
             there was no such caste at all in the Mysore State as it
             existed before 1956........”
6
Thereafter, this Court referred to the material placed before

it   and   came   to   the   conclusion   that   “Bhovi”   caste   was   earlier

known as the “Voddar” caste.  It appeared that at a Conference of

the   Voddar  Caste, held  in July, 1944, it was resolved that the

name   of   that   caste   be   changed   from   “Voddar”   to   “Bhovi”.
Eventually, the Government also accepted the said Resolution by

passing an order.
The   matter   does   not   end   here.     The   Government   Order

directed that the community known as ‘Vodda’ would in future be

called as ‘Boyi’ in all Government communications and records.
This   Court   also   considered   the   issue   of   change   in   spellings

wherein ‘Boyi’ was mentioned in the Government Order but the

caste   declared   to   be   a   Scheduled   Caste   was   “Bhovi”.
Furthermore, the Government Order refers to ‘Vodda’ and not to

“Voddar”.     Dealing   with   the   issue   of   different   spellings   the

Constitution Bench held as follows:
“......Here   again   there   is   force   in   the   contention   that
            where   the   same   caste   was   spelt   differently,   the
            different spellings have been provided in the Order as
            illustrated   already.     But   the   same   difficulty   which
            faced us in considering the question whether  Voddar
7
caste   was   meant   by   the   caste  Bhovi  included   in   the
               Order   arises   when   we   consider   the   difference   in
               spellings,   for   it   is   not   in   dispute   that   there   was   no
               caste known as Bhovi in the Mysore State as it existed
               in 1950 when the Order was passed.  As the President
               could  not   have   included  in  the  Order   a  non­existent
               caste it means the word ‘Bhovi’ relates to some caste in
               Mysore as it was before 1956 and we have therefore to
               establish the identity of that caste and that can only
               be   done   by   evidence.     In   that   connection   the   High
               Court has held that ever since the Order of 1946, the
               Voddar  caste   has   been   variously   spelt   as  Boyi,   Bovi
               and Bhovi in English, though the Kanada equivalent is
               one and the same.   The High Court therefore has not
               attached any importance to the change in the English
               spelling   in   the   peculiar   circumstances   of   this
               case........”
8.       The second Constitution Bench judgment is in the case of

Bhaiya Lal  v.  Harikishan Singh2  .   In this case the appellant

claimed that he belonged to ‘Dohar’ caste, which was a sub­caste

of ‘Chamar’ caste.   The Constitution Bench held that an inquiry

of such a kind was not permissible.
9.       The third Constitution Bench judgment is in the case of the
State   of   Maharashtra  v.  Milind3
.     In   this   case   the   notified

Scheduled Tribe was Halba/Halbi.  The High Court, relying upon

certain material held that “Halba­Koshti” was included in “Halba”
2
AIR 1965 SC 1557
3
(2001) 1 SCC 4
8
or   Halbi”.     This   Court  held that  it was not  permissible for  the

courts to do so.  After discussing the entire law, this Court held

as follows:
“36. In the light of what is stated above, the following
               positions emerge:
1.      It is not at all permissible to hold any inquiry or
               let in any evidence to decide or declare that any tribe
               or   tribal   community   or   part   of   or   group   within   any
               tribe   or   tribal   community   is   included   in   the   general
               name even though it is not specifically  mentioned in
               the   entry   concerned   in   the   Constitution   (Scheduled
               Tribes) Order, 1950.
2.      The Scheduled Tribes Order must be read as it
               is.  It is not even permissible to say that a tribe, sub­
               tribe, part of or group of any tribe or tribal community
               is synonymous to the one mentioned in the Scheduled
               Tribes Order if they are not so specifically mentioned
               in it.
3.       A notification issued under clause (1) of
Article
               342
,   specifying   Scheduled   Tribes,   can   be   amended
               only by law to be made by Parliament.  In other words,
               any   tribe   or   tribal   community   or   part   of   or   group
               within any tribe can be included or excluded from the
               list   of   Scheduled   Tribes   issued   under   clause   (1)   of
Article 342
only by Parliament by law and by no other
               authority.
4.      It is not open to State Governments or courts or
               tribunals or any other authority to modify, amend or
               alter   the   list   of   Scheduled   Tribes   specified   in   the
               notification issued under clause (1) of
Article 342.
5.    Decisions of the Division Benches of this Court
               in  Bhaiya Ram Munda v. Anirudh Patar4  and  Dina v.
Narain Singh5 did not lay down law correctly in stating
               that the inquiry was permissible and the evidence was
4
(1970) 2 SCC 825
5
38 ELR 212; (1968) 8 DEC 329
9
admissible   within   the   limitations   indicated   for   the
            purpose of showing what an entry in the Presidential
            Order   was   intended   to   be.     As   stated   in   Position   (1)
            above no inquiry at all is permissible and no evidence
            can be let in, in the matter.”



      It   would   be   pertinent   to   mention   that   in  Milind’s  case

(supra), the Constitution Bench reaffirmed the ratio of the earlier

two Constitution Bench judgments.
10.   It is thus obvious that the power of the Court is very limited

and the Court cannot modify, alter, add to or subtract from the

Presidential Order or the  notification issued by Parliament.   At

the same time, the Court has to ensure that the order is read in

such   a   manner   that   no   caste   or   tribe,   which   is   intended   by

President or by Parliament to be included, is actually excluded.
11.   Mr.   Shibashish   Misra,   learned   counsel   appearing   for   the

State submits that in view of the judgment delivered in Milind’s

case  (supra),  no  court  or authority  has any  jurisdiction to add

any tribe or caste.  According to him, since the tribe, which has

been   declared   to   be   a   Scheduled   Tribe   is   “Kulis”,   the   courts

cannot   give   an   interpretation   that   persons   belonging   to   “Kuli”

community   are   also   entitled   to   the   benefit   of   being   declared
10
Scheduled Tribe.   On the other hand Mr. V. Giri, learned senior

counsel submits that it is but obvious that “Kulis” is only a plural

for “Kuli” and not a separate caste.
12.   Coming   to   the   facts   of   the   present   case,   the   first   Order

which has been placed on record is the Constitution (Scheduled

Tribes) Order, 1950 and in Part VI the Schedule, dealing with the

State   of   Odisha   at   Item   No.   31,   the   tribe   “Kulis”   has   been

declared to be a Scheduled Tribe for the entire State of Odisha.

The   next   relevant   document   is   the   Scheduled   Castes   and

Scheduled Tribes Lists (Modification) Order, 1956 and in Part IX

of Schedule I, dealing with the State of Odisha, “Kuli” has been

declared to be a Scheduled Caste in Sambalpur district only.  In

the very same order in Part IX of Schedule III, “Kulis” continued

to   be   declared   to   be   a   Scheduled   Tribe   throughout   the   State

of Odisha.
13.   The   Parliament   replaced   the   Presidential   Orders   by   the
Scheduled   Castes   and   Scheduled   Tribes   Orders   (Amendment)

Act, 1976
.
This Act
was enacted for the purposes of inclusion

and exclusion from the lists of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled

Tribes of certain castes and tribes.  The Presidential Orders were
11
replaced by this Act.  In Schedule I at Part XIII dealing with the

State   of   Odisha,   the   caste   “Kuli”   no   longer   finds   mention.     In

Schedule   II   at   Part   XII   dealing   with   the   Scheduled   Tribes,   the

tribe “Kulis” is notified to be a Scheduled Tribe for the whole of

the State of Odisha.   The Hindi version of this Order describes

the tribe “Kuli” (ककलल)  as a Scheduled Tribe.
14.       Persons   belonging   to   the   “Kuli”   community   have   for   long

been claiming that they are part of the “Kulis” tribe and the High

Court of Odisha has always held that the term “Kulis” is nothing

but a plural for the term “Kuli” and has consistently held that

“Kuli” are part and parcel of “Kulis” tribe.  The first judgment in

this   regard   was   delivered  in
Sebaram   Meher  v.  The   State   of

Orissa6
.  A Division Bench of the High Court held that there is no

difference  between the  terms “Kuli” and “Kulis” because it was

not   disputed   that   there   is   no   separate   community   known   as

“Kulis” in the State of Odisha.  This view was followed in a large

number of judgments including the judgment under appeal.  The

State of Odisha did not challenge the earlier judgments.   Those
6
58 (1984) CLT 562
12
judgments   became   binding   as   far   as   the   State   of   Odisha   is

concerned.
15.   Mr.   Misra   submits   that   since   those   judgments   were

rendered   before   the   Constitution   Bench   judgment   in  Milind’s

case   (supra),   they   were   not  challenged  by  the  State  of  Odisha.

This   submission   is   wholly   without   merit.     In  Milind’s  case

(supra)   this   Court   has   only   reiterated   what   was   said   in

Basavalingappa’s  case and in  Bhaiya Lal’s  case (supra) and

many other cases.   Therefore, we cannot accept the explanation

of the State in this regard.
16.   We have even otherwise gone into the merits of the matter.

Despite pointed queries put by the Court, learned counsel for the

appellant and the intervenor could not place any material before

us   to   show   that   there   is   a   separate   community   by   the   name

“Kulis”.   Time and again, the documents which were referred to

were   the   documents   relating   to   the   period   when   “Kuli”   were

declared   to   be   Scheduled   Caste   in   the   district   Sambalpur

whereas “Kulis” were declared to be a tribe in the entire State.
13
The documents referred to by both the parties which are more in

the   nature   of   reports,   indicate   that   “Kuli”   is   a   community   of

weavers   who   were   earlier   forest   dwellers.     This   community   is

engaged in the weaving of very coarse type of cloth.   In none of

the documents could we find any material to show that “Kuli” or

“Kulis”   are   two   different   castes   or   tribes   dealing   with   some

different vocations.    In all the documents they have been dealt

with synonymously.
17.   In 1962, in a study conducted by the Scheduled Castes and

Scheduled Tribes Research and Training Institute, the following

remarks were made:
“The   Kuli   As   a   Tribe   –   The   Kuli   are   fully   integrated
            with  the  caste hierarchy  of  the  Hindu  society.     They
            accept the superiority of the Brahman, have functional
            relationship with other castes and have a rigidly fixed
            caste occupation. They worship the gods of the Hindus
            and have no separate gods or goddesses.  They do not
            take   such   food   and   indulge   in   such   practices   which
            are   prohibited   for   Hindus.     Rather   they   behave   like
            high castes in this respect.
Conclusion   –  On  the  basis   of  the   above  findings   the
            following conclusions may be drawn:­

            (1)     There   is   no   reason   to   justify   the   Kuli   being
                    treated as a tribe.
(2)     The Kuli have the status of a Scheduled Caste
                    but   in   that   capacity   they   occupy   a   position
14
superior   to   other   Scheduled   Castes.     A   slight
                  stigma   of   untouchability   is   now   attached   to
                  them but they are likely to be cleared up of this
                  in near future.
Recommendation   –   It   is   therefore   recommended   that
           the  Kulis  should be treated as a Scheduled  Caste in
           both Sambalpur and Bolangir districts.   They may be
           descheduled after a period of five years by which time
           they would have achieved a status equivalent to Other
           Backward Classes”.
(emphasis supplied)
18.   In 1979, in another study, the following observations were

made:
“The Kulis  till now follow the traditional occupation of
           weaving.     They   have   absolutely   no   other   occupation
           except a few families who practice cultivation.   1% of
           the Kuli own land and in no case the holding is more
           than 2 acres.   The  Kulis  have been hard hit because
           they specialize in coarse and inferior type of clothing
           which   is   generally   used   by   the   poorer   section.
           Moreover,   hand   woven   cloth   has   gradually   been
           replaced by the mill made cloth.  As a result they live
           on hand to mouth economy.
xxx                   xxx                    xxx

                  xxx                   xxx                    xxx
It   is   therefore   recommended   that   Kuli   should
           neither   be   treated   as   Scheduled   Caste   nor   as
           Scheduled Tribe in Orissa.   However they should be
           provided   with   all   the   benefits   by   the   Govt.   as   an
           economically backward class.”

                                                     (emphasis supplied)
15
19.      In a communication sent to the Government in 1979 7, it was

mentioned that the Census of 1971 distinguishes the “Kuli” caste

from “Kuli” tribe in different districts as follows;
Sl.     Distict                  Population
                 No.
                                           Kuli Caste   Kuli Tribe

                 1.      Sambalpur         3554         936
2.      Balangir          522          657
3.      Phulbani          10           172
4.      Kalahandi         ­            2
5.      Ganjam            ­            40
6.      Dhenkanal         ­            19
7.      Mayurbhanj        ­            37
8.      Sundargarh        ­            29
4086         1892
                       Total
20.      In 1981, a communication was sent by the Commissioner

and  Secretary of  the  Harijan and Tribal Welfare Department of

the Government of Odisha to the Union of India, making some

proposals on behalf of the State of Odisha for amendments to the

list   of   Scheduled   Castes   and   Scheduled   Tribes.     In   respect   of

“Kulis”,   it   was   mentioned   that   they   are   weavers   by   profession,
7
Vide Letter No.1489 dated 26.07.1979
16
mainly found in Bolangir, Sambalpur and Phulbani districts.   It

was   submitted   that   they   do   not   possess   tribal   characteristics

and, therefore, may be deleted from the list of Scheduled Castes

and Scheduled Tribes.
21.   Relying upon these documents, it is urged that the “Kulis”

and   the   “Kuli”   are   separate   and   members   of   the   “Kuli”

community cannot be treated as “Kulis”.   We fail to understand

how this can be deduced from the aforesaid documents.   In the

statement   showing   the   population,   both   communities   are

described   as   “Kuli”   but   while   describing   the   occupation,   the

members of the community are described as “Kulis” and it has

been   recommended   that   “Kuli”   should   neither   be   treated   as

Scheduled Caste nor as Scheduled Tribe.  This shows that there

was only one community known as “Kuli”, which was treated as

Scheduled Caste for some time in the district of Sambalpur but

was treated as Scheduled Tribe for the entire State of Odisha.  In

none of the documents placed before us by the State, there is any

indication to show that there is a separate caste or tribe by the

name “Kulis”.
17
22.      We may now refer to the 24th Report of the Commissioner for

Scheduled   Castes   and   Scheduled   Tribes.     In   this   Report,

prepared in December, 1977, dealing with the State of Odisha, it

has been observed8 as follows:
“.....In case of  Orissa, the Kuli community which was
                earlier   declared   as   Scheduled   Caste   in   Sambalpur
                district   has   been   deleted   from   the   list   as   Kulis   are
                already declared as Scheduled Tribes throughout the
                State.....”



         In   this   Report,   it   is   clearly   indicated   that   the   “Kuli”

community has been deleted from the list of Scheduled Castes in

Sambalpur   as   “Kulis”   are   already   declared   as   Scheduled   Tribe

throughout   the   State.     This   clearly   indicates   that   the

Commissioner was of the view that “Kuli” community which was

one   of   the   communities   declared   to   be   Scheduled   Castes   in

Sambalpur   district,   would   now   fall   in   the   category   of

Scheduled Tribe.
23.      The State has failed to show that there is any community

caste or tribe, known as “Kulis”.   The community  is known  as

“Kuli”.   Further, it is apparent that the term “Kulis” used in the
8
At Para 2.8, Page 16
18
Order is in the nature of plural for “Kuli”.   This becomes even

more   apparent   from   the   various   documents
referred   to   above
wherein   the   terms   “Kulis”   and   “Kuli”   have   been   used

interchangeably and though the caste or tribe has been described

as   “Kuli”,   the   members   of   the   community,   when   dealt   with

together,   have   been   described   as   “Kulis”.     Furthermore,   in   the

Hindi version of the Amendment Act of 1976, the Scheduled Tribe

has been described as “Kuli” and not “Kulis”.
24.   In  Basavalingappa’s  case, the Constitution Bench of this

Court   held   that   caste   “Bhovi”   includes   people   of   the   “Voddar”

caste   mainly   on   the   ground   that   prior   to   reorganisation   of  the

State of Mysore, there was no caste “Bhovi” and, therefore, the

Presidential Order could not be set at naught by excluding what

was intended to be included in the list of Scheduled Castes.  The

present case is very similar.  As held above, the State has failed

to place any material on record to show that there is any caste or

tribe by the name “Kulis”.  It is, therefore, apparent that both in

the
Presidential Order and in the Act
, the term “Kulis” was used

as plural for the term “Kuli”.
19
25.   We are fully conscious of the limitations on the powers of

this Court.   We cannot add to alter or modify the notified list of

Schedules Castes and Scheduled Tribes.  We are also aware that

we cannot take into consideration any evidence in this regard.  At

the same time, we are of the considered view that we cannot give

such an interpretation to a Caste or Tribe mentioned  in the list

of   notified   Scheduled   Castes   or   Scheduled   Tribes   which   would

have the effect of nullifying the intention of the Parliament.   In

the present case, earlier the President and later Parliament had

included “Kulis” in the list of Scheduled Tribe.  It has been found

that there is no community by the name “Kulis” in the State of

Odisha.     The   only   community   is   “Kuli”.     If   we   do   not   include

“Kuli”   in   “Kulis”,   the   net   result   would   be   that   we   would   be

deleting a Tribe from the list of Scheduled Tribes.   This also no

Court or Tribunal is entitled to.   We have to read the entries in

the list in a manner which is consistent with the intention of the

Parliament.     According   to   us,   earlier   the   President   and   later

Parliament   while   using   the   term   “Kulis”   only   intended   it   to   be

used   as   plural   for   the   word   “Kuli”.     Any   other   interpretation

would   mean   that   nobody   would   be   able   to   take   benefit   of

belonging to “Kulis” tribe.
20
26.   Taking all the above facts into consideration, in the peculiar

facts and circumstances of the case, we are of the view that the

term “Kulis” in the English version will include members of the

“Kuli”   community.     The   appeals   are   accordingly   dismissed.

Application   for   intervention   is   also   dismissed.   Pending

application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
….……………………..J.
                                               (MADAN B. LOKUR)




                                              .….…………………….J.
                                                 (DEEPAK GUPTA)
New Delhi
September 27, 2018