[Cites
0
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Dalip Kaur (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Ram Kishan (D) Thr. Lr. on 27 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 1201, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 382
Author:
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
Bench:
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
,
N.V. Ramana
NON­REPORTABLE
                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5806 OF 2008


Dalip Kaur (D) Thr. Lrs. & Ors.                      ..Appellants
                       Versus
Ram Kishan (D) Thr. Lr(s). & Ors.                    ..Respondents


                       J U D G M E N T


MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR, J.
1.   This   appeal   is   directed   against   the   judgment   dated

22.09.2004 passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at

Chandigarh in Regular Second Appeal No. 551 of 1982.
The   appellants   herein   are   the   original   defendants.

Respondent no.1 in this appeal, namely, Ram Kishan (now dead

and represented through his legal heir) filed a suit for possession

as the owner of the 1/3rd  share of the suit property against the

contesting defendant Nos. 1 and 2 (appellants herein).  The trial

Court  decreed   the   suit.     The  first  appellate  Court  reversed the

judgment and decree of the trial Court and dismissed the suit.

The High Court set aside the judgment of the first appellate Court
1
and affirmed the judgment of the trial Court.  Consequently, the

suit came to be decreed by the High Court.
2.    Brief facts leading to this appeal are as under:
Harnam Singh was the original owner of the property.   He

died on 12.11.1934, leaving behind his wife Prem Kaur and three

daughters, namely, Basant Kaur, Dalip Kaur and Raj Kaur.  After

the   death   of   Harnam   Singh   in   the   year   1934,   Prem   Kaur

succeeded   to   the   property   in   question   as   per   the   prevailing

custom in the area. She executed a gift deed on 19.09.1951 in

favour of three daughters, namely, Basant Kaur, Dalip Kaur and

Raj   Kaur   to   the   extent   of   1/3 rd  each.     Basant   Kaur,   the   first

daughter   of   Harnam   Singh   and   Prem   Kaur   expired   on

25.03.1975, leaving behind her husband – Ram Kishan s/o Telu.
Basant Kaur had executed a will in favour of her husband – Ram

Kishan.   Based on the said will, he filed a suit for possession of

1/3rd share in the property.
It is the case of the defendants that upon the death of their

sister   Basant   Kaur,   the   suit   property   devolved   on   heirs   of   her

father Harnam Singh; since they are the only heirs of their father,

they are entitled to the property as reversioners.
2
3.    There is no dispute with regard to the relationship between

the parties.  The only question to be decided in this appeal is, as

to   whether   the   trial   Court   and   the   High   Court   are   justified   in

concluding that Basant Kaur was entitled to 1/3 rd  share in the

property   of   Prem   Kaur,   and   consequently,   as   to   whether   the

plaintiff being the husband of Basant Kaur is entitled to the said

1/3rd share.
4.    Indisputably, the suit property was gifted by Prem Kaur by

executing   a   registered   deed   in   favour   of   her   three   daughters,

namely,   Basant   Kaur   (wife   of   the   contesting   respondent)   and

Dalip Kaur and Raj Kaur (defendant nos. 1 and 2) on 19.09.1951

in   equal   shares.     The   possession   of   the   property   was   also

delivered   to   them.     Mutation   no.   1555   was   sanctioned   on

26.6.1952 in their favour respectively.  The gift deed, as well as,

the consequent mutation are not questioned by anybody at any

point of time.
5.    The husband of Prem Kaur, viz. Harnam Singh, expired in

the   year   1934.   The   parties   are   Hindus.   The   properties   are

situated at Punjab. It may be noted at this point that though the

Benaras school of Mitakshara law covers practically the whole of

North India, Punjab is an exception, since here the Mitakshara
3
law has been modified considerably by custom on certain points.

The   whole   matter   is   viewed   keeping   in   mind   customary   Hindu

law prevailing in the state of Punjab during the relevant period of

time.
6       Prem Kaur, being the mother of Basant Kaur, Dalip Kaur

and   Raj   Kaur,   gifted   the   properties   situated   at   Manauli,   tehsil

Kharar in favour of her three daughters. Prem Kaur had a limited

estate in the property. Despite the same, the three daughters did

not object to the alienation. On the contrary, they accepted the

gift and got their names mutated in the revenue records.
7.      Learned author Sir Dinshaw Mulla, while commenting in his

book Hindu Law (22nd edition, §191) mentions that a reversioner,

whether male or female, who consents to an alienation (including

by way of gift) by a widow or other limited heir made without legal

necessity, or to an invalid surrender, and transferees from him,

are   precluded   from   disputing   the   validity   of   the   alienation,

though he may have received no consideration for his consent.
In §192, it is observed by the learned author that where a

widow or other limited heir enters into a family arrangement or a

compromise   which   involves   an   alienation   of   the   estate,   the

reversioner who has been a party to and has benefitted from the
4
transaction is precluded from questioning the alienation, and so

are his descendants. There is no question in a case of this kind of

a   transfer   of  spes   successionis  by   the   reversioner.   The

reversioner, being a party to a transaction cannot repudiate it.
This Court in the case of Krisha Behari Lal v. Gulabchand &

Ors., (1971) 1 SCC 837, has held that where a widow entered into

a compromise with a presumptive reversioner and was accepted

as the absolute owner of a portion of the properties, and gave up

her   claim   in   the   remaining   properties,   the   presumptive

reversioners who themselves ultimately became the reversioners

were estopped from challenging the transaction. It was held by

the Supreme Court that the settlement could also be considered

as a family arrangement binding on the parties.
8.    In   the   matter   on   hand,   on   facts   we   find   that   though   the

properties   were   gifted   by   Prem   Kaur   in   favour   of   her   three

daughters, the said gift by her as a limited owner was treated by

the three daughters, who were the only legal representatives to

their   parents,   as   a   surrender   of   properties   by   their   mother   in

their favour. We find that the alienation by way of gift by Prem

Kaur is more in the nature of a family arrangement, inasmuch as
5
she must have  intended  to avoid any future disputes after her

demise.   All   the   three   daughters   are   beneficiaries   of   such

arrangement.   As   mentioned   supra,   all   the   three   daughters   got

their   names   mutated   by   Mutation   No.   1555   sanctioned   on

26.6.1952.   The   Court   leans   strongly   in   favour   of   family

arrangements/alienations in favour of all legal representatives, to

bring about harmony in the family and to do justice to its various

members   and   avoid   future   disputes.   We   also   find   that   the

alienation   by   way   of   gift   by   the   mother   in   favour   of   the   three

daughters as far back as 1951, under which all daughters were

given   equal   shares   in   the   property,   and   by   which   the   mother

relinquished all her rights in favour of the three daughters, was

permissible   under   the   prevailing   customary   law.   Prem   Kaur’s

three   daughters   accepted   such   agreement   with   a   bona   fide

intention.   Prem   Kaur   also   did   not   think   of   her   personal

advantage   while   settling   the   properties   among   her   three

daughters equally, bona fide. In this view of the matter, we affirm

the decision of the High Court, which, approving the judgment of

the   Trial   Court,   decreed   the   suit   inasmuch   as   the   late   Ram

Kishan,   being   the   plaintiff,   was   held   to   be   entitled   to   get

possession as owner of 1/3 of the property.
6
9.   Hence, the appeal stands dismissed.
…………………………………….J.
                              [N.V. RAMANA]


NEW DELHI;                    …………………………………….J.
SEPTEMBER 27, 2018.           [MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR]
7