[Cites
20
, Cited by
40
]
Supreme Court of India
S. Nambi Narayanan vs Siby Mathews & Others Etc. on 14 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 5112, 2018 (10) SCC 804, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 1682, (2018) 72 OCR 22, (2018) 7 MAD LJ 692, (2018) 4 RECCRIR 801, (2018) 11 SCALE 171, 2019 (1) SCC (CRI) 682, (2018) 4 KER LT 1337, (2018) 4 PAT LJR 204, (2019) 133 ALL LR 305, (2019) 193 ALLINDCAS 96 (SC), (2019) 1 CIVILCOURTC 284, (2019) 1 JCR 34 (SC), (2019) 1 ICC 1053, (2018) 4 JLJR 166, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 247
Author:
Dipak Misra
Bench:
D.Y. Chandrachud
,
A. M. Khanwilkar
,
Dipak Misra
1


                                                                    REPORTABLE


                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 6637-6638 of 2018

         S. Nambi Narayanan                                           …Appellant(s)

                                                  VERSUS



         Siby Mathews & Others Etc.                                   …Respondent(s)


                                              JUDGMENT
Dipak Misra, CJI

                         The appellant, a septuagenarian, a former Scientist of the Indian

         Space Research Organisation (ISRO), has assailed the judgment and

         order passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Kerala whereby

         it has overturned the decision of the learned single Judge who had

         lancinated the order of the State Government declining to take

         appropriate action against the police officers on the grounds of delay and

         further remitted the matter to the Government. To say the least, the

         delineation by the Division Bench is too simplistic.
2.              The exposé of facts very succinctly put is that on 20.01.1994,
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK GUGLANI
Date: 2018.09.14
12:51:07 IST
Crime No.225/94 was registered at Vanchiyoor Police Station against
Reason:
2
one Mariam Rasheeda, a Maldivian National, under
Section 14
of the

Foreigners Act, 1946 and paragraph 7 of the Foreigners Order. The

investigation of the case was conducted by one S. Vijayan, the

respondent no. 6 herein, who was the then Inspector, Special Branch,

Thiruvananthapuram.
3.   Mariam Rasheeda was arrested and sent to judicial custody on

21.10.1994. Her custody was obtained by the Police on 03.11.1994 and

she was interrogated by Kerala Police and Intelligence Bureau (IB)

officials. Allegedly, during interrogation, she made certain ‘confessions’

which led to the registration of Crime No. 246/1994, Vanchiyoor Police

Station on 13.11.1994 under
Sections 3
and
4
of the Indian Official

Secrets Acts, 1923, alleging that certain official secrets and documents

of Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) had been leaked out by

scientists of ISRO.
4.   Another Maldivian National Fousiya Hasan along with Mariam

Rasheeda was arrested in Crime No. 246/1994. On 15.11.1994,

investigation of both the cases was taken over by the Special

Investigation Team (SIT) headed by one Mr. Siby Mathews, respondent

no. 1 herein, who was the then D.I.G. Crime of Kerala Police. On

21.11.1994, Sri D. Sasikumaran, a scientist at ISRO, was arrested and

on 30.11.1994, S. Nambi Narayanan, the appellant herein, was arrested
3
along with two other persons. Later, on 04.12.1994, consequent to the

request of the Government of Kerala and the decision of the

Government of India, the investigation was transferred to the Central

Bureau of Investigation (CBI), the respondent no. 4 herein.
5.   After the investigation, the CBI submitted a report before the Chief

Judicial Magistrate (CJM), Ernakulam, under
Section 173(2)
of Cr.P.C.

stating that the evidence collected indicated that the allegations of

espionage against the scientists at ISRO, including the appellant herein,

were not proved and were found to be false. This report was accepted

vide court’s order dated 02.05.1996 and all the accused were

discharged.
6.   That apart, in the said report, addressed to the Chief Secretary,

Government of Kerala, the CBI, the respondent no. 4 herein, had

categorically mentioned:-
“Notwithstanding the denial of the accused persons
           of their complicity, meticulous, sustain and
           painstaking investigations were launched by the CBI
           and every bit of information allegedly given by the
           accused in their earlier statement to Kerala
           Police/IB about the places of meetings for purposes
           of espionage activities, the possibility of passing on
           the drawing/documents of various technologies,
           receipt of money as a consideration thereof etc.,
           were gone into, but none of the information could be
           substantiated.”
4
7.    The CBI in its report, as regards the role of the respondent no.1

herein, went on to state:-
“I, Sh. Siby Mathew was heading the Special
      Investigation Team and was, therefore, fully responsible
      for the conduct of investigation in the aforesaid two
      cases. Investigation conducted by the CBI has revealed
      that he did not take adequate steps either in regard to
      the thorough interrogations of the accused persons by
      Kerala Police or the verification of the so called
      disclosure made by the accused persons. In fact, he left
      the entire investigation to IB surrendering his duties. He
      ordered indiscriminate arrest of the ISRO scientist and
      others without adequate evidence being on record. It
      stressed that neither Sh. Siby Mathew and his team
      recovered any incriminating ISRO documents from the
      accused persons nor any monies alleged to have been
      paid to the accused persons by their foreign masters. It
      was unprofessional on his part to have ordered
      indiscriminate arrest to top ISRO scientists who played a
      key role in successful launching of satellite in the space
      and thereby caused avoidable mental and physical
      agony to them. It is surprising that he did not take any
      steps at his own level to conduct investigation on the
      points suggested by him. Since Sh. Mathew was based
      at Trivandrum, there was no justification for not having
      the searches conducted in the officials’ residential
      premises of the accused Nambi Narayanan was arrested
      by the Kerala Police on 30.11.1994.
Vi. Shri Siby Mathew and his team miserably failed
      even in conducting verification of the records of Hotels
      viz., Hotel foret Manor, Hotel Pankaj, Hotel Luciya, etc.,
      which were located at Trivandrum to ascertain the
      veracity of the statement of accused persons….
The above facts are being brought to the notice of
      the competent authority for their kind consideration and
      for such action as deemed fit.
[Emphasis added]
5
8.    On 27.06.1996, the State Government of Kerala, being dissatisfied

with the CBI report, issued a notification withdrawing the earlier

notification issued to entrust the matter to CBI and decided to conduct

re-investigation of the case by the State Police. This notification for

re-investigation was challenged by the appellant herein, before the High

Court of Kerala, in O.P. No. 14248/1996-U but the notification was

upheld by the High Court of Kerala vide order dated 27.11.1996.
9.    Aggrieved by the aforesaid order of the Kerala High Court, the

appellant herein, moved this Court by filing a special leave petition. This

Court in
K. Chandrasekhar v. State of Kerala and others
1 quashed the

notification of the State of Kerala for re-investigation holding that the said

notification was against good governance and consequently, all accused

were freed of charges. The observations of this Court read thus:-
“Even if we were to hold that State Government had the
      requisite power and authority to issue the impugned
      notification, still the same would be liable to be quashed
      on the ground of malafide exercise of power. Eloquent
      proof thereof is furnished by the following facts and
      circumstances as appearing on the record….”
                                                [Emphasis added]
10.   Even after disposal of the case by this Court, the State of Kerala

did not take any action against the erring police officers. In the year

1 (1998) 5 SCC 223
6
2001, the National Human Rights Commission ordered a compensation

of Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees ten lakhs only) as interim relief to the

appellant, who had sought Rs.1,00,00,000/- (Rupees one crore only) as

damages. A division bench of the Kerala High Court, vide order dated

07.09.2012, asked the Government to pay the interim relief of Rs.

10,00,000/- (Rupees ten lakhs only) within three weeks of the said order.
11.   Thereafter, one Rajasekharan Nair filed a writ petition, being W.P.

(C) No. 8080 of 2010, before the Kerala High Court on the basis of the

report filed by the CBI seeking directions for the State of Kerala to pass

appropriate orders and take necessary action against the erring police

officers for conducting a malicious investigation. In the meantime, the

Government, by order dated 29.06.2011, decided not to take any

disciplinary action against the members of the SIT (erring police

officers). The relevant portion of the order of the State of Kerala dated

29.06.2011 reads as follows:-
“5) Both the CBI and the accused-discharged persons
       approached the Hon’ble High Court against the action of
       Government of Kerala. However, the High Court upheld
       the action of the Government. Against this the CBI and the
       accused – discharged persons approached the Supreme
       Court through SLPs against the action of Government of
       Kerala.
6) In the meantime Government examined the case with
       reference to the views obtained form the State Police Chief
       on the observation of the CBI along with the explanation of
       the officers concerned. After examination it was decided to
7
await the decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court. The
         Hon’ble Supreme Court allowed the prayer of the CBI and
         the accused discharged persons questioning the
         notification issued by the Government withdrawing the
         consent given to the CBI to investigate into the espionage
         case and also to “further investigate” the ISRO espionage
         case and also directed to give Rs. 1 Lakh each to the
         accused appellants as cost.
7) Government examined the matter with reference to the
         entire records of the case and in proper application of
         mind. It has been found that neither the Hon’ble Chief
         Judicial Magistrate Court who accepted the Final Report
         nor the Hon’ble Supreme Court had issued any direction to
         take action against the investigating officers viz :- Shri S.
         Vijayan,    the     then   Inspector,    Special     Branch,
         Thiruvananthapuram City, Shri K.K. Joshwa, the then Dy.
SP, CB CID, Thiruvananthapuram, Shri Siby Methews, the
         then DIG (Crimes) of the Special Investigation Team who
         investigated in to the ISRO Espionage case.
8) In the circumstances, Government are of the view that
         it is not proper or legal to take disciplinary action against
         the officials for the alleged lapses pointed out in the
         investigation report of the CBI at this juncture, after the
         lapse of 15 years and therefore Government decide that
         no disciplinary action need be taken against the above
         officials for their alleged lapses in the investigation of the
         ISRO Espionage case and it is ordered accordingly.”
12.   W.P. (C) No. 8080 of 2010 was disposed of by the High Court

having     been    rendered    infructuous    as   the   petitioner   therein,

Rajesekharan Nair, wanted to reserve his right to challenge the order

issued by the Government. Despite insurmountable difficulties, the

indomitable spirit of the appellant impelled him to file another writ

petition, W.P. (C) No. 30918 of 2012, before the Kerala High Court. The

learned Judge of the High Court of Kerala, considering the pleadings of
8
the parties and thereafter elaborately considering the matter, allowed the

writ petition and quashed the order dated 29.06.2011 passed by the

State of Kerala whereby the Kerala Government had decided not to take

any disciplinary action against the members of the SIT (erring police

officers) and consequently remitted the matter to the State of Kerala, the

respondent no. 2 herein, for reconsideration and passing further orders

within three months. Though the learned single Judge left it open to the

State of Kerala to decide on the course of action to be taken in the

matter, yet it was categorically mentioned that the reconsideration of the

matter should not just be a namesake which will make the administration

of justice a mockery.
13.   Though the said decision of the learned single Judge was not

challenged by the State of Kerala, yet two private persons, being the

respondent nos. 1 and 5 herein, assailed the judgment before the

Division Bench in WA Nos. 1863 and 1959 of 2014. The Division Bench

of the High Court, vide impugned judgment and order dated 04.03.2015,

observed that the only question before the Government was whether any

disciplinary action was to be initiated against the officers who were

members of the SIT which conducted investigation for some days and

thereafter reported that the matter required to be investigated by the

CBI. The Division Bench opined that the factual finding or report
9
submitted by the CBI on 03.06.1996 in the matter could only be treated

as an opinion expressed by the CBI which may be considered by the

Government. Further, the Division Bench left it to the Government to

consider or not to consider the opinion expressed by the CBI in its

aforesaid report for the purpose of taking disciplinary action.
14.   The Division Bench also held that the Kerala Government’s

decision of not taking action against the erring police officers of the SIT

was based on three specific findings, namely (i) the Government’s

examination of the case with reference to the views obtained from the

State Police Chief with respect to the observations of the CBI alongwith

the explanation of the erring police officers concerned, (ii) the absence

of any direction by the Chief Judicial Magistrate who had accepted the

final report, and (iii) absence of any direction from the Supreme Court to

take action against the investigating officers. That apart, the Government

opined that it is not proper or legal to take disciplinary action against the

officers on the basis of CBI report after a lapse of fifteen years.
15.   Be it noted, the Division Bench concluded by observing thus:
“Therefore the three reasons mentioned in Ext.P2 clearly
      indicate that the Government has examined the relevant
      matters for arriving at the said decision. When a decision
      has been taken not to proceed further with any
      disciplinary action, after considering such relevant
      matters, the decision cannot be considered as
      unreasonable, unfair or arbitrary.”
10
And again:-
“In fact, whether the accused were tortured or not is a
      disputed question of fact. Further no such complaint was
      raised by the accused. When the fact being so and since
      the petitioner having already approached the National
      Human Rights Commission and the Civil Court, it is for
      the said agencies to arrive at a proper finding regarding
      such disputed facts.”
      The said order is the subject matter of assail before this Court in

these appeals.
16.   It is urged by the appellant that the prosecution launched against

him by the Kerala police was malicious on account of two reasons, the

first being that the said prosecution had a catastrophic effect on his

service career as a leading and renowned scientist at ISRO thereby

smothering his career, life span, savings, honour, academic work as well

as self-esteem and consequently resulting in total devastation of the

peace of his entire family which is an ineffaceable individual loss, and

the second, the irreparable and irremediable loss and setback caused to

the technological advancement in Space Research in India.
17.   It has also been contended that the CBI, to whom the investigation

of the case against the appellant was transferred, after a thorough

investigation for about eighteen months, filed a comprehensive and

exhaustive report wherein it had recommended that the case against the
11
appellant be closed as the allegations against the appellant are totally

unsubstantiated.
18.   The appellant has also drawn the attention of this Court to the fact

that the CBI in the said report had also highlighted several omissions

and commissions on the part of the Kerala Police Officers while

investigating the case against the appellant. That apart, the CBI, in its

report submitted to the Kerala Government, had recommended that

action be taken against the erring police officers for serious lapses in the

discharge of their duties. The appellant has, in his submissions,

expressed his agony over the fact that the State Government, instead of

acting upon the recommendations made by the CBI and taking

appropriate action against the erring police officers, focused its entire

attention on taking further action on the investigation against the

appellant and hastened to constitute a Special Investigation Team (SIT)

through a notification which was challenged before the High Court.
19.   The appellant has further highlighted that this Court had earlier

opined about the malicious prosecution launched against him. Reliance

has been placed on the criticism advanced by the NHRC against the

State Government. Learned senior counsel has urged with anguish that

the High Court has fallen into grave error by sustaining the order of the

Government and remaining oblivious to the plight of the appellant. It is
12
his   further   submission   that   the   appellant   should   be   granted

compensation by taking recourse to the principle of constitutional tort

and a committee be constituted to take appropriate action against the

officers who had played with the life and liberty of a man of great

reputation.
20.   Learned counsel for the respondent no. 1 has submitted that the

contention of the appellant that if he had not been falsely implicated, he

would have made a huge difference in the cryogenic technology and

thereby contributed immensely to the Nation is untenable as it is an

admitted fact that he had submitted his VRS on 01.11.1994 immediately

after the arrest of Mariam Rasheeda, and on the very same day, his

resignation was accepted by the Superior Officer. It is pointed out that

the claim of significant contribution to the Nation is being put forth by

appellant only to gain the sympathy of the Court.
21.   It is further canvassed that the entire investigation of the case

against the appellant was carried out under close supervision of the then

Director General of Police (Intelligence) & Director General of Police

(Law and Order) and daily reports were sent to them during the course

of the investigation. It has also been highlighted that on the day of arrest

of the appellant, the respondent no. 1 had submitted a report to the DGP

requesting entrusting of the matter to the CBI which is a clear indication
13
of the fact that there was no mala fide on the part of the said respondent

no. 1 and other officials of the Kerala Police. The respondent no. 1 has

contended that the entire gamut of facts reveals that he and other

officials had performed their duties with full responsibility and the

evidence on record and the statements of other accused had clearly

shown the involvement of the accused persons in the activities of

espionage.
22.   The respondent no. 1, in order to substantiate his claim that the

appellant and the other accused persons were never subjected to any

torture by the respondent no. 1 or other police officers, seeks to draw the

attention of the Court to the findings of a Division Bench of the High

Court which had dealt with a writ petition filed when the investigation was

pending before the CBI. It is put forth on behalf of the respondent no. 1

that he himself did not take any steps for thorough interrogation of the

accused and sent the same to the CBI and, hence, the argument that he

was tortured by the State police was far from the truth. As per the

notification dated 20.01.1987 issued by the Government of India,

Ministry of Home Affairs, the Central Government conferred the powers

of Superintendent of Police on officers of the rank of Assistant Director of

the Intelligence Bureau and in the instant case, the IB had come into the
14
picture long before the constitution of a Special Investigation Team (SIT)

by the State Government.
23.   It is highlighted by the respondent no. 1 that there was sufficient

evidence indicating the involvement of the appellant and it had also

come to the notice of the respondent no. 1 that the appellant, who had

submitted his VRS, was intending to leave the country and in the light of

the said facts, the arrest of the appellant and other accused persons had

become necessary. Learned counsel would contend that the stand of the

CBI that no incriminating records had been recovered is unacceptable

inasmuch as the final report reveals that 235 documents were recovered

from the house of the accused persons and the reason for the same was

an issue which required investigation.
24.   Further, it is contended that the case had been investigated by the

respondent no. 1 only for 17 days and thereafter, it was the CBI that

carried out the investigation and, hence, the responsibility to apprise the

media fell on the CBI and not on the respondent no. 1. Various other

aspects have been controverted to show the non-involvement of the said

respondent and the bona fide act on his part to transfer the case to the

CBI. To make allegations against the SIT after transfer of the case to the

CBI is unwarranted.
15
25.   Learned counsel for the respondent no. 1 submits that the whole

thrust of the argument of the appellant that he was subjected to torture

falls to the ground as the IB officials against whom the major charges of

torture had been levelled had not been made accountable for the said

action and, therefore, it would be discriminatory to hold the respondent

no. 1 and other police officers of Kerala accountable for the alleged

torture. That apart, it is urged that the learned single Judge of the High

Court had only remanded the matter to the State Government for fresh

consideration and had not given any finding on the allegation of torture

and the respondent no. 1 had also contended that the appellant never

raised any allegations of torture before the CJM Court. Further, it is

argued that the appellant was in custody of Kerala police only for 5 days,

while the CBI had taken remand of the accused on three occasions and

had kept in custody for forty five days.
26.   On behalf of the CBI, the fourth respondent, it is submitted that

inspite of highlighting several lapses and faults on the part of the police

officials while carrying out investigation against the appellant and other

accused persons, the Kerala Government has failed to take any action

against the erring officials. It has been submitted that the reasons given

by the Kerala Government for not initiating any action against the erring

police officers, who had not only inflicted inhuman custodial torture to the
16
scientists of ISRO but also arrested them while they were working on a

crucial space programme, was an unpardonable lapse. It is pointed out

that if the action of the Government of Kerala is not interfered with on the

ground of delay, it would tantamount to taking advantage of one’s own

wrong doing and further adding a premium to an unpardonable fault.
27.   Learned counsel for the respondent no. 4 has submitted that the

conduct of the police officials is criminal in nature as per the investigation

and report submitted by the CBI and the investigation of the CBI had

clearly established that the investigation carried out by the State police

was full of lapses and also involved employment of illegal means such

as criminal torture. The stand of the respondents is that the report is

recommendatory but it was incumbent upon the State of Kerala to act

upon the same as that would have reflected an apposite facet of

constitutional governance and respect for individual liberty and dignity.

Relying upon the judgment of this Court in
Japani Sahoo v. Chandra

Sekhar Mohanty2
, it is submitted that the State of Kerala could not take

shelter of the doctrine of delay and laches. The erring conduct of the

police officers is of criminal nature and justice can be meted out to the

appellant only by taking appropriate action against the said officers along

with payment of compensation for the humiliation and disgrace suffered

by the victim.
2 (2007) 7 SCC 394
17
28.   It is further contended by the learned counsel for the respondent

no. 4 that investigation can be initiated to instill confidence in the public

mind. To buttress his stand, the decision in Punjab and Haryana High

Court
Bar Association v. State of Punjab and others
3 has been

pressed into service.
29.   First, we shall advert to the aspect of grant of compensation. From

the analysis above, we are of the view that the appellant was arrested

and he has suffered custody for almost fifty days. His arrest has been

seriously criticized in the closure report of the CBI.      The comments

contained in the report read as follows:-
“2. Consequent upon the request of Govt. of Kerala, the
      investigation of Crime No 225/95 and No. 246/94 was
      entrusted to the .CHI for investigation vide DP&T
      Notification No. 228/59/94-AVD.II (i) & (ii) dated 2/12/94.
      Accordingly, case RC. 10(S) 94 lis. 14 of
Foreigners Act
and Para 7 of
Foreigners Act, 1948
(corresponding to
      Crime No. 225/95) and case RC 11 (S)/94 U/s. I20-B r/w
      See. 3, 4 & 5 of official
Secrets Act
r/w
Sec. 34
IPC
      (corresponding to Crime No. 246/94). were registered on
      3/12/94 in SIU. V Branch of CBl/SIC.II/New Delhi.
3. Immediately after the registration of the case, the
      investigation was taken upon 4/12/94 and the police case
      files of both the cases were taken over. After
      investigation, a Chargesheet in Case Crime no. 225.94
      was filed on 17/12/94 against Mariam Fasheeda. This
      case has ended in acquittal of accused Mariyam
      Rasheeda vide Judgment dated 14.11.1995, passed by
      the Hon’ble Chief Judicial Magistrate, Cochin.
3 (1994) 1 SCC 616
18
4.     The local police during the course of
investigation of case crime No. 225/94 had seized a Diary
written in Dwivegi script from accused Mariyam
Rasheeda, the contents of which indicated that she was
collecting informations about certain Maldivian nationals
based in Bangalore who were allegedly planning a coup
against the Govt. of Maldives. It was further revealed that
accused Mariyam Rasheeda along with Fauziya Hassan
had stayed in Room No. 205 of Hotel Smart, Trivandrum
from 17/9/94 to 20/10/94 and during this period a number
of telephone calls were found to have been made from
Room No. 205 to Tel. No. of D. Sasikumaran, a senior
Scientist of Indian Space Research Organisation,
Valiamala. Accused Mariyam Rasheeda while in Kerala
Police custody in this case was interrogated by Kerala
Police and officials of Intelligence Bureau. Accused
Mariyam Rasheeda allegedly made a statement revealing
the contacts of Fauziya Hassan and of one Zuheira, a
Maldivian national settled in Colombo with Mohiyuddin
state to be Pakistani national working as Assistant
Manager, Habib Bank in Male and Mazhar Khan, another
Pak National. She also allegedly disclosed that according
to Fauziya Hassan, D. Sasikumaran was friend of
Zuheria. Based on the disclosures allegedly made by
accused Mariyam Rasheeda coupled with the contents of
her diary and the telephone contacts with D.
Sasikumaran, the instant case was registered on the
suspicion that she and Fauziya Hassan along with others
were taking part in activities prejudicial to the sovereignty
and integrity of India.
5. The investigation of crime No. 246/94 remained
with Special Branch only for two days and on 15.11.94,
the investigation was taken over by Special Investigation
was taken over by Special Investigation Team headed by
Shri Siby Mathews, DIG (Crime), Trivandrum. During the
course of investigation, the Kerala Police/Crime branch
arrested 6 accused persons on the dates as shown
below:-
i.     Fauziya Hassan - 13.11:94
     ii.    Mariyam Fasheeda-       14.11.94
     iii.   D. Sasikumaran -        21.11.94
19
iv.   K. Chandrasekhar -  23.11.94
          v.    Nambi Narayanan -   30.11.94
          vi.   Sudhir Kumar Sharma - 01.12.94
5.     The search of the office room as well as residence
     of D. Sasikumaran at Space Application Centre,
     Ahemedabad, was conducted on 21.11.94 and that of his
     office and residence at Trivandrum on 30.11.94. The
     search of office as well as residence of accused
     Chandrasekhar and S.K. Sharma, were conducted on
     21.11.94 at Bangalore. The house search of Ms Sara
     Palani of Bangalore where accused Fauziya Hassan was
     residing, was also conducted on 21.11.94. In addition, the
     house seach of Shri. M.K. Govinadan Nair and Shri
     Mohana Prasad, both senior Scientists of LPSC
     Valiamala, was also conducted but nothing incriminating
     was recovered. The Crime Branch also exdamined 27
     witnesses but none of the witnesses stated anything
     which could throw any light about the alleged espionage
     activities of the accused persons. The 7 witnesses of
     Hotel Samrat, Tridandrum, proved the stay of accused
     Mariyam Rahseeda and Fauziya Hassan in Room No.
     205 in Hotel Samrat from 19.9.94 to 20.10.94 and the visit
     of Sasikumaran to Hotel Samarat to meet Mariyam
     Rasheeda. The witnesses of Hotel Geeth, Trivandrum
     and that of Hotel Rock Holm, Trivandrum, proved the visit
     of accused Sasikumaran alongwith Mariyam Rasheeda to
     the said hotel on 10.10.94 and witjiMariyam Rasheeda to
     the said hotel on 10.10.94 and 28.9.94, respectively.”

And again:-
“10. Though no independent evidence has come on
     record during the course of local Police/Crime branch
     investigation about the alleged espionage activities of the
     accused persons, yet based on the revelations allegedly
     made by the accused, the module that emerged regarding
     the espionage activities was that accused Nambi
     Narayanan and Sasikumaran used to pass on documents
     drawings of ISRO relating to Viking/Vikas Engine
     technology, Cryogenic Engine technology and PSLV
     Flight Data/Drawings and accused Chandersekhar, S.K.
     Sharma and Raman Srivastava, the then IGP South
20
Zone, Kerala passed on secrets of Aeronautical Defence
Establishments, Bangalore. The documents/drawings
were allegedly passed on to Mohd. Aslam, a Pak nuclear
scientist and Mohd. Pasha/ahmed Pasha for monetory
considerations and that the amount running into lacs of
US dollars was received andshared by accused
Sasikumaran, Chandrasekhar, Nambi Narayanan and
Shri Raman Srivastava and that Mohiyuddin, Asstt.
Manager of Habib Bank, Male, was one of the persons
who was financing the accused. Accused Fauziya
Hassan, zuheria, a Maldivian national settled in
Colomobo, Mr. Alexi Vassive of Glovkosmos, Russia, and
Shri Raman srivastava, worked as conduits. Some of the
important meetings which were held for espionage
activities and in which the documents were allegedly
passed on for a consideration, were held at International
Hotel Madras on 24.5.1994, m Bangalore in the mid
September and on 23.9.94 at Hotel Luciya, Trivandrum, in
which some of the accused as well as said Zuheira and
Shri Raman Srivastava, IGP, took part.
11. Immediately after taking over the investigation
, by CBI, all the 6 accused persons are thoroughly
interrogated, taking the statements purported to have
been made by the accused before the Kerala Police/IB, to
be true, but all of them denied having indulged in any
espionage activity. On being confronted with the
statements made by them before Kerala Police as well as
IB officials, the accused took the plea that the statements
were made on the suggested lines under duress. Though
there was no complaint either from ISRO or fromDE
Bangalore about the loss of any documents, the alleged
revelations of the accused made before local
Police/Intelligence officials were taken at their face value
and focused investigation was carried out to find out the
details and purposes of various visits of accused Mariyam
Rasheeda and Fauziya Hassan to India, their places of
stay were verified, the persons, including accused,, with
whom they came in contact were examined and efforts
are made to gather oral as well as documentary evidence
to find out whether the accused have committed any acts
which were prejudicial to the sovereignty, integrity and
security of the State and violative of the
Official Secrets
Act, 1923
21
x           x           x           x         x

“Accused Nambi Narayanan jointed Thumba Equotarial
Launching System on 12.9.1996 as Technical Assistant
(Design) and then from time to time he was promoted and
was working as Scientist-II since January 93. In system
Project, Associates Project Director GSLV and Project
Director PS-II and PS-LV and was responsible for the
organization and management of launch vehicle system
projects in LPSC.
x            x         x           x          x
32. During the investigation neither any evidence came
on record indicating that the accused indulged in
espionage activities by way of passing on of secret
documents of ISRO of any Defence establishments nor
any incriminating documents could be recovered.
Accused Mariyam Rasheeda has taken the stand that she
was to return to Male on 29.9.94 but could reach
Trivandrum Airport as she did not get any transport on
account of the 'bandh'. Subsequently, the Indian Airlines
(lights were suspended on account of plague scare and
thus, she could not go. Since she was going to complete
stay of 90 days on 14.10.94, and to enable her to stay
beyond 90 days she required the permission of the police
authorities, she alongwith Fauziya Hassan visited office of
the Commissioner of Police and contacted Inspector
Vijayan. She was advised by Inspector Vijayan to first
obtain a confirmed ticket for her return and then to
approach for the extension of her stay. Accordingly, she
got one Indian Airlines ticket and one Air Lanka ticket
confirmed for her departure of 17.10.94 and approached
Inspector Vijayan. However, Inspector vijayan took ticket
as well as her Passport and ultimately she was arrested
on 20.10.94.
x           x           x           x
38. As per the statement of accused Nambi Narayanan
allegedly made before Kerala Police, a deal for sale
Viking/Vikas Engine drawings was struck with Habibullah
Khan for Rs. 1.5 crores. Two installments of the drawings
were given to Rauziya at Thampanoor 'Bus Stand and
22
Luciya Hotel and the third installment was scheduled to
     be given on 5,12.94. Another deal for transfer for Rocket
     Launch details of LPSC was finalized with Fauziya
     Hassan and Ahemd Pash at hotel Fort Manor during
     February, 1993 for a consideration of USS 1.00 lakh and
     that on 11.10.94 he and Sasikumaran took Fauziya from
     Hotel Samrat to a nearby dam and engaged in transfer of
     packets containing Cryogenic technology.
The investigation revealed:-
(xiv) Investigation has established that the accused
     persons including Rasheeda, Nambi Narayanan and
     Chandrasekhar were harassed and physically abused. It
     is curious that while the IB had all the six accused
     persons in their custody, they recorded the statements of
     only Sasikumaran, Chandrashekar, Fauziya and
     Rasheeda and not of Nambi Narayanan and S.K..
Shanna. There is reason to believe that the interrogators
     forced the accused persons to make statements on
     suggested lines. The CBI seized the personal diary of
     Chandrasekhar on 9.12.94. which contained the details of
     his activities almost on day to day basis. If
     Chandrasekhar had made truthful disclosures to the
     Kerala Police/IB interrogators, certainly they would have
     also discovered the existence of his diary which did not
     support case against him. He made disclosures before
     the CBI regarding the existence of his diary which on
     analysis corroborates his version regarding his
     movements ex. Bangalore.
(xv) On the request of CBI, Director, LPSC had
     constituted a Committee of experts of determine whether
     any documents were found to be missing. The Committee
     gave a report to say that only 254 documents were found
     to be missing which were random in nature and did not
     pertain to a particular system or sub system. The
     Committee also noted that Vikas Engine was released on
     the basis of the in-house drawings which were prepared
     after modifying the SEP drawings and all the in-house
     drawings were available and there was likely to be no
     impact of some small number of missing documents.
     Similarly, all the 16.800 sheets in the Fabrication Divn.
     where Sasikumaran was working were found to be intact.
23
(xvi) Neither any incriminating documents of any money-
      Indian or foreign have been recovered form the accused
      persons during searches conducted by the Kerala Police
      and later by the CBI. The scrutiny of bank accounts also
      do not indicate anything suspicious in this regard.

      (xvii) It is reasonable to believe that if Rasheeda was
      involved in any espionage activity regarding ISRO, she
      should have made a mention thereof in her diary which is
      not the case.
114. During course of investigation, certain lapses were
      found on the part of earlier investigations/interrogators.
      The report is being submitted that Government of
      Kerala/Govt. of India, separately on these aspects.
115. So sum up, in view of the evidence on record, oral
      as well as documentary, as discussed above, the
      allegations of espionage are not proved and have been
      found to be false. It is, therefore, prayed that the report
      may kindly be accepted and the accused discharged and
      permission be accorded to return the seized documents
      to the concerned.”

      From the aforesaid report, the harassment and mental torture

faced by the appellant is obvious.
30.   The report submitted by the CBI has been accepted by this Court

in
K. Chandrasekhar
(supra). Dealing with the conclusion of the report,

this Court stated:-
“(iii) Though the investigation of the case centered round
       espionage activities in ISRO no complaint was made by
       it to that effect nor did it raise any grievance on that
       score. On the contrary, from the police report submitted
       by the CBI we find that several scientists of this
       organisation were examined and from the statements
       made by those officers the CBI drew the following
       conclusion:
24
“The sum and substance of the aforesaid
    statements is that ISRO does not have a system of
    classifying drawings/documents. In other words, the
    documents/drawings are not marked as Top Secret,
    Secret, Confidential or Classified etc. Further, ISRO
    follows an open-door policy in regard to the issue of
    documents to the scientists. Since ISRO is a
    research-oriented organisation, any scientist
    wanting to study any document is free to go to the
    Documentation Cell/Library and study the
    documents. As regards the issue of documents to
    various Divisions, the procedure was that only the
    copies used to be issued to the various divisions on
    indent after duly entering the same in the
    Documentation         Issue     Registers.        During
    investigation, it has been revealed that various
    drawings running into 16,800 sheets were issued to
    the Fabrication Division where accused Sasi
    Kumaran was working, and after his transfer to SAP,
    Ahmedabad on 7-11-1994, all the copies of the
    drawings were found to be intact. Nambi Narayanan
    being a senior scientist, though had access to the
    drawings, but at no stage any drawings/documents
    were found to have been issued to him. They have
    also stated that it was usual for scientists to take the
    documents/drawings          required       for      any
    meetings/discussions to their houses for study
    purposes. In these circumstances, the allegation
    that Nambi Narayanan and Sasi Kumaran might
    have passed on the documents to a third party, is
    found to be false.”

It further appears that at the instance of CBI, a
Committee of senior scientists was constituted to
ascertain whether any classified documents of the
organisation were stolen or found missing and their
report shows that there were no such missing
documents. There cannot, therefore, be any scope for
further investigation in respect of purported espionage
activities in that organisation in respect of which only the
Kerala Police would have jurisdiction to investigate;
25
31.   As stated earlier, the entire prosecution initiated by the State police

was malicious and it has caused tremendous harassment and

immeasurable anguish to the appellant.        It is not a case where the

accused is kept under custody and, eventually, after trial, he is found not

guilty. The State police was dealing with an extremely sensitive case and

after arresting the appellant and some others, the State, on its own,

transferred the case to the Central Bureau of Investigation.           After

comprehensive enquiry, the closure report was filed. An argument has

been advanced by the learned counsel for the State of Kerala as well as

by the other respondents that the fault should be found with the CBI but

not with the State police, for it had transferred the case to the CBI. The

said submission is to be noted only to be rejected. The criminal law was

set in motion without any basis. It was initiated, if one is allowed to say,

on some kind of fancy or notion. The liberty and dignity of the appellant

which are basic to his human rights were jeopardized as he was taken

into custody and, eventually, despite all the glory of the past, he was

compelled to face cynical abhorrence. This situation invites the public

law remedy for grant of compensation for violation of the fundamental

right envisaged under
Article 21
of the Constitution. In such a situation,

it springs to life with immediacy. It is because life commands self-respect

and dignity.
26
32.   There has been some argument that there has been no complaint

with regard to custodial torture. When such an argument is advanced,

the concept of torture is viewed from a narrow perspective. What really

matters is what has been stated in
D.K. Basu v. State of W.B.
4. The

Court in the said case, while dealing with the aspect of torture, held:-
“10. ‘Torture’ has not been defined in the Constitution or
        in other penal laws. ‘Torture’ of a human being by
        another human being is essentially an instrument to
        impose the will of the ‘strong’ over the ‘weak’ by
        suffering. The word torture today has become
        synonymous with the darker side of human civilisation.
‘Torture is a wound in the soul so painful that
             sometimes you can almost touch it, but it is also so
             intangible that there is no way to heal it. Torture is
             anguish squeezing in your chest, cold as ice and
             heavy as a stone, paralysing as sleep and dark as
             the abyss. Torture is despair and fear and rage and
             hate. It is a desire to kill and destroy including
             yourself.’
                                             — Adriana P. Bartow
11. No violation of any one of the human rights has been
        the subject of so many conventions and declarations as
        ‘torture’ — all aiming at total banning of it in all forms, but
        in spite of the commitments made to eliminate torture,
        the fact remains that torture is more widespread now
        than ever before. ‘Custodial torture’ is a naked violation
        of human dignity and degradation which destroys, to a
        very large extent, the individual personality. It is a
        calculated assault on human dignity and whenever
        human dignity is wounded, civilisation takes a step
        backward — flag of humanity must on each such
        occasion fly half-mast.
4 (1997) 1 SCC 416
27
12. In all custodial crimes what is of real concern is not
         only infliction of body pain but the mental agony which a
         person undergoes within the four walls of police station
         or lock-up. Whether it is physical assault or rape in
         police custody, the extent of trauma, a person
         experiences is beyond the purview of law.”
33.    From the aforesaid, it is quite vivid that emphasis has been laid on

mental agony when a person is confined within the four walls of a police

station or lock up.         There may not be infliction of physical pain but

definitely there is mental torment.
In
Joginder Kumar v. State of U.P.
and others5, the Court ruled:-
“8. The horizon of human rights is expanding. At the
         same time, the crime rate is also increasing. Of late, this
         Court has been receiving complaints about violation of
         human rights because of indiscriminate arrests. How are
         we to strike a balance between the two?
9. A realistic approach should be made in this direction.
The law of arrest is one of balancing individual rights,
         liberties and privileges, on the one hand, and individual
         duties, obligations and responsibilities on the other; of
         weighing and balancing the rights, liberties and
         privileges of the single individual and those of individuals
         collectively; of simply deciding what is wanted and
         where to put the weight and the emphasis; of deciding
         which comes first — the criminal or society, the law
         violator or the law abider….”
34.
In
Kiran Bedi v. Committee of Inquiry and another
6, this Court

reproduced an observation from the decision in D.F. Marion v. Davis7:-
5 (1994) 4 SCC 260
6 (1989) 1 SCC 494
7 217 Ala. 16 (Ala. 1927)
28
“25. … ‘The right to the enjoyment of a private
        reputation, unassailed by malicious slander is of ancient
        origin, and is necessary to human society. A good
        reputation is an element of personal security, and is
        protected by the Constitution equally with the right to the
        enjoyment of life, liberty, and property.’”
35.   Reputation of an individual is an insegregable facet of his right to

life with dignity.
In a different context, a two Judge Bench of this Court in
Vishwanath Agrawal v. Sarla Vishwanath Agrawal8
has observed:-
“55. … reputation which is not only the salt of life, but
        also the purest treasure and the most precious perfume
        of life. It is extremely delicate and a cherished value this
        side of the grave. It is a revenue generator for the
        present as well as for the posterity.”
36.   From the aforesaid analysis, it can be stated with certitude that the

fundamental right of the appellant under
Article 21
has been gravely

affected. In this context, we may refer with profit how this Court had

condemned the excessive use of force by the police.
In
Delhi Judicial

Service Association v. State of Gujarat and others
9, it said:-
“39. The main objective of police is to apprehend
        offenders, to investigate crimes and to prosecute them
        before the courts and also to prevent commission of
        crime and above all to ensure law and order to protect
        the citizens’ life and property. The law enjoins the police
        to be scrupulously fair to the offender and the Magistracy
        is to ensure fair investigation and fair trial to an offender.
        The purpose and object of Magistracy and police are
        complementary to each other.         It is unfortunate that
        these objectives have remained unfulfilled even after 40
        years of our Constitution.           Aberrations of police
8 (2012) 7 SCC 288
9 (1991) 4 SCC 406
29
officers and police excesses in dealing with the law and
       order situation have been subject of adverse comments
       from this Court as well as from other courts but it has
       failed to have any corrective effect on it. The police has
       power to arrest a person even without obtaining a
       warrant of arrest from a court. The amplitude of this
       power casts an obligation on the police … [and it] must
       bear in mind, as held by this Court that if a person is
       arrested for a crime, his constitutional and fundamental
       rights must not be violated.”
37.   If the obtaining factual matrix is adjudged on the aforesaid

principles and parameters, there can be no scintilla of doubt that the

appellant, a successful scientist having national reputation, has been

compelled to undergo immense humiliation. The lackadaisical attitude of

the State police to arrest anyone and put him in police custody has

made the appellant to suffer the ignominy. The dignity of a person gets

shocked when psycho-pathological treatment is meted out to him. A

human being cries for justice when he feels that the insensible act has

crucified his self-respect. That warrants grant of compensation under the

public law remedy. We are absolutely conscious that a civil suit has been

filed for grant of compensation. That will not debar the constitutional

court to grant compensation taking recourse to public law. The Court

cannot lose sight of the wrongful imprisonment, malicious prosecution,

the humiliation and the defamation faced by the appellant.
In
Sube
30
Singh v. State of Haryana and others
10, the three-Judge Bench, after

referring to the earlier decisions, has opined:-
“38. It is thus now well settled that the award of
      compensation against the State is an appropriate and
      effective remedy for redress of an established infringement
      of a fundamental right under
Article 21
, by a public servant.
      The quantum of compensation will, however, depend upon
      the facts and circumstances of each case. Award of such
      compensation (by way of public law remedy) will not come in
      the way of the aggrieved person claiming additional
      compensation in a civil court, in the enforcement of the
      private law remedy in tort, nor come in the way of the
      criminal court ordering compensation under
Section 357
of
      the Code of Criminal Procedure.”
38.
In
Hardeep Singh v. State of Madhya Pradesh
11, the Court was

dealing with the issue of delayed trial and the humiliation faced by the

appellant therein. A Division Bench of the High Court in intra-court

appeal had granted compensation of Rs. 70,000/-. This Court, while

dealing with the quantum of compensation, highlighted the suffering and

humiliation caused to the appellant and enhanced the compensation.
39.
In the instant case, keeping in view the report of the CBI and the

judgment rendered by this Court in
K. Chandrasekhar
(supra), suitable

compensation has to be awarded, without any trace of doubt, to

compensate the suffering, anxiety and the treatment by which the

quintessence of life and liberty under
Article 21
of the Constitution

withers away. We think it appropriate to direct the State of Kerala to pay

10 (2006) 3 SCC 178
11 (2012) 1 SCC 748
31
a sum of Rs. 50 lakhs towards compensation to the appellant and,

accordingly, it is so ordered. The said amount shall be paid within eight

weeks by the State. We hasten to clarify that the appellant, if so advised,

may proceed with the civil suit wherein he has claimed more

compensation. We have not expressed any opinion on the merits of the

suit.
40.     Mr. Giri, learned senior counsel for the appellant and the appellant

who also appeared in person on certain occasions have submitted that

the grant of compensation is not the solution in a case of the present

nature. It is urged by them that the authorities who have been

responsible to cause such kind of harrowing effect on the mind of the

appellant should face the legal consequences. It is suggested that a

Committee should be constituted to take appropriate steps against the

erring officials. Though the suggestion has been strenuously opposed,

yet we really remain unimpressed by the said oppugnation. We think that

the obtaining factual scenario calls for constitution of a Committee to find

out ways and means to take appropriate steps against the erring

officials. For the said purpose, we constitute a Committee which shall be

headed by Justice D.K. Jain, a former Judge of this Court. The Central

Government and the State Government are directed to nominate one

officer each so that apposite action can be taken. The Committee shall

meet at Delhi and function from Delhi. However, it has option to hold
32
meetings at appropriate place in the State of Kerala. Justice D.K. Jain

shall be the Chairman of the Committee and the Central Government is

directed to bear the costs and provide perquisites as provided to a

retired Judge when he heads a committee. The Committee shall be

provided with all logistical facilities for the conduct of its business

including the secretarial staff by the Central Government.
41.   Resultantly, the appeals stand allowed to the extent indicated

hereinabove. There shall be no order as to costs.
..………………………….CJI.
(Dipak Misra)

                                          ..…………………………….J.
                                          (A. M. Khanwilkar)


                                          ..…..……………….………..J.
                                          (Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud)
New Delhi;
September 14, 2018