[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Ambala Bus Syndicate P.Ltd. vs Chandigarh Administration on 26 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 5354, 2019 (12) SCC 685, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 904, (2018) 13 SCALE 669, (2018) 4 CURCC 467, (2019) 1 ANDHLD 127
Author:
Kurian Joseph
Bench:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
,
Kurian Joseph
REPORTABLE

                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 10002/2018
                                     (ARISING FROM SLP(C) No(s).19092/2011)

     AMBALA BUS SYNDICATE PVT. LTD.                                                      APPELLANT(S)

                                                             VERSUS

     CHANDIGARH ADMINISTRATION & ORS.                                                    RESPONDENT(S)


                                                      J U D G M E N T
KURIAN, J.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
2.   Leave granted.
3.   The appellant is aggrieved by the judgment dated

                         21.04.2011 passed by the Division Bench of the High

                         Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in Letters

                         Patent Appeal No.1098 of 2010, whereby the Division

                         Bench overturned the view taken by the learned Single

                         Judge of the High Court and held that the appellant

                         cannot      operate    its     stage       carriages       beyond     the

                         territory of Punjab in view of the 1998 Scheme, as

                         amended in 2001.            The relevant consideration in the

                         impugned order reads:-
“The 1998 Scheme and the modified Scheme of
                              2001     does    not    permit       non-air      conditioned
                              buses       of          the       private           operators
Signature Not Verified
(persons/agencies) to operate in the U.T.,
Digitally signed by
NARENDRA PRASAD
Date: 2018.10.01
Chandigarh.       Section      66     of    the     1988   Act
17:13:10 IST
Reason:
prohibits an owner of the motor vehicle to
                              permit    use    of     his   vehicle      as   a   transport
1
vehicle in any public place whether or not
     carrying       any    passengers          or    goods        without
     permit     granted         or     counter-signed             by   the
     competent            authority.                This          Section
     necessitates a permit for a vehicle to be
     used as a transport vehicle. Section 88 of
     the 1988 Act provides counter-signatures of a
     permit granted in any one State to be valid
     in any other State. Since the 1998 Scheme of
     the U.T. Chandigarh excludes the operation of
     private    operators            altogether,          which    Scheme
     has been framed under Section 99 read with
     Section    100       of    the     1988       Act     falling     in
     Chapter VI of the 1988 Act, the same shall
     have an over riding effect. If that be so,
     the respondent-Company, a private operator,
     has no right to claim counter-signatures from
     the     Authority         of    U.T.   Chandigarh            on   the
     permit issued to it by the Authority of the
     State     of     Punjab          under         the     Reciprocal
     Agreement dated 4.6.2008 also.
In the light of the above conclusions
     reached by us, the respondent-Company cannot
     claim    counter-signatures              on     an    inter-State
     permit from the Authority of U.T., Chandigarh
     to operate a non-air conditioned bus in the
     territory of U.T. Chandigarh.”
4.    Unfortunately, the Division Bench has missed the

crucial     relevance          and     effect       of     the     reciprocal

Agreement      of    2008,          which   came          into     effect    on

04.06.2008, which specifically provides for counter

signature of non-A.C. buses.                  The relevant paragraph

is set out below:-
2
“The routes mentioned in Annexures A,B,C
     & D shall always mean the shortest direct
     route connecting the two terminals lying in
     the two states through the places mentioned
     therein.         Any discrepancy discovered later in
     the name or length of route shown in the said
     annexure shall promptly be corrected through
     correspondence            between          the      reciprocating
     States/UT and shall not be treated as any
     modification         of       the     agreement.            The    Air
     conditioned         and       Non-air          conditioned        buses
     owned      and     operated         by    STU’s     of   both      the
     State/UT shall only be allowed subject to the
     counter signatures.                 Integral Air Conditioned
     Buses       of     the    private         operator       shall      be
     allowed on the routes covered in annexure D
     to          this          agreement               subject            to
     countersignatures, provided that permits for
     such       Buses    shall       not       be     extended     beyond
     Chandigarh except in Punjab area.                           Non air
     conditioned buses of the private operators
     having permits issued before 01.11.1966 may
     be allowed after verification of the original
     permits and countersignatures provided that
     such permits shall be countersigned only if
     they fall in the scope and terms of
Section
     74
of the Punjab Reorganization Act, 1966 and
     provisions of
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
.”
5.   There is no dispute that despite the Scheme of

1998,     as    amended       in   2001,       the     appellant        operated

their stage carriage up to 2008.                         According to the

learned counsel appearing for Respondent Nos.1 and 3,

reciprocal       Agreement         of    2008       specifically        contains

the provision to deny the counter signature of the
3
bus operated by the appellant in the Union Territory

of Chandigarh.
6.     Despite the persuasive arguments advanced by the

learned counsel for Respondent Nos.1 and 3, we find

it difficult to appreciate the contention.                          Learned

counsel has specifically referred to
Chapter VI of

the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
(for short, ‘the said

Act’) and has invited our attention to Section 98 of

the said Act to canvass the point that the Scheme

under    Chapter       VI    of   the   said      Act    has    overriding

effect       over   the     reciprocal      Agreements       contemplated

under
Section 88
, coming under Chapter V of the said

Act.    Section 98 of the said Act reads as follows:-
“98. Chapter to override Chapter V and other
       laws.- The provisions of this Chapter and the
       rules and orders made thereunder shall have
       effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
       therewith contained in Chapter V or in any
       other law for the time being in force or in
       any instrument having effect by virtue of any
       such law.”
7.
Section 88 (5)
and (6) under Chapter V read as

under:-
“88    (5)   Every     proposal       to   enter      into   an
       agreement       between    the       States      to   fix    the
       number of permits which is proposed to be
       granted or countersigned in respect of each
       route or area, shall be published by each of
       the     State      Governments        concerned         in   the
       Official Gazette and in any one or more of
4
the      newspapers            in        regional          language
     circulating in the area or route proposed to
     be covered by the agreement together with a
     notice           of     the         date        before         which
     representations in connection therewith may
     be submitted, and the date not being less
     than thirty days from the date of publication
     in the Official Gazette, on which, and the
     authority by which, and the time and place at
     which, the proposal and any representation
     received         in   connection         therewith         will   be
     considered.
(6) Every agreement arrived at between the
     States shall, insofar as it relates to the
     grant       of    countersignature             of    permits,     be
     published by each of the State Governments
     concerned in the Official Gazette and in any
     one or more of the newspapers in the regional
     language         circulating        in   the     area     or   route
     covered          by   the    agreement         and       the   State
     Transport         Authority       of     the    State      and    the
     Regional Transport Authority concerned shall
     give effect to it.”
8.   There cannot be any dispute that the Scheme is

unilateral,       whereas        the     reciprocal        agreements        are

bilateral.        Despite the availability of Scheme, the

Union Territory of Chandigarh and the State of Punjab

have consciously entered into a reciprocal agreement

permitting the non-A.C. buses, for which the State of

Punjab     had    issued         permits      prior      to    1966    and   it

continued to be renewed by the State of Punjab to

operate in the Union Territory of Chandigarh.                           It has
5
also come in the affidavit of the State of Punjab

that such mileage has been taken into consideration

for the mileage entitlement of the Union Territory of

Chandigarh,   in   the     reciprocal       agreement    which     has

come into effect on 04.06.2008.                Therefore, unless

the   reciprocal   agreement       is   superseded      by   a   fresh

agreement or unless there is a new scheme framed by

the   Union   Territory     of    Chandigarh     specifying        the

provisions to the contrary, the buses operated by the

appellant,    which      had      permits     issued     prior      to

1.11.1966 and so long as they are renewed by the

State of Punjab, the Union Territory of Chandigarh

cannot refuse counter signature for the reason that

the permits already issued in 1966 had outlived its

life after five years of the reorganization.                       The

overriding effect provided in Section 98 of the said

Act operates only in case of an inconsistency on a

legal position.       There is no such situation in the

present   case.       On    the    contrary,     the     reciprocal

agreement is on mutually beneficial terms.
9.    Therefore, we set aside the impugned order passed

by the Division Bench and restore that of the learned

Single Judge of the High Court.
10. The   appeal   is,     accordingly,       disposed       of.   The

consequences will follow and needful shall be done

within four weeks from today.
6
11. Pending    applications,       if   any,   shall   stand
disposed of.
12. There shall be no orders as to costs.
.......................J.
                                            [KURIAN JOSEPH]



                                   .......................J.
                                       [SANJAY KISHAN KAUL]
NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 26, 2018.
7