[Cites
11
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
N Radhakrishnan @ Radhakrishnan ... vs Union Of India on 5 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 4154, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 1021, 2018 (6) ABR 116, (2018) 10 SCALE 717, (2018) 190 ALLINDCAS 44, (2018) 3 KER LT 1042, (2018) 72 OCR 467, (2018) 7 MAD LJ 628, 2018 (9) SCC 725, AIR 2018 SC (CIV) 2963
Author:
Dipak Misra
Bench:
D.Y. Chandrachud
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
,
Dipak Misra
1


                                                                       REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                   CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                              WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 904 OF 2018 

          N. Radhakrishnan                                                …Petitioner(s) 
          @ Radhakrishnan Varenickal


                                                VERSUS

          Union of India and others                                       …Respondent(s)
J U D G M E N T

          Dipak Misra, CJI

                         A writer or an author, while choosing a mode of expression,

          be it a novel or a novella, an epic or an anthology of poems, a

          play   or   a   playlet,   a   short   story   or   a   long   one,   an   essay   or   a

          statement of description or, for that matter, some other form, has

          the right to exercise his liberty to the fullest unless it falls foul of

          any   prescribed   law   that   is   constitutionally   valid.   It   is   because

          freedom of expression is extremely dear to a civilized society.   It
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHETAN KUMAR
Date: 2018.09.05
holds it close to its heart and would abhorrently look at any step
12:08:12 IST
Reason:
taken to create even the slightest concavity in the said freedom. It
2
may   be   noted   here   that   we   are   in   this   writ   petition,   preferred

under
Article 32
of the Constitution, dealing with creativity and

its impact and further considering the prayer for banning a book

on the foundation that a part of it is indecent and offends the

sentiments of women of a particular faith.   Having said this, we

would like to refer to two authorities highlighting the importance

of creativity and necessity of freedom of expression and how the

principle   of   pragmatic   realism   assures   the   said   creative

independence   as   civilization,   indubitably   a   progressive   one,

perceives   and   eagerly   desires   for   its   accentuated   protection,

nourishment and constant fostering. It is so because curtailment

of   an   author’s   right   to   freedom   of   expression   is   a   matter   of

serious concern.
2.
In
Devidas   Ramachandra   Tuljapurkar   v.   State   of

Maharashtra
and others1, the Court, dealing with the meaning

of the words “poetic licence”, observed:­  

      “…  it  can   never   remotely  mean a  licence as used or
      understood   in   the   language   of   law.   There   is   no
      authority   who   gives   a   licence   to   a   poet.   These   are
      words from the realm of literature. The poet assumes
      his   own   freedom   which   is   allowed   to   him   by   the
      fundamental   concept   of   poetry.   He   is   free   to   depart
      from reality; fly away from grammar; walk in glory by

1 (2015) 6 SCC 1
3
not following systematic metres; coin words at his own
      will; use archaic words to convey thoughts or attribute
      meanings;   hide   ideas   beyond   myths   which   can   be
      absolutely   unrealistic;   totally   pave   a   path   where
      neither   rhyme   nor   rhythm   prevail;   can   put   serious
      ideas in satires, ifferisms, notorious repartees; take aid
      of   analogies,   metaphors,   similes   in   his   own   style,
      compare like  “life with sandwiches that is consumed
      everyday”   or   “life   is   like   peeling   of   an   onion”,   or
      “society is like a stew”; define ideas that can balloon
      into   the   sky   never   to   come   down;   cause   violence   to
      logic   at   his   own   fancy;   escape   to   the   sphere   of
      figurative truism; get engrossed in the “universal eye
      for   resemblance”,   and   one   can   do   nothing   except
      writing a critical appreciation in his own manner and
      according to his understanding. When a poet says “I
      saw   eternity   yesterday   night”,   no   reader   would
      understand   the   term   “eternity”   in   its   prosaic   sense.
      The Hamletian question has many a layer; each is free
      to   confer   a   meaning;   be   it   traditional   or   modern   or
      individualistic. No one can stop a dramatist or a poet
      or a writer to write freely expressing his thoughts, and
      similarly   none   can   stop   the   critics   to   give   their
      comments   whatever   its   worth.   One   may   concentrate
      on   Classical   facets   and   one   may   think   at   a
      metaphysical level or concentrate on Romanticism as
      is understood in the poems of Keats, Byron or Shelley
      or   one   may   dwell   on   Nature   and   write   poems   like
      William   Wordsworth   whose   poems,   say   some,   are
      didactic.   One   may   also   venture   to   compose   like
      Alexander   Pope   or   Dryden   or   get   into   individual
      modernism   like   Ezra   Pound,   T.S.   Eliot   or   Pablo
      Neruda. That is fundamentally what is meant by poetic
      licence.”
3.
In
Raj Kapoor and others v. State
and others2,  Krishna

Iyer,   J.,   speaking   for   himself,   while   quashing   the   criminal

proceedings   initiated   against   the   petitioner   therein   for   the
2 (1980) 1 SCC 43
4
production   of   the   film,   namely,   ‘Satyam,   Sivam,   Sundaram’,

observed:­ 

     “12. … Jurisprudentially speaking, law, in the sense of
     command to do or not to do, must be a reflection of the
     community’s   cultural   norms,   not   the   State’s
     regimentation   of   aesthetic   expression   or   artistic
     creation.   Here   we   will   realise   the   superior
     jurisprudential value of  dharma, which is a beautiful
     blend   of   the   sustaining   sense   of   morality,   right
     conduct,   society’s   enlightened   consensus   and   the
     binding   force   of   norms   so   woven   as   against   positive
     law in the Austinian sense, with an awesome halo and
     barren autonomy around the legislated text is fruitful
     area   for   creative   exploration.  But   morals   made   to
     measure by statute and court is risky operation with
     portentous   impact   on   fundamental   freedoms,   and   in
     our constitutional order the root principle is liberty of
     expression and its reasonable control with the limits of
     ‘public   order,   decency   or   morality’.   Here,   social
     dynamics   guides   legal   dynamics   in   the   province   of
     ‘policing’ art forms.”
                                                  [Emphasis added]
4.   The learned Judge further went on to say:­ 

     “15. …   The   relation   between   Reality   and   Relativity
     must   haunt   the   Court’s   evaluation   of   obscenity,
     expressed   in   society’s   pervasive   humanity,   not   law’s
     penal   prescriptions.   Social   scientists   and   spiritual
     scientists will broadly agree that man lives not alone
     by   mystic   squints,   ascetic   chants   and   austere
     abnegation  but by luscious love of Beauty, sensuous
     joy   of   companionship   and   moderate   non­denial   of
     normal demands of the flesh. Extremes and excesses
     boomerang   although   some   crazy   artists   and   film
     directors   do   practise   Oscar   Wilde’s   observation:
‘Moderation   is   a   fatal   thing.   Nothing   succeeds   like
     excess’.
5
16. All these add up to one conclusion that finality and
      infallibility   are   beyond   courts   which   must   interpret
      and administer the law with pragmatic realism, rather
      than romantic idealism or recluse extremism.”
                                                 [Emphasis added]
5.    We have referred to the aforesaid decisions in the beginning

as we intend to adjudicate the lis on the touchstone of “pragmatic

realism”.   When   we   say   “pragmatic   realism”,   it   has   to   be

understood   in   the   context   of   creativity,   for   the   present   Writ

Petition preferred under
Article 32
of the Constitution seeks for

issue of an appropriate writ to ban the novel, namely, “Meesha”

meaning   Moustache   which   appeared   in   a   popular   Malayalam

weekly,   “Mathrubhumi”,   published  from   Kozikhode,  Kerala   and

circulated throughout the country and abroad.
6.    It is averred by the petitioner that the said literary work is

insulting and derogatory to temple going women and it hurts the

sentiments of a particular faith/community. It is further asserted

that   the   portion   of   the   book   ‘Meesha’   which   was   published   in

‘Mathrubhumi’ shows temple going women in bad light and it has

a disturbing effect on the community.
7.    It is contended that the editor of ‘Mathrubhumi’ has failed

in his duty by not editing or scrutinizing the portion of the book
6
‘Meesha’ which was published in the weekly. It is put forth by the

petitioner that he has approached this Court singularly for the

protection   of   the   legitimate   interest   of   the   women   community.

The petitioner submits that such writings which have appeared

in   ‘Mathrubhumi’   are   not   a   manifestation   of   the   freedom   of

expression but are collusive efforts aimed at dividing the society,

for   such   imputations   are   discriminatory   against   women   and

threaten   the   very   fabric   of   the   society   which   embodies   within

itself   the   virtues   of   pluralistic   community,   religion   and   gender

balance.   The   petitioner   avers   that   defamatory   and   degrading

publications which cater to perverted and communal minds need

to be checked and nipped in the bud as they have a tendency to

propel the general public to view the women community as mere

sexual   and   material   objects   which,   in   turn,   denies   the   women

community   their   fundamental   rights   and   also   jeopardizes  their

safety and well­being.
8.    It   is   also   alleged   by   the   petitioner   that   the   impugned

incriminating   material   appearing   in   ‘Mathrubhumi’   defiles   the

places of worship and causes the public to look down upon them

with   contempt   and   ridicule,   whereas   worshipping   of   deities   by
7
visiting the temples with purity of body and mind is an integral

part of the Hindu religion.
9.    It is urged that the said publication in ‘Mathrubhumi’ has

the proclivity and potentiality to disturb the public order, decency

or morality and it defames the women community, all of which

are grounds for the State to impose reasonable restrictions under
Article 19(2)
on the fundamental right of freedom of speech and

expression. To buttress his stand, the petitioner has submitted

that  after the publication of the incriminating material, women

visiting   temples   are   subjected   to   ridicule   and   embarrassment

through   various   social   media   platforms   and   instances   such   as

these are bound to have an adverse effect on the liberty, freedom

and empowerment of women.
10.   The   petitioner   has   also   averred   that   if   such   a   work   of

literature is not checked, it may trigger a ‘Charlie Hebdo’ kind of

a backlash in our country and, therefore, it is necessary for this

Court to lay down guidelines to regulate and prohibit, those who

control/manage/publish   both   on   print   and   electronic   media

platforms,   from   publishing   such   insensitive,   incriminating   and

defamatory articles which could disrupt the peaceful co­existence

of various communities and religions in the country.
8
11.   In  view  of   the   aforesaid, the petitioner  has prayed to this

Court to issue a writ of Mandamus or any other writ/directions

to the Respondent No. 1, the Union of India, the Respondent No.

2, the State of Kerala and the Respondent No. 4, the Chief Editor

of   ‘Mathrubhumi’   weekly,   to   search   and   seize   all   copies   of

‘Mathrubhumi’   weekly   volume­2   dated   11.07.2018   from   all   the

States and/or issue a writ of prohibition or any other directions

to the Respondents to prevent any further publication/circulation

of the novel titled ‘Meesha’ in the form of a book or in any other

form   including   the   internet.   The   petitioner   has   also   prayed   to

issue   appropriate   directions   in   the   nature   of   mandamus   or

otherwise to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, New

Delhi, to frame such guidelines as to prevent the recurrence of

such instances which have the tendency to cause threat to the

integrity of the society and the safety of women.
12.   It may be noted here that when the Writ Petition was listed

on   02.08.2018,   this   Court,   before   issuing   notice,   deemed   it

appropriate to pass an order on the same date which reads as

follows:­ 

      “Mr. M.T. George, learned counsel shall file within five
      days   hence   the   central   theme   of   the   book   and   the
9
three chapters, which have been published in a weekly
      newspaper, namely, Mathrubhumi.”
13.   In pursuance of the aforesaid order of this Court, Mr. M.T.

George, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Chief Editor

of   ‘Mathrubhumi’,   the   Respondent   No.   4   herein,   has   filed   the

translated copy of the central theme of the book ‘Meesha’ along

with an English translation of the three chapters of the novel.
14.   A perusal of the central theme of ‘Meesha’ reveals that the

book is a narration which revolves back to the 19 th  century and

extends   to   the   present   times   with   Vavachan   alias   Meesha

(Moustache), Paviyam, Chella and Sita as its central characters.

Vavachan is one of the six children of Paviyam and Chella and

their   family   is   engaged   in   agriculture   for   a   living.   The   novel

begins with young Vavachan travelling in a boat with his father

for gathering fodder grass. On the way, Paviyam tries to steal a

bunch of raw bananas from a Pulaya (farm) but his attempt was

foiled   by   a   young   woman   of   the   household,   named,   Sita.

Vavachan at his young age is stunned and baffled when he sees

the half­naked body of Sita. After this rendezvous, a storm hits

and Paviyam, the father, along with his son Vavachan lose their

way. After the storm subsides and time passes, Vavachan comes
10
across two men who tell him that the world was about to witness

a   big   war   and   they   were   going   to   Malaya   (town)   to   escape   a

famine.  Vavachan gets hooked with the idea of Malaya though he

had no idea as regards its location.
15.   As the narration proceeds, Vavachan along with his family

lived in constant hunger. One day, a theatre group comes to their

village from Malabar. The proprietor of the theatre group needs

an actor with a big and ferocious moustache to play the role of a

policeman. But there was no one in the village who was sporting

a big moustache as it was considered as act of defiance especially

among   the   lower   castes.   The   proprietor   of   the   theatre   group

comes   across   Vavachan   who   had   never   shaven   in   his   life   and

sported thick hair and a beard. The proprietor gave Vavachan a

tonsure treatment, that is to say, he shaved his head but allowed

a ferocious Moustache (Meesha) to remain. Thereafter, Vavachan

was   put   on   stage   where   he   only   has   to   scream   twice   blood­

curdling ‘daa’ (you).
16.   In response, people got scared and ran away from the scene

and Vavachan’s moustache, which he refused to shave off even

after   the   show,   became   a   notorious   legend.   The   upper   caste

people   who   resented   Vavachan’s   Moustache   ascribed   to   him
11
every   kind   of   crime,   even   though   he   was   innocent   and   just

wanted   to   go   to   Malaya   and   marry   the   girl,   Sita,   who   had

bedazzled   him   when   he   was   young   and   whom   he   had   seen

half­naked.
17.   When  the period of  famine and hunger struck, Vavachan,

with armed men after him, fled from his village and hid in the

fields of Kuttanadan where labyrinthine canals and marshes saw

human presence only during the farming season. Gradually, with

the passage of time, Vavachan got immersed in the Kuttanadan

environment where he encountered the myths, legends, folklore

and superstitions ingrained among the people.
18.   Paviyam and Chella, the parents of Vavachan, die without

seeing   him.   But   after   Chella’s   death,   he   returns   to   his   native

village and runs away with a book from Kalan and reads it fully.

The stories of (Meesha) Vavachan alias Moustache get etched in

the   region’s   sub­consciousness.   The   moustache   becomes   a

legend himself with super natural powers. The landlords and the

government   become   afraid   that   Meesha’s   activities   would   hurt

the farming activities in Kuttanadan and they deploy a legendary

sub­inspector   named   Thanu  Linga  Nadar   to  deal  with  Meesha.

However,   at   that   time,   Kuttanadan   witnessed   a   deluge   and
12
Nadar’s   mysterious   death   increased   Meesha’s   terror.

Subsequently, Meesha locks horns with a local strongman named

Karumathara Ittichan and rumors went around that Meesha was

killed in fight with Ittichan.
19.   But Meesha had reached Kumarakom, an important place

in   northern   Kuttanadan,   where   an   Englishman   called   Brenen

Sayip (Saheb) had installed a machine to pump out water from

the   fields   of   Kuttanadan.   Refusing   to   divulge   the   secret   of   the

machine, Brenen Saheb charges hefty amounts from the people.

Avarachan,   a   man   interested   in   science,   manages   to   steal   the

secret with the help of Meesha. Meesha works as a help of Baker

Sayip who has vast fields and also conducts missionary work in

the region. There Meesha befriends a fisherman called Ouseph,

who was born to a Malayali woman from Baker Sayip’s father.
20.   Baker   Sayip   is   a   well­known   crocodile   hunter   who   was

known   to   have   caused   the   extinction   of   crocodiles   in   the

Vembanad   Lake.   However,   the   last   crocodile   is   after   Baker   for

revenge. In the end, it is Meesha who conquers the crocodile and

due to this feat of Meesha, Baker Sayip becomes his bête noire.

When   Meesha   realizes   that   Baker   has   turned   against   him,   he

escapes from there along with Ouseph.
13
21.   Thereafter, Meesha comes across a prostitute, Kuttathi, who

had heard about the adventures of Meesha. One Kunjachan, the

son   of   the   lake   area’s   owner   troubles   Kuttathi   and   is   a   big

nuisance   for   her.   Meesha   slams   Kunjachan   as   well.   In   return,

Kuttathi, with the assistance of one Narayanan, who also sports

a   moustache,   helps   Meesha   to   find   his   childhood   crush   Sita.

Meesha   saves   Sita   from   a   robber   called   Katta   Pulavan.

Thereupon,   Meesha   asks   Sita   to   accompany   him,   but   Sita   is

unwilling and refuses to submit herself to Meesha.
22.   Thus,   Vavachan   alias   Meesha,   who   is   able   to   defeat

everyone in life, is defeated by a woman in the end.
23.   Presently, we may refer to and quote the dialogue from the

book   “Meesha”   that   has   impelled   the   petitioner   to   move   this

Court in the instant writ petition. The English translation of the

dialogue appears at page twenty­six of the translated copy of the

three   chapters   submitted   by   Mr.   M.T.   George,   learned   counsel

appearing   for   the   Respondent   No.   4,   the   Chief   Editor   of   the

weekly ‘Mathrubhumi’. It reads thus:­

       “Why do these girls take bath and put on their best
       when they go to the temple?” a friend who used to
14
join   the   morning   walk   until   six   months   ago   once
       asked.
“To Pray”, I said.
“No”, he said. “Look carefully, why do they need to
       put their best clothes in the most beautiful way to
       pray? They are unconsciously proclaiming that they
       are ready to enter into sex”, he said. I laughed.

       “Otherwise,” he continued, “why do they not come to
       the   temple   four   or   five   days   a   month?   They   are
       letting   people   know   that   they   are   not   ready   for   it.
       Especially,   informing   those   Thirumenis   (Brahmin
       priests) in the temple. Were they not the masters in
       these matters in the past?”
24.   The primary issue that emerges for consideration is whether

the  aforesaid portion of  the book ‘Meesha’ which the petitioner

asserts   to   be   derogatory   to   the   women   community   is   an

aberration of such magnitude which requires the intervention of

this Court on the ground that it has the potentiality to disturb

the public order, decency or morality and whether it defames the

women   community,   and,   therefore,   invites   imposition   of

reasonable restriction under
Article 19(2)
of the Constitution.
25.   For   deciding   this   question,   we   must   advert   to   the

fundamental   idea   behind   art   and   literature   and   the   liberalism
15
associated with artistic expression. Literature symbolizes freedom

to   express   oneself   in   multitudinous   ways.   One   should   never

forget that only when creativity is not choked, it helps the society

to be able to accept the thoughts and ideas of a free mind.
26.   Literature can act as a medium to connect to the readers

only when creativity is not choked or smothered. The free flow of

the stream of creativity knows no bounds and imagination brooks

no   limits.   A   writer   or   an   artist   or   any   person   in   the   creative

sphere has to think in an unfettered way free from the shackles

that   may   hinder   his   musings   and   ruminations.   The   writers

possess the freedom to express their views and imagination and

readers too enjoy the freedom to perceive and imagine from their

own   viewpoint.   Sans   imagination,   the   thinking   process   is

conditioned.
27.   Creative voices cannot be stifled or silenced and intellectual

freedom   cannot   be   annihilated.     It   is   perilous   to   obstruct   free

speech, expression, creativity and imagination, for it leads to a

state   of   intellectual   repression   of   literary   freedom   thereby

blocking free thought and the fertile faculties of the human mind

and   eventually   paving   the   path   of   literary   pusillanimity.   Ideas

have wings. If the wings of free flow of ideas and imagination are
16
clipped, no work of art can be created.   The culture of banning

books directly impacts the free flow of ideas and is an affront to

the   freedom   of   speech,   thought   and   expression.   Any   direct   or

veiled   censorship   or   ban   of   book,   unless   defamatory   or

derogatory to any community for abject obscenity, would create

unrest and disquiet among the intelligentsia by going beyond the

bounds   of   intellectual   tolerance  and  further  creating  danger   to

intellectual   freedom   thereby   gradually   resulting   in   "intellectual

cowardice" which is said to be the greatest enemy of a writer, for

it destroys the free spirit of the writer.   It shall invite a chilling

winter of discontent.   We must remember that we live not in a

totalitarian regime but in a democratic nation which permits free

exchange of ideas and liberty of thought and expression. It is only

by   defending   the   sacrosanct   principles   of   free   speech   and

expression   or,   to   borrow   the   words   of   Justice   Louis   Brandeis,

"the freedom to think as you will and to speak as you think" and

by safeguarding the unfettered creative spirit and imagination of

authors, writers, artists and persons in the creative field that we

can   preserve   the   basic   tenets   of   our   constitutional   ideals   and

mature as a democratic society where the freedoms to read and

write are valued and cherished.
17
28.   The   aforesaid   also  calls from  the readers and admirers of

literature and art to exhibit a certain degree of adherence to the

unwritten codes of maturity, humanity and tolerance so that the

freedom of expression reigns supreme and is not inhibited in any

manner. The flag of democratic values and ideals of freedom and

liberty has to be kept flying high at all costs and the Judiciary

must   remain   committed   to   this   spirit   at   all   times   unless   they

really   and,   we   mean,   really   in   the   real   sense   of   the   term,   run

counter to what is prohibited in law.  And, needless to emphasise

that prohibition should not be allowed entry at someone’s fancy

or view or perception.
29.
In
Samaresh   Bose   and   another   v.   Amal   Mitra
and

another3, the question that arose before this Court was whether

the   accused   persons   had   committed   an   offence   under
Section

292
IPC.  In the said case, an author had written a novel under

the  caption ‘Prajapati’  which was published in ‘Sarodiya Desh’.

The   contention   before   the   trial   court   was   that   the   novel   was

obscene and both the accused persons, namely, the author and

the   publisher   had   sold,   distributed,   printed   and   exhibited   the

same.     The   accused   persons   who   faced   trial   stood   convicted.

3 (1985) 4 SCC 289
18
Their   conviction   was   affirmed   by   the   High   Court.     This   Court,

while   dealing   with   the   issue   for   the   purpose   of   deciding   the

question of obscenity in any book, story or article, opined:­

      “29. … The decision of the court must necessarily be
      on   an   objective   assessment   of   the   book   or   story   or
      article as a whole and with particular reference to the
      passages  complained of in the book, story or article.
      The   court   must   take   an   overall   view   of   the   matter
      complained of as obscene in the setting of the whole
      work, but the matter charged as obscene must also be
      considered by itself and separately to find out whether
      it is so gross and its obscenity so pronounced that it is
      likely to deprave and corrupt those whose minds are
      open   to   influence   of  this  sort and  into whose hands
      the   book   is   likely   to   fall.   Though   the   court   must
      consider the question objectively with an open mind,
      yet   in   the   matter   of   objective   assessment   the
      subjective attitude of the Judge hearing the matter is
      likely   to   influence,   even   though   unconsciously,   his
      mind and his decision on the question. A Judge with a
      puritan and prudish outlook may on the basis of an
      objective   assessment   of   any   book   or   story   or   article,
      consider   the   same   to   be   obscene.   It   is   possible   that
      another Judge with a different kind of outlook may not
      consider the same book to be obscene on his objective
      assessment   of   the   very   same   book.   The   concept   of
      obscenity   is   moulded   to   a   very   great   extent   by   the
      social outlook of the people who are generally expected
      to read the book. It is beyond dispute that the concept
      of   obscenity   usually   differs   from   country   to   country
      depending   on   the   standards   of   morality   of
      contemporary   society   in   different   countries.   In   our
      opinion,   in   judging   the   question   of   obscenity,   the
      Judge in the first place should try to place himself in
      the  position of  the  author and from the viewpoint of
      the author the Judge should try to understand what is
      it that the author seeks to convey and whether what
      the author conveys has any literary and artistic value.
19
The   Judge   should   thereafter   place   himself   in   the
     position of a reader of every age group in whose hands
     the book is likely to fall and should try to appreciate
     what   kind   of   possible  influence   the   book   is   likely   to
     have in the minds of the readers. …”

  The Court, further analyzing the story of the novel, expressed

thus:­

     “35. … If we place ourselves in the position of readers,
     who   are   likely   to   read   this   book—and   we   must   not
     forget that in this class of readers there will probably
     be   readers   of   both   sexes   and   of   all   ages   between
     teenagers and the aged—we feel that the readers as a
     class   will   read   the   book   with   a   sense   of   shock   and
     disgust,   and   we   do   not   think   that   any   reader   on
     reading   this   book   would   become   depraved,   debased
     and encouraged to lasciviousness. It is quite possible
     that   they   come   across   such   characters   and   such
     situations in life and have faced them or may have to
     face them in life. On a very anxious consideration and
     after carefully applying our judicial mind in making an
     objective assessment of the novel we do not think that
     it   can   be   said   with   any   assurance   that   the   novel   is
     obscene   merely   because   slang   and   unconventional
     words have been used in the book in which there have
     been emphasis on sex and description of female bodies
     and there are the narrations of feelings, thoughts and
     actions in vulgar language. Some portions of the book
     may appear to be vulgar and readers of cultured and
     refined taste may feel shocked and disgusted. Equally
     in   some   portions,   the   words   used   and   description
     given may not appear to be in proper taste. In some
     places there may have been an exhibition of bad taste
     leaving it to the readers of experience and maturity to
     draw   the   necessary   inference   but   certainly   not
     sufficient   to   bring   home   to   the   adolescents   any
     suggestion which is depraving or lascivious.”
20
30.
In   this   regard,   we   may   refer   with   profit   to   the

pronouncement in
Bobby Art International and others v. Om

Pal   Singh   Hoon
and   others4,   popularly   known   as  “Bandit

Queen case”.   The Court analysed the storyline, the humiliation

faced   by   the   female   child,   the   torment   faced   by   her   and,

eventually, the innocent woman becoming a dreaded dacoit and

observed that to appreciate the story, the character of the person

portrayed had to be viewed.  In that context, the Court held:­

      “27. First, the scene where she is humiliated, stripped
      naked,   paraded,   made   to   draw   water   from   the   well,
      within the  circle of  a hundred men. The exposure of
      her breasts and genitalia to those men is intended by
      those   who   strip   her   to   demean   her.   The   effect   of   so
      doing   upon   her   could   hardly   have   been   better
      conveyed   than   by   explicitly   showing   the   scene.   The
      object of doing so was not to titillate the cinemagoer’s
      lust but to arouse in him sympathy for the victim and
      disgust   for   the   perpetrators.   The   revulsion   that   the
      Tribunal referred to was not at Phoolan Devi’s nudity
      but at the sadism and heartlessness of those who had
      stripped her naked to rob her of every shred of dignity.
      Nakedness does not always arouse the baser instinct.
      The reference by the Tribunal to the film ‘Schindler’s
      List’ was apt. There is a scene in it of rows of naked
      men and  women,  shown frontally, being led into the
      gas chambers of a Nazi concentration camp. Not only
      are they about to die but they have been stripped in
      their   last   moments   of   the   basic   dignity   of   human
      beings. Tears are a likely reaction; pity, horror and a
      fellow­feeling   of   shame   are   certain,   except   in   the
      pervert   who   might   be   aroused.   We   do   not   censor   to

4 (1996) 4 SCC 1
21
protect the pervert or to assuage the susceptibilities of
      the   over­sensitive.   ‘Bandit   Queen’   tells   a   powerful
      human story  and   to that story the scene of Phoolan
      Devi’s   enforced   naked   parade   is   central.   It   helps   to
      explain  why  Phoolan Devi became what she did: her
      rage and vendetta against the society that had heaped
      indignities upon her.”

      The   aforesaid,   as   is   evident,   appreciates   the   agonies   and

torture suffered by the protagonist and the nature of depiction of

the   scenes   on   celluloid   and   lays   down   the   principle   not   to   be

guided   by   the   sensitivity   of   a   pervert   viewer.     The   principle   of

assuagement is not to be taken recourse to so as to make the

idea of freedom of expression susceptible to suit the views and

perceptions   of   a   pervert   thinker   or   viewer.   Similarly,   while

reading a book, the setting, the constituents that constitute the

elements of the character and the purpose are to be kept in view.
31.
In this context, reference to the view expressed in
Viacom

18 Media Private Limited and others v. Union of India
and

others5 would be apposite.  In the said case, the challenge was to

the   ban   imposed   by   four   States   for   screening   the   movie

‘Padmaavat’. The Court quashed the notifications of banning on

the bedrock that the expression of an idea through the medium

of cinema which is a popular medium has its own status and the

5 (2018) 1 SCC 761
22
artistic expression should not be tinkered with. The Court went

on   to   observe   that   if   intellectual   prowess   and   natural   or

cultivated power of creation is inhibited without the permissible

facet   of   law,   the   concept   of   creativity   would   pave   the   path   of

extinction; and when creativity dies, values of civilization corrode.
The   Court,   in   the   said   context,   reproduced  a  passage   from   an

order   in
Nachiketa   Walhekar   v.   Central   Board   of   Film

Certification6
which reads as under:­

      “Be it noted, a film or a drama or a novel or a book is a
      creation   of   art.     An   artist   has   his   own   freedom   to
      express himself in a manner which is not prohibited in
      law and such prohibitions are not read by implication
      to   crucify   the   rights   of   expressive   mind.   The  human
      history   records   that   there   are   many   authors   who
      express their thoughts according to the choice of their
      words,   phrases,   expressions   and   also   create
      characters who may look absolutely different than an
      ordinary man would conceive of.  A thought provoking
      film should never mean that it has to be didactic or in
      any   way   puritanical.     It   can   be   expressive   and
      provoking   the   conscious   or   the   sub­conscious
      thoughts   of   the   viewer.     If   there   has   to   be   any
      limitation,   that   has   to   be   as   per   the   prescription   in
      law.”
32.
In
Adarsh Cooperative Housing Society Ltd. v. Union of

India
and   others7,  the   issue   before   this   Court   was   whether

screening of  feature film, which incorporated a perception with

6 (2018) 1 SCC 778
7 2018 (4 ) SCALE 390
23
regard   to   a   particular   situation,   would   affect   the   trial   which

involved   the   petitioner,   the   society   or   the   exercise   of   “error

jurisdiction” of the appellate court. This Court negatived the said

contention and ruled that courts of law decide the lis on the basis

of   the   materials   brought   on   record   and   not   on   the   basis   of

imagination as projected in the language of the theatre or a script

on celluloid. The Court opined thus:­

      “…there   can   be   multitudinous   modes,   manners   and
      methods   to   express   a   concept.   One   may   choose   the
      mode   of   silence   to   be   visually   eloquent   and   another
      may use the  method  of semi melodramatic approach
      that will have impact. It is the individual thought and
      approach which cannot be curbed.”

And again:
“…the   doctrine   of   sub­judice   may   not   be  elevated   to
      such an extent that some kind of reference or allusion
      to a member of a society would warrant the negation of
      the right to freedom of speech and expression which is
      an   extremely   cherished   right   enshrined   under   the
      Constitution.   The   moment   the   right   to   freedom   of
      speech and expression is atrophied, not only the right
      but also the person having the right gets into a semi
      coma. We may hasten to add that the said right is not
      absolute but any restriction imposed thereon has to be
      extremely   narrow   and   within   reasonable   parameters.
      In the case at hand, we are obligated to think that the
      grant of certificate by the CBFC, after consulting with
      the   authorities   of   the   Army,   should   dispel   any
      apprehension of the members or the society.”
24
33.   It would usher in a perilous situation, if the constitutional

courts,   for   the   asking   or   on   the   basis   of   some   allegation

pertaining to scandalous effect, obstruct free speech, expression,

creativity and imagination. It would lead to a state of intellectual

repression of literary freedom. When we say so, we are absolutely

alive   to   the   fact   that   the   said   right   is   not   absolute   but   any

restriction   imposed   thereon   has   to   be   extremely   narrow   and

within the reasonable parameters as delineated by
Article 19(2)
of

the   Constitution.   Here,   we   may   remind   ourselves   of   the

expression   used   by   George   Orwell.   It   is   free   thinking   and

intellectual cowardice. Creative writing is contrary to intellectual

cowardice and intellectual pusillanimity.
34.   Keeping   in   view   the   aforesaid   principles,   the   objections

raised   as   regards   the   contents   of   the   novel   and   the   language

used   which   is   reflected   in   the   dialogue   as   reproduced

hereinbefore are to be decided.   The grievance, as is reflectible,

pertains   to   derogatory   comments   on   women,   especially   when

they go to temple.  As stated earlier, it is the duty of the Court to

see   whether   such   a   dialogue  was   contrived  to   give   rise  to   any

kind of sensuous situation or projection of a class to humiliate

them.   A   creative   work   has   to   be   read   with   a   matured   spirit,
25
catholicity   of   approach,   objective   tolerance   and   a   sense   of

acceptability founded on reality that is differently projected but

not   with   the   obsessed   idea   of   perversity   that   immediately

connects one with the passion of didacticism or, for that matter,

perception   of   puritanical   attitude.   A   reader   should   have   the

sensibility   to   understand   the   situation   and   appreciate   the

character   and   not   draw   the   conclusion   that   everything   that   is

written   is   in   bad   taste   and   deliberately   so   done   to   pollute   the

young   minds.   On   the   contrary,   he/she   should   elevate

himself/herself   as   a   co­walker   with   the   author   as   if   there   is

social   link   and   intellectual   connect.     The   feeling   of   perverse

judging should be abandoned.  A creative writing is expectant of

empathetic   reading.     It   is   not   averse   to   criticism   but   certainly

does not tolerate unwarranted protest.  The author of “Wuthering

Heights”   expects   the   readers   to   appreciate   the   morbidity   that

surrounds the character of “Heathcliff”.  Similarly, the great poet

of “Nala Damayanti” desired the readers to enjoy the description

of the beauty of the princess appreciating the narrative but not to

engage in pervert thinking.
35.   One has to understand and appreciate the characteristics of

the character and the plots and sub­plots that are woven in the
26
story.  The character of Meesha as has been projected shows the

myriad experiences with different situations.   The situations, as

we   find,   can   be   perceived   as   certain   sub­plots   which   evolved

around the fundamental characteristics of the protagonist.   The

theory of consistency of character as adopted by certain writers

seems to have been maintained in the narrative.  The situations

and  the  treatment of  situations may be different but the basic

response of the protagonist remains unchanged.   All these, we

say, can be from one reader’s point of view.  To another reader, it

may   seem   that   the   sub­plots   have   been   enthusiastically

contrived to bring in tempting situations to draw the protagonist

in and to exposit chain reactions.  Appreciated from either point

of view, it cannot be denied that it is a manifestation of creativity.
The perception of a character which is in consonance with the

story invites empathetic readers to view him/her from a different

perspective.  A reader with mature sensibility would connect with

the plight of the protagonist or may distance himself/herself by

expressing the view that the projection is derogatory and hurtful

to a  section  of people.   He/she treats the novel as scandalous

and   offensive.   The   Court   is   not   to   be   swayed   by   any   kind   of

perception.   One may have a grave dislike towards a particular
27
manner of expression but that would not warrant for issue of a

mandamus from the Court to ban the book or the publication.

The language used in the dialogue cannot remotely be thought of

as obscene. The concept of defamation does not arise.  Nurturing

the   idea   that   it   is   derogatory   and   hurtful   to   the   temple   going

women   would   tantamount   to   pyramiding   a   superstructure

without the infrastructure.
36.   If   one   understands   the   progression   of   character   through

events and situations, a keen reader will find that beneath the

complex scenario, the urge is to defeat and to conquer and not to

accept a denial. Both the facets are in the realm of obsession and

the   author   allows   the   protagonist   to   rule   his   planet.   His

imagination   encircles   his   world.   A   reader   has   the   liberty   to

admire him or to sympathise.  Either way, the dialogue to which

the objection is raised is not an intrusion to create sensation. It

is   a   facet   of   projection   of   the   characters.   It   is,   in   a   way,

imaginative   reality   or   as   Pablo   Picasso   would   like   to   put   it,

“Everything   you   can   imagine   is   real”.     A   pervert   reader   may

visualise   absence   of   decency   or   morality   or   the   presence   of

obscenity but they are really invisible.
28
37.   If books are banned on such allegations, there can be no

creativity.   Such interference by constitutional courts will cause

the death of art.  True it is, the freedom enjoyed by an author is

not absolute, but before imposition of any restriction, the duty of

the Court is to see whether there is really something that comes

within the ambit and sweep of
Article 19(2)
of the Constitution.

At that time, the Court should remember what has been said in
S. Rangarajan v. P. Jagjivan Ram and others
8 wherein, while

interpreting
Article 19(2)
, this Court borrowed from the American

test of clear and present danger and observed:­

      “45.   …   Our   commitment   of   freedom   of   expression
      demands   that   it   cannot   be   suppressed   unless   the
      situations   created   by   allowing   the   freedom   are
      pressing   and   the   community   interest   is   endangered.
      The   anticipated   danger   should   not   be   remote,
      conjectural   or   far­fetched.   It   should   have   proximate
      and direct nexus with the expression. The expression
      of   thought   should   be   intrinsically   dangerous   to   the
      public interest. In other words, the expression should
      be inseparably locked up with the action contemplated
      like the equivalent of a “spark in a power keg”.”
38.   To apply the said litmus test, it is to be borne in mind that a

book should not be read in a fragmented manner.   It has to be

read as a whole.    The  language used, the ideas developed, the

style  adopted, the manner in which the characters are portrayed,

8 (1989) 2 SCC 574
29
the   type   of   imagery   taken   aid   of   for   depiction,   the   thematic

subsidiary   concepts   projected   and   the   nature   of   delineation   of

situations have to be understood from an objective point of view.

There may be subjective perception of a book as regards its worth

and   evaluation   but   the   said   subjectivity   cannot   be   allowed   to

enter into the legal arena for censorship or ban of a book.
39.   Quite apart from the above, the creativity and the author’s

perception of the universe are to be borne in mind.  What is true

to poetry is applicable to novels or any creative writing.  It has to

be kept uppermost in mind that the imagination of a writer has

to enjoy freedom.   It cannot be asked to succumb to specifics.

That   will   tantamount   to   imposition.   A   writer   should   have   free

play with words, like a painter has it with colours. The passion of

imagination cannot be directed. True it is, the final publication

must not run counter to law but the application of the rigours of

law has to also remain alive to the various aspects that have been

accepted by the authorities of the Court. The craftsmanship of a

writer deserves respect by acceptation of the concept of objective

perceptibility.
40.   It ought to be remembered that eventually, what the great

writer and thinker Voltaire had said ― “ I may disapprove of what
30
you   say,   but   I   will   defend   to   the   death   your   right   to   say   it”

becomes   the   laser   beam   for   guidance   when   one   talks   about

freedom of expression.
41.   In   view   of   the   aforesaid   analysis,   the   writ   petition,   being

devoid   of   merit,   stands   dismissed.   However,   there   shall   be   no

order as to costs.
…………………………….CJI
                                                   (Dipak Misra)


                                                   ……………………………….J.
                                                   (A.M. Khanwilkar)


New Delhi;                                            ...………………….………..J.
September 05, 2018                                    (Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud)