[Cites
0
, Cited by
14
]
Supreme Court of India
Anil Kumar P.P. vs The State Of Kerala And Ors Rep By The ... on 25 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 755
Author:
Kurian Joseph
Bench:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
,
Kurian Joseph
1

                                                                                   NON-REPORTABLE

                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 9954-9955 OF 2018
                              [@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 7378-7379 OF 2017]


                         ANIL KUMAR P.P.                                       Appellant(s)

                                                         VERSUS

                         THE STATE OF KERALA AND ORS.                         Respondent(s)


                                                  J U D G M E N T
KURIAN, J.
1.     Leave granted.
2.     Heard   Dr.   Gopakumaran   Nair,   learned   senior

                         counsel appearing for the appellant, and Mr. Jaideep

                         Gupta, learned senior counsel appearing for the State

                         and Mr. Vipin Nair and Mr.P.B.Suresh, learned counsel

                         appearing for the Public Service Commission.
3.     The appellant is aggrieved since the  High Court

                         has   virtually   set   aside   the   orders   passed   by   the

                         Government in exercise of their powers under Rule 39

                         of   the   Kerala   State   and   Subordinate   Services   Rules,
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
which   relaxed   the   rigour   of   the   General   Rules   and
JAYANT KUMAR ARORA
Date: 2018.10.06
12:35:53 IST
Reason:
Special   Rules   for   the   purpose   of   promotion   of   the

                         appellant   from   the   post   of   Deputy   Range   Officer   to
2
the post of Range Forest Officer, previously known as

Range Officer.
4.   We see from the records that the Government had

applied its mind to the peculiar facts of the case of

the   appellant   and   the   invocation   of   Rule   39   was   in

terms   of   equity   and   justice.     But   from   the   order

dated   23.08.2013,   we   find   that   the   Government   had

exempted   the   appellant   even   from   the   requirement   of

undergoing   training,   which   is   the   requirement   for

promotion to the post of Range Forest Officer, on the

sole ground that the service left was only 4 1/2  years

as on the date of the order and after undergoing the

training,   the   appellant   may   not   get   sufficient

service.   We fail to appreciate the rationale behind

it.     If   training   is   a   requirement   for   appointment/

promotion  to  a post,  unless there  is  an appropriate

satisfaction   on   the   part   of   the   competent   authority

that   in   view   of   the   experience,   exposure   and

expertise   of   the   candidate   concerned,   it   was   not

necessary   for   a   further   training,   there   could   not

have been an exemption from the mandatory requirement

of training on invoking Rule 39.  We do not find that

there   was   such   an   enquiry   in   that   regard   and   a

consequent satisfaction.
3
5.    Therefore,   we   set   aside   the   order   dated

23.08.2013 and remit the matter to the Government for

consideration  afresh,  after affording  an  opportunity

of   hearing   to   the   appellant   as   well.     Fresh   orders

shall be passed by the Government within a period of

six weeks.
6.    We make it clear that the impugned Judgment shall

not   stand   in   the   way   of   the   Government   considering

the   representation   afresh   in   terms   of   what   we   have

indicated hereinabove.
7.    In   view   of   the   above,   the   appeals   are   disposed

of.
8.    We   make   it   clear   that   this   Judgment   is   passed

having regard to the peculiar facts and circumstances

of the case and the same is not to be treated as a

precedent.
.......................J.
                                              [ KURIAN JOSEPH ]



                                       .......................J.
                                         [ SANJAY KISHAN KAUL ]

New Delhi;
September 25, 2018.