[Cites
8
, Cited by
10
]
Supreme Court of India
Pankaj Sinha vs Union Of India And Ors. on 14 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 4297, 2018 (4) AJR 736, (2018) 11 SCALE 210, (2018) 8 MAD LJ 47, 2019 (135) ALR SOC 6 (SC), 2019 (197) AIC (SOC) 6 (SC), (2019) 1 JCR 20 (SC), AIR 2018 SC (CIV) 3042, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 177
Author:
Dipak Misra
Bench:
D.Y. Chandrachud
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
,
Dipak Misra
REPORTABLE
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                        CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                    WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.767 OF 2014

         Pankaj Sinha                                                        ...Petitioner(s)

                                                      versus

         Union of India and Others                                           ...Respondent(s)



                                                 JUDGMENT
Dipak Misra, CJI

                         The instant writ petition preferred under
Article 32
of the Constitution

         of India seeks issue of directions to the Union of India and the States, the

         respondent Nos. 1 to 30 herein, to conduct periodic national survey for

         determining new cases relating to detection rate of leprosy and to publish

         and bring in the public domain the reports of National Sample Survey on

         Leprosy conducted in 2010-2011 and further to conduct regular and

         sustainable massive awareness campaigns for the general public to dispel

         the fear associated with leprosy and support and encourage the people
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK GUGLANI
Date: 2018.09.14
afflicted by the said disease to lead a life of equality and dignity.
11:34:10 IST
Reason:
2
2.   It is also prayed that the respondents should ensure that Multi-Drug

Therapy (MDT) drugs and other drugs for management of leprosy and

complications in leprosy are available free of cost and do not go out of

stock at all Primary Health Centres (PHCs) in the country and also direct all

hospitals and health care institutions throughout the country, whether

private or Government, not to discriminate against women with leprosy and

not to turn them away and deny them treatment. A relief is also sought to

issue mandamus to all the schools in the country not to discriminate

against children from leprosy affected families and to provide them free

education. The petitioners also seek for providing hygienic conditions in

leprosy colonies and to make MCR footwear available free of cost to the

leprosy affected persons in the country. That apart, a prayer has been

made to direct the Union of India to frame separate rules for evaluation of

disabilities suffered by leprosy affected persons for the purpose of issuing

disability certificate in exercise of the power granted under the Rights of

Persons with
Disabilities Act, 2016
(No. 49 of 2016).
3.   When the matter was listed on 1st September, 2014, the following

order came to be passed:-
"In support of the petition preferred under
Article 32
of the
        Constitution of India, it is submitted by Mr. Gonsalves that
        despite the human civilization has advanced in
        advancement made in the field of medicine and in spite of
3
civilisation having reached the pinnacle of scientific
       research, an effective cure, namely, Multi-Drug Therapy
       (MDT) which has been available since 1981 that can
       completely cure 99% of leprosy bacteria, due to apathy of
       the Government of India and the State Governments,
       people are still suffering from the said disease, which is
       treated as a social stigma.
It is urged by him, had people been made aware by the
       competent authorities of the Central Government and the
       State Governments, millions of people who are suffering
       from leprosy would have been cured and come to the
       mainstream of life and would not have been ostracized
       from the society. Learned senior counsel would contend
       that because of non-concern, the leprosy affects more
       than one lakhs twenty five thousand persons yearly
       throughout the country, which is completely avoidable.
       It is averred in the petition that they are not allowed to
       have education, sanitary benefits, community based
       rehabilitation as a result of which they are driven to
       streets and eventually turn to begging or compelled to live
       in so-called leprosy homes where they are treated as
       unpersons or aliens.
In the writ petition, number of prayers have been made
       which pertains to issuance of directions for availability of
       the drugs at primary health centres and proper
       administration of the same for treatment of the pregnant
       women suffering from leprosy in an apposite manner with
       dignity, and making provision in educational institutions
       whether government or private, so that discrimination
       against the children of the leprosy affected families due to
       some kind of inhibition which has no constitutional
       sanction, is stopped and for providing banking facilities
       and establishment of such colonies where they can live
       for temporary period till they are cured and come to the
       society, etc."
4.   On 28th November, 2014, the Court passed the following order:-
4
"Mr. Maninder Singh, learned Additional Solicitor General
         appearing for Union of India prays for four weeks time to
         file the requisite data as directed by this Court vide order
         dated 1.9.2014. Mr Singh has assured this Court that he
         will not seek further adjournment.
The respondent States shall file their respective replies
         within the said period. If, they are unable to collect the
         data throughout the State, whatever data they have
         collected during the time granted by us, shall be brought
         on record.
We have granted four weeks time as we are inclined to
         think that this is a cause which can be taken on a priority
         basis by the States, for what has been agitated before us
         is that the leprosy, as on today, is curable. Yet, because
         of apathy shown by the concerned authorities, it still
         remains a stigmatic disease in the society. It is
         inconceivable as it affects the human dignity and the
         basic concept of humanness."
5.    Be it noted, the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority

(IRDA) and the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) were arrayed as respondent

Nos.31 and 32 in the writ petition and they had taken time to obtain

instructions.
6.    On 13th January, 2015, after taking note of the submissions made by

the learned counsel for the parties, the Court had noted thus:-
"Needless to say, curability is admitted depending upon
         the degree. As advised at present, we are of the
         convinced view that more progressive steps are required
         to be taken by the Union of India and the States. It would
         be advisable, if the Union of India and the States can
         think of having Leprosy Cure Centres, where medication
5
follow up and other treatment protocols are followed in
         proper prospective so that the stigmatic disease is
         eradicated or reduced to a significant percentage. Mr.
         Maninder Singh, learned Additional Solicitor General and
         other learned counsel appearing for various States pray
         for four weeks' time to obtain instructions in this regard."
7.    Taking into consideration the affidavits filed and instructions obtained,

the Court, on 23rd April, 2015, passed the following order:-
"It is submitted by Mr. Maninder Singh, learned Additional
         Solicitor General appearing for Union of India, that as far
         as prayers (A) and (B) are concerned, he will produce the
         data and the report as prayed for and also file a reply
         supported by an affidavit in that regard. As far as prayer
         (E) is concerned, we would like Mr. Maninder Singh,
         learned Additional Solicitor General to obtain instructions
         whether the concerned Ministry, i.e., Ministry of Health
         and Family Welfare, Government of India, has any team
         which is exclusively meant to look after the leprosy homes
         or leprosy colonies and eventually the patients suffering
         from leprosy. We would like the affidavit to contain what
         kind of treatment is administered when the initial
         symptoms get manifested. In essence, whether there is
         any machinery to that effect. We have so directed as
         there is no dispute that the leprosy is totally curable in
         21st century. We accept the submission of Mr. Kamlesh
         Kumar Mishra, learned counsel for the petitioner, that the
         Union of India and all the State Governments have a duty
         to see that this century old stigmatic disease is
         eradicated. We also accept his submission that it can be
         done with a concerted effort by the Union of India and the
         States.
Mr. Ranjit Rao, learned AAG for the State of U.P., has
         submitted that in the State of U.P. there is a rehabilitation
         programme of the leprosy patients and throughout the
         State, the patients are administered medicines and some
         of them have been cured. Be it noted, the Director
6
Genearal of Medical and Health, Government of U.P. has
         filed an affidavit in that regard. At this juncture, it is
         necessary to state that the affidavit reflects that there are
         72 leprosy centres and in the 72 centres, approximately
         5,000 persons, including the leprosy patients and their
         dependents, are residing. The said aspect is required to be
         verified and accordingly we constitute a Committee
         consisting of Mr. Ashok Gupta, learned senior counsel,
         Supreme Court of India, Mr. Om Subhash Tripathi, M-1,
         Govindpur, Allahabad and Mr. Chander Shekhar Singh,
         58/14, Lai Bhadur Shastri Marg, Civil Lines, Allahabad.

         The Committee shall initially visit the leprosy homes at
         Lucknow, Banaras and Agra. The Committee shall submit
         a report within eight weeks hence. The State Government
         shall pay the fees of the members of the Committee
         which is conceded to by Mr. Ranjit Rao, learned AAG.
         This concession is given in presence of Mr. Vijay Bahadur
         Singh, learned Advocate General for the State of U.P. We
         are not determining the quantum of fees. We hope that
         the State will fix the quantum, regard being had to the
         experience of the 5 members of the Committee at the
         Bar. The visits of the Committee shall be coordinate by
         Mr. Rao after holding discussions with Mr. Ashok Gupta,
         learned senior counsel."
8.    It is worthy to note here that during the pendency of this writ petition,

another Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1151 of 2017 was filed seeking the relief

that number of legislations be declared as unconstitutional being violative

of
Articles 14
, 19(1)(d)
, 19(1) (g)
and
21
of the Constitution of India. In the

course of hearing of the said writ petition, our attention had been drawn to

the 256th Report of the Law Commission. The said report had been

submitted on the basis of the initiative taken by the Union of India titled
7
"Legal Enactments Simplification and Streamlining". The Law Commission

had referred to the provisions of the Leprosy Act and adverted to the

Second Interim Report No.249 wherein it had been mentioned that India is

a member of the U.N. General Assembly which unanimously passed a

resolution on the elimination of discrimination against persons affected by

leprosy and their family members. As per the Law Commission Report, the

Leprosy Act was against the spirit of the Resolution and, therefore, required

immediate repeal in consultation with the States. Paragraphs 2.2.1, 2.2.2

and 2.2.3 were reproduced by this Court when the said writ petition was

taken up on 5th July, 2018. We think it appropriate to reproduce the said

paragraphs and other paragraphs that had been adverted to for proper

appreciation:-
"In paragraphs 2.2.1 to 2.2.3, there has been a reference
        to the facts and myths surrounding leprosy. We think it
        appropriate to reproduce the said paragraphs:
"2.2.1 There are several myths and distortions
           surrounding Leprosy that are sought to be clarified in
           this Chapter. Such myths consider Leprosy as a
           hereditary and infectious disease that is caused due to
           impure blood and poverty. Many also believe that the
           infection of Leprosy spreads through food and water
           and is difficult to detect. However, all such beliefs are
           not based on evidence and therefore without merit.
2.2.2 Leprosy is not a hereditary disease and is not
           caused due to impure blood or poverty, but due to the
           causative agent Mycobacterium Leprae as mentioned
           above. Further, even though Leprosy is a chronic
8
infectious disease, it is neither difficult to diagnose nor
  hard to treat. The main consideration for an effective
  Leprosy treatment is early detection and regularity in
  treatment.
2.2.3 All persons are not susceptible to Leprosy,
  although insanitary conditions, malnutrition and lack of
  personal hygiene may increase the chances of getting
  infected by the Leprosy bacillus or a host of other
  diseases and infections caused on account of such
  conditions. Further, Leprosy is not a fatal disease,
  even though on account of the stigma and
  discrimination, it may cause permanent psychological
  and social damage to the victims."
In paragraph 2.4.2., it has been mentioned that leprosy is
a completely curable disease. We think it relevant to
reproduce paragraph 2.4.2. which is to the following
effect:
"2.4.2 Although Leprosy is the cause of irreversible
  disabilities, with advances in science and technology in
  the field of Leprosy treatment during the last three
  decades, it is now a completely curable disease that
  can be rendered non-infectious in the initial stages of
  the treatment itself. The treatment that has made it
  possible to cure Leprosy is the process of Multi-Drug
  Therapy ("MDT"), which was first recommended by the
  WHO in early 1980s after over 40 years of research
  and testing. Under MDT, powerful drugs such as
  Rifamipicin, Clofazimine and others in combination
  with Dapsone, are administered to the affected person
  to effectively fight the Leprosy bacillus. Over the past
  two decades, more than 15 million Persons affected by
  Leprosy are said to have been cured under MDT."
Eventually, after analysing various aspects, the Law
Commission recommended as follows:
"7.13 This statute should be titled as the "Elimination of
  Discrimination against Persons affected by Leprosy
9
Bill, 2015". This standalone law, apart from
          comprehensively covering the repeal/modification of
          the specified statutes, shall contain principles of
          nondiscrimination and equal protection before law.
          These principles shall specify that (1) No person, or
          public or private establishment shall discriminate
          against any person affected by Leprosy, or members
          of his family on any ground in relation to their affliction
          of Leprosy, or their disability, physical attributes or any
          other form of their association with Leprosy; and (2) All
          persons affected by Leprosy and members of their
          family shall be entitled to the recognition, enjoyment
          and exercise, on an equal basis, of all human rights
          including freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution of
          India. Further, the law shall also contain enabling
          provisions regarding affirmative action and repeal and
          amend discriminatory provisions listed above.
7.14 A model Bill is provided in the Annexure for the
          consideration of the Government of India. The Law
          Commission of India believes that the fact that India is
          home to the most number of Persons affected by
          Leprosy in the world is a matter of deep shame.
          Further, despite clear scientific evidence and
          pioneering social efforts, the stigma associated with
          leprosy still continues unabated. The proposed Bill is
          an important step in eliminating the social
          discrimination faced by such persons, a necessary
          precursor to their reintegration into society. As a
          humane society that believes in human rights for all,
          especially its poorest, the Law Commission believes
          that the Bill should be converted into a law as
          expeditiously as possible by the Government of India."
9.   After referring to the same, the Court observed:-
"The annexure contains a draft Bill, namely, Eliminating
       Discrimination Against Persons Affected by Leprosy
       (EDPAL) Bill, 2015. The Law Commission recommended
       the repeal of the
Lepers Act
and other laws, which create
10
any kind of stigma, disability or discrimination against
         persons    suffering    from    leprosy.  Despite    the
         recommendations made by the Law Commission, it is
         submitted by Mr.Raju Ramachandran, learned senior
         counsel for the petitioner, no steps have been taken to
         repeal those obsolete laws, except for the
Lepers Act
which has been repealed."
10.
In the said order, a reference was made to a two-Judge Bench decision

rendered in
Dhirendra Pandua vs. State of Orissa and Others1
wherein

the learned Judges had taken note of the progress made in the field of

science and technology and curability of leprosy. The said paragraphs read

as follows:-
"29. It is true that now with aggressive medication a
         patient may be fully cured of the disease, yet the
         Legislature in its wisdom has thought it fit to retain such
         provisions in the statute in order to eliminate the danger
         of its being transmitted to other people from the person
         affected by the disease. Having regard to these
         circumstances, we are convinced that the said
         classification does bear a reasonable and just relation
         with the object sought to be achieved by the statute in
         question and cannot be said to be unreasonable or
         arbitrary. Accordingly, we hold that
Sections 16(l)(iv)
and
17 (l)(b)
of the Act are not violative of
Article 14
of the
         Constitution.
30. Before parting with this case, we deem it appropriate
         to point out that having regard to the changed concept
         and knowledge gained about the disease of leprosy, on
         the recommendation of the Working Group on Eradication
         of Leprosy, appointed by the Government of India, many
         State Governments and Union Territories have repealed

1 (2008) 17 SCC 311
11
the antiquated Lepers Act, 1898 and subsequent similar
         State Acts, providing for the segregation and medical
         treatment of pauper lepers suffering from infectious type
         of disease. Therefore, keeping in view the present
         thinking and researches carried on leprosy as also on
         tuberculosis, and with professional input, the Legislature
         may seriously consider whether it is still necessary to
         retain such provisions in the statutes."
11. In the said order, the Court emphasized on social awakening, the

curability of the disease and lack of professional approach to the same and

the social stigma that still remains attached to the said disease. The

directions issued by the Court in the said case are to the following effect:-
"(i)     The Union of India and the Department of Health
         and other concerned Departments shall carry out
         awareness campaigns at various levels so that people
         come to know about the curability of the disease and of its
         not being contagious.
(ii)    Some responsible authorities, at least two, shall
         be exclusively nominated for the said duty.
(iii)    There should be specific programmes on All
         India Radio and Doordarshan, both at the Central and the
         State level, as also on the regional channels, for
         educating       people about the fact that leprosy is not a
         communicable disease and not to treat any person
         suffering from that disease with any kind of stigma or
         discrimination.
(iv)    The programmes shall be shown on
         Doordarshan, both on the national and the regional
         channels, to the extent feasible on prime time so that the
         people can see them.
12
(v)      Hospitals should not decline to treat such
         patients suffering from leprosy for administering the first
         dosage and thereafter provide treatment if they suffer
         from any other disease. It has to be remembered that a
         person has a right to avail the treatment in the
         government hospitals.
(vi)    The awareness campaign must cover all areas
         from urban areas to the panchayat level so that there will
         be a concrete and holistic approach with regard to
         awareness.
(vii)    The Union of India and the States shall take
         steps to rehabilitate persons suffering from leprosy to
         bring them in the main-stream. It should be the primary
         duty of the State to see that this category of persons does
         not suffer from any kind of stigma.
(viii)    We would commend to the Union of India and
         the State Governments to apprise us about the steps
         taken with regard to the repeal of the provisions where
         leprosy has been treated as a stigmatic disability. A report
         of compliance shall be filed by the Union of India as well
         as all the States."
12.   The said writ petition was adjourned to 20th August, 2018, seeking

due compliance. On 20th August, 2018, after hearing the learned Attorney

General for India and learned counsel for the parties, the Court passed the

following order:-
"In the course of hearing of the petition, we sought the
         assistance of Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney
         General for India. According to Mr. Venugopal, apart from
         positive law and repeal of statutes which relate to the
         stigma attached to leprosy patients, there has to be
         awareness campaign at various levels so that the people
         come to know that the disease is not incurable and
13
further, after administration of the first dosage, it ceases
        to be contagious. Learned Attorney General would also
        submit that the patients suffering from leprosy, who have
        lost their limbs, can be brought to the mainstream of
        society if certain treatments are given by plastic surgery.
Mr. Raju Ramachandran, learned senior counsel for the
        petitioner submitted that pending repeal of the
        enactments, this Court should issue directions so that the
        patients suffering from leprosy live a life of dignity with
        decency. Regard being had to the non-adversarial
        submissions at the Bar, we would ask the learned
        Attorney General as well as Mr.Raju Ramachandran,
        learned senior counsel for the petitioner to give their
        suggestions in writing so that this Court will be in a
        position to issue appropriate directions.
Let the matter be listed on 10.09.2018.
In the meantime, learned Attorney General shall apprise
        us whether a recommendation can be made to the
        legislature to pass an affirmative law conferring certain
        rights and benefits on the persons suffering from leprosy
        and any statute, rule, regulation orenactment, running
        counter to the affirmative law, shall be treated to have
        been repealed."
13.   On 10th September, 2018, the following order came to be passed:-
"Mr. Raju Ramachandran, learned senior counsel has filed
         certain 'Suggestions' as part of his submissions. He has
         given 11 suggestions.
Out of the 11 suggestions, suggestion nos.10 and 11
        pertain to the legislative realm. Mr. Venugopal, learned
        Attorney General would pray for six weeks' time in respect
        of these two aspects.
As far as the other 9 suggestions are concerned, prima
        facie we are of the view that they would fall within the
14
executive sphere. The said suggestions are - (i)
         Awareness, Sensitisation and Dissemination of action
         taken; (ii) Nondiscrimination; (iii) Pensionary benefits for
         persons affected by leprosy; (iv) Healthcare and
         Rehabilitation; (v) Housing assistance; (vi) Education; (vii)
         Employment and livelihood; (viii) Welfare; and (ix)
         Language and Expression.
We would request Mr. Venugopal, learned Attorney
         General to assist with regard to the aforesaid 9 aspects
         by filing his suggestions within four weeks hence.
         All the States shall file their response with regard to the
         steps taken and to be taken, keeping in view the
         constitutional goal."
14.   In the instant writ petition, the petitioner has drawn the attention of the

Court to the fact that although leprosy as a disease has been scientifically

and medically proven to be curable and manageable with MDT, yet the fact

remains that millions of people and their family members still suffer from

leprosy and the social, economic and cultural stigma attached to the said

disease. This fact reveals the lack of awareness and the prevailing

misguided notions in the society pertaining to leprosy. Further, the

miserable plight of the persons afflicted with leprosy does not end here. It

has been highlighted that due to the disability that entails as a result of the

disease, the people affected by leprosy suffer additional discrimination in

the form of denial of access to health services, education and livelihood

options. At present, majority of the populace which is afflicted with leprosy

live as a marginalized section in the society deprived of even basic human
15
rights which manifestly results in violation of the fundamental right to

equality and right to live with dignity.
15.   It has been further brought to the attention of the Court that as per the

requirements of the World Health Organization (WHO), all countries are

required to achieve a prevalence of less than one leprosy case per 10,000

persons and although India had declared way back in 31.12.2005 that it

has achieved the said goal of elimination of leprosy, yet the progress

reports of NLEP which have been reporting prevalence rate in certain

States of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare exposit an entirely

different reality. As per the said reports, out of 642 districts in India, only

543 districts have achieved a prevalence rate of less than one case of

leprosy for 10,000 persons. The underestimation of the cases of leprosy

and the declaration of elimination of leprosy has resulted in the integration

of leprosy in general health services thereby leading to diversion of funds

which would have otherwise been dedicated to eliminating leprosy.
16.   The petitioners have expressed deep concern over the fact that

although a National Sample Survey of Leprosy was conducted by the

respondent No. 1, Union of India, yet the said survey has never been

brought out in the public domain. The desired results have not been

achieved due to improper dispensation of the MDT drugs through the PHCs
16
established for the said purpose. It is urged that the staff of PHCs display

sheer lack of sensitivity while dealing with patients affected with leprosy as

a consequence of which the level of stigma and isolation still prevails

amongst the said patients. Several incidents have also been reported

which have brought to light the discriminatory treatment meted out by the

Government hospitals to leprosy affected pregnant women and cases

wherein women have been refused treatment solely on account of being

affected by leprosy. Another aspect, that is, the area of education has also

been brought forth by the petitioners. It has been urged that lack of

adequate education facilities would further magnify the sense of insecurity

and stigma prevailing amongst the persons affected with leprosy. For any

development to take place, the first step would be in the direction of

ensuring quality education for the children who are the wards of people

affected with leprosy.
17.   It has been pointed out that several instances have come to fore

highlighting that the persons affected with leprosy are being provided with

APL cards and not BPL cards which prevented these people from claiming

benefits under various schemes brought out by the Government, such as

the Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY), which again deprives this section of the

populace from claiming their right to food. Deprivation of housing and other
17
basic civic amenities, adequate sanitary facilities and rehabilitation

programmes are yet other serious concerns which, if not addressed, would

lead to the entire reformatory process taking a huge setback.
18.   Keeping in view the factual matrix in entirety and the submissions

advanced, we think it appropriate to issue the following directions :-
(i)    The Union and the States are to undertake periodical

             national surveys for determining the prevalence rate and

             new cases detection rate of leprosy and, at the same

             time, publish and bring the reports of the National Sample

             Survey of Leprosy conducted in 2010-11 and subsequent

             thereto into the public domain. That apart, the activities of

             the National Leprosy Eradication Programme (NLEP)

             must be given wide publicity;
(ii)   On leprosy day which is internationally observed every

             year on the last Sunday of January, the Union of India

             along with all State Governments should organize

             massive    awareness     campaigns    to   increase   public

             awareness about the signs and symptoms of leprosy and

             the fact that it is perfectly curable by the Multi Drug
18
Therapy (MDT). Awareness should also be spread about

        the free availability of MDT at all government health care

        facilities in the country, the prescribed course for MDT

        treatment and all other relevant information related to

        MDT. The content and information contained in the

        awareness programmes should discontinue to use

        frightening images of people disabled with leprosy and

        instead use positive images of cured persons sharing

        their experiences of being cured of leprosy;
(iii)   The Union and the States are to ensure that drugs for

        management of leprosy and its complications including

        the MDT drugs are available free of cost and do not go

        out of stock at all Primary Health Centres (PHCs) or, as

        the case may be, public health facilities in the country;
(iv)    All-year awareness campaigns should also be run, by the

        Union as well as the States, to inform the citizenry that

        under the National Leprosy Eradication Programme

        (NLEP), treatment is provided free of cost to all leprosy
19
cases diagnosed through general health care system

       including NGOs;
(v)    The Union and the States must organize seminars at all

       levels which serve as platforms to hear the views and

       experiences directly from the former patients and their

       families as well as doctors, social workers, experts, NGOs

       and Government officials;
(vi)   The awareness campaigns must include information that

       a person affected by leprosy is not required to be sent to

       any special clinic or hospital or sanatorium and should not

       be isolated from the family members or the community.
The awareness campaigns should also inform that a

       person affected with leprosy can lead a normal married

       life, can have children, can take part in social events and

       go to work or school as normal. Acceptability of leprosy

       patients in the society would go a long way in reducing

       the stigma attached to the disease;
(vii) Health care to leprosy patients, at both Government as

       well as private run medical institutions, must be such that

       medical officials and representatives desist from any

       discriminatory behaviour while examining and treating
20
leprosy patients. Treatment     of   leprosy should be

       integrated into general health care which will usher in a

       no-isolation method in general wards and OPD services.

       In particular, it must be ensured that there is no

       discrimination against women suffering from leprosy and

       they are given equal and adequate opportunities for

       treatment in any hospital of their choice. To this effect,

       proactive measures must be taken for sensitization of

       hospital personnel;
(viii) Patients affected with leprosy, for whom partial deformity

       can be corrected by surgery, should be advised and

       provided adequate facility and opportunity to undergo

       such surgeries;
(ix)   The possibility of including leprosy education in school

       curricula so as to give correct information about leprosy

       and leprosy patients and prevent discrimination against

       them should be explored;
(x)    The Union and the State Governments must ensure that

       both private and public schools do not discriminate

       against children hailing from leprosy affected families.
21
Such children should not be turned away and attempt

       should be made to provide them free education;
(xi)   Due attention must be paid to ensure that the persons

       affected with leprosy are issued BPL cards so that they

       can avail the benefits under AAY scheme and other

       similar schemes which would enable them to secure their

       right to food;
(xii) The Union and the States should endeavour to provide

       MCR footwear free of cost to all leprosy affected persons

       in the country;
(xiii) The States together with the Union of India should

       consider formulating and implementing a scheme for

       providing at least a minimum assistance, preferably on a

       monthly basis, to all leprosy affected persons for

       rehabilitation;
(xiv) The Union and the State Governments must pro-actively

       plan and formulate a comprehensive community based

       rehabilitation scheme which shall cater to all basic

       facilities and needs of the leprosy affected persons and

       their families. The scheme shall be aimed at eliminating
22
the stigma that is associated with persons afflicted with

               leprosy.
(xv) The Union Government may consider framing separate

               rules for assessing the disability quotient of the leprosy

               affected persons for the purpose of issuing disability

               certificate in exercise of the power granted under the

               Rights of Persons with
Disabilities Act, 2016
(No. 49 of

               2016).
19.   The writ petition is, accordingly, disposed of. There shall be no order

as to costs.
…………………………….CJI
                                                  (Dipak Misra)


                                                  ………………………….…..J.
                                                  (A.M. Khanwilkar)


                                                  ………………………….…..J.
                                                  (Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud)
New Delhi;
September 14, 2018