[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Himalaya Vintrade Pvt. Ltd. vs Md. Zahid on 16 September, 2021
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2021 SC 782
Author:
Ajay Rastogi
Bench:
Abhay S Oka
,
Ajay Rastogi
1

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5779   OF 2021
                                  (arising out of SLP(C)No.5730 of 2021)


                         HIMALAYA VINTRADE PVT. LTD.                     APPELLANT(S)

                                                       VERSUS

                         MD. ZAHID & ANR.                                RESPONDENT(S)



                                                  O R D E R
Leave granted.
The appellant-defendant has approached to this Court

                      assailing the order passed by Ld.Trial Judge and confirmed

                      by the High Court on the application filed at his instance

                      under Order VII Rule 11, Civil Procedure Code, 1908.
The facts on record are not in dispute. The appellant-

                      defendant initially entered into an agreement to sell of

                      the subject property in question on 23.02.2018 and after a

                      formal deed of conveyance finally a sale deed was executed

                      on 30.09.2019 and his right of ownership over the subject

                      property in question became absolute.
The respondent no.1-plaintiff filed a suit with the

                      following prayer:
Signature Not Verified
a) for   a declaration     that the   plaintiff is   a
Digitally signed by
NEETU KHAJURIA
Date: 2021.09.20
16:27:32 IST
Reason:
lawful occupier as caretaker/servant of the sole
                             owner of the A schedule property and occupier and
                             adverse possessor of the B Schedule property.
2
b)     for   the       permanent          injunction         restraining
     defendant        to    disturb           or   evict        the   peaceful
     possession of the plaintiff otherwise then the
     due course of law.
Schedule A of property
     All that an area of land admeasuring 16 kh. 3 ch.
     4 sq.ft. be the same and a little more or less
     with three storied residential building have each
     floor    are     5000       Sq.ft.       more      or   less     and   some
     vacant possession lying and situated at premises
     no.217, Lower Circular Road and now known as 217
     A.J.C.Bose       Road,       Kolkata-700017             P.S.Beniapukur,
     Dist-South 24 pargans


                            Schedule B property
     All that three rooms and one godown along with
     some     vacant       land     at        premises         no.217,      Lower
     Circular Road and now known as 217 A.J.C.Bose
     Road, Kolkata-700017 P.S.Beniapukur.


     It     was   a   specific          case       of    the    respondent      no.1-

plaintiff that he was in possession of the subject property

as a caretaker/servant. Para nos.2, 4 and 6 of the plaint

are reproduced hereunder:
2. That the plaintiff is a servant/caretaker of
    the “A” schedule property appointed by the Mirza
    Habibullah Khaleeli and the said sole owners of
    the said property allow the plaintiff for used
    and residing all that three rooms and one godown
    along with some vacant land which is more fully
    and particularly described in the “B” schedule
    below     lying        and    situated         at      premises      no.217,
    Lower     Circular           Road     and        now     known     as    217
3
A.J.C.Bose Road, Kolkata-700017 P.S.Beniapukur is
    the   subject       matter      of     the     suit   within   the
    jurisdiction of this ld.Court.
4. That on all a sudden the defendants and their
    men   and    agents      with    other    antisocial     elements
    trying      to   take    or   enter     into    the   plaintiff’s
    rooms i.e. B schedule Property with an ulterior
    motive they trying to dispossess the plaintiff
    from his lawful occupation as servant/caretaker
    with a view to grab the occupation/residence but
    the defendant is not success to fulfill their ill
    desired, for the intervention of the local people
    and their strong support the defendants could not
    succeed      there       to     oust     and    dispossess     the
    plaintiff.
6. That the right title interested possession of
    the plaintiff in the suit property as well as
    lawful      right       of    servant     and     caretaker    and
    claiming as adverse possessor of the B schedule
    property even thus been clouded for unlawful act
    of the defendants so the plaintiff is compelled
    instituted the instant suit against the defendant
    for declaration that the defendant be not ousted
    from the B schedule property i.e. suit property
    other than due process of law and for permanent
    injunction against the defendant not to disturb
    the peaceful possession of the suit property and
    also not disturb or the egress and ingress of the
    suit property.
After the notice was served. The application under

Order VII Rule 11,
CPC
came to be filed at the behest of
4
the present appellant-defendant with an objection that the

suit proceedings at the instance of the respondent no.1-

plaintiff       who      had         pleaded           himself          to      be        a

caretaker/servant,        acquires            no    interest       in    the    subject

property     irrespective          of     his       long     possession,        is    not

maintainable     under       the    law       and    as    regards      the    plea       of

adverse     possession         is       concerned,           it     lacks      material

particulars.
The    Trial     Judge       dismissed         the     application        on    the

premise that these are the subject matter of disputes which

can be examined only after the written statement being

filed at the behest of the present appellant-defendant and

is not within the scope of Order VII Rule 11,
CPC
and order

of Trial Judge came to be confirmed by the High Court by

the impugned order assailed in the present proceedings.
After we heard counsel for the parties and taking into

consideration the material on record, in our considered

view, the Trail Court has committed a manifest error in

appreciating the pleadings on record from the plaint filed

at   the    instance    of     respondent           no.1-plaintiff           who     as   a

caretaker/servant        can        never          acquire        interest     in     the

property     irrespective          of     his       long     possession        and    the

caretaker/servant        has       to     give       possession         forthwith         on

demand and so far as the plea of adverse possession is

concerned as it lacks material particulars and the plaint

does not discloses the cause of action for institution of

the suit.
5
In our considered view, the order of the Ld. Trial

Judge which has been confirmed by the High Court impugned

in the instant proceeding is not sustainable on the first

principles of law.
Consequently, the appeal succeeds and is allowed. The

order of the High Court is, hereby, quashed and set aside.

The plaint no.T.
S.150
/2019, on the file of Ld.2nd Civil

Judge(Jr.Div) at Sealdah is, accordingly, rejected.
Since we have rejected the plaint in reference to the

proceeding       initiated,    we   direct   the    respondent     no.1-

plaintiff to handover, vacant and peaceful possession of

the subject property in question free from all encumbrances

within three months.
If   the    respondent   no.1-plaintiff      fails   to   handover

possession, the appellant-defendant will be at liberty to

take the recourse as known to the law.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed

of.
............... J.
(AJAY RASTOGI)



                                              ............... J.
(ABHAY S OKA)
NEW DELHI
SEPTEMBER 16, 2021