[Cites
27
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
Mr. Rajeev Nohwar vs Chief Controlling Revenue Authority ... on 24 September, 2021
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
B V Nagarathna
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
CA 5970/2021
                                                              1


                                                                                                Reportable


                                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                                   Civil Appeal No 5970 of 2021
                                              (Arising out of SLP (C) No 699 of 2019)



                      Mr Rajeev Nohwar                                                     Appellant


                                                         Versus


                      Chief Controlling Revenue Authority                                  Respondent(s)
                      Maharashtra State, Pune and Others




                                                      JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J


                      1    Leave granted.
2    A citizen‟s claim for the refund of stamp duty has found a winding path to this

                           court. The appellant booked a residential apartment. There arose a dispute with

                           the builder. It led to a consumer complaint. The litigation consumed time. The

                           appellant was permitted to opt for a refund of the price. The claim for refund of

                           stamp duty has been rejected by the revenue arm of the state on the ground

                           that more than six months have elapsed. The Bombay High Court, agreeing with
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Chetan Kumar
the decision found the claim to be stale. A simple claim for refund leads us to
Date: 2021.10.05
17:04:04 IST
Reason:
CA 5970/2021
2
the complexities of a revenue sourcing law.
3       This appeal arises from a judgment dated 22 November 2018 of a Single Judge of

               the High Court of Judicature at Bombay. The Deputy Inspector General of

               Registration and Deputy Controller of Stamps, Pune rejected an application for

               refund of stamp duty filed by the appellant. The order of the authority was

               challenged in the exercise of the jurisdiction of the High Court under
Article 226
of the Constitution. The petition has been dismissed.
4       On 24 April 2014, the appellant booked a residential flat, being Unit No 2001

               admeasuring 1660 sq ft in Tower No 24 of a construction project called Lodha

               Belmondo in Pune for a consideration of Rs 1,68,88,095. The appellant initially

               paid an amount of Rs 33,91,795 by July 2014 representing 19.9% of the agreed

               sale consideration, following which a confirmatory email was issued. This was

               followed by a letter of allotment dated 15 July 2014. On 14 August 2014, the

               appellant paid an amount of Rs 1,58,28,221 out of the agreed consideration. In

               order to facilitate the execution of a conveyance, the appellant purchased an

               e-SBTR stamp paper through a government challan bearing MTR GRN No

               MH0023603832014155 for a total amount of Rs 8,44,500 from the IDBI bank,

               Aundh, Pune for the execution of the agreement to sell.
5       Disputes arose between the appellant and the developer which led to the

               appellant instituting a consumer complaint before the National Consumer

               Disputes Redressal Commission1. During the pendency of the complaint,          an


1   “NCDRC”
CA 5970/2021
3
interim order dated 25 September 2014 restrained the developer from creating

               third party interests in the flat. Eventually by an order dated 6 May 2016, the

               complaint was allowed. The appellant was given the option to either execute

               the agreement with the developer, in which event the developer would pay

               compensation in the amount of Rs 10 lakhs, or in the alternative, if the appellant

               was not willing to execute an agreement, the developer was directed to refund

               the entire consideration together with interest at the rate of 12% per annum from

               the date of receipt of each installment until the date of refund along with

               compensation of Rs.10,00,000. The appellant exercised the option of seeking a

               refund of consideration together with interest.
6       The developer issued a cheque on 11 July 2016 for the refund of the

               consideration in terms of the order of the NCDRC. The appellant thereupon

               applied on 16 July 2016 for refund of the stamp duty of Rs 8,44,500 to the

               Collector of Stamps. By a communication dated 5 August 2016, the Collector of

               Stamps forwarded the file to the Deputy Inspector General of Registration with a

               recommendation that the refund should be denied on the ground that the

               appellant had not applied for refund within six months. By an order dated 27

               September 2016, the Deputy Inspector General of Registration rejected the

               application for refund of stamp duty on the ground that the application for

               refund was not made within six months as mandated by
Section 48(3)
of the

               Maharashtra Stamp Act 1958. The appellant filed an appeal before the Chief

               Controlling Revenue Authority under
Section 53(1A)
of the Maharashtra Stamp

               Act 1958. The appeal was dismissed on 2 April 2018 on the same ground. The
CA 5970/2021
4
appellant moved the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in a writ petition

               under
Article 226
of the Constitution challenging the orders dated 27 September

               2016 and 2 April 2018 and for seeking an order directing the refund of the stamp

               duty paid.
7       The High Court by its judgment dated 22 November 2018 dismissed the petition,

               affirming the view of the revenue authorities that the application for refund was

               barred by limitation, not having been preferred within a period of six months

               from the date of the purchase of the e-stamp. The High Court rejected the

               argument that the six month limitation period under
Section 48(3)
would not be

               applicable since the appellant‟s case falls under
Section 52A
of the Act. It was

               observed that
Sections 47
,
48
,
52
and
52A
of the Act will have to be interpreted

               harmoniously, and an application under
Section 52A
will also have to be made

               within six months from the date of purchase of the stamps. The matter has

               accordingly travelled to this Court. Notice was issued on 18 January 2019.


           8   Mr Varun Singh, counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant submits that in

               order to appreciate the circumstances in which the application for refund was

               filed, it is necessary to bear in mind the following events:
(i)    The e-stamp paper was purchased on 16 August 2014;
(ii)   Following the dispute with the developer, the appellant

                              moved the NCDRC which initially granted an interim stay on

                              the creation of third party rights on 25 September 2014 and
CA 5970/2021
5
eventually allowed the complaint on 6 May 2016; and
(iii)   The application for refund was moved on 16 July 2016.
9       In this backdrop, counsel for the appellant submitted that for the following five

               reasons, the application for refund was instituted within a reasonable period and

               cannot be held to be barred either on laches or limitation:
(i)        The dispute in relation to the agreement with the developer

                               was pending adjudication before the NCDRC;
(ii)       The appellant had paid the stamp duty and purchased the e-
stamp paper bona fide in order to facilitate the completion of

                               the transaction pertaining to the residential flat;
(iii)      In order to demonstrate the readiness and willingness of the

                               appellant before the NCDRC, it was necessary for the

                               appellant to continue to retain the e-stamp paper pending the

                               disposal of the proceedings;
(iv)       The e-stamp paper, as a matter of fact, would have been used

                               if the adjudication by the NCDRC had resulted in a resolution of

                               the dispute by removing some of the offending provisions

                               insisted by the developer; and
(v)        Following the order of the NCDRC, the appellant exercised the
CA 5970/2021
6
option to seek a refund in terms of a judicial order of the

                               competent forum.
10     In this backdrop, counsel has relied on the provisions of
Sections 47
,
48
and
52A
of the Maharashtra Stamp Act 1958. It has been submitted that the provisions of
Section 48(3)
which prescribe a period of six months from the date of purchase

               of stamp for filing an application for refund, would have no application where

               the case is not covered by the provisions of
Section 47
. In such a situation, it was

               urged that
Section 52A
would enure to the benefit of the appellant.
In this

               context, counsel for the appellant relied on a judgment of a two-Judge Bench

               of this Court in
Committee-GFIL vs Libra Buildtech Private Limited and Others.2
11     Opposing the submissions of the appellant, Mr Rahul Chitnis, Chief Standing

               Counsel for the State of Maharashtra has urged that:
(i)     The application filed by the appellant was specifically under

                               the provisions of
Section 47
of the Maharashtra Stamp Act 1958;
(ii)    Once the appellant has conceded that the application was

                               filed with reference to
Section 47
, the period of limitation

                               prescribed in
Section 48
would squarely stand attracted;
(iii)   As a matter of fact, the application for refund of stamp duty

                               would be relatable to the provisions of
Section 47(a)
of the Act;
and


2   (2015) 16 SCC 31
CA 5970/2021
7
(iv)   In these circumstances, the appellate authority was justified in

                            coming to the conclusion that the application for refund was

                            barred by limitation.
The rival submissions fall for our analysis.
12      Chapter 5 of the
Maharashtra Stamp Act
1958 is titled “allowances for stamps in

               certain cases”.
Section 47
which deals with “allowance for spoiled stamps”

               provides as follows:
“47.      Allowance for spoiled stamps.- Subject to such rules as
                        may be made by the State Government as to the evidence to
                        be required, or the inquiry to be made, the Collector may on
                        application, made within the period prescribed in
section 48
, and
                        if he is satisfied as to the facts, make allowance for impressed
                        stamps spoiled in the cases hereinafter mentioned, namely:
(a)   the stamp on any paper inadvertently and undesignedly
                              spoiled, obliterated or by error in writing or any other means
                              rendered unfit for the purpose intended before any
                              instrument written thereon is executed by any person;
(b)   the stamp on any document which is written out wholly or in
                              part, but which is not signed or executed by any party
                              thereto;
(c)   the stamp used for an instrument executed by any party
                              thereto which-
(1) has been afterwards found by the party to be absolutely
                              void in law from the beginning;
(1A) has been afterwards found by the Court, to be
                              absolutely void from the beginning under
section 31
of the
                              Specific Relief Act, 1963;
(2) has been afterwards found unfit by reason of any error or
CA 5970/2021
8
mistake therein, for the purpose originally intended;
(3) by reason of the death of any person by whom it is
                    necessary that it should be executed, without having
                    executed the same, or of the refusal of any such person to
                    execute the same, cannot be completed so as to effect
                    the intended transaction in the form proposed;
(4) for want of the execution thereof by some material
                    party, and his inability or refusal to sign the same, is in fact
                    incomplete and insufficient for the purpose for which it was
                    intended;
(5) by reason of the refusal of any person to act under the
                    same, or to advance any money intended to be thereby
                    secured, or by the refusal or non-acceptance of any office
                    thereby granted, totally fails of the intended purpose;
(6) becomes useless in consequence of the transaction
                    intended to be thereby effected by some other instrument
                    between the same parties and bearing a stamp of not less
                    value;
(7) is deficient in value and the transaction intended to be
                    thereby effected had been effected by some other
                    instrument between the same parties and bearing a stamp
                    of not less value;
(8) is inadvertently and undesignedly spoiled, and in lieu
                    whereof another instrument made between the same
                    parties and for the same purpose is executed and duly
                    stamped:
Provided that, in the case of an executed instrument,
                    except that falling under sub-clause (lA), no legal
                    proceeding has been commenced in which the instrument
                    could or would have been given or offered in evidence and
                    that the instrument is given up to be cancelled, or has been
                    already given up to the Court to be cancelled.
Explanation.- The certificate of the Collector under
section 32
that the full duty with which an instrument is chargeable has
               been paid is an impressed stamp within the meaning of this
               section.”
                                                            (emphasis supplied)
CA 5970/2021
9
13
Section 47
is subject to the rules which are made by the State government in

               regard to the evidence to be required or enquiry to be made. The provision

               stipulates that the Collector may make allowance, on an application seeking an

               allowance, for impressed stamps spoiled in the cases which are set out in

               clauses (a) to (c). The opening words of
Section 47
also indicate that the

               application under
Section 47
has to be made within the period which is

               prescribed by
Section 48
. The prefatory words of
Section 47
advert to “impressed

               stamps spoiled in the cases” which are contained in clauses (a) to (c). Clause
(a) deals with a situation where the stamp on any paper is inadvertently or

               undesignedly spoiled, obliterated or rendered unfit for the purpose intended

               either by an error in writing or by any other means before the instrument written

               on it is executed by any person. The object of clause (a) is to ensure that an

               allowance is made for impressed stamps which are spoiled inadvertently or

               unintentionally or where the stamp paper is rendered unfit for the purpose for

               which it was intended. That is why the expressions which have been used in

               clause (a) are spoiled, obliterated, or rendered unfit for the purpose.

       14      Section 47 covers three classes of cases within it: (i) spoiled; (ii) obliterated; and
(iii) unfit for the purpose by an error in writing or „any other means‟. It is

               contended by the State that the case of the appellant would fall within the

               purview of the third category since it was rendered unfit for the purpose, i.e., the

               purpose of purchase of the property. This submission thus places reliance on the

               expression ‘purpose’ used in the provision. The submission does not accord with

               a plain reading of the provision. The expression “any other means” must be read
CA 5970/2021
10
in the context of the words which immediately precede it, namely, “error in

               writing”. The expression “by any other means” would indicate that the legislature

               intended to refer to defacement of a stamp paper in any manner analogous to

               an error in writing the instrument on the stamp paper. “Any other means” refers

               to any other modality by which the stamp paper is rendered unfit for the

               purpose for which it was purchased. Moreover, the prefatory words in
Section

               47
state that the collector must be satisfied that the stamp is „spoiled‟. Clauses
(a) to (c) lay down the cases that are covered within the ambit of the

               expression „spoiled stamps‟. The emphasis of
Section 47
is not on the purpose but

               on unfit stamps. Therefore, a case where the stamp has not been utilized at all

               because it is not needed subsequent to the purchase will not fall within the

               purview of
Section 47
. Only those cases where the stamp is unfit for the purpose

               by an error in writing or any other means would be covered by the provision. It

               is not the case of the appellant that the stamp paper has been spoiled or

               obliterated or rendered unfit for the purpose for which it was required. In the

               present case, it is common ground that the stamp paper is not spoiled but the

               purpose for which the stamp was purchased has become redundant in view of

               the judgment of the NCDRC. Therefore, there would be no occasion to apply

               the provisions of clause (a) of
Section 47
.
15      Clause (c) of
Section 47
begins with the expression “stamp used for an

               instrument executed by any party thereto” and is followed by eight sub clauses.

               In other words, clause (c) of
Section 47
applies only where a stamp paper has

               been used for an instrument which has been executed by one of the parties to
CA 5970/2021
11
the instrument. That is why, for instance sub clause (2) refers to the instrument

               being subsequently found unfit either by reason of an error or mistake for the

               purpose for which it was originally intended. Sub clause (4) adverts to a situation

               where the instrument has not been executed by a material party and by his

               inability or refusal to sign it renders the instrument incomplete and insufficient for

               the purpose for which it was intended. Clause (c) of
Section 47
has no

               application to the facts of the present case since it is common ground that the

               stamp was not used for an instrument already executed by any party thereto.

       16      Now it is in this backdrop that it becomes necessary to advert to
Section 48
of

               the Act.
Section 48
provides as follows:
“48. Application for relief under
section 47
when to be made. - The
                       application for relief under
section 47
shall be made within the
                       following period, that is to say.-
(1) in the cases mentioned in clause (c) (5), within six months of
                       the date of the instruments:
Provided that where an Agreement to sell immovable property,
                       on which stamp duty is paid under
Article 25
of the Schedule I, is
                       presented for registration under the provisions of the
Registration
                       Act, 1908
and if the seller refuses to deliver possession of the
                       immovable property which is the subject matter of such
                       agreement the application may be made within two years of the
                       date of the instrument [or where such agreement is cancelled by
                       a registered cancellation deed on the grounds of, dispute
                       regarding the premises concerned, inadequate finance, financial
                       dispute in terms of agreed consideration, or afterwards found to
                       be illegal construction or suppression of any other material fact,
                       the application may be made within two years from the date of
                       such registered cancellation deed;
(2) in the case when for unavoidable circumstances any
                       instrument for which another instrument has been substituted
                       cannot be given up to be cancelled, the application may be
CA 5970/2021
12
made within six months after the date of execution of the
                       substituted instrument.
(3) in any other case, within six months from the date of purchase
                       of stamp.”
17
Section 48
begins with the statement that the application for relief under
Section

               47
shall be made within the periods which are indicated in clauses (1), (2) and

               (3). In other words, the periods of limitation which are prescribed in clauses (1),

               (2) and (3) are in respect of those cases which are governed by
Section 47
.

               Clause (1) stipulates that for cases governed by clause (c)(5), the period within

               which the application has to be filed will be six months of the date of the

               instrument.   Clause   (2)   specifies   that   in   case   where   for   unavoidable

               circumstances, any instrument for which another instrument has been

               substituted cannot be given up to be cancelled, in such an event, the

               application may be made within six months after the date of execution of the

               substituting instrument. Clause (3) which is a residuary provision provides for a

               limitation of six months from the date of the purchase of stamp.


       18      The revenue authorities rejected the application filed by the appellant on the

               ground that the application was not filed within six months from the date of the

               purchase of the stamp paper, treating the case to fall within the residuary

               provision in
Section 48
of the Act. This view has been accepted by the Single

               Judge of the Bombay High Court. What this view misses is that
Section 48
in its

               entirety applies only to those cases where the application for relief is governed
CA 5970/2021
13
by
Section 47
. If the application for refund is not with reference to the provisions

               of
Section 47
, the period of limitation in
Section 48
clearly has no application.

               Since the application of the appellant does not fall within the purview of any of

               the clauses in
Section 47
, the 6 month limitation period prescribed in
Section 48
would not be applicable to the application for allowance filed by the appellant.

       19      Having observed that the application of the appellant for allowance is not

               covered by the
Section 47
, it is imperative to determine if it falls within the

               purview of any other provisions of the Act.
Section 49
provides that allowance

               can be made without any limit of time for stamp papers that are used as printed

               forms of instruments by any banker or company, if the forms are not required by

               the banks or the companies. Thus, the application of the appellant is not

               covered by
section 49
.
Section 50
states that allowance for misused stamps can

               be made. The provision brings within the purview of the term „misused stamps‟,

               the stamps of greater value than required or stamps of description other than

               that prescribed by any rules or stamps that are useless since the instrument is

               written in contravention of the provisions or where a stamp has been used when

               the instrument is not charged with stamp duty.
Section 50
only covers those

               cases where inadvertent mistakes are made in the stamp paper. Therefore, the

               case of the appellant is not covered by
Section 50
since there is no mistake in

               the e-stamp, be it with regard to the value or description.
Section 51
lays down

               the procedure for seeking allowance for cases that fall under
Section 47
,
49
and
50
and is thus of no application to the appellant‟s claim.
20      Now it is important to refer to
Section 52
of the Act which provides as follows:
CA 5970/2021
14
“52. Allowance for stamps not required for use: When any person
                       is possessed of a stamp or stamps which have not been, spoiled
                       or rendered unfit or useless for the purpose intended, but for which
                       he has no immediate use, the Collector shall repay to such person
                       the value of such stamp or stamps in money, deducting
                       [thereform such amount as may be prescribed by rules made in
                       this behalf by the State Government] upon such person delivering
                       up the same to be cancelled, and proving to the Collector's
                       satisfaction,—
(a) that such stamp or stamps were purchased by such
                             person with a bona fide intention to use them ; and
(b) that he has paid the full price thereof ; and
(c) that they were so purchased within the period of 1[six
                             months] next preceding the date on which they were so
                             delivered :
Provided that, where the person is a licensed vendor of stamp,
                       the Collector may, if he thinks fit, make the repayment of the sum
                       actually paid by the vendor without any such deduction as
                       aforesaid.”
                                                                       (emphasis supplied)
Section 52
deals with provision of allowance in case of stamps that are not

               required for use. There are two kinds of stamps that are not required for use. The

               first is where the stamp is spoiled, as covered by
Section 47
of the Act. The

               second is where the stamp is not spoiled but the stamp is not needed since the

               purchaser has no use of it.
Section 52
specifically excludes the first of category

               since it is already covered by
Section 47
. The provision only applies to the class in

               the second category. Thus,
Section 52
covers stamps that are not spoiled but

               which are of no use to the applicant by the occurrence of any subsequent

               event that renders the purpose of purchase of stamp void or nugatory. For the

               application of
Section 52A
, the applicant must have purchased the stamp on

               the payment of full price, with a bona fide intention to use it. However, within six

               months from the purchase of the stamp, the purpose of the purchase has not
CA 5970/2021
15
been fulfilled. Such a situation can arise in multiple circumstances. For example,

               a person may have obtained a stamp paper for purchasing a building.
However, before the agreement of sale could be executed, the building turns to

               shambles after an earthquake hits the area. In such a case, the stamp paper

               has no use. This may also cover a case where the seller has taken back his

               consent to sell the property after the purchase of the stamp paper. In such

               cases, the stamp purchased will not have any use since the purpose for which it

               was purchased could not materialize.
21      It could be argued that the use of the words, “for which he has no immediate

               use” in
Section 52
would only covers cases where the purpose for the purchase

               of the stamp is still valid but the execution of the purpose if delayed and not

               „immediate‟. Such an interpretation, however, is erroneous in view of the holistic

               reading of the provision. The use of the phrase „immediate‟ must be read in the

               context of the limitation period prescribed by the provision. Since a six month

               limitation period has been imposed in
Section 52
for the cases that fall within its

               purview, the use of the phrase „no immediate use‟ should be interpreted to

               mean either the permanent abandonment of the purpose or a delay (of more

               than six months from the purchase of the stamp) in the execution of the

               purpose.
22      However,
Section 52
would only apply to those cases where the applicant had

               knowledge that the stamp purchased was not be required for use within six

               months from the date of purchase. The provision cannot be arbitrarily applied to

               cases where the purchaser of the stamp had no knowledge that the stamp
CA 5970/2021
16
would not be required for use within six months from the purchase of the stamp.

               In the instant case, the appellant had no knowledge of the fact that the stamp

               was not needed within six months from the purchase of it. He was in a bona fide

               contest over his rights with the builder. Therefore, the case of the appellant

               would not fall under
Section 52
of the Act as well.
23      It has been contended by the counsel for the appellant that the case of the

               appellant falls within the purview of
Section 52A
of the Act. Now, it becomes

               necessary to advert to the provisions of
Section 52A
which provides as follows:
“52A. Allowance for duty.- (1) Notwithstanding anything
                       contained in
sections 47
,
50
,
51
and
52
, when payment of duty is
                       made by stamps or in cash as provided for under sub-section (3)
                       of
section 10
or
section 10A
or section 108, and when the amount
                       of duty paid exceeds rupees one lakh, the concerned Collector
                       shall not make allowance for the stamps, or the cash amount
                       paid under the Challans, which are spoilt or misused or not
                       required for use, but shall, after making necessary enquiries,
                       forward the application with his remarks thereon to,-
(a) the Additional Controller of stamps for the cases handled
                            by the Collectors working in the Mumbai City District and
                            Mumbai Suburban District; and
(b) the concerned Deputy Inspector General of Registration
                            and Deputy Controller of Stamps of the division for the cases
                            handled by the Collectors other than those mentioned in
                            clause (a).
(2) The Additional Controller of Stamps or, the concerned Deputy
                       Inspector General of Registration and Deputy Controller of Stamps
                       of the division, as the case, may, be, on receiving such
                       application consider the same and decide whether such
                       allowance shall be given or not, and accordingly shall, grant the
                       same, if the amount of allowance does not exceed rupees ten
                       lakh, and if, it exceeds rupees ten lakh, shall submit such
                       application, with his remarks thereon to the Chief Controlling
                       Revenue Authority for decision.
CA 5970/2021
17
(3) The Chief Controlling Revenue Authority on receiving such
                       application shall decide on merit whether such allowance shall
                       be given or not, and pass such order thereon as he thinks just and
                       proper, which shall be final and shall not be questioned in any
                       court or before any authority.”
24
Section 52A
is prefaced with a non obstante clause which operates

               notwithstanding anything contained in
Sections 47
,
50
,
51
and
52
.
Section 52A
stipulates that when the amount of stamp duty paid exceeds Rs 5 lakhs, the

               concerned Collector shall not make an allowance for the stamps or the cash

               amount paid under the challans but shall after making necessary enquiries

               forward the application with his remarks to the Additional Collector of Stamps

               (for cases handled by the Collectors working in the Mumbai City District and

               Mumbai Sub-Urban Districts) and the concerned Deputy Inspector General of

               Registration and Deputy Controlling of Stamps for cases in other regions.


       25      In view of
Section 52A(2)
of the Act, the Additional Collector of Stamps or the

               DIG as the case may be, on assessing the application has to decide whether

               allowance should be given or not and shall grant it if the amount of allowance

               does not exceed Rs 20 lakhs. If the amount exceeds Rs 20 lakhs, the application

               has to be submitted to the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority. The Chief

               Controlling Revenue Authority on receiving the application is required to decide

               on merits whether or not the allowance should be given. The provisions of
Section 52A
were substituted with effect from 1 May 2006 by
Maharashtra Act
12 of 2006. By an Amendment, the amount of Rs 5 lakhs which has been

               specified in sub-Section (1) was enhanced from Rs 1 lakh by
Maharashtra Act
20
CA 5970/2021
18
of 2015 with effect from 24 April 2015. Likewise in sub-Section (2), the amount of

               Rs 20 lakhs stands enhanced from the earlier amount of Rs 10 lakhs by the same

               amending provision.
26      The provisions of
Section 52A
as noticed above have overriding force and

               effect, inter alia, on the provisions of
Sections 47
,
50
,
51
and
52
. It is pertinent to

               note that the non obstante clause does not apply to
Sections 48
and
49
of the

               Act. While
Section 48
is a limitation clause applicable to cases that are covered

               by
Section 47
,
Section 49
applies to a Corporation where no limitation period

               has been prescribed.
Section 52A
can be applied to the appellant‟s case only if

               the provision is interpreted to override the limitation period
laid down in
the

               preceding provisions and if it is regarded as a residual substantive provision that

               would cover all cases that are not covered by any of the provisions. We will now

               consider the validity of such an interpretation.
27      If
Section 52A
was enacted with the intent to override the limitation prescribed

               by
Sections 50
,
51
and
52
then
Section 48
ought to have also been included

               specifically since
Section 48
is the limitation provision applicable to
Section 47
.
Section 48
is not incorporated in the non-obstante provision of
section 52
A. This

               is hence intrinsic material to indicate that the purpose of the non-obstante

               clause in
Section 52A
was        to override the jurisdiction of the adjudicating

               authority (i.e the Collector) under
Sections 47
,
50
,
51
and
52
to decide the

               claims for allowances.
Section 52A
specifically divests the power of the Collector

               to decide the claims of allowance falling within those provisions and vests the

               power to other authorities if the payment of stamp duty exceeds Rupees five
CA 5970/2021
19
lakhs. In those cases, though the application is to be made to the Collector, he

               will have no adjudicatory capacity. The Collector must forward the application

               to the concerned authority as mentioned in
Section 52A
along with remarks and

               such authority would have the power to decide the claim. The interpretation

               that
Section 52A
only overrides the authority of the Collector in adjudicating the

               case is evident since the provision does not override
Section 49
where the

               adjudicating officer is the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority. In such a case,
Section 52A
cannot be considered as a residual clause by applying it to classes

               of cases that do not fall within the purview of any other provisions. A contrary

               interpretation would create an artificial class based on economic capacity, as

               cases where the stamp duty paid exceeds Rupees five lakhs will alone be

               adjudicated without application of any limitation period as a residual case,

               while cases falling within the same class but where stamp duty paid is less than

               Rupees five lakhs cannot take recourse to the provision. It is an established

               principle of interpretation that an interpretation that furthers the constitutionality

               of a provision will have to be undertaken. An interpretation which leads to an

               invidious discrimination must be eschewed. Thus, the intendment of
Section 52A
was neither to cover the applications that are not brought under any of the

               preceding substantive clauses nor to override the limitation clauses.

       28      Evidently, and for the reasons that we have indicated above, the application

               filed by the appellant did not fall within the ambit of
Sections 47
,
52
and
52A
. It

               is true that the application for refund was titled with reference to the provisions

               of
Section 47
. But, it is well settled that a reference of a wrong statutory provision,
CA 5970/2021
20
cannot oust the citizen of an entitlement to refund which otherwise follows in

               terms of a statutory provision.
29      In the present case, the stamp paper was purchased bona fide in view of the

               agreement to sell which was to be executed by the appellant with the

               developer. There was a dispute with the developer which led to the institution of

               the proceedings before the NCDRC. There was nothing untoward in the

               conduct of the appellant and certainly no unreasonable delay on the part of

               the appellant in awaiting the outcome of the proceedings. The NCDRC allowed

               the complaint giving the option to the appellant of either going ahead with the

               agreement along with an award of compensation or, in the alternative, to seek

               a refund with interest. The appellant having exercised the latter option applied

               within two months from the order of the NCDRC for the grant of refund. The

               conduct of the appellant, therefore, cannot be held to be unreasonable nor

               was there any intentional or wanton delay on the part of the appellant in

               applying for a refund of stamp duty. Such an application must be filed within a

               reasonable period.
30      In
Committee-GFIL
(supra), a two-judge Bench of this Court was dealing with the

               issue of limitation prescribed in the
Indian Stamp Act
1899. In this case, an

               auction sale of immovable properties was held by a committee constituted by

               this Court. Successful bidders deposited with the committee, the entire sale

               consideration along with the stamp duty. However, the transaction failed due to

               reasons beyond the control of the parties. The Court cancelled the transaction
CA 5970/2021
21
and directed the committee to refund the sale consideration with interest and

               permitted the purchasers to approach the State Government for refund of the

               stamp duty. The applications of the auction-purchasers seeking refund of stamp

               duty was rejected on the ground that the applications were time-barred. An

               application against the rejection of the refund applications was filed before this

               Court. This Court allowed the application on three grounds: (i) the transaction

               which was Court-monitored, could not be fulfilled for reasons beyond the

               control of the auction-purchasers. No act of the Court should prejudice a

               person; (ii) in view of the principle of restitution embodied in
Section 65
of the

               Contract Act, any advantage received by a person under a void contract or a

               contract that becomes void is bound to be restored; and (iii) in light of equity

               and justice, the six months limitation period prescribed in
Section 50
of the Indian

               Stamp Act 1899 must be read to mean six months from the date of the order of

               this Court.
31      We are conscious of the fact that as a general rule of law, the right to refund is a

               statutory creation. A refund can be sought in terms envisaged by statute. As

               discussed above, the case of the appellant is not specifically barred by any

               substantive provision. It is an established principle that this Court while exercising

               its power under
Article 142
of Constitution must not ignore and override statutory

               provisions but must rather take note of the express statutory provisions and

               exercise its discretion with caution.3 Therefore, if a statute prescribes a limitation

               period, this Court must be slow to interfere with the delay under
Article 142.
3AR Anthulay v. RS Nayak, (1988) 2 SCC 602;
Union Carbide Corporation v. Union of India
, (1991) 4 SCC 584;
Supreme Court
Bar Association v. Union of India
, (1998) 4 SCC 409.
CA 5970/2021
22
However, in the case of an eventuality such as the instant case where the facts

               of the case are not covered by the statute, this Court under
Article 142
will have

               the power to do complete justice by condoning the delay. We are of the view

               that since the delay in filling the application for refund in the instant case was

               due to the prolonged proceedings before the NCDRC, the application cannot

               be rejected on the ground of delay. A litigant has no control over judicial

               delays. A rejection of the application for refund would violate equity, justice and

               fairness where the applicant is made to suffer the brunt of judicial delay.

               Therefore, this is a fit case for the exercise of the power under
Article 142
of the

               Constitution.
32      For the above reasons, we       allow the appeal and set aside the impugned

               judgment and order of the learned Single Judge of the Bombay High Court

               dated 22 November 2018. As a consequence, we direct that the appellant

               would be entitled to a refund of the stamp duty which was paid at the time of

               the purchase of the e-stamp paper, conditional on the appellant returning the

               e-stamp paper to the Collector of Stamps, Mumbai. The refund shall be

               processed within a period of one month of the delivery of the e-stamp paper to

               the Collector. The appellant would be entitled to interest at the rate of 6% per

               annum from 16 July 2016 until the date of refund. In the circumstances of the

               case, there shall be no order as to costs.
CA 5970/2021
23
33      Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
.........….....….......………………........J.
                                                              [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                                           ….....….....….......………………........J.
                                                            [B V Nagarathna]

       New Delhi;
September 24, 2021
       CKB