[Cites
14
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sanjay Prakash vs Union Of India on 23 May, 2025
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
2025 INSC 779



                                                                REPORTABLE


                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 13104 OF 2024


                         SANJAY PRAKASH & ORS.              APPELLANT(S)


                                                   VERSUS



                         UNION OF INDIA & ORS.              RESPONDENT(S)

                                                 WITH

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 13105 OF 2024

                                                 WITH

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 13106 OF 2024

                                                 WITH

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 13107 OF 2024

                                                 WITH

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 13108 OF 2024
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
KAVITA PAHUJA
Date: 2025.05.23
17:53:14 IST
Reason:
                                   AND

                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 13110 OF 2024


                            JUDGMENT
UJJAL BHUYAN, J.
Substantive grievance in all the civil appeals being

identical, those were heard together and are being disposed of

by this common judgment and order.
2.           All the civil appeals arise out of the common

judgment and order dated 27.07.2020 passed by the High

Court of Delhi (High Court) disposing of the following writ

petitions:
(i)     W.P.(C) No. 12052 of 2019 (
Tarun Kumar

                   Banjaree & Ors. Vs. Union of India & Ors.
);
(ii) W.P.(C) No. 12751 of 2019 (
Sanjay Prakash &

                   Ors. Vs. Union of India & Ors.
);
(iii) W.P.(C) No. 12875 of 2019 (
Mahendra Singh Deo

                   Vs. Union of India & Ors.
);
2
(iv) W.P.(C) No. 13014 of 2019 (
Radha Mohan Meena

              & Ors. Vs. Union of India & Ors.
); and
(v) W.P.(C) No. 13588 of 2019 (
Sudhir Kumar Singh

              and Ors. Vs. Union of India & Ors.
).
3.         It may be mentioned that the above five writ

petitions were filed before the High Court by personnel

belonging to different services viz. Central Reserve Police Force

(CRPF), Border Security Force (BSF), Sashastra Seema Bal

(SSB), Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) and Central Industrial

Security Force (CISF), collectively known as Central Armed

Police Forces (CAPFs). In all the five writ petitions, the following

reliefs were sought:
(i) for a direction to the Union of India in respect of

           each of the CAPFs to fill up all the additional posts

           created pursuant to the cadre review (CR) of the year

           2016 as per the existing recruitment rules which

           provide for certain percentage of posts at each level

           upto Senior Administrative Grade being filled up by

           way of deputation;
3
(ii) for a direction to the respondents to amend the

                         recruitment rules of each service i.e. CAPFs by

                         including various attributes as required by the Office

                         Memorandum dated        19.11.2009   issued   by the

                         Department of Personnel and Training, Government of

                         India (DoPT) read with the related Office Memoranda

                         dated   24.03.2009,   24.04.2009,    15.12.2009   and

                         08.05.2018 by providing that all posts upto Senior

                         Administrative Grade should be filled up by way of

                         promotion only and not by way of deputation;
(iii) thereafter, to conduct cadre review of Group-A

                         officers of each cadre by treating each service as

                         Organized Group-A Service (OGAS).
4.
In support of the prayers made, appellants relied

          upon the report of the Sixth Central Pay Commission, OM

          dated 19.11.2009 of the DoPT and the decision of this Court

          in
Union of India Vs. Harananda1
by which the decision of the

          High Court in
G.J. Singh Vs. Union of India2
has been affirmed.
1
(2019) 14 SCC 126
2
2015 SCC Online Del 11803
4
5.        At the outset, let us examine the report of the Sixth

Central Pay Commission which was of March, 2008. The report

indicated that mandate of the Sixth Central Pay Commission

was not only to evolve a proper pay package for the government

employees but also to make recommendations rationalizing the

governmental structure with emphasis on accountability,

responsibility and assimilation of technology etc. The Sixth

Central Pay Commission recommended that the next cadre

review   exercise   should       take   into   consideration   its

recommendations.     The     report     indicated   that   despite

recommendations of the earlier Central Pay Commissions and

cadre reviews carried out earlier, all the services still had a

great degree of stagnation at the level of Senior Administrative

Grade. Thereafter, the Sixth Central Pay Commission made

certain recommendations to ensure service progression of

officers belonging to General Civil Services (GCS) Group-A

which are not part of any Organized Group-A Service (OGAS)

having individual recruitment rules. As a matter of fact, as per

the report of the Sixth Central Pay Commission, Group A civil
5
posts in the Central Government can be broadly categorized

into two: those classified as GCS Group A and OGAS.
6.        The aforesaid recommendations of the Sixth Central

Pay Commission were accepted by the Government of India.

DoPT considered a number of representations concerning

attributes and definition of OGAS on whom the benefit of Non-

Functional Financial Upgradation (NFFU) was conferred. DoPT

also   considered   several       representations   by   personnel

belonging to General Civil Services (GCS) Group-A claiming the

status of OGAS and conferment of the benefit of NFFU.
7.        This led DoPT to issue OM dated 19.11.2009

observing that the difference between an OGAS and other

services/cadres had not been fully appreciated. Therefore, to

remove any doubt, DoPT through the said OM dated

19.11.2009 spelt out the attributes of an OGAS. Relevant

portion of the OM dated 19.11.2009 of the DoPT reads as

under:
6
(i) The highest cadre post in such services is not below
the level of Rs. 37400-67000 plus Grade pay of Rs. 10000
(SAG);
(ii) Such services have all the standard grades namely,
Rs. 15600-39100 plus Grade pay Rs. 5400 (JTS), Rs.
15600-39100 plus Grade pay Rs. 6600 (STS), Rs. 15600-
39100 plus Grade pay Rs. 7600/Rs. 37400-67000 plus
Grade pay of Rs. 8700 (JAG/NFSG) and Rs. 37400-67000
plus Grade pay of Rs. 10000 (SAG);
(iii) At least 50% of the vacancies in Junior Time Scale
(JTS) in such services are required to be filled by direct
recruitment;
(iv) All the vacancies above JTS and upto SAG level in
such services are filled up by promotion from the next
lower grade;
(v) While a service may comprise one or more distinct
cadre(s), all such cadres should be governed by
composite Service Rules facilitating horizontal and
vertical movement of officers of a particular cadre at least
upto SAG level. The cadre posts of an Organised Service
expressly belong to that service. The posts not belonging
to any service are classified as General Central Service
and, therefore, an Organised Group A Service cannot
have posts/grades classified as General Central Service;
and
(vi) Such a service consists of two distinct components,
namely Regular Duty Posts and Reserves. The Reserves
are generally of four types, viz. (i) Probationary Reserves,
7
(ii)   Leave   Reserve,    (iii)    Training   Reserve    and   (iv)
     Deputation Reserve. The various types of reserves are
     usually created and accounted for in the Junior Time
     Scale.
Note: The existing Organised Group A Services have
     evolved over a period of time and may have minor
     deviations     owing      to       their   respective    functional
     requirements. The services already declared as such need
     not, however, be reviewed.
2. The above are certain basic attributes of an Organised
     Group A Service. There is, however, nothing to suggest
     that the services/cadres fulfilling these criteria would be
     automatically conferred the status of an Organised
     Group A Service. An Organised Group A Service is one
     which is constituted consciously as such by the Cadre
     Controlling Authorities and such a service can be
     constituted only through the established procedures.
8.           Members of the CAPFs also represented that each of

the CAPFs is an OGAS and, therefore, members of the CAPFs

were entitled to the status and benefits associated with an

OGAS including the benefit of NFFU. However, representations

of the CAPFs were rejected.
9.           This led to filing of a batch of writ petitions before

the High Court. Vide the judgment and order dated 03.09.2015
8
High Court allowed the writ petitions (
G.J. Singh Vs. Union of

          India
).     Respondents     were    directed   to   issue   requisite

          notification granting the benefit of NFFU to the appellants

          within eight weeks.
10.            Aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment and order of

          the High Court, Union of India preferred civil appeals before

          this Court. Several other civil appeals were also filed by the

          Union of India against similar judgments and order of the High

          Court including the judgment and order dated 04.12.2012 in
Harananda Vs. Union of India3
.
11.            All the civil appeals came to be disposed of by this

          Court vide the judgment and order dated 05.02.2019 in
Harananda
(supra). There were two groups of appeals. One

          group pertained to declaration of Railway Protection Force

          (RPF) as an OGAS within a definite timeframe with further

          direction to extend all the benefits conferred on OGAS to RPF.

          The other set of appeals dealt with the grievance of CAPFs

          relating to rejection of the request for grant of NFFU in respect
3
2012 SCC OnLine Del 6001
9
of which the High Court had directed the respondents to issue

requisite    notification   granting   benefit   of   NFFU     as

recommended by the Sixth Central Pay Commission.

11.1.       Insofar the first group of appeals are concerned, this

Court examined the OM dated 20.11.2003 of the DOPT and

considered as to whether under the said OM an ‘in principle’

decision was taken for constitution of the RPF as an OGAS.

High Court had treated the said OM as an ‘in principle’

decision for constitution of the RPF as an OGAS, thereafter

directing further steps for cadre restructuring of RPF and also

to finalize the service rules with reference to the RPF as an

OGAS. This Court noted that from the judgment and order of

the High Court it was evident that the same was a consent

order. This Court further noted that it was never disputed by

any of the respondents that the OM dated 20.11.2003 was not

an ‘in principle’ decision of the DOPT for constitution of the

RPF as an OGAS. Therefore, this Court held that it was not

open to the Union of India to challenge the judgment of the

High Court whereby further direction was issued by the High
10
Court that necessary cadre structure of RPF as also the service

rules should be finalized with reference to RPF being an OGAS.

This Court affirmed the aforesaid judgment and order of the

High Court and also found that even on merits, Union of India

had no case. This Court declared that RPF was rightly treated

and considered as an OGAS and that the High Court was fully

justified in directing Union of India and others to take further

steps for cadre restructuring of the RPF and to finalize the

service rules with reference to the RPF being an OGAS.

11.2.     Insofar the second group of appeals are concerned,

this Court noted that the High Court had allowed the challenge

of the appellants by quashing OM dated 28.10.2013 and the

related letters whereby their request for grant of NFFU was

rejected whereafter the High Court directed the respondents to

issue requisite notification granting the benefit of NFFU as

recommended by the Sixth Central Pay Commission to the

appellants belonging to the CAPFs.
11.3.     This Court noted that the issue in the aforesaid

appeals was non-grant of NFFU to the appellants serving in
11
CRPF. NFFU was being denied solely on the ground that CRPF

is not an OGAS. According to the respondents out of the six

attributes which are required to be considered for treating

and/or considering an organization as an OGAS, CRPF did not

satisfy attributes (iv) and (vi) and also on the ground that the

Sixth Central Pay Commission did not recommend grant of

NFFU to CAPFs.
11.4.        This Court examined the above controversy in the

following manner:
23.5. So far as the submission made on behalf of the
        appellants that CAPFs are not an Organised Group A
        Services as they do not satisfy two attributes out of six
        attributes is concerned, it is required to be noted that
        the OM dated 19-11-2009 specifically notes that there
        may be certain “minor deviations” from the attributes
        listed therein and also to the extent wherein it states
        that even if the listed criteria are fulfilled, the same
        would not automatically confer the status of an
        Organised Group A Service. Thus, as rightly observed by
        the High Court in the impugned judgment and order,
        fulfilling/compliance of the attributes shall not be given
        too much weightage while deciding on the status of
        CAPFs.
12
23.6. At this stage, it is required to be noted that while
considering the case of ITBP, the Department of
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, Government of India,
it has been referred to in the additional affidavit of the
Director, DoPT that since ITBP has no proper structure
it is not possible to compare it with other Organised
Services like BSF, CRPF. Thus, the Government itself
has itself admitted way back on 21-10-1986 that BSF
and CRPF are Organised Services and have, in fact,
used them as examples of Organised Services. At the
cost of repetition, it is to be noted that thereafter the
Government has, through its own process, classified the
BSF, CRPF and ITBP as being on a par with each other
in the 1986, 1993 and 2010 Monographs, wherein the
aforesaid CAPFs have been shown as a part of the same
Group A Central Civil Services.
23.7. From the impugned judgments and orders passed
by the High Court, it appears that by passing the
impugned judgments and orders and holding that
CAPFs are Organised Group A Central Civil Services, the
High Court has considered the report of the Second
Administrative Reform Committee which included in
Table 4.1 a list of all Organised Group A Central Services
in the Government of India in which the Paramilitary
Forces such as BSF, CISF, SRPF and ITBP are shown at
Sl. Nos. 22 to 25 respectively and the source at the
bottom of the Table is stated to be the DoPT itself.
13
23.8. Considering     the     aforesaid    facts     and
        circumstances and the material on record, which came
        to be considered by the High Court in detail, it cannot
        be said that CAPFs do not constitute Organised Group
        A Central Civil Services/Group A Central Civil Services.
11.5.        Thus, this Court opined that it cannot be said that

CAPFs do not constitute OGAS. Insofar the other ground that

was urged that CRPF is denied NFFU because the Sixth

Central Pay Commission did not grant NFFU to CAPFs, this

Court held thus:
24. Now, so far as another ground on which CRPF are
        denied NFFU that the 6th Central Pay Commission did
        not grant NFFU to CAPFs is concerned, it is required to
        be borne in mind that the Central Pay Commission, as
        such, is not authorised to define “Organised Services” or
        to   grant   such    status   to   any    service.   The
        recommendations would be made by the Central Pay
        Commission on the basis of the information submitted
        to it by the various Departments. It appears from the
        material on record that right from 1986 onwards, in
        various Monographs CAPFs were included in the list of
        Group A Central Civil Services. The Government took
        “U” turn and a stand was taken that CAPFs are not
        Organised Group A Central Services and, therefore, on
        the basis of such a stand, the Department must have
14
given the information to the Central Pay Commission
        and, therefore, the 6th Pay Commission did not
        recommend NFFU to CAPFs. Therefore, merely because
        the 6th Pay Commission did not recommend to grant
        NFFU to CAPFs — Group A Officers in PB-III and PB-IV,
        the Group A Officers in PB-III and PB-IV cannot be
        denied NFFU, which otherwise is granted to all the
        Officers of Group A Central Civil Services.
11.6.        Therefore this Court held that merely because the

Sixth Central Pay Commission did not recommend grant of

NFFU to CAPFs, the same could not be denied.
11.7.        Thereafter, this Court held that the High Court was

fully justified in directing the respondents to issue requisite

notification granting NFFU to the CAPFs and concluded as

under:
24.2. Considering the aforesaid facts and circumstances
        and the objects and reasons of the grant of NFFU as
        recommended by the 6th Pay Commission, when the High
        Court has observed and consequently directed that the
        officers in PB-III and PB-IV in the CAPFs are Organised
        Group A Service and, therefore, entitled to the benefits
        recommended by the 6th Pay Commission by way of
        NFFU and thereby has directed the appellants to issue
15
a requisite notification granting the benefits of NFFU as
      recommended by the 6th Central Pay Commission, it
      cannot be said that the High Court has committed any
      error which calls for the interference by this Court. We
      are in complete agreement with the view taken by the
      High Court.
12.        Relying on the decision in
Harananda
(supra) and

seeking parity with RPF, the related writ petitions were filed

before the High Court seeking the reliefs as indicated above.

High Court noted that it did not find any discussion or

consideration by this Court on the aspect of the need for

deputation at some posts in CAPFs or the qualifying term on

each level of the cadre.
Therefore, High Court concluded that
Harananda
(supra) was not concerned with elimination of

deputation existing in CAPFs but was concerned solely with

grant of NFFU. High Court was of the view that no direction

could be issued for restructuring of the recruitment rules of

the CAPFs by complying with attributes (iv) and (vi) of the DoPT

OM dated 19.11.2009. For this, High Court relied upon the

contention of the appellants in the earlier round of writ

petitions that notwithstanding CAPFs not fulfilling the said
16
attributes they were entitled to the benefit of NFFU. Besides

that High Court also found that there was no similarity

between RPF and other CAPFs. As such, question of

discrimination did not arise. High Court further noted that

respondents      had   set   out    numerous   reasons justifying

deputation in CAPFs but appellants did not seek any relief on

that ground. Therefore, High Court refrained from adjudicating

on this issue.
12.1.     High Court thereafter considered the OM dated

19.11.2009 as well as the related OMs and noted that OM

dated 19.11.2009 was not for amendment of the recruitment

rules of any service. Moreover, as per the said OM, CAPFs did

not qualify as OGAS. Referring to the decisions in
G.J. Singh
(supra) and
Harananda
(supra), this Court observed that

members of CAPFs have been held entitled to the benefit of

NFFU. High Court held that recruitment rules of CAPFs are not

required to be amended as a consequence of the said

judgments. OM dated 15.12.2009 was in reference to the

earlier OM dated 24.03.2009 whereby guidelines were issued
17
for   amendment    of   service   rules/recruitment   rules   to

incorporate the changes arising out of the Sixth Central Pay

Commission recommendations including bringing uniformity

in eligibility criteria across all OGAS for promotions. Besides

directing initiation of action for amendment of service rules

qua eligibility criteria for promotion to Senior Administrative

Grade level and Higher Administrative Grade level, this Court

noted that CAPFs are being treated as OGAS but only for the

purpose of NFFU.
Neither from the judgment of the High Court

in
G.J. Singh
(supra) nor of this Court in
Harananda
(supra), a

directive to declare CAPFs as OGAS for all purposes

whatsoever is discernible. Adverting to the DoPT OM dated

24.04.2009, High Court was of the view that the said OM was

also on the subject of granting NFFU to OGAS in furtherance

of the Sixth Central Pay Commission recommendations.

12.2.     It was thereafter that the High Court considered the

DoPT OM dated 08.05.2018 which was in reference to the

earlier OM dated 31.12.2010 as per which recruitment rules

should be reviewed once in five years with a view to affecting
18
such changes as have become necessary to bring the

recruitment rules in conformity with the changed position with

further direction to immediately undertake the exercise for

review of existing service rules/recruitment rules which had

not been amended in the last five years.
12.3.         Insofar challenge to cadre review is concerned, High

Court declined to enter into the said controversy because as

per the OMs dated 31.12.2010 and 08.05.2018, cadre review

is required to be carried out in every five years; the last cadre

review being carried out in the year 2016. The next cadre

review was due in the year 2021. Therefore, High Court was of

the view that all that was required to be done was to issue a

direction to the respondents for carrying out the next cadre

review in which an opportunity of hearing should be given to

the cadre officers of CAPFs. Accordingly, all the writ petitions

were disposed of in the following manner:
(I)   By permitting the members of each Central Armed
              Police Force to, if so desire, make comprehensive
              representation(s) to the Ministry of Home Affairs, for
              amendment of the respective Recruitment Rules of
19
each Central Armed Police Force including qua Cadre
       Structure, Residency, Deputation etc.
(II)   By directing the Ministry of Home Affairs to, in
       compliance of the DoPT OMs dated 31st December,
       2010 and 8th May, 2018, immediately undertake the
       exercise for review of existing Recruitment Rules of
       each Central Armed Police Force, also taking into
       consideration the representation(s), if any, received
       from the members of the Central Armed Police Forces
       and after giving them an opportunity of being heard
       and to place its decision in this regard before the
       Department of Personnel and Training.
(III) By directing the Department of Personnel and Training
       to, immediately on receipt of decision from the Ministry
       of Home Affairs qua review of Recruitment Rules of
       respective Central Armed Police Forces, take necessary
       action thereon;
(IV) By permitting the petitioners to make comprehensive
       representation(s) qua each Central Armed Police Force
       to the Department of Personnel and Training, qua the
       Cadre Review due in the year 2021 including as to the
       terms of reference if any thereof.
(V)    By directing the Department of Personnel and Training
       to ensure timely commencement of Cadre Review
       exercise due in the year 2021 and to, in the terms of
       reference qua Cadre Review for Central Armed Police
       Forces, consider incorporating the representation(s), if
20
any, made by the members of each Central Armed
           Police Force and the decision of the Ministry of Home
           Affairs qua the review of Recruitment Rules of each
           Central Armed Police Force.
(VI) By directing that the entire exercise aforesaid be
           concluded on or before 30th June, 2021.
13.       When the related special leave petitions were filed,

this Court vide the order dated 27.10.2020 had issued notice

and stayed the impugned directions. Thereafter, learned

Chamber Judge passed an order on 28.06.2021 granting leave

to the officers belonging to the Indian Police Service (IPS) for

being impleaded in the related batch of special leave petitions.

Vide the order dated 05.11.2024, leave was granted.
14.       While appellants in Civil Appeal No. 13104 of 2024

(
Sanjay Prakash and Ors. Vs. Union of India and Ors.
) are

officers belonging to Group-A executive cadre of the Central

Industrial Security Force (CISF), appellants in Civil Appeal No.

13106 of 2024 (
Mahendra Singh Deo and Ors. Vs. Union of India

and Ors.
) are officers belonging to the Border Security Force

(BSF).
Similarly, appellants in Civil Appeal No. 13107 of 2024
21
(
Tarun Kumar Banjaree and Ors. Vs. Union of India and Ors.
)

are officers belonging to the Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP).
Appellants in Civil Appeal No. 13105 of 2024 (
Sudhir Kumar

Singh and Ors. Vs. Union of India and Ors.
) are officers

belonging to the Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB).
Appellants in

Civil Appeal No. 13108 of 2024 (
Radha Mohan Meena and Ors.

Vs. Union of India and Ors.
) are officers belonging to the Central

Reserve Police Force (CRPF).
Finally, appellants in Civil Appeal

No. 13110 of 2024 (
Dr. Jyoti Prakash Sharma and Ors. Vs.

Union of India and Ors.
) are serving as Assistant Commandants

in the CRPF.
15.        As   already   noticed   above,   grievance    of   the

appellants are identical though they belong to different CAPFs.

Their grievance primarily relates to declaration and treating

the CAPFs as OGAS and thereafter to extend the benefits

available to officers belonging to OGAS like grant of NFFU,

cadre review, service rule parity by amendments of the

respective recruitment rules providing uniform promotional

avenues. Core of the grievances of the appellants as it appears,
22
are non-recognition as OGAS, non-grant of NFFU and service

stagnation.   The   grievance   is   focused   on   the   existing

recruitment rules which provides for lateral entry into their

respective services by way of deputation to various posts by

officers belonging to the Indian Police Service (IPS), in the

process resulting in complete stagnation in their service

careers. Their contention is that once the CAPFs are declared

as OGAS for all purposes, consequential steps like cadre review

and restructuring of the service rules/recruitment rules will

follow eliminating lateral entry, like by way of deputation, to

posts upto the Senior Administrative Grade level. According to

them, because of IPS officers occupying posts upto the Senior

Administrative Grade, their promotional prospects are being

hampered leading to stagnation in the service hierarchy.
16.       Mr. Dushyant Dave, learned senior counsel, while

opening the arguments on behalf of the appellants in Civil

Appeal No. 13104 of 2024 submitted that in
Harananda
(supra), this Court has unconditionally held that Group-A

executive cadre of CISF as well as other CAPFs are OGAS. Once
23
they are declared as OGAS, all the attributes of the cadre ought

to be uniformized in the subsequent cadre review in

accordance with the OM dated 19.11.2009 which specifically

states that cadre posts of OGAS expressly belong to that

service; therefore, no deputation is allowed in such a service.

16.1.      He further submits that finding of the High Court

that Group-A executive cadre of CISF and the other CAPFs are

OGAS only for the purpose of grant of NFFU is not only

erroneous but is contrary to the entire reasoning of this Court.

There is no conditional or limited finding of this Court that the

said services are to be treated as OGAS only for the purpose of

grant of NFFU. He also refers to the clarificatory order of this

Court dated 18.10.2019 holding that CAPFs as well as RPF

must be treated as OGAS.
16.2.      According to him, if the view of the High Court is

accepted then it would not only mean overruling the judgment

of the High Court itself in
G.J. Singh
(supra) but also of this

Court in
Harananda
(supra).
In fact, in
Harananda
(supra),

this Court held as follows:
24
23.8. Considering the aforesaid facts and circumstances
        and the material on record, which came to be considered
        by the High Court in detail, it cannot be said that CAPFs
        do not constitute Organised Group A Central Civil
        Services/Group A Central Civil Services.
16.3.        Mr. Dave, learned senior counsel, extensively

referred to the report of the Sixth Central Pay Commission and

emphasized       that    mandate      of   the   Sixth   Central     Pay

Commission was not only to evolve a proper pay package for

the Government employees but also to make recommendations

rationalizing the governmental structure with a view to

improving the delivery mechanisms for providing better

services to the common man. On the evolution, growth and

structure of OGAS, the Sixth Central Pay Commission

observed as under:
An organised Group A Central Service represents a
        group of posts belonging to a distinct functional area
        arranged in a hierarchical order and pyramidal manner
        representing different grades or levels of responsibility.
        These responsibility increases with each senior level. At
        the time of the Second Central Pay Commission (
CPC
)
        in 1957, there were 6 Group A non-technical Services
25
(then called Class I Services). Over the years, more of
    these Services were organised to manage and run a
    particular Branch of the Government, or a department,
    which is many cases was an operative role. As a result,
    the officers belonging to these Services develop domain
    expertise in their particular branch. At the same time,
    as officers of these services grow in their cadres, they
    have to shoulder higher responsibilities relating to both
    policy   formulation    and          general    administration.
    Consequently, Organised Central Services have a very
    good talent pool, which has both the experience of
    general administration policy formulation and extensive
    knowledge of their area(s) of specialization.
16.4.     After   observing        so,     the     Sixth   Central    Pay

Commission made the following recommendations:
The Commission, accordingly, recommends that the
    post of Additional DIG should be merged with that of
    DIG in the pre-revised pay scale of Rs.16400-20000.
    Further, all posts up to the rank of DIG should,
    henceforth, be filled by promotion from amongst the
    officers of the respective CPMFs. Fifty percent of the
    posts in the grade of IG/equivalent and above should be
    allowed to be filled on deputation with the remaining
    posts being filled on promotion of the eligible officers.
26
16.5.       Recommendations of the Pay Commission were

clear and unambiguous, he submits. All posts upto the rank

of Deputy Inspector General (DIG) should be filled up by

promotion from amongst the officers of the respective CAPFs.
Not more than 50 percent of the posts in the grade of

Inspector General (IG)/equivalent and above should be

allowed to be filled up on deputation with the remaining posts

being filled up by way of promotion from amongst the eligible

officers.
16.6.       Mr. Dave submits that Government of India,

Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) had

accepted the recommendations of the Sixth Central Pay

Commission on 29.08.2008 to the effect that eligibility criteria

prescribed for promotion to Senior Administrative Grade in

various Group-A services should be uniform.

16.7.       He submits that once the Central Government has

made a reference to the Central Pay Commission in respect of

Government       employees        and   it   had   accepted   the

recommendations, then it is bound to implement the
27
recommendations in respect of all Government employees. If

            it does not implement the recommendations qua certain

            categories of employees then it commits a breach of
Article 14
and
Article 16.
In support of such submission, he has referred

            to and has placed reliance on a decision of this Court in
Purushottam Lal Vs. Union of India4
.
16.8.      Regarding the effect of an office memorandum, Mr.

            Dave has referred to a decision of this Court in
Laljee Dubey

            Vs. Union of India5
, more particularly to paragraphs 16, 17

            and 18 thereof.
16.9.      In this connection, he has placed reliance on various

            OMs by the DoPT dated 24.03.2009, 24.04.2009, 19.11.2009

            and 15.12.2009, whereby and whereunder all the Central

            Government Ministries and Departments were directed to

            amend the existing service rules and to grant NFFU status

            with effect from 01.01.2006.
4
(1973) 1 SCC 651
5
(1974) 1 SCC 230
28
16.10.     He submits that while the Ministry of Railways had

complied with the judgment of this Court qua RPF, the other

ministries have been found to be remiss in doing so.

16.11.     Mr. Dave further submitted that on 12.07.2019

respondent No. 4 had issued an OM concluding as under:
The RPF and Group A Executive Cadres of the following
     CAPFs having been treated as Organised Group A
     Service (OGAS) by this Department for cadre review and
     other related matters accordingly:
(i)   Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF)
(ii) Border Security Force (BSF)
(iii) Central Industrial Security Force (CISF)
(iv) Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP)
(v) Shashstra Seema Bal (SSB)

16.12.     In view of the above, first respondent is under an

obligation to implement the said OM.
16.13.     Mr. Dave finally submits that it is a fit case where

all the civil appeals should be allowed and the respondents be

directed to forthwith implement the judgment of this Court in
Harananda
(supra) as well as the OMs including the OMs

dated 19.11.2009 and 12.07.2019 and thereafter grant all the
29
consequential benefits to the appellants and similarly placed

officers including grant of NFFU with effect from 01.01.2006,

cadre review and amendment of the respective recruitment

rules providing for 100 percent promotion upto the level of

Senior Administrative (SAG) and 50 percent upto the level of

Higher Administrative Grade (HAG). Making an impassioned

plea, Mr. Dave submits that more than 18,000 officials of

CAPFs have been fighting this litigation and waiting for justice

since 2009. They are performing their duties in the service of

this country under most demanding and hostile conditions.

Over 153 of them have laid down their lives for defending the

unity and integrity of this country while discharging their

duties. It is unfortunate that the Central Government has

been found wanting in respect of granting relief to the

appellants as highlighted above.
17.       Supporting the submissions of Mr. Dave, Mr. Shyam

Divan, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants in

Civil Appeal No. 13108 of 2024 highlighted that the

foundation of the case of the appellants is traceable to
30
paragraphs 23.4 and 23.8 of this Court’s decision in
Harananda
(supra).
Prayers made by the appellants are

required to be considered in the backdrop of what this Court

declared in
Harananda
(supra).
He submits that DoPT has

fully accepted the
Harananda
(supra) judgment by issuing an

OM on 12.07.2019 requiring CRPF and the other four CAPFs

to be treated as OGAS for cadre issues and all other related

matters.
17.1.      Unfortunately in the impugned judgment High

Court has completely ignored and made no reference to the

OM dated 12.07.2019 rendering the judgment patently

erroneous.
17.2.      Despite the categorical finding of this Court and

declaration made that CAPFs are indeed OGAS and

acceptance of the same by the Union Government by way of

OM dated 12.07.2019, High Court in the impugned judgment

held that there was no general determination by this Court to

treat CAPFs as OGAS for all purposes. He submits that this

finding is wholly untenable. Such erroneous finding was the
31
fulcrum of the impugned judgment but the basis is no longer

valid in as much as Union of India has categorically

acknowledged and accepted the position that CAPFs are

indeed OGAS and in the light of the judgment in
Harananda
(supra), there can be no further debate on this issue.

17.3.       Learned senior counsel submits that it is the stated

policy of the Union Government that in respect of all OGAS,

promotion upto SAG level is within the service. The argument

of the respondents is that condition (iv) characteristics is

absent in the case of CRPF officers. This condition is no longer

relevant. Relevance of this condition is only at a stage anterior

to the declaration since the OM of 19.11.2009 was indicative

of certain characteristics. But now CRPF or for that matter all

the CAPFs are over that stage.
Consequently all future cadre

reviews must be after the services rules are appropriately

realigned    to   comport   with   this   Court’s   judgment   in
Harananda
(supra).
18.         Mr. S. Gurukrishna Kumar and Mr. K. Parameshwar,

learned senior advocates also argued on behalf of the
32
appellants. It is their submission that pursuant to the

declaration in
Harananda
(supra), it was incumbent on the

Union of India through its cadre controlling authority to treat

the CAPFs as OGAS. This was to be done following an exercise

of cadre review whereby the recruitment rules of the services

are amended every five years. It is further submitted that

when the RPF has been treated as OGAS, there is no reason

why the CAPFs should not be treated as OGAS. This is clearly

discriminatory. They have also highlighted the structure of

CISF as an example to illustrate as to how the service officers

are suffering stagnation due to lack of vacancies in the SAG

and above because of holding of such posts by officers

belonging to the IPS brought in by way of deputation.
19.      Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned Additional Solicitor

General of India representing Union of India and the official

respondents has made a subtle submission. According to her,

High Court in
G.J. Singh
(supra) and this Court in
Harananda
(supra) had declared that CAPFs should be treated as OGAS

and   consequently    granted   benefits   arising   from   the
33
recommendations of the Sixth Central Pay Commission i.e.

grant of NFFU. It was argued on behalf of Union of India that

CAPFs were not OGAS since they did not possess all the

attributes as required by the DoPT OMs. On the same

grounds, the Sixth Central Pay Commission had also not

recommended NFFU to the CAPFs. This Court declared that a

service can be an OGAS even if does not possess all the

attributes of an OGAS. Deputation of IPS officers is a minor

deviation which is allowed in terms of DoPT OM dated

19.11.2009.
This Court however clarified that the decision in
Harananda
(supra)    will   not     affect   the    IPS

deputations/deputationists.
19.1.    Learned Additional Solicitor General submits that

the above two judgments do not declare CAPFs as OGAS but

only declare that CAPFs in the past have been treated as

OGAS thus entitling them to the grant of NFFU. High Court

as well as this Court only directed the Central Government to

issue requisite notification granting the benefit of NFFU as

recommended by the Sixth Central Pay Commission to the
34
members of the CAPF. There are no further directions to take

consequential steps for making the CAPFs comply with all the

attributes of OGAS in terms of the DoPT OM dated

19.11.2009.
19.2.    Turning to the impugned judgment she submits

that High Court was justified in holding that the claim of the

appellants do not flow from the said judgments. High Court is

right in holding that the appellants have failed to show that

the benefits of OGAS enures to them independent of the relied

upon judgments.
19.3.    Learned Additional Solicitor General submits that

the present batch of appeals are nothing but an attempt to

reagitate the same grievance by seeking to inject the six

attributes in terms of the DoPT OM dated 19.11.2009 into the

CAPFs. The initial argument was that for declaring the CAPFs

as OGAS they did not posses all the six attributes in terms of

the OM dated 19.11.2009. In a complete u-turn, it is now

contended that since the CAPFs are OGAS they must possess
35
all the six attributes for which consequential directions

should be issued.
19.4.    It is submitted that recruitment rules of each force

are formulated keeping in mind the peculiarity/functionality

of each of the services. Each of the CAPF has a different role

to play in the security scenario of the country. Functional

attributes of each of them cannot be identical. Therefore, it

does not follow from being declared as OGAS that all the

CAPFs must acquire all the six attributes.
19.5.    The issue that came up for consideration in
G.J.

Singh
(supra) and
Harananda
(supra) was limited to grant of

NFFU which was initially denied on the ground that CAPFs

did not possess the six attributes required for designation as

an OGAS. It was the contention of the appellants in the

previous round that despite the deviations from the attributes

mentioned in the OM dated 19.11.2009, CAPFs had been

treated as OGAS and, as such, were entitled to grant of NFFU.

She submits that NFFU and Non-Functional Selection Grade
36
(NFSG) have been granted to all those officers who meet the

eligibility criteria.
19.6.      She submits that the present batch of appeals is

premature. High Court vide the impugned judgment had

given liberty to the appellants to file representations for cadre

review which was directed to be completed by June, 2021.

However because of the stay granted by this Court on

27.07.2020, the process has been kept in abeyance.

19.7.      She has also highlighted the different functional

requirements of each of CAPFs and the allowances and

benefits availed of by them which are not available to other

OGAS. Therefore, in view of the peculiarity of different

services, complete uniformity across all services may not be

feasible or even desirable. Each service cannot have an

identical cadre structure. DoPT never intended this. The cadre

controlling authority, in this case Ministry of Home Affairs, in

consultation     with   the   DoPT   and   the   Department    of

Expenditure determines the cadre structure and manpower

planning following laid down procedure. These decisions are
37
based    on   an     organization’s   specific    needs.     Decisions

regarding     promotional       prospects,     application    of    the

deputation norm, etc. are part of executive policy making

guided   by       functional,   operational,     organizational     and

personal requirements of the CAPFs.
19.8.       Ms.    Bhati   submits    that     framing/    review    of

recruitment rules is a legislative function whereas cadre

review exercise is an executive function. In a policy matter as

well as in a matter within the legislative field, this Court may

not issue any mandamus.
19.9.       Recruitment rules of the CAPFs have been framed

keeping in view the functional requirement of each of the

CAPFs. Being an armed force of the Union, the purpose is to

keep each of the CAPFs fit for fighting as well as to ensure

coordinated action between the States and the Centre within

the federal framework of our country. Therefore, deputation

of IPS officers is necessary. Service conditions of CAPFs

cannot be structured like civilian OGAS. In the above

backdrop, Ministry of Home Affairs had sought exemption
38
from the DoPT for OMs dated 24.04.2009, 19.11.2009 and

15.12.2009. In its reply DoPT stated that the OGAS can be

broadly classified in four different categories, each having

some common features and some unique features. It is for the

cadre controlling authority to decide what is the appropriate

structure. OMs dated 24.04.2009 and 15.12.2009 were

issued prior to CAPFs being declared as OGAS. Now, CAPF

has emerged as a fifth category of OGAS. In this case DoPT

observed that: all the attributes of an OGAS perhaps cannot

be imposed on the CAPFs, as MHA being the cadre controlling

authority in case of CAPFs, is best aware of the functional

requirements of each component services within CAPF and

accordingly create a cadre structure that is ideally suited to

perform the function and tasks for which that service has

been set up and for its administration. Therefore, DoPT

concluded that there may not be a need to grant any formal

exemption from the operation of OMs dated 24.03.2009,

24.04.2009 and 15.12.2009 in respect of CAPFs, as sought

for by the MHA.
39
19.10.       She submits that CAPFs are different from other

civilian OGAS as these are forces consisting of ground troops,

deployed at various locations for different purposes like

guarding and patrolling the border, internal security, law and

order, conducting elections and performing other important

duties. These are vital for national security. These ground

troops consist mostly of lower ranks from Constables upto

Inspectors. As a matter of fact, in CRPF, 98 percent of the

force is constituted by these ranks, 1.5 percent by GD officers

and 0.5 percent are others like doctors, ministerial,

engineering, etc. IPS officers are important part of this

hierarchy. Since CAPFs are deployed in various states, IPS

officers are essential for the effective operation of CAPFs

facilitating        cooperation         with    the     concerned       State

Governments          and   their        respective    police   forces   thus

preserving the federal structure. IPS being an all India service,

both in respect of the Union and the States, a certain number

of   posts     in    different     police      organizations    and     other

organizations of the Central Government are filled up by IPS
40
officers allotted to various state cadres on the basis of central

deputation for a tenure. IPS officers play a crucial role while

coordinating between the Central Government and the State

Governments.
19.11.    She finally submits that Ministry of Home Affairs as

the cadre controlling authority is well aware of the functional

needs and has decided to maintain the current cadre

structure of CAPFs. Any change in the present structure of

CAPFs will have far-reaching implications. She submits that

taking an overall view of the matter, the present batch of

appeals may be dismissed.
20.       Submissions were made on behalf of Indian Police

Central Service Association. Learned counsel representing the

association has supported the stand taken by the learned

Additional Solicitor General. It is submitted that IPS officers

are recruited keeping in view the demands of both the Central

Government and the State Governments. Accordingly, 40

percent of the sanctioned strength of IPS in a state cadre is

earmarked for central deputation reserve offering IPS officers
41
to the Central Government to man various police and other

organizations of the Central Government on deputation. IPS

officers play an important role in the overall internal security

architecture of the country besides coordinating between the

Central Government and the State Governments when CAPFs

are deployed.
20.1.     Each recruitment rules of the different CAPFs

framed under their respective statutes provide for deputation

of IPS officers. These recruitment rules are statutory in

character and cannot be overridden by administrative

guidelines like the DoPT OM. Functional and operational

requirements of CAPFs necessitate deputation of IPS officers

bringing in valuable additions to internal security and law

and order duties, besides coordination with state police

forces. This Court in
Harananda
(supra) explicitly clarified

that its decision did not impact the rights of IPS officers for

deputation to CAPFs.
20.2.     Learned counsel has also sought to distinguish

CAPFs from RPF. The two do not stand on the same footing.
42
20.3.    He, therefore, submits that all the appeals being

misconceived, should be dismissed.
21.      Similar submission was made on behalf respondent

No.5 who is an IPS officer and who got himself impleaded in

the present proceeding.
22.      Submissions made by learned counsel for the

parties have received the due consideration of this Court.
23.      As we have seen, the genesis of the dispute, rather

grievance of the appellants, started with the recommendations of

the Sixth Central Pay Commission. We have already examined

the relevant portion of the recommendations. Commission noted

that Group-A civil posts in the Central Government can be

broadly categorized into two: firstly, those included in OGAS

and those which are not part of OGAS and hence classified as

GCS Group-A. After an exhaustive analysis of grade

evaluation, growth and structure of OGAS, Commission noted

that through the mechanism of cadre review leading to cadre

restructuring, most OGAS have got more posts created at

Senior Administrative Grade and Higher Administrative
43
Grade levels. However, it was noted that notwithstanding

such cadre reviews and restructuring of service rules, most of

the services still had a great degree of stagnation at the level

of Senior Administrative Grade and Higher Administrative

Grade. Sixth Central Pay Commission noted the disparity as

far as appointment to various grades are concerned and

recommended that in order to bring in uniformity, eligibility

criteria should be uniform across various OGAS.
24.       Ministry of Finance in the Department of Expenditure,

Government of India accepted the recommendations of the Sixth

Central Pay Commission submitted on 24.03.2008. As regards

the recommendations of the Commission that whenever any

Indian Administrative Service (IAS) officer of a particular batch

is posted at the centre to a particular grade carrying a specific

grade pay in the pay bands of PB-3 or PB-4, grant of higher pay

scale on non-functional basis to the officers belonging to batches

of organized Group-A services that are senior by two years or

more should be given by the Government. This recommendation

was accepted by the Government of India with the further
44
clarification that this will also be applicable to the Indian Police

Service (IPS) and the Indian Forest Service (IFS) in their

respective   state cadres for      which the relevant cadre

controlling authority will issue the orders.

24.1.     Another recommendation of the Sixth Central Pay

Commission that eligibility criteria prescribed for promotion

to Senior Administrative Grade in various Organized Group-A

Service (OGAS) should be uniform was also accepted by the

Government of India.
25.       This takes us to the OM dated 24.03.2009 of the

DoPT which was issued to carry out the recommendations of

the Sixth Central Pay Commission. By the said OM, DoPT laid

down the steps that were required to be taken to amend the

existing service rules/recruitment rules of the different

services. All the ministries/departments were requested to

effect necessary amendments to the service rules/recruitment

rules by following the laid down procedure to bring the service

rules/recruitment rules in sync with the recommendations of

the Sixth Central Pay Commission.
45
26.       DoPT issued another OM dated 24.04.2009 relating

to non-functional upgradation for officers of OGAS in Pay

Band-3 and Pay Band-4 consequent upon acceptance of the

recommendations of the Sixth Central Pay Commission.
27.       Now we come to the OM dated 19.11.2009 of the

DoPT which is by way of clarification qua attributes of OGAS.

We have already extracted relevant portion of the OM dated

19.11.2009. This OM was necessitated in view of large

number of representations being received either seeking

clarification about the attributes and definition of OGAS or

seeking grant of status as OGAS and consequential benefits

flowing therefrom. Cases were filed in different courts

claiming the status of OGAS and consequential benefits.

DoPT stated that attributes of an OGAS are clearly
laid down

in
existing monogram of cadre management published by the

DoPT. However, as a clarificatory measure, those attributes

were restated which we have extracted in the earlier part

of the judgment. Attribute No. (iii) says that atleast 50 percent

of vacancies in the Junior Time Scale (JTS) in such
46
services are required to be filled by direct recruitment. As per

attribute No. (iv), all the vacancies above JTS and upto Senior

Administrative Grade level in such services are to be filled up

by promotion from the next lower grade. In terms of

attribute No. (v) while a service may comprise one or more

distinct grades, all such cadres should be governed by

composite service rules facilitating horizontal and vertical

movement of officers of a particular cadre atleast up to the

level of Senior Administrative Grade. The cadre posts of an

organized service (OGAS) expressly belong to that service.

Attribute No. (vi) explains that such service consists of two

distinct components viz. Regular Duty Posts and Reserves.

Reserves are generally of four types: (i) Probationary Reserve
(ii) Leave Reserve (iii) Training Reserve and (iv) Deputation

Reserve. These reserves are usually created and accounted

for in the JTS. It was clarified that existing OGAS have evolved

over a period of time and may have minor deviations owing to

their respective functional requirements. Those services
47
which have already been declared as OGAS need not be

reviewed.
28.         OM   dated   15.12.2009   of    DoPT   deals   with

amendment of the service rules/recruitment rules in OGAS

pursuant to recommendations of the Sixth Central Pay

Commission. It says that Sixth Central Pay Commission had

recommended for bringing uniformity in eligibility criteria

across various Organized Group-A Services (OGAS) for

promotion. The issue was examined whereafter a decision was

taken to amend the existing service rules/recruitment rules

by incorporating the following:
1. For promotion to SAG level, the requirement shall
        be:
officers in the JAG with 8 years regular service in the
        grade including NFSG or officers with 17 years
        regular service in Group A posts in the service out of
        which atleast 4 years regular service should be in
        JAG (including service rendered in the NFSG of JAG).
        1.1. Likewise, for promotion to HAG level, the
        eligibility requirement shall be:
officers in the SAG with 3 years regular service in
        the grade or officers with 25 years regular service in
48
Group    A   posts    in   the   service   out   of   which
        atleast 1 year regular service should be in the SAG.
29.       OM dated 14.12.2010 deals with cadre review of

Central Group-A Services. Clause 5 (i) stipulates that every

cadre should be reviewed once in every five years. Review

should be first carried out by the cadre controlling authority

preferably in consultation with the representatives of the

services/cadre in question. Thereafter, the procedure for

cadre review is laid down.
30.       This brings us to the decision of the High Court in
G.J. Singh
(supra). The decision impugned in the writ

petitions was the rejection by the respondents of the request

of the petitioners belonging to CRPF, BSF and ITBP for grant

of NFFU as applicable to other Group-A officers. High Court

observed that the crux of the dispute was the classification of

the Central Government Group-A Services as organized or

otherwise and whether the officers of CAPFs are part of

Organized Group-A Services i.e. OGAS. High Court was of the

view that issue in those batch of writ petitions was not fixation
49
of pay scale but whether the Central Government had, at any

time, acknowledged or stated that such officers of CAPFs

formed a part of OGAS. High Court noted from an analysis of

the materials on record that the Central Government itself

had admitted way back on 29.10.1986 that BSF and CRPF

are organized services; rather used them as examples of

organized services. Thereafter, Central Government had

through its own process classified BSF, CRPF, ITBP and CISF

as being at par with each other in 1986, 1993 and 2010

monographs wherein the aforesaid CAPFs have been shown

as part of the same Group-A Central Civil Services. Referring

to the six attributes which the Central Group-A Services need

to possess in terms of the OM dated 19.11.2009 to be

considered as OGAS, High Court noted that as per the own

admission of the respondents, these attributes are merely

traits/characteristics and are not sacrosanct. Even the note

in the OM dated 19.11.2009 provides for minor deviations

from these attributes. Thereafter, High Court declared that

officers in PB-3 and PB-4 in the CAPFs belong to OGAS.
50
Hence, consequential benefit should be extended to them

including by way of NFFU. High Court held thus:
86. The issue of acknowledging the petitioners as OGAS
    has been pending for some time like a festering wound.
From the preceding discussion, the Court would note
    although from the government records it can clearly be
    seen that the Petitioners have over and over again been
    recognised as OGAS, an element of obfuscation has been
    kept alive. It cannot be overemphasised that in matters
    relating to the armed forces and the paramilitary/CAPFs
    there ought to be clarity and certainty apropos the service
    benefits which the forces would be entitled to. An element
    of greater dispatch in taking decisions governing their
    service conditions would always be requisite. Therefore,
    to the extent that the OM dated 19/20.11.2009 and OM
    dated    28.10.2010      themselves     leave    scope     for
    interpretation, it could well be said that there is a level of
    arbitrariness in them. The government having repeatedly
    acknowledged      the    Petitioners    in   their   various
    communications as belonging to OGAS cannot be allowed
    to reprobate there from.
87. In view of the above, the Court is of the view that the
    petitioners, i.e., officers in PB-3 and PB-4 in the CAPFs
    (CRPF in the present instance) have been categorised
    under Organised Group ‘A’ Service ever since the year
    1986. Hence, the benefits contemplated by the 6th
CPC
by way of NFFU to remove disparity between All India
51
Services and other Organised Central Group ‘A’ Services,
      ought to be granted to them. Accordingly, the impugned
      OM dated 28.10.2010 and all other letters whereby the
      petitioners' request for the grant of NFFU was rejected,
      cannot be sustained and are hereby quashed.
88. In view of the above, the Writ Petitions are allowed.
      The   respondents   shall    issue   requisite   notification
      granting the benefits of Non Functional Financial
      Upgradation as recommended by the 6th Central Pay
      Commission to the Petitioners within eight weeks from
      this order.
31.         This came to be challenged by the Union of India in
Harananda
(supra). This Court formulated the issue in the

appeals as being non-grant of NFFU to officers/employees

serving in the CRPF which was denied solely on the ground

that CRPF is not an OGAS and, therefore, not entitled to

NFFU. This Court noticed that considering the materials on

record, more particularly, the monographs published by the

DoPT right from 1996 till date, CAPFs have been shown as

part of the Central Group-A Services after conducting the

exercise of cadre review etc. by the DoPT. All throughout

CAPFs have been shown to be part of Central Group-A
52
Services. Therefore, it was not open to the DoPT not to

consider and/or treat the CAPFs as Organised Group-A

Services. This Court concluded that it cannot be said that

CAPFs do not constitute OGAS. Paragraphs 23.4 and 23.8,

being the fulcrum of the appellants case, are extracted

hereunder:
23.4. Considering    the        material   on   record,   more
    particularly, the Monographs published by the DoPT
    right from 1986 till date, CAPFs have been shown to be a
    part of the Central Group A Services. CAPFs have been
    shown as a part of the Central Group A Services after
    conducting the exercise of cadre review, etc. by the DoPT.
Therefore, all throughout from 1986 till date, in the
    Monographs published by the DoPT, CAPFs have been
    shown to be a part of Central Group A Services.
    Therefore, thereafter it would not be open for the DoPT
    not to consider and/or treat the CAPFs as an Organised
    Group A Services.
*            *         *              *           *         *

    23.8. Considering the aforesaid facts and circumstances
    and the material on record, which came to be considered
    by the High Court in detail, it cannot be said that CAPFs
    do not constitute Organised Group A Central Civil
    Services/Group A Central Civil Services.
53
31.1.
In paragraph 24.2 of
Harananda
(supra), this Court

held that High Court was right in observing and consequently

directing that officers in PB-3 and PB-4 in the CAPFs belong

to OGAS and, therefore, entitled to the benefits recommended

by the Sixth Central Pay Commission by way of NFFU, further

directing the respondents to issue requisite notification

granting NFFU to such officers of the CAPFs as recommended

by the Sixth Central Pay Commission. This Court declared

that it was in complete agreement with the view taken by the

High Court.
32.       From the above, what is discernible is that

immediate grievance of the appellants in the aforesaid batch

of civil appeals was the rejection of their claim to NFFU, the

basis of such rejection being refusal of the Central

Government to treat the CAPFs as belonging to OGAS.

However, this Court while framing the issue for consideration

went to the root of the dispute and declared that for all intent

and purposes, CAPFs belong to OGAS. From a careful reading

of the judgment of this Court in
Harananda
(supra), we have
54
no doubt in our mind that such declaration by this Court was

not confined only to the grant of NFFU but in respect of the

status of the CAPFs as OGAS.
33.       Following the same, DoPT issued OM dated

26.03.2019 calling upon the cadre controlling authorities for

the RPF and CAPF i.e. Ministry of Railways and Ministry of

Home Affairs respectively to send detailed modalities on all

issues/directions as per the decision of this Court in
Harananda
(supra) in the matter of organized status and

consequential benefit of NFFU to enable implementation at

the earliest.
34.       In this proceeding, we are not concerned with the

OM dated 08.04.2019 dealing with RPF. Nonetheless, it may

be mentioned that vide the said OM dated 08.04.2019 of the

Railway Board, Ministry of Railways, judgment of this Court

in
Harananda
(supra) has been implemented by taking the

relevant steps, such as, notifying RPF as OGAS, restructuring

of RPF cadre and to revise the recruitment rules of RPF in
55
consultation with the Union Public Service Commission

(UPSC). This was followed by OM dated 12.04.2019.
35.      However, what is of crucial significance is the OMs

dated 04.07.2019 and 12.07.2019 of DoPT. Subject-matter of

OM dated 04.07.2019 is grant of benefit of NFFU and Non-

Functional Selection Grade (NFSG) to Group-A executive

cadre officers of CAPFs considered by the courts as belonging

to OGAS. The said OM mentioned that approval of

the competent authority has been conveyed to the grant of

OGAS to Group-A executive cadre officers of CAPFs and

consequently benefits of NFFU w.e.f. 01.01.2006 and NFSG

at the rate of 30% of Senior Duty Posts (SDP) w.e.f.

06.06.2000. Director Generals of CAPFs were therefore

directed to extend the benefits of NFFU and NFSG to the

eligible Group-A executive cadre officers of CAPFs by taking

immediate necessary action for implementation.
36.      By way of the OM dated 12.07.2019, it was stated

that Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Railways vide

their respective letters dated 04.07.2019 and 11.07.2019 had
56
conveyed the approval of the competent authority to grant of

OGAS     status    to   Group-A    executive    cadre   officers   of

CAPFs and RPF and consequential benefits of NFFU w.e.f.

01.01.2006 and NFSG @ 30% to Senior Duty Posts (SDP)

w.e.f.   06.06.2000     respectively.   Further,   it   has    been

mentioned that RPF and Group-A executive cadres of the

CAPFs have been treated as OGAS by the DoPT for cadre

review and other related matters. Relevant portion of the OM

dated 12.07.2019 reads as under:
2. In compliance of the above mentioned judgment dated
    5.2.2019 of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, the Ministry of
    Home Affairs and Ministry of Railways vide their
    references cited above, have conveyed the approval of the
    competent authority to grant of OGAS status to RPF and
    to Group A Executive Cadre Officers of CAPFs and
    consequential benefits of NFFU with effect from 1.1.2006
    and NFSG at 30% of Senior Duty Post (SDP) with effect
    from 6.6.2000 respectively.
3. The RPF and Group A Executive Cadres of the following
    CAPFs having been treated as Organised Group A service
    (OGAS) by this Department for cadre review and other
    related matters accordingly.
(i)     Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF)
          (ii)    Border Security Force (BSF)
57
(iii)   Central Industrial Security Force (CISF)
(iv)    Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP)
(v)     Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB)
37.      After issuance of OM dated 12.07.2019 treating the

CAPFs as OGAS for cadre review and other related matters,

the scope of the dispute has considerably narrowed down;

rather, we can say that there is hardly any dispute left now

for adjudication. Unfortunately, this OM dated 12.07.2019

was not taken note of by the High Court while disposing of the

related writ petitions filed by the appellants vide the

impugned judgment dated 27.07.2020. High Court had

rendered its judgment one year after the OM dated

12.07.2019 was issued. Failure to consider this OM has

materially affected the adjudication by the High Court.
38.      Now that the scope of the lis has considerably

narrowed down, it will be useful to highlight the grievances

expressed by the appellants all this while. Since we have

focused primarily on Civil Appeal No.13104 of 2024 (
Sanjay

Prakash and Ors. Vs. Union of India and Ors.
) which in turn is

concerned with CISF, we may have a glance at the posts in
58
the CISF in terms of hierarchy which is produced below in the

form of a statement:
Grades                CORRESPONDING RANKS IN
                               CISF            OTHER CAPFs
      Apex Grade                     Director General
                                            (DG)
  Higher Administrative         Additional Director General
          Grade                            (ADG)
          (HAG)
  Senior Administrative             Inspector General
          Grade                            (IG)
          (SAG)
    Super Time Scale          Deputy Inspector General
                                       (DIG)
  Junior Administrative     Senior          Commandant
          Grade           Commandant
         (NFSG)
  Junior Administrative   Commandant       Second in Command
          Grade                                   (2IC)
          (JAG)
    Senior Time Scale              Deputy Commandant
          (STS)                            (DC)
   Junior Time Scale              Assistant Commandant
          (JTS)                             (AC)
39.      Thus, we find that in the Junior Time Scale is the

post of Assistant Commandant; Deputy Commandant is in

the grade of Senior Time Scale. Commandant and Senior

Commandant are included in Junior Administrative Grade

with Senior Commandant being granted NFSG. Deputy
59
Inspector General (DIG) is placed in the Super Time Scale

Grade, whereas Inspector General (IG) is placed in the Senior

Administrative Grade (SAG). Therefore, posts upto Inspector

General are at the level of SAG or below. Additional Director

General (ADG) is placed in the Higher Administrative Grade

(HAG). The topmost post is Director General (DG).
40.       According to the appellants, the existing Group-A

executive cadre of CISF mirrors a pyramid with fewer posts at

the top of the hierarchy in comparison to the number of posts

at the bottom. But the grievance is that the senior posts are

filled up mostly by way of deputation from amongst officers

belonging to the IPS. As one moves up in the hierarchy,

number of deputation posts in Group-A executive cadre

increases. In other words, it is the case of the appellants that

number of posts and the percentage of deputation are

inversely proportional. In this respect, appellants have placed

the following chart in tabular form depicting the cadre

structure and how the cadre posts are filled up:
60
Rank        Total        Division of Group A Executive Cadre posts
                positions          As percentage             Numbers
                              Deputation       Cadre   Deputation Cadre
DG             1             100%        Excluded      1          0
ADG             4             75%           25%         3          1
IG            16             50%           50%         8          8
DIG            67             30%           70%        20         47
     Sr.           81       Promotion failing which by     NIL        81
 Commandant                          deputation
 Commandant       125                                      NIL       125
   Deputy         344              2%           98%        NIL       344
 Commandant                   absorption
                             failing which
                             by promotion
 Assistant        639       2% absorption       98%        NIL      639
 Commandant                 failing which
                            by promotion
41.          Appellants have stated that their grievance qua

stagnation in service in contrast to the upward mobility of the

deputationists, being IPS officers who have far more lenient

and relaxed eligibility criteria for appointment in Group-A

executive cadre, has been taken note of by this Court in
Harananda
(supra). Appellants have depicted the grievance

by way of a chart highlighting the differential requirement of

residency period for promotion and appointment against a

cadre post for cadre officers vis-a-vis deputationists. The

chart is as under:
61
Promotion              Total qualifying      Central Deputation
                                   service (in years)           for IPS
                                      required for
                                     promotion in
      From               To             CISF as per       Level        Minimum
                                       existing RRs                    length of
                                      (GCS Group A)                    service in
                                                                      the IPS for
                                                                       eligibility
                                                                      for central
                                                                      deputation
ADG                DG              Excluded          DG              30
IG                ADG                30            ADG              26
DIG                IG                 24             IG              18
Senior                DIG                20            DIG              14
Commandant
 Commandant         Senior                 15*
                  Commandant
SP              7
DC          Commandant                11
AC                 DC                 06                 -           -
42.          Appellants        have     also     illustrated       their   service

stagnation due to lack of vacancies by highlighting the same

in a tabular format which is as under:
Rank           Total Cadre          No. of officers eligible for
                      Positions           promotion to the rank in Column
       (1)               (2)              (1) but stagnating due to lack of
                                          vacancies, eligibility reckoned
                                          under existing recruitment rules
                                          From the next        Based on
                                          lower rank           years of
                                                               service
       DG                      0          1. Rules for promotion to the
                                          rank of DG yet to be framed.
62
2. Eligible CISF officer not
                                   promoted to the rank of ADG
                                   though vacancy exists
ADG                 1                 8                 13
IG                 8                59                 72
DIG                47                52                 53
Sr.               81                21                 21
Commandant
Total Officers stagnating from                  140
Batches 1987 – 2005
Total Cadre Officers from                       153
Batches 1987 – 2005
43.       Now that the Central Government has accepted that

CAPFs are included in OGAS, the natural consequences

should follow. Eligible officers belonging to the CAPFs have

already been granted NFFU following the decision of this

Court in
Harananda
(supra). DoPT OM dated 12.07.2019

makes it abundantly clear that the CAPFs have been treated

as OGAS for cadre issues and all other related matters. In

other words, CAPFs are OGAS for all purposes. When CAPFs

have been declared as OGAS, all benefits available to OGAS

should naturally flow to the CAPFs. It cannot be that they are

granted one benefit and denied the other.
44.       However, we are conscious of the fact that the role

of CAPFs is crucial while maintaining security at the borders
63
of our country as well as in discharging internal security

duties. There are various issues connected with             the

deployment of CAPFs, including coordinating with the State

Governments and the state police force. Central Government

in its wisdom has taken the view that presence of IPS officers

in each of the CAPFs is vital to maintain the character of each

of the CAPFs as a unique central armed force. This is a policy

decision. Of course, individual officers belonging to the IPS or

the association of IPS officers cannot have a say as to how

much the deputation quota should be and how long the

deputation should continue. They are there on deputation by

virtue of the policy decision of the Central Government

manifest through the service rules/recruitment rules of the

CAPFs. Having said that we cannot also be oblivious of the

grievance expressed by officers of the CAPFs as highlighted

supra. Their dedicated service upholding the security,

integrity and sovereignty of the nation while safeguarding our

borders and maintaining internal security within the country

cannot be ignored or overlooked. They discharge their duties
64
under very demanding conditions. They have a grievance that

because of lateral entry into the higher grades of the

respective CAPFs, they are unable to get their timely

promotion. Consequently, there is a great deal of stagnation.

Such stagnation can adversely impact the morale of the

forces. This also needs to be factored in while considering

review of such policy decision.
45.      Having regard to the discussions made above and

now that Government of India has accepted the CAPFs as

belonging to OGAS vide the DoPT OM dated 12.07.2019, we

are of the view that the following directions would meet the

ends of justice. We, accordingly, order as follows:
1.     Let the cadre review in all the CAPFs which

        was due in the year 2021 be carried out within a

        period of six months from today.
2.     Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India

        shall give effect to the DoPT OM dated 12.07.2019

        and undertake the exercise for review of the existing

        service rules/recruitment rules of each of the CAPFs.
65
While    carrying    out   the   aforesaid   exercise,

representative of the cadre officers of each of the

CAPFs shall be given an opportunity of being heard.
3.      Let the above exercise pertaining to review

of existing service rules/recruitment rules of each of

the CAPFs be carried out and completed within a

period of six months from today.
4.      DoPT shall take appropriate decision after

receipt of action taken report(s) from the Ministry of

Home Affairs regarding cadre review and review of

existing service rules/recruitment rules within a

period of three months from the date of receipt of

such report(s).
5.      Keeping in mind the twin objectives of service

mobility of the cadre officers of CAPF thereby

removing stagnation on the one hand and the

operational/functional requirement of the forces on

the other hand, we are of the view that the number of

posts earmarked for deputation in the cadres of the
66
CAPFs upto the level of Senior Administrative Grade

        (SAG) should be progressively reduced over a period

        of time, say within an outer limit of two years.
6.     This will bring in a sense of participation of

        the cadre officers belonging to the CAPFs in the

        decision making process within the administrative

        framework of the CAPFs thereby removing the long

        standing grievances of the cadre officers.
46.      In view of the above, interim stay granted by this

Court on the exercise of cadre review stands recalled.
47.      All the civil appeals are accordingly disposed of in

the above terms. However, there shall be no order as to cost.
……………………………J.
                                         [ABHAY S. OKA]


                                     ……………………………J.
                                        [UJJAL BHUYAN]
NEW DELHI;
MAY 23, 2025.
67