[Cites
27
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Raju @ Umakant vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 May, 2025
Author:
Sanjay Karol
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
2025 INSC 615                                                          REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.        OF 2025
                         (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NO. 17398/2024)

             RAJU @ UMAKANT                                           APPELLANT(s)
                                                  VERSUS

             THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                            RESPONDENT(s)


                                              JUDGMENT
K.V. Viswanathan, J.
1.             Leave granted.
2.             The present appeal challenges the judgment and order of the

             Division Bench of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur in

             Criminal Appeal No. 2324 of 2006. By the said judgment, the High

             Court confirmed the conviction and sentence imposed on the

             appellant by the Special Judge, (SC/ST Prevention of Atrocities) Act,

             Katni, Madhya Pradesh in Special Sessions Case No. 140 of 2004

             and Special Sessions Case No. 136 of 2005. The appellant thus
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
RAJNI MUKHI
Date: 2025.05.01
stands convicted for offences punishable under Sections 366, 376(2)
   18:09:32 IST
   Reason:
1
(g) and 342 of the
Indian Penal Code
, 1860 (for short ‘
IPC
’) and
Section 3(2)(v)
of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes

(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 (for short ‘1989 Act’). For the

offence punishable under
Section 366
IPC, the appellant has been

sentenced to 5 years rigorous imprisonment with a fine of Rs. 2000/-
and, in default of fine, to undergo a sentence of 6 months rigorous

imprisonment. For the offences punishable under 376(2)(g)
IPC
and
Section 3(2)(v)
of the 1989 Act, the appellant has been sentenced to

rigorous imprisonment for life with a fine of Rs. 2000/- and, in

default of fine, to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 1 year. For the

offence under
Section 342
IPC, the appellant has been sentenced to

undergo 6 months’ rigorous imprisonment with a fine of Rs. 200/-

and, in default of fine, to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 2

months. Aggrieved, the appellant is before us.
3.   The appellant was Accused No. 1 and one Jalandhar Kol was

Accused No. 2. Accused No. 2 was sentenced for the same offences

as that of the appellant except that there was no conviction and

sentence on Accused No. 2 under the 1989 Act. The other difference

was that insofar as Section 376(2)(g) was concerned, Accused No. 2
2
was sentenced to 10 years rigorous imprisonment with a fine of Rs.

2000/- and, in default of fine, to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 1

year. The Accused No. 2 is not before us.
PROSECUTION CASE: -
4.   The prosecution case originated with a missing report No.

11/2004 lodged on 24.06.2004 at 18:30 hrs. at Police Station,

Kymore, District Katni, Madhya Pradesh. The complainant – ‘S’

(PW-2) informed the Police that on the previous night at 10:00 PM,

his daughter-the prosecutrix (hereinafter referred to as ‘R’) went to

see the barat at the house of one Fagun Chaudhary along with ‘SA’

(DW-1). The complainant averred that ‘R’ did not return home.

Description was given and it was also mentioned that ‘R’ was

wearing a green colored Sari and Blouse. Investigation was taken up

on the missing report after registration.
5.   As per the recovery memo Exhibit P-1, on 28.06.2004 at 11:30

hours, ‘R’ was recovered from the house of ‘LB’ (DW-2) mentioned

as wife of the appellant (though it has subsequently come on record

as part of the evidence of prosecutrix that the appellant Raju and LB
3
were only having a relationship). The recovery memo was witnessed

by an independent witness PW-3, ‘TP’ and other Panch witnesses

and was signed by PW-11 Sub-Inspector - J. L. Mishra. The recovery

memo stated that: -
“In the presence of us, aforesaid Panchas R (prosecutrix), Village
     Jhiriya who was earlier in Raju’s house was brought by LB to her
     house who was recovered by the Kymore Police from LB’s
     house.”

‘LB’ also signed the recovery memo.
6.    PW-11 J. L. Mishra on recovery of the prosecutrix ‘R’,

recorded the statement of ‘R’ as per her narration and registered Case

Crime No. 113 of 2004 under
Sections 376
,
363
,
366
,
342
,
506
/
34
IPC and
Section 3
(1-12) of the 1989 Act. Exhibit P-20 is the FIR

and was registered on 28.06.2004 at 16:00 hours. In her statement,

which resulted in the FIR, ‘R’ stated that accused Jalandhar abducted

‘R’ by threatening her and raped her by threatening to kill her and

appellant Raju helped Jalandhar in committing the offence and kept

Jalandhar in his room in Haristone Kachhgawan. By Exhibit P-2, the

prosecutrix ‘R’ consented to her medical examination by stating that
4
accused Jalandhar committed wrongful act with her. Consent to the

same effect was also given by PW-2 ‘S’, the father of ‘R’.
7.   PW-13 S.K. Pandey has deposed that he was posted as DSP,

AJAK, PS Katni, and that case diary pertaining to Case Crime No.

113 of 2004 was received for investigation on 30.06.2004. PW-13

further deposed that prosecutrix along with her father appeared

before AJAK Katni and gave Exhibit P-3 on 30.06.2004. In Exhibit

P-3, it was mentioned by the father of the prosecutrix that his

daughter ‘R’ went to see the barat of the daughter of Fagun; that

while returning from the barat, she has been kidnapped; that the

appellant Raju of Village Jhiriya and his servant Jalandhar Kol of

village Barchheka were stalking her; that on not finding ‘R’, PW-2

kept track by giving information to Kymore Police Station; that PW-

2 came to know that the appellant Raju and Jalandhar have together

kidnapped ‘R’ and kept her confined at various places; that coming to

know that police had been informed, Jalandhar fled the place; the

prosecutrix ‘R’ was freed; that the appellant Jalandhar and Raju are

goons and prosecutrix ‘R’ was scared of them; that ‘R’ was scared

when she stated that Raju and Jalandhar forcibly kidnapped ‘R’ and
5
confined her in the house of the field and committed rape on her; that

by threatening her, they confined the prosecutrix in various places

under their custody; that because of fear, this could not be stated

earlier and hence the application is given today; that Raju and

associates are giving threats and hence an investigation was prayed

for.
8.     During the investigation, on 22.07.2004, ‘R’ gave Exhibit P-6

to SHO about threats being given by Jalandhar and Raju due to

lodging of the report with Police. It is also stated that on 20.07.2004

appellant Raju abused them and even kicked the door of the house.

Legal action was prayed for.
9.     Raju was arrested on 23.07.2004 and Jalandhar was arrested on

22.05.2005. Charge-sheet has been filed on 31.07.2004 stating that

Raju and Jalandhar are accused, and it was stated that a

supplementary challan would be filed against Jalandhar separately.

Chargesheet was filed for offences punishable under 376(2), 366,

363, 342, 34 and 506
IPC
read with
Section 3
(1-12), 3 (2) (v) of the

1989 Act. Charges were framed by the Trial Court in Sessions Case
6
No. 140 of 2004 against the accused on 25.05.2005 for offences

punishable under
Sections 366
,
376(2)(g)
&
342
IPC and 3(2)(v) of

the 1989 Act.
10.   At the Trial, the prosecution examined thirteen witnesses and

produced several exhibits and the defence examined two witnesses.

On appreciation of the evidence, the Trial Court recorded conviction

for the appellant and accused Jalandhar and sentenced them. The

details have already been set out in Para one above. The High Court

confirmed the same. The Accused No.1 is in appeal before us.
11.   We have heard Shri Susheel Tomar, learned Counsel for the

appellant and Shri Sarthak Raizada, learned Counsel for the State

and have perused the records. We have also called for the Trial Court

records from the High Court and obtained translation of the Hindi

documents. We have carefully examined the Trial Court records also.

ANALYSIS AND REASONS: -
12.   Learned Counsels have reiterated the respective contentions put

forth before the Courts below. We have dealt with the arguments as
7
part of the discussion and hence are not separately setting out the

contentions herein.
13.   Though at the trial Court and at the High Court stage, a dispute

with regard to the age of the prosecutrix was raised, it was found at

the trial that the prosecution has failed to prove beyond doubt that

the age of the prosecutrix was less than 18 years as on the date of the

incident. This finding was confirmed by the High Court. We see no

ground to interfere with the said finding.
14.   The case revolves around the testimony of the prosecutrix ‘R’

who was examined as PW-1. She has categorically deposed that, at

around 1:00 AM, when she and her friend ‘SA’ were returning from

the wedding ceremony, they halted to attend calls of nature.

Thereafter, when they were proceeding towards their house, the

accused persons caught hold of them from behind. According to the

prosecutrix, while the appellant Raju caught her, Jalandhar was

accompanying him. PW-1 states that at the same time her friend ran

away. She further states that while one caught hold of her the other

gagged her mouth and were threatening to kill her if she raised a hue

and cry. She deposed that the accused had a two-wheeler and they
8
forcefully made her sit on the two-wheeler and took her to the house

of the appellant which was in the middle of the fields. She deposed

that both the appellants locked her in the room and committed

wrongful act with her. She deposed that she was wearing a green

colored Sari and further stated that Jalandhar committed wrongful act

by inserting his penis into her vagina. Raju also committed wrongful

act by putting his penis into her vagina. Thereafter, the accused took

her to Dair Salaiya on a Motorcycle. The appellant took her to his

house where ‘LB’, with whom he had a relationship, was there and

locked her and after two days her father got her released from there.

She further clearly deposed that she had told her parents, brother and

sister-in-law about the incident and that appellant Raju stayed with

‘LB’ and Jalandhar after taking keys from ‘LB’ took her to another

house.
15.   PW-1 further deposed that Jalandhar drank alcohol and made

her also to drink alcohol. Thereafter, she clearly deposed that

Jalandhar committed rape on her. Further, she categorically deposed

that appellant Raju also reached the other house in Dair Salaiya and

committed wrongful act with her. She stated that Dair Salaiya was a
9
dense colony where she stayed for two days; that she used to have

meals at the residence of ‘LB’, that she had taken bath and washed

her clothes and that she did not tell ‘LB’ about the wrongful act

committed by the accused. The prosecutrix denied the suggestion

that her father wanted Jalandhar to leave the services under Raju and

that Raju didn’t remove Jalandhar and, as such, her father filed a

false case against Raju. She denied the suggestion that she was in a

physical relationship with Jalandhar for four years. She admitted that

she was first married in village Pauri. She denied that she went to

the house in the field at her free will. PW-1 denied the suggestion

that Raju did not commit any forceful act on her.
16.   PW-1 stated that during the time she was gagged and lifted,

Jalandhar caught hold of her and Raju (appellant) went to take the

Motor Bike and both took her in the Motorcycle. She further deposed

that the accused lifted up her Petticoat and tore her undergarment.

She deposed that appellant-Raju raped first and Jalandhar raped

thereafter. She also stated that Raju was drunk, and Jalandhar was

not. She stated that there was darkness in the room and that they
10
were unable to see each other and that Jalandhar laid the mat and

accused one after the other did wrongful act.
17.   We have carefully considered the evidence of PW-1. We are

convinced that notwithstanding the minor contradictions, her

evidence inspires confidence and that she has clearly spoken about

the accused abducting her and also committing rape on her. She has

also clearly spoken about the wrongful confinement. Nothing has

been elicited in the cross-examination to dilute her testimony. The

charges under
Section 366
,
376(2)(g)
and
342
IPC are clearly made

out. It is now fairly well settled that the prosecutrix is not an

accomplice and that if the evidence of the prosecutrix inspires

confidence it can be acted upon without corroboration.
18.   Not only does the evidence of ‘R’ sound natural, it also inspires

confidence and we have no manner of doubt whatsoever that on the

facts of this case, any need for corroboration can be safely dispensed

with. As has been rightly observed, a woman or a girl subjected to

sexual assault is not an accomplice but a victim of another person’s

lust and it will be improper and undesirable to test her evidence with
11
suspicion. All that the law mandates is that the Court should be alive

to and conscious of the fact that it is dealing with the evidence of a

person who is interested in the outcome of charge levelled by her and

if after keeping that aspect in mind if the Court is thereafter satisfied

that the evidence is trustworthy, there is nothing that can stop the

Court from acting on the sole testimony of the prosecutrix. [See
State of Rajasthan v. N.K. the Accused
, (2000) 5 SCC 30,

Rameshwar v. State of Rajasthan, 1951
SCC 1213, State of

Maharashtra Vs. Chandraprakash Kewal Chand Jain
, (
1990) 1

SCC 550, State of Punjab v. Gurmit Singh
, (1996) 2 SCC 384]
19.   The variation in the narration in the FIR Exhibit P-20 dated

28.06.2004 and the complaint Exhibit P-3 dated 30.06.2004 and the

minor contractions in the evidence do not detract from the clinching

testimony of the prosecutrix (PW-1) clearly implicating the appellant

and the co-accused. The fact that in the F.I.R. (Exhibit P-20) only

rape by accused Jalandhar was clearly mentioned and the role of the

appellant was only to help and the further fact that the consent letter

given by the prosecutrix and her father only mentioned about rape by
12
Jalandhar also does not enure to the benefit of the appellant. We say

so for the following reasons: -
(a)   Firstly,- In this case, the aspect of abduction under
Section 366
IPC is clearly spoken about and on that there is no contradiction.
(b)   Secondly, - PW-2, the father of the prosecutrix, lodged the

missing report promptly on the morning of 24.06.2004 and on

28.06.2004 the prosecutrix was recovered from the house of ‘LB’

after she was brought from the house of Raju-appellant. This is

spoken to by PW-1, PW-2, PW-3 ‘TP’ and PW-11, J.L. Mishra.
(c)   Thirdly, - Even if PW3 ‘TP’ was treated as hostile, on the

aspect of recovery, his evidence is clearly believable as he states that

Police recovered the girl in his presence from ‘LB’s house and that

the recovery memo Exhibit P-1 was signed by him and that recovery

memo was prepared in his presence.          It is well-settled that the

evidence of the prosecution witness cannot be rejected in toto merely

because the prosecution chose to treat him as hostile and cross-

examined him. It has been held that the evidence of such witnesses

cannot be treated as effaced or washed off the record altogether but
13
the same can be accepted to the extent their version is found to be

dependable on a careful scrutiny thereof. It has been held that where

the evidence of such a witness is consistent with the case of the

prosecution, it can be relied upon. [See Selvamani vs. State Rep. by

the Inspector of Police, 2024 SCC OnLine SC 837 and Neeraj

Dutta vs. State (Government of NCT of Delhi) (2023) 4 SCC 731

(para 87). Hence, there is clear evidence on the aspect of recovery

from the confinement made by the accused of the prosecutrix.
(d)    Fourthly, in her evidence, the prosecutrix clearly, clinchingly

and unwaveringly deposed about the commission of rape by both the

appellant and the co-accused Jalandhar.
(e)    Fifthly, it is important to note that the charge against the

appellant is under Section 376 (2)(g), which reads as under:-
“376. Punishment for rape.-
(2) Whoever,-
(g) commits gang rape, shall be punished with rigorous
      imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten
      years but which may be for life and shall also be liable to
      fine:
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special
      reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a
14
sentence of imprisonment of either    description    for    a
      term of less than ten years.
Explanation 1.-Where a woman is raped by one or more in a
      group of persons acting in furtherance of their common
      intention, each of the persons shall be deemed to have
      committed gang rape within the meaning of this sub-
      section.”
20.    It is important to note that in Explanation 1 to 376(2)(g) in the

Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 1980 (which eventually became
Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 1983
), it was proposed that gang

rape be defined as rape committed by three or more persons acting in

furtherance of their common intention. The Joint Committee of

Parliament recommended that in cases of gangrape “even if one

commits rape all the other persons involved should be held

responsible and be equally punished” and recommended that

gangrape should be defined as “rape committed by one or more in a

group of persons”. [See the Report of the Joint Committee presented

on 02.11.1982 on the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 1980.] This

recommendation was accepted and the
Criminal Law (Amendment)

Act, 1983
was enacted with the explanation in the present form as

extracted hereinabove.
15
21.    This aspect has also come up for judicial consideration before

this Court in
Pramod Mahto and Others vs. State of Bihar
, (1989)

Supp (2) SCC 672 wherein this Court held that the Explanation has

been introduced with a view to effectively dealt with the growing

menace of gang rape and in such circumstances, it was not necessary

that the prosecution should adduce clinching proof of complete act of

rape by each one of the accused on the victim or on each one of the

victims where there are more than one.
22.    Further, in
Ashok Kumar vs. State of Haryana
, (2003) 2 SCC

143, it was held as under:-
“8. Charge against the appellant is under
Section 376(2)(g)
IPC.
      In order to establish an offence under
Section 376(2)(g)
IPC,
      read with Explanation I thereto, the prosecution must adduce
      evidence to indicate that more than one accused had acted in
      concert and in such an event, if rape had been committed by
      even one, all the accused will be guilty irrespective of the fact
      that she had been raped by one or more of them and it is not
      necessary for the prosecution to adduce evidence of a
      completed act of rape by each one of the accused. In other
      words, this provision embodies a principle of joint liability and
      the essence of that liability is the existence of common intention;
      that common intention presupposes prior concert which may be
      determined from the conduct of offenders revealed during the
      course of action and it could arise and be formed suddenly, but,
      there must be meeting of minds. It is not enough to have the
      same intention independently of each of the offenders. In such
16
cases, there must be criminal sharing marking out a certain
      measure of jointness in the commission of offence.”
                                                (Emphasis supplied)
23.    In view of this, it is very clear that in a case of gang rape under

Section 376(2)(g), an act by one is enough to render all in the gang

for punishment as long as they have acted in furtherance of the

common intention.       Further, common intention is implicit in the

charge of Section 376(2)(g) itself and all that is needed is evidence to

show the existence of common intention.
24.    In this case, as is clear from the sequence of events, the

abduction of the victim, her wrongful confinement, her testimony

about being subjected to sexual assault clearly points to the fact that

the ingredients of Section 376(2)(g) are squarely attracted and the

appellant herein along with Jalandhar Kol acted in concert and with a

common intention to sexually assault the prosecutrix ‘R’.             Even

though the prosecutrix had clearly deposed in the evidence that the

appellant also subjected her to sexual assault, we have delved into

this aspect only because of the argument of the learned counsel for

the appellant that in the FIR and in the consent form, the role of the
17
appellant as a participant in the sexual assault of rape is not

specifically mentioned.
(f)    Lastly, - The argument that the prosecutrix was in a relationship

with the co-accused Jalandhar Kol and the implication that there was

consent has only to be stated to be rejected.
Section 114A
of the

Evidence Act, as it stood in 2004, reads as under:-
“114A. Presumption as to absence of consent in certain
      prosecutions for rape.- In a prosecution for rape under clause
(a) or clause (b) or clause (c) or clause (d) or clause (e) or clause
(g) of sub-section (2) of
Section 376
of the Indian Penal Code
      (45 of 1860), where sexual intercourse by the accused is proved
      and the question is whether it was without the consent of the
      woman alleged to have been raped and she states in her evidence
      before the Court that she did not consent, the Court shall
      presume that she did not consent.”
25.    This section came up for consideration before this Court in
State of Rajasthan vs. Roshan Khan and Others
, (2014) 2 SCC 476

and Mohd. Iqbal and Another vs. State of Jharkhand, (2013) 14

SCC 481. This Court held that in view of
Section 114A
of the

Evidence Act, there is a presumption as to absence of consent in case

of gang rape and it will be presumed that the prosecutrix did not give

consent as long as the prosecutrix states in evidence before the Court

that she did not consent.            It has further been held that the
18
presumption is based on the reasoning that nobody can be consenting

to several persons simultaneously. In this case, apart from feebly

suggesting that the prosecutrix has been having physical relations

with the co-accused Jalandhar Kol for the last four years and that she

went to the house of Jalandhar Kol out of her free will, there is

nothing concrete adduced to rebut the presumption. A reading of the

evidence of the prosecutrix makes it amply clear that she was

subjected to forcible sexual intercourse against her consent. She has

also specifically denied the suggestion that she went with Jalandhar

on her free will.
26.   We are not inclined to believe ‘SA’ (DW-1) who has deposed in

favour of the defence that the prosecutrix ‘R’ had told her that while

returning from the wedding, she had to go somewhere and then she

had gone with Jalandhar Kol and further that Raju was not present.
In her cross-examination itself, she clarified that she did not know

what Jalandhar did with the prosecutrix after taking her away nor did

she know where they went. DW-1 admitted that her father works for

the appellant. She further deposed that she never told anyone where

the prosecutrix went or with whom. It should also be pointed out
19
that PW-2, father of the prosecutrix who lodged the missing report

had mentioned in the report that DW-1 told him that she did not

know where the prosecutrix went. Further, PW-1 ‘R’ herself had

deposed that when she was being abducted DW-1 had run away. For

all these reasons, we are not prepared to attach any importance to the

evidence of DW-1.
27.   Equally, the evidence of ‘LB’ (DW-2) who claims that the

prosecutrix rented the house at Rs.200/- per month and paid Rs.200/-

as advance is also not sounding true or natural. Her evidence is also

contrary to the contents of the recovery memo Exh. P-1 inasmuch as

DW-2 denies that she brought the girl from the house of Raju at the

time of her recovery. There is also evidence to show that she is

acquainted with the appellant and we are inclined to believe that the

defence witnesses have been put up only to present a false narrative.

The witness also had not produced any receipt given for the amount

of Rs.200/- or any rental arrangement or agreement.
28.   Nothing much turns on the evidence of the Doctor, (PW-10)

who performed the medical examination on the prosecutrix. Her
20
evidence that no definite opinion could be given, and that no other

injury other than the one on the lip of ‘R’ was present, does not mean

that sexual assault was not committed on the prosecutrix ‘R’. It is

also well-settled that where the ocular evidence is clear, it will

prevail over the medical evidence. [See
Central Bureau of

Investigation and Another vs. Mohd. Parvez Abdul Kayuum and

Others
, (2019) 12 SCC 1 (para 65)]
29.   However, we need to comment on one aspect of the matter.

The prosecutrix had been subjected to the two-finger test, though the

medical examination is of 29.06.2004 and long before the judgments

of this Court in Lillu alias
Rajesh and Another vs. State of

Haryana
, (
2013) 14 SCC 643 and State of Jharkhand vs.

Shailendra Kumar Rai
alias Pandav Rai, (2022) 14 SCC 299. We

are only re-emphasizing this aspect so that this obnoxious, inhuman

and degrading practice is not repeated on victims of sexual assault.
30.
In
Shailendra Kumar
(supra), this Court, after relying on Lillu

(supra), held as under:-
65. Whether a woman is “habituated to sexual intercourse” or
      “habitual to sexual intercourse” is irrelevant for the purposes of
21
determining whether the ingredients of Section 375IPC are
       present in a particular case. The so-called test is based on the
       incorrect assumption that a sexually active woman cannot be
       raped. Nothing could be further from the truth — a woman's
       sexual history is wholly immaterial while adjudicating whether
       the accused raped her. Further, the probative value of a
       woman's testimony does not depend upon her sexual history. It
       is patriarchal and sexist to suggest that a woman cannot be
       believed when she states that she was raped, merely for the
       reason that she is sexually active.
66. The legislature explicitly recognised this fact when it
       enacted the
Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013
which inter
       alia amended the
Evidence Act
to insert Section 53-A. In terms
       of
Section 53-A
of the Evidence Act, evidence of a victim's
       character or of her previous sexual experience with any person
       shall not be relevant to the issue of consent or the quality of
       consent, in prosecutions of sexual offences.
31.    This Court further exhorted the Union and State Governments

to do the following:
“69.1. Ensure that the guidelines formulated by the Ministry of
      Health and Family Welfare are circulated to all government and
      private hospitals.
69.2. Conduct workshops for health providers to communicate
      the appropriate procedure to be adopted while examining
      survivors of sexual assault and rape.
69.3. Review the curriculum in medical schools with a view to
      ensuring that the “two-finger test” or per vaginum examination
      is not prescribed as one of the procedures to be adopted while
      examining survivors of sexual assault and rape.”

It was further directed in para 71 that any person who conducts the

“two-finger test” or per vaginum examination (while examining a
22
person alleged to have been subjected to a sexual assault) in

contravention of the directions of this Court shall be guilty of

misconduct.
32.    Even though the two-finger test in this case was carried out on

29.06.2004, long before the awareness about its inhumane nature was

created, we are only reiterating this aspect so that in future these

practices do not recur.
CHARGES UNDER SC/ST ACT – 1989 ACT – NOT MADE OUT.
33.    Before we conclude, there is one aspect which the courts below

have completely overlooked and which should enure to the benefit of

the appellant. The appellant has been convicted under
Section 3(2)
(v) of the1989 Act.
Section 3(2)(v)
of the 1989 Act, at the relevant

time, reads as under:-
“3. (2) Whoever, not being a member of a Scheduled Caste or
      Scheduled Tribe—
      ***
(v) commits any offence under the
Indian Penal Code
, 1860
      punishable with imprisonment for a term of ten years or more
      against a person or property on the ground that such person is a
      member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe or such
      property belongs to such member, shall be punishable with
      imprisonment for life and with fine;”
23
34.   A careful perusal of the section reveals that when any person

not being a member of the Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe

commits any offence under
IPC
, punishable with imprisonment with

ten years or more against a person or property on the ground that

such person is a member of a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe or

such property belongs to such member, shall be punishable with

imprisonment for life and with fine.
35.   As far as the ingredients of
Section 3(2)(v)
are concerned, the

words “on the ground that such person is a member of a Scheduled

Caste or a Scheduled Tribe” has come up for consideration before

this Court on a few occasions.
In Dinesh alias
Buddha vs. State of

Rajasthan
, (2006) 3 SC 771, this Court held as follows:-
“15. Sine qua non for application of
Section 3(2)(v)
is that an
      offence must have been committed against a person on the
      ground that such person is a member of the Scheduled Castes
      or the Scheduled Tribes. In the instant case no evidence has
      been led to establish this requirement. It is not the case of the
      prosecution that the rape was committed on the victim since
      she was a member of a Scheduled Caste. In the absence of
      evidence to that effect,
Section 3(2)(v)
has no application. Had
      Section 3(2)(v) of the Atrocities Act been applicable then by
      operation of law, the sentence would have been imprisonment
      for life and fine.”
24
36.   The holding was that the sine qua non for application of
Section 3(2)(v)
was that the offence must have been committed

against a person on the ground that such person is a member of the

Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe.
37.   To the same effect was the holding in
Asharfi vs. State of Uttar

Pradesh
, (2018) 1 SCC 742 wherein in para 8 and 9, it was held as

under:-
“8. In the present case, unamended
Section 3(2)(v)
of the
      SC/ST Prevention of Atrocities Act is applicable as the
      occurrence was on the night of 8-12-1995/9-12-1995. From the
      unamended provisions of
Section 3(2)(v)
of the SC/ST
      Prevention of Atrocities Act, it is clear that the statute laid
      stress on the intention of the accused in committing such
      offence in order to belittle the person as he/she belongs to
      Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe community.
9. The evidence and materials on record do not show that the
      appellant had committed rape on the victim on the ground that
      she belonged to Scheduled Caste.
Section 3(2)(v)
of the SC/ST
      Prevention of Atrocities Act can be pressed into service only if
      it is proved that the rape has been committed on the ground that
      PW 3 Phoola Devi belonged to Scheduled Caste community. In
      the absence of evidence proving intention of the appellant in
      committing the offence upon …………. only because she
      belongs to Scheduled Caste community, the conviction of the
      appellant under
Section 3(2)(v)
of the SC/ST Prevention of
      Atrocities Act cannot be sustained.”
38.   Similar was the holding in
Khuman Singh vs. State of

Madhya Pradesh
, (2020) 18 SCC 763.
25
39.   However, we find that the section was subjected to a closer

analysis in
Patan Jamal Vali vs. State of Andhra Pradesh
, (2021) 16

SCC 225. Speaking for the Court, Justice D.Y. Chandrachud (as the

learned Chief Justice then was), after adverting to the three earlier

judgments, rightly held that the statute did not utilize the phrase

“only on the ground”.
It was held in
Patan Jamal Vali
(supra) that

reading the expression “only” would be to add a restriction which

was not found in the statute. It was held that undoubtedly the statute

used the word “on the ground” but the juxtaposition of “the” before

“ground” does not invariably mean that the offence ought to have

been committed only on that ground. The Court held that to read the

provision in that manner would dilute a statutory provision meant to

safeguard the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes against acts of

violence which pose a threat to their dignity. It was further held that,

as the Section stood in its unamended form, knowledge by itself that

the victim belonged to Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe cannot be

said to be the basis of the commission of the offence.
We

respectfully concur with the holding in
Patan Jamal Vali
(supra).
40.   The Court went on to hold in
Patan Jamal Vali
(supra) as
26
under:
“59. … … As we have emphasised before in the judgment, an
      intersectional lens enables us to view oppression as a sum of
      disadvantage resulting from multiple marginalised identities.
      To deny the protection of
Section 3(2)(v)
on the premise that
      the crime was not committed against an SC & ST person solely
      on the ground of their caste identity is to deny how social
      inequalities function in a cumulative fashion. It is to render the
      experiences of the most marginalised invisible. It is to grant
      impunity to perpetrators who on account of their privileged
      social status feel entitled to commit atrocities against socially
      and economically vulnerable communities. This is not to say
      that there is no requirement to establish a causal link between
      the harm suffered and the ground, but it is to recognise that
      how a person was treated or impacted was a result of
      interaction of multiple grounds or identities. A true reading of
Section 3(2)(v)
would entail that conviction under this
      provision can be sustained as long as caste identity is one of
      the grounds for the occurrence of the offence. In the view
      which we ultimately take, a reference of these decisions to a
      larger Bench in this case is unnecessary. We keep that open and
      the debate alive for a later date and case.”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
41.   Earlier, in the same judgment, dealing with the situation where

oppression operated at an intersectional fashion, this Court held in

      “54. The key words are “on the ground that such person is a
      member of an SC or ST”. The expression “on the ground”
      means “for the reason” or “on the basis of”. The above
      provision (as it stood at the material time prior to its
      amendment, which will be noticed later) is an example of a
      statute recognising only a single axis model of oppression. As
      we have discussed above, such single axis models require a
      person to prove a discrete experience of oppression suffered on
      account of a given social characteristic. However, when
      oppression operates in an intersectional fashion, it becomes
27
difficult to identify, in a disjunctive fashion, which ground
       was the basis of oppression because often multiple grounds
       operate in tandem. Larrisa Behrendt, an aboriginal legal
       scholar from Australia, has poignantly stated the difficulty
       experienced by women facing sexual assault, who are
       marginalised on different counts, to identify the source of their
       oppression:
“When an Aboriginal woman is the victim of a sexual
       assault, how, as a black woman, does she know whether it is
       because she is hated as a woman and is perceived as inferior
       or if she is hated because she is Aboriginal, considered
       inferior and promiscuous by nature?” [ Larissa Behrendt,
       “Aboriginal Women and the White Lies of the Feminist
       Movement : Implications for Aboriginal Women in Rights
       Discourse”, 1 Australian Feminist Law Journal 1 (1993), p.
35.]”
                                              (Emphasis supplied)
42.
Section 3(2)(v)
has since been amended (amended on

26.01.2016) and in the amended form it reads as under:-
“3. (2) Whoever, not being a member of a Scheduled Caste or
      Scheduled Tribe—
      ***
(v) commits any offence under the
Indian Penal Code
(45 of
      1860_ punishable with imprisonment for a term of ten years or
      more against a person or property knowing that such person is a
      member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe or such
      property belongs to such member, shall be punishable with
      imprisonment for life and with fine;”
43.    The Court notices in
Patan Jamal Vali
(supra) that the

amendment has decreased the threshold of proving that the crime

was committed on the basis of the caste identify to a threshold where
28
mere knowledge is sufficient to threshold a conviction. The Court

also noticed that presumption in
Section 8
which provided that if the

accused was acquainted with the victim or his family, the court shall

presume that the accused was aware of the caste or tribal identity of

the victim unless proved otherwise.
44.   Reverting to the facts of this case, we find that there was no

evidence to bring the case within the threshold of
Patan Jamal Vali
(supra). There is no evidence whatsoever to establish the fact that

the victims caste identity was one of the grounds for the occurrence

of the offence. In the absence of any evidence attracting the offence

of
Section 3(2)(v)
, we are constrained to record an acquittal for the

appellant from the charge of
Section 3(2)(v)
of the 1989 Act.
CONCLUSION:
45.   For the reasons stated above, while maintaining the conviction

of the appellant under
Sections 366
,
342
and
376(2)(g)
of the IPC,

we set aside the conviction of the appellant under
Section 3(2)(v)
of

the 1989 Act. Coming to the sentence, we are not inclined to disturb

the sentence of five years imposed on the appellant for the offence

punishable under
Section 366
IPC as well as the fine and default
29
sentence imposed on him by the trial Court and affirmed by the High

Court. We are also not inclined to disturb the sentence imposed

under
Section 342
IPC by the trial Court and confirmed by the High

Court. However, to bring the sentence on par with that imposed on

Jalandhar Kol (A-2) for the offence under Section 376 (2)(g), we

modify the sentence of life imprisonment imposed on the appellant to

that of rigorous imprisonment for 10 years and fine of Rs.2,000/-
with default sentence of rigorous imprisonment of one year in case of

non-payment of fine. All sentences to run concurrently. The accused,

who is in custody shall serve out the remaining sentence, as directed.
46.   The appeal is partly allowed in the above terms.
……….........................J.
                                           [SANJAY KAROL]


                                       .……….........................J.
                                        [K. V. VISWANATHAN]
New Delhi;
1st May, 2025.
30