[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Gopal Govind Lakade vs The State Of Maharashtra on 6 May, 2025
2025 INSC 658
                                                                                    REPORTABLE

                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.           OF 2025
                               (@ Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 10483/2024)


            GOPAL GOVIND LAKADE & ANR.                                      ...APPELLANT(S)

                                                          VERSUS

            THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ANR.                                 ...RESPONDENT(S)


                                                     O R D E R
Leave granted.
2.              Respondent no.2 has been served.         However, there is no

            representation              on    behalf     of    respondent   no.2.     In   the

            circumstances,              we    have     heard   learned   counsel     for   the

            appellant(s) and learned counsel for the respondent/State.
3.              Learned counsel appearing for the appellant(s) drew our

            attention to the impugned order. For immediate reference, the

            impugned order dated 30.10.2023 passed by the Division Bench

            of the High Court of Bombay, Aurangabad Bench, in Criminal

            Application No. 2439/2023 is extracted as under -
“P.C.
Signature Not Verified
1. After hearing the learned advocate for the
Digitally signed by
NEETU SACHDEVA
Date: 2025.05.09
applicants for sometime, we are not inclined even
   16:39:35 IST
   Reason:                   to issue notice in this matter.
2.   Writ petition stands dismissed.”
1
4.   Learned counsel for the appellant(s) submitted that there

has been no consideration of the case of the appellant(s) by

the Division Bench of the High Court.               The High Court was not

even inclined to issue notice to the respondent(s) in the

application filed by the appellant(s) herein; that there is a

civil   dispute    between   the   appellant(s)          and    respondent     no.2

which has been given a criminal colour and an FIR has been

lodged against the appellant(s) herein which was sought to be

quashed. There being no reason whatsoever for dismissing the

complaint,   let     alone   declining     to     even    issue    notice,      the

impugned order may be set aside and the matter may be remanded

to the High Court.
5.   Learned counsel for the respondent(s)/State submitted that

appropriate orders may be made in this appeal having regard to

the nature and tenor of the impugned order.
6.   We find that the appellant(s) herein had filed a criminal

application seeking quashing of the complaint filed against the

appellant(s). If the Division Bench of the High Court was not

inclined   to     even   issue   notice    to     the    respondent(s),        then

reasons ought to have been assigned for that purpose, or in the

alternative,       notice    should       have     been        issued    to    the

respondent(s)      and   after   giving    a     fair    opportunity     to    both

sides, dismissed the complaint on merits. In the absence of any

of the aforesaid options being exercised by the Division Bench

of the High Court, we find that the impugned                     order    is    in
2
violation of the principles of natural justice inasmuch as we

are not able to gather any reason as to why the High Court was

not inclined to even issue notice to respondent(s) in the

application filed by the appellant(s) herein seeking quashing

of the FIR registered against the appellant(s).
7.    In the circumstances, we have no option but to set aside

the   impugned   order   and   restore   Criminal   Application   No.

2439/2023 on the file of the High Court, by remanding the

matter to the High Court with a request to dispose the same on

its own merits and in accordance with law.
8.    This appeal is allowed and disposed of in the aforesaid

terms.
…………………………………………………………J.
                                                  (B.V. NAGARATHNA)




                                           …………………………………………………………J.
                                            (SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA)
NEW DELHI;
MAY 06, 2025.
3
4