[Cites
50
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Vinod Infra Developers Ltd vs Mahaveer Lunia on 23 May, 2025
2025 INSC 772                                                                   REPORTABLE
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7109 OF 2025
                                     [Arising out of SLP(C) No. 4862 OF 2025]


          VINOD INFRA DEVELOPERS LTD.                                  …        APPELLANT



                                                            VERSUS

          MAHAVEER LUNIA & ORS.                                        …        RESPONDENTS



                                                      JUDGMENT
R. MAHADEVAN, J.
Leave granted.
2.             Aggrieved by the order dated 31.01.2025 passed by the High Court of

          Judicature for Rajasthan at Jodhpur 1 in S. B. Civil Revision Petition No. 99/2023,

          the appellant / plaintiff has preferred the present Civil Appeal. By the said order,

          the High Court allowed the Civil Revision Petition filed by Respondent Nos. 1 to

          4, set aside the order dated 14.07.2023 passed by the Additional District Judge No.

          7, Jodhpur, and rejected the plaint under Order VII Rule 11 of the Code of Civil
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2025.05.23
17:18:17 IST
Reason:
Procedure, 1908 (“
CPC
”).
1
Hereinafter referred to as “the High Court”
1
3.     The facts of the case as projected by the appellant are as follows:
3.1.   The appellant company claims to be the owner of the agricultural land

purchased in the year 2013, comprising Khasra No.175, 175/2, 175/4, 175/5,

175/6, 175/7 admeasuring 18 bighas 15 biswas situated in Village Pal, District

Jodhpur (“subject property”), and they obtained a loan of Rs.7,50,00,000/- from

Respondent No.1. On 23.05.2014, the Board of Directors of the appellant company

passed a resolution authorising their Managing Director Mr. Vinod Singhvi, and

authorised representative Mr. Mahaveer Lunia (Respondent No.1), to sell the

subject property. Pursuant to the said Board resolution, on 24.05.2014, Mr. Vinod

Singhvi executed unregistered power of attorney and agreement to sell in favour of

Respondent No.1, concerning the subject property.
3.2.   Subsequently, on 12.08.2015, the original sale deeds through which the

appellant company had purchased the subject property were impounded by the

Collector of Stamps for insufficient stamp duty. The appellant company challenged

this action by filing a revision petition before the Rajasthan Tax Board, which

allowed the revision and remanded the matter to the Collector of Stamps for

re-adjudication. In the meanwhile, the appellant company handed over the original

documents pertaining to the suit property to the private respondents as security for

the loan obtained by them.
2
3.3.   In April, 2022, when the appellant company approached the private

respondents to settle the loan and retrieve the original documents, the respondents

failed to respond. Consequently, on 24.05.2022, the Board of Directors of the

appellant company passed a resolution revoking the authority granted to

Respondent No.1, thereby invalidating all the actions related thereto and declaring

them as non-est. Accordingly, the power of attorney was also revoked on

27.05.2022.
3.4.   Despite the same, Respondent No.1 executed sale deeds dated 13.07.2022

and 14.07.2022 which were registered on 19.07.2022 in his favour and Respondent

Nos.2 to 4 in respect of the subject property. Based on these sale deeds, their

names were also mutated in the revenue records.
3.5.   Aggrieved, the appellant company instituted Original Civil Suit bearing

No.122 of 2022 before the District Court, Jodhpur, against Respondent Nos.1 to 4,

as well as concerned government authorities, and developer, seeking the reliefs of

declaration, possession, and permanent injunction in respect of the subject

property.
3.6.   During the pendency of the aforesaid suit, Respondent Nos.1 to 4 filed an

application under
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
seeking rejection of the plaint, which

was dismissed by the Additional District Judge No.7, Jodhpur Metropolitan, by

order dated 14.07.2023. Challenging this order, Respondent Nos.1 to 4 filed
3
S.B. Civil Revision Petition No.99 of 2023 before the High Court, which was

allowed by the impugned order dated 31.01.2025, thereby rejecting the plaint.
Aggrieved by the same, the appellant has preferred this appeal before us.
4.       The contentions of the learned counsel for the appellant are summarized as

under:
4.1.     The High Court erred in rejecting the plaint under
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
. It

is settled law that a plaint can only be rejected if it is manifestly vexatious or does

not disclose any right to sue. In the present case, the cause of action concerning the

sale deeds dated 13.07.2022 and 14.07.2022 which were registered on 19.07.2022

subsequent to the cancellation of power of attorney, clearly raises triable issues of

title and fraud, which cannot be dismissed as ‘academic’.
4.2.     The suit was based on two separate and distinct causes of action: (i) the

unregistered agreement to sell dated 24.05.2014 being in the nature of a mortgage;
and (ii)the execution of the sale deed(s) dated 13.07.2022 and 14.07.2022, which

were registered on 19.07.2022, subsequent to the revocation of the power of

attorney on 27.05.2022. The High Court erroneously treated the entire plaint as

unsustainable based on the alleged invalidity of the first cause of action, without

adjudicating upon the second.
4.3.     The Board Resolution and the General Power of Attorney executed in favour

of Respondent No.1 were revoked on 24.05.2022 and 27.05.2022, respectively.
4
Hence, the execution of sale deeds thereafter is non-est in law and raises serious

questions of validity, which must be tried by a civil court.

4.4.     Under
sections 17
,
23
and
49
of the Registration Act, 1908, an unregistered

agreement to sell is inadmissible in evidence for the purpose of transferring title.

No steps were taken to register the agreement to sell dated 24.05.2014, nor was any

suit for specific performance filed by the private respondents.
Thus, the document

has no legal sanctity in establishing ownership or rights in immovable property.

4.5.     It is well settled that title to immovable property can only be adjudicated by

a competent civil court and not by revenue authorities. Reliance was placed on
Suraj Bhan v. Financial Commissioner2
and
Jitendra v. State of Madhya

Pradesh and Others3
, wherein it was held that revenue entries are for fiscal

purposes and do not confer title.
4.6.     The appellant has specifically pleaded that the transaction represented by the

agreement to sell was in fact a mortgage arrangement. This brings the case within

the exceptions to
Section 92
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1892 thereby permitting

oral and extrinsic evidence to establish the true nature of the transaction.

4.7.     The appellant was and remains willing to repay Rs. 19 crores in order to

redeem the mortgaged property. The refusal of Respondent No. 1 to co-operate and
2
(2007) 6 SCC 186
3
2021 SCC OnLine SC 802
5
his unilateral execution of sale deeds amounts to an infringement of the appellant’s

substantive rights.
4.8.     The appellant relies on the decision of this Court in
Central Bank of India

v. Prabha Jain4
, which holds that if even one cause of action in a plaint survives,

the entire plaint must be tried. The doctrine of severance does not apply to reject an

entire plaint based on a partial defect.
With these submissions, the learned counsel seeks to allow this appeal by setting

aside the impugned order passed by the High Court and restoring the plaint to its

original position on the file.
5.       Per contra, the learned counsel for Respondent Nos.1 to 4 made the

following submissions:
5.1.     All documents executed between the parties, including the agreement to sell

dated 24.05.2014, clearly reflect a sale transaction. There is no reference to a

mortgage or loan in any document between 2014 and 2022. The claim that the

transaction was a mortgage is an afterthought, introduced only at the time of filing

the civil suit in November, 2022. Thus, the plaint discloses no cause of action, as

the entire narrative is based on an unregistered agreement to sell.
4
2025 INSC 95
6
5.2.      The High Court rightly held that the plaint was drafted in a manner intended

to abuse the judicial process by disguising a completed sale transaction as a

mortgage and claiming reliefs without proper pleadings or court fee.

5.3.      As per
Section 207
of the Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 1955, suits relating to

khatedari rights and recovery of possession based on tenancy or mortgage issues

fall within the exclusive jurisdiction of the revenue courts. The appellant

themselves claimed to be khatedari tenants seeking restoration of such rights upon

cancellation of the sale deeds. Hence, the suit lies outside the jurisdiction of the

civil court.
5.4.      The appellant has merged the claim for redemption of mortgage into

declaratory reliefs without separately praying for redemption or paying the

necessary court fee. This improper pleading supports the High Court’s conclusion

that the suit is not maintainable.
5.5.      Regarding mutation entries in the respondents’ favour, it is submitted that

once the sale deeds are validly executed and registered, the corresponding mutation

is a natural administrative consequence.
5.6.      The High Court’s view is consistent with binding precedents including

Pyare Lal v. Shubhendra Pilania and Others 5, wherein, it was held that suits for

declaration of khatedari rights must be adjudicated by revenue courts.
5
(2019) 3 SCC 692
7
5.7.   The High Court correctly exercised its jurisdiction under
Order VII Rule 11

CPC
in rejecting the plaint at the threshold, given the absence of a valid cause of

action, jurisdictional infirmities, and procedural impropriety in the reliefs sought

by the appellant.
Thus, the learned counsel submitted that the impugned order passed by the High

Court does not warrant any interference by this Court.
6.     We have heard the learned counsel appearing for both sides and perused the

materials available on record.
7.     Seemingly, the appellant, claiming ownership of the subject property

(agricultural land), instituted a suit for declaratory reliefs, primarily asserting that

despite the revocation of the power of attorney, Respondent No.1 proceeded to

execute sale deeds in respect of the subject property. Elaborating further, the

appellant stated that they had borrowed Rs. 7,50,00,000/- from Respondent No. 1

in May, 2014. In connection with this loan, the appellant executed a board

resolution, a power of attorney, and an agreement to sell in favour of Respondent

No. 1, which were all unregistered documents. The appellant contended that these

documents were not intended to effect transfer of ownership, but were executed as

security for the loan, thereby constituting a mortgage in substance, and that, the

board resolution and power of attorney were revoked on 24.05.2022 and
8
27.05.2022 respectively. It was further stated that the appellant is ready and willing

to repay Rs. 19 crores to redeem the property. The appellant also sought a

declaration that the sale deeds dated 13.07.2022 and 14.07.2022 (registered on

19.07.2022) executed by Respondent No. 1 in his favour and in favour of

Respondent Nos. 2 to 4, are void and ineffective, having been executed on the

basis of the revoked instruments. Further, a decree for possession was prayed for,

along with a permanent injunction restraining Respondent Nos. 1 to 4 and

Respondent No. 7 (developer) from alienating, altering, or undertaking any

construction or agricultural activity on the property.
7.1.   During the pendency of the suit, Respondent Nos. 1 to 4 filed an application

under
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
seeking rejection of the plaint on the grounds that it

disclosed no cause of action, no mortgage existed, the valuation was incorrect, and

the requisite court fee had not been paid.
7.2.   The trial Court (Additional District Judge, Jodhpur) dismissed the Order VII

Rule 11 application, holding that triable issues were raised. However, the High

Court allowed the application and rejected the plaint in its entirety, resulting in the

present appeal.
8.     The position of law is that rejection of a plaint under
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
is permissible only when the plaint, on its face and without considering the

defence, fails to disclose a cause of action, is barred by any law, is undervalued, or
9
is insufficiently stamped. At this preliminary stage, the court is required to confine

its examination strictly to the averments made in the plaint and not venture into the

merits or veracity of the claims. If any triable issues arise from the pleadings, the

suit cannot be summarily rejected. Keeping in mind this settled principle of law,

we proceed to examine whether the High Court was justified in rejecting the plaint

under
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
.
9.    Admittedly, the appellant is the owner of the subject property. As stated in

the plaint, the appellant received Rs. 7.5 crores from Respondent No. 1 in 2014

through cheques, in consideration of which, unregistered power of attorney and

agreement to sell were executed, purportedly based on a board resolution.

Subsequently, those documents were revoked by the appellant on 24.05.2022 and

27.05.2022 respectively. Despite the revocation and the fact that the documents

were unregistered, Respondent No. 1 executed sale deeds on 13.07.2022 and

14.07.2022, which were registered on 19.07.2022, in his favour and in favour of

Respondent Nos. 2 to 4. As per the settled law, in the absence of registration, such

documents do not confer valid authority to transfer title.
Sections 17
and
49
of the

Registration Act, 1908, clearly state that unregistered documents required to be

registered are inadmissible in evidence for the purpose of conveying title or

completing a sale transaction, and can only be admitted for collateral purposes or
10
in a suit for specific performance. This legal position has been well established in
S. Kaladevi v. V.R. Somasundaram6
, wherein, it was held as follows:
“10.
Section 17
of the 1908 Act is a disabling section. The documents defined in
          clauses (a) to (e) therein require registration compulsorily. Accordingly, sale of
          immovable property of the value of Rs.100 and more requires compulsory
          registration. Part X of the 1908 Act deals with the effects of registration and non-
          registration.
11.
Section 49
gives teeth to
Section 17
by providing effect of non-registration of
          documents required to be registered.
Section 49
reads thus:
"
S.49
. Effect of non-registration of documents required to be registered.- No
          document required by
Section 17
or by any provision of the
Transfer of Property
          Act, 1882
(4 of 1882), to be registered shall-
(a) affect any immovable property comprised therein, or
(b) confer any power to adopt, or
(c) be received as evidence of any transaction affecting such property or conferring
          such power,
          unless it has been registered:
Provided that an unregistered document affecting immovable property and
          required by this Act or the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882
(4 of 1882), to be
          registered may be received as evidence of a contract in a suit for specific
          performance under Chapter II of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 (1 of 1877), or as
          evidence of any collateral transaction not required to be effected by registered
          instrument."
12. The main provision in
Section 49
provides that any document which is required
          to be registered, if not registered, shall not affect any immovable property
          comprised therein nor such document shall be received as evidence of any
          transaction affecting such property. The proviso, however, would show that an
          unregistered document affecting immovable property and required by the 1908 Act
          or the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882
to be registered may be received as an
          evidence to the contract in a suit for specific performance or as evidence of any
          collateral transaction not required to be effected by registered instrument. By
          virtue of proviso, therefore, an unregistered sale deed of an immovable property of
          the value of Rs.100 and more could be admitted in evidence as evidence of a
          contract in a suit for specific performance of the contract. Such an unregistered
          sale deed can also be admitted in evidence as an evidence of any collateral
6
(2010) 5 SCC 401
11
transaction not required to be effected by registered document. When an
unregistered sale deed is tendered in evidence, not as evidence of a completed sale,
but as proof of an oral agreement of sale, the deed can be received in evidence
making an endorsement that it is received only as evidence of an oral agreement of
sale under the proviso to
Section 49
of the 1908 Act.
13. Recently in
K.B. Shah and Sons (P) Ltd v. Development Consultant Ltd
, this
Court noticed the following statement of Mulla in his
Indian Registration Act
, (7th
Edn., at p. 189):
"The High Courts of Calcutta, Bombay, Allahabad, Madras, Patna, Lahore, Assam,
Nagpur, Pepsu, Rajasthan, Orissa, Rangoon and Jammu & Kashmir; the former
Chief Court of Oudh; the Judicial Commissioner's Court of Peshawar, Ajmer and
Himachal Pradesh and the Supreme Court have held that a document which
requires registration under
Section 17
and which is not admissible for want of
registration to prove a gift or mortgage or sale or lease is nevertheless admissible
to prove the character of the possession of the person who holds under it......"
This Court then culled out the following principles: (
K.B. Saha
Case, SCC p. 577,
para 34)
"1. A document required to be registered, if unregistered is not admissible into
evidence under
Section 49
of the Registration Act.
2. Such unregistered document can however be used as an evidence of collateral
purpose as provided in the proviso to
Section 49
of the Registration Act.
3. A collateral transaction must be independent of, or divisible from, the
transaction to effect which the law required registration.
4. A collateral transaction must be a transaction not itself required to be effected
by a registered document, that is, a transaction creating, etc. any right, title or
interest in immovable property of the value of one hundred rupees and upwards.
5. If a document is inadmissible in evidence for want of registration, none of its
terms can be admitted in evidence and that to use a document for the purpose of
proving an important clause would not be using it as a collateral purpose."

To the aforesaid principles, one more principle may be added, namely, that a
document required to be registered, if unregistered, can be admitted in evidence as
evidence of a contract in a suit for specific performance.”
12
The aforementioned decision was followed by this Court in
Muruganandam v.

Muniyandi (Died
) through LRs7, wherein the following passage is pertinent:
“9. Having considered the matter in detail, we are of the opinion that the prayer of
         the appellant in the interlocutory application falls under proviso to
Section 49
of the
         Registration Act which provides that an unregistered document affecting immovable
         property may be received as evidence of a contract in a suit for specific
         performance. The proviso also enables the said document to be received in evidence
         of a collateral transaction.
Section 49
reads as follows:
“49. Effect of non-registration of documents required to be registered.- No document
         required by
section 17
[or by any provision of the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882
, to
         be registered shall –
(a)affect any immovable property comprised therein, or
(b)confer any power to adopt, or
(c)be received as evidence of any transaction affecting such property or conferring
         such power, unless it has been registered:
Provided that an unregistered document affecting immovable property and required
         by this Act or the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882
to be registered may be received as
         evidence of a contract in a suit for specific performance under Chapter II of the
         Specific Relief Act, 1877 or as evidence of any collateral transaction not required to
         be effected by registered instrument.”
10.
In
Kaladevi
(supra), this Court has held that an unregistered document may be
         received as evidence of a contract in a suit seeking specific performance. …”



         In the present case, Respondent No.1 has not instituted any suit for specific

performance. Moreover, the power of attorney relied upon was unregistered and

had already been revoked prior to the execution of the sale deeds. Therefore,

Respondent No.1 cannot rely on the unregistered documents to assert any

proprietary rights and had no valid authority to execute the impugned sale deeds.
7
2025 SCC OnLine SC 1067
13
9.2.      Additionally,
Section 54
of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, categorically

provides that a contract for the sale of immovable property does not, by itself,

create any interest in or charge on such property. In the present case, the appellant

has contended that the agreement to sell dated 24.05.2014 was, in substance, a

transaction executed as security for the loan amount received from Respondent

No. 1, and was effectively in the nature of a mortgage, and they are now ready and

willing to repay the loan amount and redeem the mortgaged property. As already

stated, the agreement to sell, power of attorney, and other connected documents

relied upon by Respondent No. 1 were unregistered, and therefore, in law, cannot

confer any title, interest, or ownership rights in respect of the subject property.

It is also significant to note that these documents were expressly revoked by the

appellant on 24.05.2022 and 27.05.2022 – prior to the execution of the impugned

sale deeds. Moreover, Respondent No. 1 has not filed any suit for specific

performance of the alleged agreement to sell, which further renders his claim

untenable. In the absence of a suit for specific performance, the agreement to sell

cannot be relied upon to claim ownership or to assert any transferable interest in

the property. This legal position has been conclusively
laid down by
this Court in
Suraj Lamp & Industries (P) Ltd. v. State of Haryana8
, wherein, it was held that

unregistered agreements to sell, even if coupled with possession, do not convey

title or create any interest in the immovable property. It was further clarified that
8
(2012) 1 SCC 656
14
such documents are insufficient to complete a sale unless duly registered and

followed by appropriate conveyance. The relevant paragraphs of
the said judgment
are extracted below:
“16.
Section 54
of TP Act makes it clear that a contract of sale, that is, an agreement
      of sale does not, of itself, create any interest in or charge on such property. This
      Court in
Narandas Karsondas v. S.A. Kamtam and Anr.
(1977) 3 SCC 247,
      observed: (SCC pp.254-55, paras 32-33 & 37)

             “32. A contract of sale does not of itself create any interest in, or charge
             on, the property. This is expressly declared in
Section 54
of the Transfer
             of Property Act.
See
Rambaran Prasad v. Ram Mohit Hazra
[1967]1 SCR
293. The fiduciary character of the personal obligation created by a
             contract for sale is recognised in
Section 3
of the Specific Relief Act,
             1963, and in
Section 91
of the Trusts Act. The personal obligation
             created by a contract of sale is described in
Section 40
of the Transfer of
             Property Act as an obligation arising out of contract and annexed to the
             ownership of property, but not amounting to an interest or easement
             therein.
33. In India, the word `transfer' is defined with reference to the word
             `convey'. The word `conveys' in
Section 5
of Transfer of Property Act is
             used in the wider sense of conveying ownership...
37....that only on execution of conveyance, ownership passes from one
             party to another...."
17.
In
Rambhau Namdeo Gajre v. Narayan Bapuji Dhotra
[2004 (8) SCC 614] this
      Court held:
"10. Protection provided under
Section 53-A
of the Act to the proposed
             transferee is a shield only against the transferor. It disentitles the
             transferor from disturbing the possession of the proposed transferee who
             is put in possession in pursuance to such an agreement. It has nothing to
             do with the ownership of the proposed transferor who remains full owner
             of the property till it is legally conveyed by executing a registered sale
             deed in favour of the transferee. Such a right to protect possession
             against the proposed vendor cannot be pressed in service against a third
             party."
15
18. It is thus clear that a transfer of immovable property by way of sale can only be
by a deed of conveyance (sale deed). In the absence of a deed of conveyance (duly
stamped and registered as required by law), no right, title or interest in an
immovable property can be transferred.
19. Any contract of sale (agreement to sell) which is not a registered deed of
conveyance (deed of sale) would fall short of the requirements of
Sections 54
and
55
of the TP Act and will not confer any title nor transfer any interest in an immovable
property (except to the limited right granted under
Section 53-A
of the TP Act).
According to the TP Act, an agreement of sale, whether with possession or without
possession, is not a conveyance.
Section 54
of the TP Act enacts that sale of
immovable property can be made only by a registered instrument and an agreement
of sale does not create any interest or charge on its subject-matter.

Scope of power of attorney
20. A power of attorney is not an instrument of transfer in regard to any right, title
or interest in an immovable property. The power of attorney is creation of an agency
whereby the grantor authorizes the grantee to do the acts specified therein, on behalf
of grantor, which when executed will be binding on the grantor as if done by him
(see section 1A and
section 2
of the Powers of Attorney Act, 1882). It is revocable or
terminable at any time unless it is made irrevocable in a manner known to law. Even
an irrevocable attorney does not have the effect of transferring title to the grantee.
21.
In
State of Rajasthan v. Basant Nehata
[2005 (12) SCC 77], this Court held:
"13. A grant of power of attorney is essentially governed by
Chapter X of the
Contract Act
. By reason of a deed of power of attorney, an agent is formally
appointed to act for the principal in one transaction or a series of transactions or to
manage the affairs of the principal generally conferring necessary authority upon
another person. A deed of power of attorney is executed by the principal in favour of
the agent. The agent derives a right to use his name and all acts, deeds and things
done by him and subject to the limitations contained in the said deed, the same shall
be read as if done by the donor. A power of attorney is, as is well known, a document
of convenience.
…
52. Execution of a power of attorney in terms of the provisions of the
Contract Act
as
also the
Powers of Attorney Act
is valid. A power of attorney, we have noticed
hereinbefore, is executed by the donor so as to enable the donee to act on his behalf.
Except in cases where power of attorney is coupled with interest, it is revocable. The
donee in exercise of his power under such power of attorney only acts in place of the
16
donor subject of course to the powers granted to him by reason thereof. He cannot
use the power of attorney for his own benefit. He acts in a fiduciary capacity. Any act
of infidelity or breach of trust is a matter between the donor and the donee."
An attorney holder may however execute a deed of conveyance in exercise of the
power granted under the power of attorney and convey title on behalf of the grantor.

Scope of Will
22. A will is the testament of the testator. It is a posthumous disposition of the estate
of the testator directing distribution of his estate upon his death. It is not a transfer
inter vivos. The two essential characteristics of a will are that it is intended to come
into effect only after the death of the testator and is revocable at any time during the
life time of the testator. It is said that so long as the testator is alive, a will is not be
worth the paper on which it is written, as the testator can at any time revoke it. If the
testator, who is not married, marries after making the will, by operation of law, the
will stands revoked. (see
sections 69
and
70
of Indian Succession Act, 1925).
Registration of a will does not make it any more effective.

Conclusion
23. Therefore, a SA/GPA/WILL transaction does not convey any title nor create any
interest in an immovable property. The observations by the Delhi High Court, in
Asha M. Jain v. Canara Bank
[94 (2001) DLT 841], that the "concept of power of
attorney sales have been recognized as a mode of transaction" when dealing with
transactions by way of SA/GPA/WILL are unwarranted and not justified,
unintendedly misleading the general public into thinking that SA/GPA/WILL
transactions are some kind of a recognized or accepted mode of transfer and that it
can be a valid substitute for a sale deed. Such decisions to the extent they recognize
or accept SA/GPA/WILL transactions as concluded transfers, as contrasted from an
agreement to transfer, are not good law.
24. We therefore reiterate that immovable property can be legally and lawfully
transferred/conveyed only by a registered deed of conveyance. Transactions of the
nature of `GPA sales' or `SA/GPA/WILL transfers' do not convey title and do not
amount to transfer, nor can they be recognized or valid mode of transfer of
immoveable property. The courts will not treat such transactions as completed or
concluded transfers or as conveyances as they neither convey title nor create any
interest in an immovable property. They cannot be recognized as deeds of title,
except to the limited extent of
section 53-A
of the TP Act. Such transactions cannot
be relied upon or made the basis for mutations in Municipal or Revenue Records.
What is stated above will apply not only to deeds of conveyance in regard to freehold
property but also to transfer of leasehold property. A lease can be validly transferred
17
only under a registered assignment of lease. It is time that an end is put to the
          pernicious practice of SA/GPA/WILL transactions known as GPA sales.”

9.3.      This Court reaffirmed the same position in
Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd

v. Central Bank of India & Ors9
, where it was reiterated that title and ownership

of immovable property can only be conveyed by a registered deed of sale. The

following observations are significant:
“25. The observations made by this Court in
Suraj Lamp
(supra) in paras 16 and 19 are also
          relevant.
…..
26.
Suraj Lamp
(supra) later came to be referred to and relied upon by this Court in
Shakeel Ahmed v. Syed Akhlaq Hussain
, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1526 wherein the Court
          after referring to its earlier judgment held that the person relying upon the customary
          documents cannot claim to be the owner of the immovable property and consequently not
          maintain any claims against a third-party. The relevant paras read as under:—

          “10.
Having considered the submissions at the outset, it is to be emphasized that
          irrespective of what was decided in the case of
Suraj Lamps and Industries
(supra) the fact
          remains that no title could be transferred with respect to immovable properties on the basis
          of an unregistered Agreement to Sell or on the basis of an unregistered General Power of
          Attorney.
The Registration Act, 1908
clearly provides that a document which requires
          compulsory registration under the Act, would not confer any right, much less a legally
          enforceable right to approach a Court of Law on its basis. Even if these documents i.e. the
          Agreement to Sell and the Power of Attorney were registered, still it could not be said that
          the respondent would have acquired title over the property in question. At best, on the basis
          of the registered agreement to sell, he could have claimed relief of specific performance in
          appropriate proceedings. In this regard, reference may be made to
sections 17
and
49
of
          the Registration Act and
section 54
of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882.
11. Law is well settled that no right, title or interest in immovable property can be
          conferred without a registered document. Even the judgment of this Court in the case of
Suraj Lamps & Industries
(supra) lays down the same proposition. Reference may also be
          made to the following judgments of this Court:
(i).
Ameer Minhaj v. Deirdre Elizabeth (Wright) Issar
(2018) 7 SCC 639
(ii).
Balram Singh v. Kelo Devi Civil Appeal No.
6733 of 2022
9
2025 SCC OnLine SC 352
18
(iii).
Paul Rubber Industries Private Limited v. Amit Chand Mitra, SLP(C) No.
15774 of
       2022.
12. The embargo put on registration of documents would not override the statutory
       provision so as to confer title on the basis of unregistered documents with respect to
       immovable property. Once this is the settled position, the respondent could not have
       maintained the suit for possession and mesne profits against the appellant, who was
       admittedly in possession of the property in question whether as an owner or a licensee.
13. The argument advanced on behalf of the respondent that the judgment in
Suraj Lamps
       & Industries
(supra) would be prospective is also misplaced. The requirement of
       compulsory registration and effect on non-registration emanates from the statutes, in
       particular the
Registration Act and the Transfer of Property Act
.
The ratio in
Suraj Lamps
       & Industries
(supra) only approves the provisions in the two enactments. Earlier judgments
       of this Court have taken the same view.”


9.4.
Furthermore, in
M.S. Ananthamurthy v. J. Manjula
, this Court undertook a

comprehensive analysis of the statutory provisions and precedents, and reaffirmed

that an unregistered agreement to sell does not and cannot by itself create or

transfer any right, title, or interest in immovable property. The following

paragraphs are pertinent in this regard:
“47. It is a settled law that a transfer of immovable property by way of sale can only
       be by a deed of conveyance. An agreement to sell is not a conveyance. It is not a
       document of title or a deed of transfer of deed of transfer of property and does not
       confer ownership right or title.
In
Suraj Lamp
(supra) this Court had reiterated that
       an agreement to sell does not meet the requirements of
Sections 54
and
55
of the
       TPA to effectuate a ‘transfer’.
…
51.
Section 17(1)(b)
prescribes that any document which purports or intends to
       create, declare, assign, limit or extinguish any right, title or interest, whether vested
       or contingent, of the value of one hundred rupees and upwards to or in immovable
       property is compulsorily registerable. Whereas,
section 49
prescribes that the
       documents which are required to be registered under
Section 17
will not affect any
       immovable property unless it has been registered.
….
19
53. Even from the combined reading of the POA and the agreement to sell, the
       submission of the appellants fails as combined reading of the two documents would
       mean that by executing the POA along with agreement to sell, the holder had an
       interest in the immovable property. If interest had been transferred by way of a
       written document, it had to be compulsorily registered as per
Section 17(1)(b)
of the
       Registration Act. The law recognizes two modes of transfer by sale, first, through a
       registered instrument, and second, by delivery of property if its value is less than Rs.
       100/-.”


Accordingly, it is abundantly clear that the unregistered agreement to sell dated

24.05.2014 cannot, under any circumstance, create or convey any right, title or

interest in favour of Respondent No.1 under
Section 54
of the Transfer of Property

Act, 1882. The subsequent revocation of authority further nullifies any claim to

title based on such documents.
9.5.   Furthermore,
Section 23
of the Registration Act mandates that any document

required to be registered must be presented for registration within four months

from the date of its execution. This requirement has not been fulfilled in the

present case, as the power of attorney and the agreement to sell, both executed in

2014, remain unregistered. Despite the execution of the agreement to sell on

24.05.2014, no attempt was made by Respondent No.1 to have it registered within

the stipulated period. This inaction further supports the appellant’s contention that

the said agreement is not only inadmissible under
Sections 17
and
49
of the Act,

but also legally ineffective due to non-compliance with the mandatory requirement

of timely registration. The failure to seek specific performance or register the
20
document within the period prescribed under
Section 23
renders the foundational

document unenforceable in law. That apart, the revocation of the Board Resolution

and Power of Attorney prior to the execution of the impugned sale deeds vitiates

the authority under which those deeds were executed by Respondent No.1.

Accordingly, serious triable issues arise, which must be adjudicated by a

competent civil court.
9.6.   However, the High Court erred in treating the second cause of action –

pertaining to the sale deeds registered on 19.07.2022 – as merely “academic”, and

proceeded to reject the plaint in its entirety without undertaking a judicial

examination of this distinct issue. This approach is contrary to the well settled legal

principle that a plaint may be rejected under
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
only if, on a

plain reading of the plaint, it discloses no cause of action or falls within the other

narrowly defined grounds under the said provision, such as under-valuation,

insufficient court fees, or bar by any law.
In this context, we may place reliance on

the judgment in
Central Bank of India
(supra), wherein, this Court while

examining the jurisdiction of civil courts in disputes involving immovable property

and proceedings under the
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets

and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002
, held that a plaint cannot be

rejected in its entirety merely because one of the prayers or reliefs sought is legally
21
untenable, so long as other reliefs are maintainable and based on independent

causes of action. The relevant paragraphs are extracted below:
“15. The plaintiff in her suit has prayed for 3 reliefs:
a) The first relief is in relation to a sale deed executed by Sumer Chand Jain in
      favour of Parmeshwar Das Prajapati.
b) The second relief is in relation to a mortgage deed executed by Parmeshwar Das
      Prajapati in favour of the bank.
c) The third relief is for being handed over the possession of the suit property.
24. Even if we would have been persuaded to take the view that the third relief is
      barred by
Section 17(3)
of the SARFAESI Act, still the plaint must survive because
      there cannot be a partial rejection of the plaint under
Order VII, Rule 11 of the
      CPC
. Hence, even if one relief survives, the plaint cannot be rejected under
Order
      VII, Rule 11 of the CPC
. In the case on hand, the first and second reliefs as prayed
      for are clearly not barred by
Section 34
of the SARFAESI ACT and are within the
      civil court’s jurisdiction. Hence, the plaint cannot be rejected under
Order VII Rule
      11 of the CPC
.
25. If the civil court is of the view that one relief (say relief A) is not barred by law
      but is of the view that Relief B is barred by law, the civil court must not make any
      observations to the effect that relief B is barred by law and must leave that issue
      undecided in an Order VII, Rule 11 application. This is because if the civil court
      cannot reject a plaint partially, then by the same logic, it ought not to make any
      adverse observations against relief B.”



Therefore, the High Court’s wholesale rejection of the plaint, without appreciating

that the reliefs claimed flowed from multiple and distinct causes of action –

particularly one arising after the revocation of the power of attorney – amounts to

an improper application of
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
. Selective severance of reliefs

is impermissible where different causes of action are independently pleaded and

supported by distinct facts.
22
9.7.   Although the private respondents contend that the power of attorney was

notarized, a consent letter was executed, and the transaction was reflected in the

income tax records – while also asserting possession over the subject property and

alleging that the suit was instituted merely to harass and disturb such possession –

these are all matters that require adjudication during trial. Such factual disputes

cannot be resolved at the stage of considering an application under
Order VII Rule

11 CPC
. Therefore, these contentions, even if raised, do not furnish a valid ground

for rejection of the plaint at the threshold.
10.    The appellant further contends that the mutation of the respondents’ names

in the revenue records, based on disputed sale deeds, cannot be treated as

conclusive proof of title, which is a matter for adjudication by a competent civil

court. It is well settled that issues relating to title of immovable property fall

exclusively within the jurisdiction of civil courts and not revenue authorities.

Revenue entries are administrative in nature and intended only for fiscal purposes.

This position has been consistently upheld by this court, including in
Suraj Bhan v.

Financial Commissioner
and
Jitendra v. State of Madhya Pradesh
(supra). It is

also to be reiterated that the issues raised in the plaint pertain to ownership, validity

of sale deeds, and declaration of title, which are civil in nature and, therefore,

triable exclusively by a civil court. In view of this, the applicability of
Section 207
of the Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 1955 – which bars the jurisdiction of civil courts in
23
matters relating to khatedari rights and recovery of possession based on tenancy –

does not arise in the present case. However, by rejecting the plaint and reversing

the trial Court’s well-reasoned order, the High Court assumed jurisdiction not

vested in it at this preliminary stage, thereby committing a jurisdictional error.
11.       Another contention raised by the appellant is that the suit cannot be

dismissed merely on the ground of insufficient court fee. The law mandates that

the plaintiff be afforded an opportunity to rectify such deficiency. Only upon

failure to comply, can the plaint be rejected. This principle was affirmed by a

three-Judge Bench of this Court in
Tajender Singh Ghambhir and another v.

Gurpreet Singh and Others10
, wherein, it was held as follows:
“7. While referring to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of
Section 6
, we
          shall refer to “plaint” which for the purposes of this discussion may be read to
          include “memorandum of appeal” as well. Sub-section (2) of
section 6
provides that
          in plaint in which sufficient court fee has not been paid, such plaint shall not be
          acted upon unless the plaintiff makes good the deficiency in court fee within such
          time as may from time to time be fixed by the court. Sub-section (3) provides that if a
          question of deficiency in court fee in respect of any plaint is raised and the court
          finds that the court fee paid is insufficient, it shall ask the plaintiff to make good the
          deficiency within the time which may be granted and in case of default, the plaint
          shall be rejected. The main provision of sub-section (3) mandates the court to record
          a finding whether court fee paid is sufficient on the question being raised by the
          officer concerned under section 24-A. It further provides that in answer to that
          question if the court finds that court fee paid is deficient, the court may allow the
          plaintiff to make up that deficiency within time so fixed by the court. Then there is a
          proviso appended to sub-section (3) which provides that the court may, for sufficient
          reasons to be recorded, proceed with the suit if security is given by the plaintiff for
          payment of the deficiency in court fee within time that may be granted by the court.
          It, however, requires the court not to deliver the judgment till such time deficiency is
10
(2014) 10 SCC 702
24
not recovered and if the deficiency in court fee is not made good within such time as
       the court may from time to time allow, the court may dismiss the suit or appeal.
8. The scheme of the above provisions is clear. It casts duty on the court to determine
       as to whether or not court fee paid on the plaint is deficient and if the court fee is
       found to be deficient, then give an opportunity to the plaintiff to make up such
       deficiency within the time that may be fixed by the court. The important thread that
       runs through sub-sections (2) and (3) of
section 6
of the 1870 Act is that for payment
       of court fee, time must be granted by the court and if despite the order of the court,
       deficient court fee is not paid, then consequence as provided therein must follow.”
12.    Furthermore, the contention of the private respondents that the appellant

handed over the impounded documents, based on which the sale deeds were

executed and mutation effected, are again factual matters to be examined at trial

and not at the stage of
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
. That apart, the decisions relied

upon by the respondents are of no assistance as they are factually distinguishable.
13.    In light of the above, we find that the trial court rightly held that the issues

are triable and that the application filed under
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
was without

merit. In contrast, the High Court erred in overturning this finding and rejecting the

plaint in its entirety.
14.    Accordingly, the appeal is allowed. The impugned order of the High Court is

set aside, and the order of the Additional District Judge is restored. Consequently,

the plaint is directed to be taken on the file of the trial Court, which shall proceed
25
with the suit in accordance with law, uninfluenced by any observations made in

this judgment. The parties shall bear their own costs.
15.   Connected Miscellaneous Application(s), if any, shall stand closed.
…………………………J.
                                                             [J.B. Pardiwala]



                                                         …………………………J.
                                                             [R. Mahadevan]

NEW DELHI;
MAY 23, 2025
26