[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Brig Sandeep Chaudhary vs The Union Of India on 14 May, 2025
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
2025 INSC 685


                                                                        Non-Reportable
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                              CIVIL APPEAL NO.4655 OF 2023

                            Brig Sandeep Chaudhary                          … Appellant


                                                         versus


                            Union of India & Ors.                       … Respondents


                                                    J U D G M E N T
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1.   To appreciate the controversy involved, a few key
                            factual details must be considered.         After completing
                            successful training at the Indian Military Academy, the
                            appellant was commissioned as a Lieutenant on 14th
                            December 1991 in the Corps of Electrical and Mechanical
                            Engineers. It is now known as the Corps of Electronics
                            and Mechanical Engineers (EME). Though the appellant
                            served in the EME, he also served as operations staff in
                            various locations, including high-altitude areas and
                            counter insurgency (operations). He was promoted from
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
time to time. Eventually, he reached the rank of Brigadier.
   Date: 2025.05.14
   18:40:19 IST

                            He   had      undertaken    several   courses   and   secured
   Reason:
Civil Appeal No.4655 of 2023                                       Page 1 of 12
instructional gradings in all the graded courses. He was
        selected for the United Nations Mission.       The appellant
        claims to be a decorated soldier who has been awarded
        twelve times and has been awarded the Vishisht Seva
        Medal (VSM) twice and was commanding the only R&D
        establishment of the Indian Army.
2.       On 8th December 2017, the appellant was posted as
        a Commandant, 3 Advance Base Workshop in the
        Northern Command.         The appellant earned two Annual
        Confidential Reports (for short, ‘ACRs’) during the period
        he worked in the Northern Command. He earned ACRs
        from the fourth respondent for the periods from December,
        2017 to June, 2018 (12/17 to 06/18) and from July, 2018
        to June, 2019 (07/18 to 06/19).            According to the
        appellant's case, the fourth respondent gave lukewarm
        reports due to his bias against the appellant.
3.       Prior to the aforesaid two ACRs written by the fourth
        respondent, the appellant was on the top of the batch
        based on his performance, profile, and awards. On 5th
        November 2019, the appellant submitted a first statutory
        complaint pointing out that he was not nominated for the
        NDC/APPA course.         The complaint was rejected. Even the
        second statutory complaint filed by the appellant based on
        a few additional facts on the conduct of the fourth
        respondent, was rejected.          In June/July 2021, the
Civil Appeal No.4655 of 2023                                  Page 2 of 12
appellant was considered for promotion to the rank of
        Major General, but was not empanelled.               Therefore, he
        submitted a non-statutory complaint on 5th August 2021,
        which was rejected on 19th January 2022.
4.       Being aggrieved by the said rejection, the appellant
        filed an Original Application No. 125/2022 before the
        Armed Forces Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi (for
        short, ‘the Tribunal’).          In the original application, the
        following prayers were made before the Tribunal:
“a) Call for complete ACRs of the
                          applicant and set aside the assessment
                          of IO and RO in the impugned ACR for
                          the period 12/17-06/18 and 7/18-
                          06/19.
b) Call for the records and set aside the
                          result of No.1 Selection Board held for
                          consideration of the applicant for the
                          rank of Maj Gen.”
5.       The Tribunal, by the first impugned order dated 26th
        April 2023, granted partial relief. The Tribunal directed
        expunction of figurative ratings by Initiating Officer (IO)
        and Reviewing Officer (RO) in Qualities to Assess Potential
        (QsAPs) and Box gradings of ACR for the period from
        07/18           to     06/19.   The    Tribunal    also   directed
        reconsideration of the appellant’s promotion to the rank of
        Major General within three months, without any loss to
        seniority.
Civil Appeal No.4655 of 2023                                          Page 3 of 12
6.       The appellant filed a Misc. App. No. 2094/2023 in the
        aforesaid O.A. No. 125/2022, seeking leave to file an
        appeal against the first impugned order before this Court.
        By the second impugned order dated 25th May 2023, the
        application for the grant of leave for filing an appeal was
        rejected.
SUBMISSIONS
7.       The learned counsel appearing for the appellant has
        taken us through the documents on record. The learned
        counsel submitted that all throughout, the appellant’s
        performance was beyond excellent, which is reflected from
        the medals conferred on him. He pointed out that the
        appellant had been awarded twelve times, including two
        VSMs.
8.       The learned counsel pointed out that there is
        evidence adduced on record, including the statements of
        the officers about the conduct of the fourth respondent
        towards the appellant.        The learned counsel submitted
        that there was no reason to take such a view.                 His
        submission is that the mala fides of the fourth respondent
        towards the appellant must be considered.
9.       Inviting our attention to the first impugned order, the
        learned counsel pointed out that the second ACR for the
        period 07/18 to 06/19 has been set aside partially, but the
Civil Appeal No.4655 of 2023                                    Page 4 of 12
earlier ACR of the period 12/17 to 06/18 has not been
        interfered with, though the basis of both ACRs is the same.
        He invited our attention to the finding recorded in the first
        impugned order. In paragraph 35, he pointed out that
        there is a finding that in the portion of the ACR that is not
        to be disclosed to the appellant, the entries therein
        distinctively showed the intent of the fourth respondent to
        affect the lower figurative ratings intentionally, which is
        masked from the knowledge of the appellant.                His
        submission is that there was no reason to treat the two
        ACRs separately. He pointed out the role played by the
        fourth respondent, who nursed a grudge against the
        appellant. He submitted that the fourth respondent has
        intelligently brought down merit in the first ACR.          He
        submitted that the fourth respondent had a biased and
        premeditated intent against the appellant. He pointed out
        that the appellant was graded ‘outstanding’ by the same
        IO in the first ACR. Because there was a large flair of 8s
        in the first ACR, the competitive rating of the appellant was
        brought down despite an overall Box grading of 9. Thus,
        presumably, grading 8 with the same assessment in the
        second ACR is beyond the perception of any prudent man.
        He also pointed out that ACRs for both periods were
        written beyond the permitted time.
Civil Appeal No.4655 of 2023                                 Page 5 of 12
10. As noted in the order dated 26th September 2024, the
        learned Additional Solicitor General (ASG) has produced
        three sets of one file and two sets of ACRs, which were
        returned to the learned ASG after perusal. The learned
        ASG submitted that the Tribunal has provided cogent
        reasons for not interfering with the first ACR.                  In the
        second ACR, as it was found that the assessment was
        biased and premeditated, the Tribunal expunged it. The
        learned ASG pointed out that the assessment of the
        officers through ACRs is being regulated by Army Order
        bearing AO No.02/2016/MS.                     It provides for giving
        numeric gradings from one to nine. It also provides a pen
        picture of the officer by three different officers.                  The
        assessment is made by three officers: (i) Initiating Officer
        (IO); (ii) Reviewing Officer (RO); and (iii) Senior Reviewing
        Officer (SRO). She also pointed out how assessments are
        made using numeric values, ranging from nine to one. She
        pointed          out    that   the    statutory   and    non-statutory
        complaints             made    by    the   appellant    were   properly
        considered and disposed of. She would, therefore, submit
        that there is no reason to interfere with the finding of fact
        recorded by the Tribunal as regards the first ACR. She
        relied upon a decision of this Court in the case of
Dev Dutt
        v. Union of India & Ors1
.
1
(2008) 8 SCC 725
Civil Appeal No.4655 of 2023                                            Page 6 of 12
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
11. We            have     given    careful     consideration     to    the
        submissions. Part I of the ACR in accordance with AO
        No.02/2016/MS consists of personal data, service record
        and authentication of data. Part II consists of personal
        and       demonstrated         performance,        which   consists       of
        personal           qualities   and      demonstrated       performance
        variables.             The personal qualities and demonstrated
        performance qualities include administrative acumen,
        motivation,            development     of     subordinates,     emotional
        stability,         understanding        viewpoints,    foresight       and
        understanding, loyalty and respect, judicious delegation,
        boldness, physical fitness and fluency in expression. The
        assessment is to be made by the IO and RO. The rating is
        given on a scale of nine to one. Then, there are pen pictures
        by the IO, RO and SRO. The pen pictures by RO and the
        SRO are not to be shown to the officer. Part III consists of
        the potential for promotion, which is to be shown to the
        officer reported upon. The Qualities to Assess Potential
        are termed as QsAP.                There are five QsAPs.        They are
        professional competence, vision and conceptual ability,
        selflessness and setting of personal example, integrity and
        moral courage and                  tolerance    for ambiguity.         The
        assessment is to be made by the IO, RO and SRO. The last
        portion of Part III is Box grading given by the IO, RO and
        SRO. This part is not to be shown to the officer.
Civil Appeal No.4655 of 2023                                              Page 7 of 12
12. As stated earlier, numerical values from 9 to 1 are
        used for assessment. The numerical value of 9 is stated
        as ‘outstanding’, and the numerical value of 7 or 8 is
        treated as ‘above average’.
13. Now, we turn to the finding recorded by the Tribunal.
        From paragraph 33 onwards, scrutiny of ACRs was made
        by the Tribunal. Paragraphs 34 to 36 of the first impugned
        order deal with the ACR of the appellant from 07/18 to
        06/19. Paragraphs 34 to 36 of the first impugned order
        read thus:
“34. We have further examined the
                          subsequent ACR of the applicant
                          covering the period from 01.07.2018 to
                          30.06.2019, wherein the IO and the
                          SRO remain the same whereas there
                          has been a change of RO with effect
                          from 01.01.2019. Compared to the
                          previous report by the same IO, this
                          report under examination almost has a
                          similar pattern while grading the ratee
                          in individual boxes in PQs (Personal
                          Qualities) & DPVs (Demonstrated
                          Performance Variables) which is shown
                          to the ratee. The assessment of QsAP
                          (Qualities to Assess Potential) is
                          indicative of the potential of the ratee
                          for his suitability in higher ranks in
                          future, if promoted. The relatively
                          lower ratings in QsAP by IO as well as
                          the box grading which has been further
                          endorsed by the RO has not been
                          adequately justified by Respondents
                          except for the reason of inaccurate
Civil Appeal No.4655 of 2023                                         Page 8 of 12
initiation of Strength Return (IAFF
                          3008) of the officers of No 3 ABW and
                          non-communication         of   adverse
                          remarks in the ACR to a ratee officer
                          under the applicant.
35. Curiously, it is important to note
                          that the Respondent No.4 as IO has
                          maintained         some        figurative
                          assessment in the portion of the ACR
                          which is to be shown to the ratee, i.e.,
                          applicant and signed as seen. Whereas
                          it is only in the part of the ACR which
                          is not to be seen by the ratee, the IO
                          has awarded relatively low gradings.
Confidential reports are meant to be
                          the appraisal of performance of the
                          ratees.      By maintaining similar
                          figurative gradings on the disclosed
                          part of the ACR, the reporting
                          officers have intended to indicate
                          the ratee that there is no downward
                          trend in his performance during the
                          period of report whereas in the
                          portion of the ACR that is not
                          disclosed to the applicant the report
                          has distinctively indicated the
                          intent to affect lower figurative
                          ratings intentionally masked from
                          the knowledge of the applicant.
36. We further note that the SRO who
                          remains common for both the reports
                          has endorsed the report of IO & RO as
                          justified and yet he has maintained
                          same box gradings in both his reports
                          under analysis. Therefore, the QsAPs
                          and the Box gradings of the CR
                          07/2018 to 06/2019 by RO warrant
Civil Appeal No.4655 of 2023                                          Page 9 of 12
interference and are required to be
                          expunged.”
14. We had perused the ACRs of the appellant.                            The
        reasons recorded while dealing with the ACR of 07/18 to
        06/19 can be summarised as under:
i. The assessment of QsAP is indicative of the
                          potential     of    the   ratee    (appellant)   for     his
                          suitability    in    higher       ranks   in   future,     if
                          promoted;
ii. Relatively lower ratings in QsAP by the IO and
                          relatively lower ratings in Box grading by the IO
                          endorsed by the RO have not been adequately
                          justified by the respondents;
iii. The fourth respondent, in his capacity as IO,
                          has maintained the same figurative assessment
                          in the portion of ACR to be shown to the ratee
                          (appellant). However, it is only in the part of the
                          ACR which is not to be seen by the ratee
                          (appellant), the IO has awarded relatively low
                          gradings;
iv. SRO was the same for both the ratings who has
                          endorsed the report of the IO and the RO as
                          justified, but had maintained the same Box
                          gradings; and
Civil Appeal No.4655 of 2023                                               Page 10 of 12
v. Therefore, the Tribunal ordered expunction of
                          figurative ratings by the IO and the RO in QsAPs
                          and Box gradings in the second ACR (07/2018
                          to 06/2019).
15. The challenge before the Tribunal was to both the
        ACRs. We may note here that IO and SRO for both the
        ACRs are the same. IO is the fourth respondent. However,
        RO for the two ACRs was different. The Tribunal has found
        fault with the approach of the IO in awarding relatively low
        gradings in that part of the ACR which is not visible to the
        ratee (appellant). In fact, there is a finding of fact recorded
        in paragraph 35 of the first impugned order, which we have
        quoted above. The intent of the fourth respondent is also
        noted. The finding is that there was an intent to affect
        lower figurative ratings to the appellant which is masked
        from the knowledge of the appellant. After having perused
        the ACRs, we are of the view that the same reasoning is
        applicable to the ACR of the period from 12/17 to 06/18.
        Unfortunately, the Tribunal has considered the case of the
        first ACR only in the context of the performance
        counselling letter dated 9th February 2018. We may note
        here that the respondents have not challenged the finding
        recorded in paragraphs 35 and 36 of the first impugned
        order. We are, therefore, of the view that the first ACR
        cannot be treated differently from the second ACR.
Civil Appeal No.4655 of 2023                                      Page 11 of 12
16. Therefore, we direct that the expunction of figurative
        ratings by IO and RO in QsAPs and Box grading of the ACR
        for the period 12/17 to 06/18 shall be made. Accordingly,
        the first impugned order dated 26th April 2023 is modified
        by      granting       the     aforesaid   additional    relief   while
        maintaining            the     relief   already   granted.        Now,
        reconsideration of the appellant for promotion to the rank
        of Major General shall be made in terms of the operative
        part       of    the   first   impugned     order   by   taking     into
        consideration the additional relief granted as above. If the
        appellant has already superannuated, his case for the
        notional promotion and grant of monetary benefits shall
        be considered within three months from today.
17. The appeal is, accordingly, allowed with no order as
        to costs.
.…………………………….J.
                                                   (Abhay S. Oka)



                                                    …………………………….J.
                                                   (Ahsanuddin Amanullah)



                                                    …………………………….J.
                                                   (Augustine George Masih)
        New Delhi;
May 14, 2025.
Civil Appeal No.4655 of 2023                                          Page 12 of 12