[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
All India Judges Association vs Union Of India on 16 May, 2025
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
B.R. Gavai
REPORTABLE

         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
        INHERENT/ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


             I.A. No. 135045 OF 2023
                      WITH
       I.A. NOS. 187237 AND 187240 OF 2024
                        IN
        WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 1022 OF 1989


ALL INDIA JUDGES ASSOCIATION
AND OTHERS                             …PETITIONERS

                     VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS                        …
RESPONDENTS



IN THE MATTER OF:
SACHIN KUMAR GUPTA
AND OTHERS            …APPLICANTS/INTERVENORS


COURT MANAGER WELFARE
ASSOCIATION           …APPLICANT/INTERVENOR


                       AND


        WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 301 OF 2024




                        1
                                              INDEX


I.        PREFACE................................................................................2
II. FACTUAL POSITION................................................................4
     a.     Concept of “Court Managers” from the Report of FC-XIII......4
     b.     Letter by the Finance Ministry dated 20 th September 2010...5
     c.     Letter by Finance Ministry dated 10th July 2013................10
     d. Judgment of this Court in the present proceedings dated 2 nd
     August 2018............................................................................11
     e.     Report of the SNJPC dated 4th February, 2022....................12
     f.     Filing of the present IAs and the Writ Petition...................17
III.        SUBMISSIONS....................................................................18
IV.         ISSUE FOR CONSIDERATION..............................................22
V.        ANALYSIS..............................................................................23
VI.         CONCLUSION.....................................................................32



                                      JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI, CJI


I.          PREFACE
1.          This matter involves a peculiar issue concerning the

situation of Court Managers, who were introduced by the

Thirteenth Finance Commission (2010-2015) to enhance the

efficiency of court management by providing administrative

support to the judges resulting in improved case disposal.
2
2.    One Court Manager Welfare Association has filed an

application       being   I.A.   No.187240   of   2024   seeking

intervention. Further, I.A. No.187237 of 2024 has been filed

by the applicant, inter alia seeking directions to bring

uniformity and enhancement in the service conditions of

Court Managers across India by granting them a higher pay

scale with appropriate allowances as recommended by the

Second National Judicial Pay Commission1. The applicant

also seeks recognition of Court Managers as Class I Gazetted

Officers, regularization of those still on a contractual basis,

and consideration of their past continuous service for

pensionary and monetary benefits. It further prays for the

directions from this Court that would result in framing of

uniform rules for career progression and promotions, along

with the formulation of a structured duty roster outlining

their roles, responsibilities, and delegated authority to ensure

efficient judicial administration.
3.    Another application being I.A. No. 135045 of 2023 has

been filed by Sachin Kumar Gupta and others seeking

intervention and directions to expedite the proceedings of LPA

1 “SNJPC” for short.
3
1951 of 2019 pending adjudication before the High Court of

Punjab and Haryana and to direct the Union of India to

absorb/regularise the services of the intervenors for the post

of Court Manager in the State of Punjab, Haryana and Union

Territory of Chandigarh.
4.     Lastly, one writ petition being W.P. (C) 301 of 2024 has

been filed by Lokesh Kumar and another seeking similar

reliefs as sought in I.A. No.187237 of 2024.
II.    FACTUAL POSITION
      a.   Concept of “Court Managers” from the Report of
           FC-XIII
5.     The concept of “Court Managers” was first proposed by

the    Thirteenth   Finance    Commission   (2010-2015).      The

Thirteenth      Finance       Commission       (FC-XIII)   report

recommended thus:
"12.87     Creation of posts of court managers:
Enhancing the efficiency of court management
       would result in improving case disposal. Providing
       support     to    judges    for  performing    their
       administrative duties would allow them more time
       for their judicial functions. Adopting an innovative
       approach, the Department of Justice has proposed
       that professionally qualified Court Managers, with
       MBA degrees, be employed to assist judges. These
       Court Managers will also be useful in feeding the
       proposed National Arrears Grid that would be set up
       to monitor disposal of cases in all the courts. We
4
support this innovation, the impact of which may be
      evaluated after 2015. The post of a Court Manager
      would be created in each judicial district to assist
      the Principal, District and Sessions judges in the
      administrative functioning of the courts. Similarly,
      posts of two Court Managers may be created for
      each High Court and one for each bench of the High
      Court. This is estimated to require Rs. 60 crore per
      year and works out to Rs. 300 crore for the period
      2010-15. These amounts have been allocated to the
      states in proportion to the number of judicial
      districts in their jurisdiction."
6.    It can thus be seen that the Thirteenth Finance

Commission had recommended the creation of the post of

Court Managers with the aim of providing assistance to

judges in performing their administrative duties. It was

proposed that the Court Managers would be appointed at

both the District Court/Sessions Court level as well as the

High Court level. It also records the estimation and allocation

of funds required for the remuneration and other expenditure

which is to be incurred by the States for appointing such

Court Managers.
b.   Letter by the Finance        Ministry   dated   20th
          September 2010
7.    Pursuant thereto, a letter (No. F 32(30) FCD/2010)

dated 20th September 2010 came to be addressed by the
5
Director,   Finance   Commission        Division,   Department     of

Expenditure,    Ministry      of    Finance    to   the    Secretary,

Department of Justice, seeking implementation of the

recommendations       given        by   the   Thirteenth    Finance

Commission (FC-XIII). The said letter was accompanied by

“Guidelines for release and utilization of Grant-in-aid for the

Improvement in Justice Delivery as recommended by the

Thirteenth Finance Commission”. The relevant portion of the

said guidelines is as under:
"12. Creation of posts of Court Managers:
12.1 With a view to enhancing the efficiency of court
     management, and resultant improvement in case
     disposal, Rs.300 crore have been allocated for
     employment of professionally qualified Court
     Managers to assist judges. The Court Managers,
     with MBA degrees, will support the judges to
     perform their administrative duties, thereby
     enabling the judges to devote more time to their
     judicial functions. The post of a Court Manager
     would be created in each judicial district to assist
     the Principal District and Session judges. Two posts
     of Court Manager may be created for each High
     Court, and one for each Bench of the High Court. In
     case the High Court is of the opinion that one Court
     Manager would be sufficient for more than one
     district, then HLMC can also take such a decision."
8.   It can thus be clear that the said guidelines reiterated

the allocation of the funds for the creation of the post of
6
Court Managers and recommended the number of posts to be

created at each level, be it at the High Court level or at the

District/ Sessions Court level.
9.   The    “Suggested     Functions,   Responsibilities    and

Qualifications of the Court Managers” were provided in

Annexure III to the said guidelines, which are set out below:
“Policies and Standards

     (1) Based on applicable directives of superior courts,
     establish the performance standards applicable to
     the court (including on timeliness, efficiency; quality
     of court performance; infrastructure; and human
     resources; access to justice; as well as for systems
     for court management and case management).
     (2) Carry out an evaluation of the compliance of the
     court with such standards; identify deficiencies and
     deviations; identify steps required to achieve
     compliance; maintain such an evaluation on a
     current basis through annual updates.
Planning
     (3) In consultation with the stakeholders of a court
     (including the Bar, ministerial staff, Executive
     Agencies supporting judicial functions such as
     prosecutors/police/process serving agencies and
     court users), prepare and update annually a 5-year
     court-wise Court Development Plan (CDP);
     (4) Monitor the implementation of the CDP and
     report to superior authorities on progress
     Information and Statistics
7
(5) Ensure that statistics on all aspects of the
functioning of the Court are compiled and reported
accurately and promptly in accordance with systems
established by the High Court;
(6) Ensure that reports on statistics are duly
completed and provided as required;
Court Management
(7) Ensure that the processes and procedures of the
court (including for filing, scheduling, conduct of
adjudication, access to information and documents
and grievance redressal) are fully compliant with
the policies and standards established by the High
Court for court management and that they
safeguard quality, ensure efficiency and timeliness,
and minimize costs to litigants and to the State; and
enhance access to justice. (Note: standard systems
for court management should be developed at the
High Court level).
Case Management
(8) Ensure that case management systems are fully
compliant with the policies and standards
established by the High Court for case management
and that they address the legitimate needs of each
individual litigant in terms of quality, efficiency and
timeliness, costs to litigants and to the State (Note:
standard systems for case management should be
developed at the High Court level).
Responsiveness Management: Access to Justice;
Legal Aid and User Friendliness
(9) Ensure that the court meets standards
established by the High Court on access to justice,
legal aid and user friendliness.
8
Quality Management
(10) Ensure that the court meets quality of
adjudication standards established by the High
Court.
Human Resource Management
(11) Ensure that Human Resource Management of
ministerial staff in the court comply with the
Human       Resource     Management   standards
established by the High Court.
Core Systems Management
(12) Ensure that the core systems of the court are
established and function effectively (documentation
management; utilities management; infrastructure
and facilities management; financial systems
management (audits, accounts, payments);
IT Systems Management
(13) Ensure that the IT systems of the court comply
with standards established by the High Court and
are fully functional.
(14) Feed the proposed National Arrears Grid to be
set up to monitor the disposal of cases in all the
courts, as and when it is set up.
Qualifications
Court Managers may have the following minimum
qualifications:
a.   A degree or advanced diploma in general
     management;
b.   5 years’ experience/training in systems
     and process management;
9
c.    5 years’ experience/training in IT systems
           management, HR management, financial
           systems management;
d.    Excellent people skills
     e.    Excellent communication skills.
     f.    Excellent computer application skills.”
10. It can be seen from the said guidelines that the main

function of the Court Managers was to increase efficiency

and quality in the working of the courts and judges by

assisting the administration in Case Management, Human

Resource   Management,      Core     Systems   Management,   IT

Systems Management, etc. It was also recommended that the

Court Managers maintain information and statistics on all

aspects of functioning of the Court through collection of data

as well as prepare and update annually the 5-year Court

Development Plans. The said guidelines also recommended

that the minimum qualifications for appointment as a Court

Manager should be that the candidate must have a degree or

advanced diploma in management with an experience of five

or more years in Human Resources, Information Technology

or Financial Management and the candidate must have
10
strong people skills, communication skills and computer

application skills.
c.    Letter by Finance Ministry dated 10th July 2013
11. Pursuant to the said guidelines, the Director, Finance

Commission Division, Department of Expenditure, Ministry

of Finance, vide another letter dated 10th July 2013, informed

to the Finance Secretaries of all States that an amount of Rs.

300 crore had been allocated for the employment of

professionally qualified Court Managers to assist the judges.

The States were allowed to use a part of their grant to provide

support to the Court Managers, provided that it does not

exceed Rs. 20,000/- per month per Court Manager.
12. Thereafter, in view of the aforesaid, many High Courts

and District Courts started appointing Court Managers, but

in the majority of the courts, the appointments were made

merely on a contractual basis since there were no formal

rules drafted for the employment of Court Managers. Thus,

these contractually appointed Court Managers had varied

pay scales and had no allowances or benefits arising out of

the employment.
11
d.     Judgment of this Court in the               present
           proceedings dated 2nd August 2018
13. This Court, in its judgment dated 2nd August 2018 given

in All India Judges’ Association and Others. v. Union of

India and Others2 in another application filed in this matter

itself, had discussed about the need of sound infrastructure

in the subordinate courts. While the issues raised in that

application were regarding general infrastructure, this Court,

gave directions regarding the necessary constituents of a

“Court Complex”. As a part of the discussion of the efficient

dispensation and the accessibility to justice for the litigants,

the role and importance of Court Managers was also

discussed. A direction was also given that Court Managers

who are already working must be regularized by the State

Government as their assistance was found necessary for a

proper administrative setup in the courts.

    e.     Report of the SNJPC dated 4th February, 2022
14. Thereafter, the SNJPC, under the Chairmanship of Mr.

Justice P. Venkatarama Reddi, former Judge of this Court,

was tasked with reviewing the pay scales, emoluments, and

service conditions of judicial officers in India’s district

2 (2018) 17 SCC 555 : 2018 INSC 671
12
judiciary. The post of Court Managers was also discussed as

there existed a number of vacanies and their services were

not being fully utilized. The relevant portion of the SNJPC

Report dated 4th February 2022 is as under:
“31. COURT MANAGERS
     31.1 The appointment of Court Managers had
     started with 13th Finance Commission Scheme
     (Grant-in-aid scheme-2010). Now, in most of the
     States, Court Managers (who are MBAs – some of
     them are also Law graduates) are in place. They are
     required to have experience in IT Systems
     Management/Human         Resources    or   Financial
     Management. There are Senior Court Managers, in
     addition to Court Managers in many States.
However, in most of the States, there are quite a
     number of vacancies remaining unfilled for years.
     According to the inputs received by the Commission,
     it appears that the services of Court Managers are
     not being fully utilized in some Courts in order to
     subserve the purpose for which they are appointed.
     The duties and responsibilities of Court Managers
     are laid down either in the Rules or the Circulars
     issued by the High Courts. Rules or Orders are in
     force in various States governing the qualifications,
     recruitment and conditions of service.
31.2 The need to avail the services of professionally
     qualified Court Managers was stressed by the apex
     Court in the case of AIJA (2018) 17 SCC 555 and a
     direction was given to regularize the services of
     Court Managers already working. In this context,
     para 12.9 of the Order passed by the Hon’ble
     Supreme Court is relevant.
“12.9. Professionally qualified Court
          Managers, preferably with an MBA
          degree, must also be appointed to render
          assistance in performing the court
13
administration. The said post of Court
     Managers must be created in each
     judicial district for assisting Principal
     District and Sessions Judges. Such Court
     Managers would enable the District
     Judges to devote more time to their core
     work, that is, judicial functions. This, in
     turn, would enhance the efficiency of the
     District Judicial System. These Court
     Managers would also help in identifying
     the weaknesses in the court management
     systems and recommending workable
     steps under the supervision of their
     respective Judges for rectifying the same.
     The services of any person already
     working as a Court Manager in any
     district should be regularized by the State
     Government as we are of the considered
     view that their assistance is needed for a
     proper administrative set-up in a court.”
31.3 Incidentally, we may mention that there is an
informative and analytical paper prepared by
DAKSH with the title “A study on the Role of Court
Managers in Indian Judiciary” (2020). NALSAR
University of Law at Hyderabad, in the report
submitted to the Department of Justice on the
subject – “A Study on Court Management
Techniques For…Subordinate          Courts” (2016),
stressed the need for efficient Court Managers.
31.4 In most of the States, the regularization of
services of Court Managers has not taken place in
spite of long passage of time. The directive of the
Supreme Court remains unimplemented though the
High Courts have been addressing the State
Governments in this regard. They continue to work
either on a consolidated pay, the maximum of which
is perhaps Rs.70,000/- (in the State of Telangana)
or the inadequate pay provided for in the Rules.
Either there are no allowances or the allowances
fixed are quite low. For instance, in Maharashtra,
14
the Court Managers are appointed on contract basis
for a period upto 5 years. The fixed pay of Senior
Court Manager is Rs.51,500/- plus allowances (total
Rs.64,000/-) and the Court Manager gets
Rs.52,900/- (including allowances). There is a
provision to increase fixed pay by 6% per annum if
the service is satisfactory. In Maharashtra, the
Court Managers of all ranks are almost in full
strength. In Rajasthan, out of 35 Court Managers’
posts sanctioned for District Courts, 29 are
presently working. Their pay is Rs.40,000/- p.m.
with a provision for increase by 10% every year. The
regularization process seems to be under
consideration.
31.5 In Gujarat, the Court Managers who are
appointed on      contract basis get consolidated
annual salary of Rs.7 lakhs in the 1 st year and from
2nd year, (s)he gets 10% incentive for ‘effective
work’. In Tamil Nadu, as per the Rules of 2012
framed by Madras High Court under
Article 229
of
the Constitution, the temporary posts of Court
Managers carry the pay scale of Rs.15600-39100
with Grade Pay (GP) of Rs.6600/-. The same pay
pattern is in force for the Court Managers in the
States of Punjab and Haryana. In the State of
Chhattisgarh (where Rules have been amended to
provide for regular cadre of Court Managers), the
pay of Senior Court Manager and Court Manager
respectively is Rs.15600-39100 plus Rs.5400/-
Grade Pay (GP) and Rs.9300-34800 plus Rs.4800/-
Grade Pay (GP). It is not clear whether they get any
allowances.
31.6 The Rules of 2018 framed by the State of
Assam are quite comprehensive and provide for
better pay benefits. Scale of pay – Rs.30000-110000
with grade pay of Rs.14500/- and annual increment
of 3%. More importantly, they are eligible to get all
the allowances admissible to Government servants
placed in the said pay scale. In the State of Assam,
the Gauhati High Court (Appointment and
15
Conditions of Service of Court Managers for the
     State   of   Assam)     Rules    2018   contemplate
     appointment of Court Managers on regular basis
     with the provisions for probation and confirmation.
     31.7 In Kerala, the Court Managers appointed on
     contract basis are working in 8 District Courts, the
     sanctioned strength being 14. It appears, the
     process for regularization is under active
     consideration of Government. Presently, they get the
     pay of Rs.42500-87000 (pre-revised).
31.8 The Commission submits that in view of the
     ad hocism in conditions of service prevailing in
     various States, it would be appropriate if the Hon’ble
     Supreme Court issues a supplemental directive to
     the State Governments regarding creation of regular
     cadre of Court Managers and regularization of
     services of Court Managers appointed on contract or
     ad hoc basis. In any case, in whatever capacity they
     are appointed, there is every need to give them the
     benefit of higher pay with reasonable quantum of
     allowances. The Commission suggests accordingly.”
15. It is thus clear that in its comprehensive report, the

SNJPC addressed various aspects of judicial administration,

including the role of Court Managers. The SNJPC recognized

the importance of professional management in courts to

enhance efficiency and reduce the administrative burden on

the judges. It recommended the appointment of Court

Managers to handle non-judicial functions, allowing judges to

focus on their core judicial responsibilities. The SNJPC also

analysed the remuneration and the employment status of the
16
Court Managers in various States including Telangana,

Maharashtra and Rajasthan where the Court Managers

continued to work on either a consolidated pay or on a

contractual basis. The Report recognized the Gauhati High

Court (Appointment and Conditions of service of Court

Managers for the State of Assam) Rules, 2018 3 as being

comprehensive rules whereby the Court Managers were

regularized and were given pay benefits and an annual

increment.
16. The SNJPC Report concluded that in view of the ad-

hocism in the conditions of service of Court Managers, this

Court should issue supplemental directions to the State

Governments for creating regular cadre of Court Managers

and the regularization of their services. It was also concluded

that, in any case, the benefit of higher pay with allowances

must be given to the Court Managers.
f.     Filing of the present IAs and the Writ Petition
17. It is therefore clear that after the recommendations of

the Thirteenth Finance Commission, the SNJPC Report and

judgment of this Court in the present proceedings dated 2nd

3 “Assam Rules of 2018” for short.
17
August 2018, it was expected that the High Courts across the

country would frame rules qua Court Managers and that the

State Governments would approve the same. However, upon a

perusal of the affidavits submitted by the various State

Governments and the High Courts in Ι.Α. Νos. 187237 of

2024 and 187240 of 2024, it can be seen that some of the

High Courts have finalised the rules for Court Managers

which   have   been   approved     by   their   respective   State

Governments. Whereas, the rules prepared by some of the

High Courts are pending approval of the concerned State

Governments. It is further noticed that few of the High

Courts are yet to even frame the rules. As a result, the

present batch of IAs so also the Writ Petition came to be filed

before this Court.
18. The learned amicus curiae has submitted a tabular

chart depicting the position with regard to the status of rules

pertaining to the service conditions of the Court Managers in

each of the High Courts.
19. Upon perusal of the said chart, it can be seen that the

rules qua Court Managers in some of the States are yet to be

framed by the High Courts and yet to be approved by the
18
State Governments. Not only that, a perusal of the rules in

existence show that there is no uniform practice adopted by

the High Courts as well as State Governments in framing and

implementing the rules regarding Court Managers.

III.   SUBMISSIONS
20. We have heard Shri Siddharth Bhatnagar who was

requested by this Court to assist as an amicus curiae. Shri

Bhatnagar has tirelessly consolidated the stands of various

High Courts and various State Governments and also given

his valuable suggestions with regard to the directions to be

issued by this Court. We have also heard various learned

Senior Counsel/learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

High Courts, State Governments and intervenors/petitioners.
21. Shri Bhatnagar submits that in view of the Report of the

Thirteenth Finance Commission, the SNJPC Report and the

clear directions of this Court vide the judgment in the

present proceedings dated 2nd August 2018, the Court

Managers appointed across India on a contractual or a

consolidated pay basis must be regularized and higher pay-

scales, along with appropriate allowances must be granted to
19
them. It is submitted that as per
Articles 229 4
and 3095 of

Constitution       of     India,     the   High      Courts      and      State

Governments have the power to determine the conditions of

service of its employees and hence, it may not be possible to

adopt a uniform pay scale and conditions of service. He,

however, submits that subject to minor variations, the rules

to be made applicable to the Court Managers in respect of all

States should largely be uniform so that there is not much

variance in the pay-scales and conditions of service of Court

Managers in some States as compared to the other States.
22. Shri Bhatnagar further submitted that the Assam Rules

of 2018, which have been drafted by the High Court of

Gauhati and approved by the State of Assam are the most

appropriate, and therefore, they should be considered as

model rules by the other High Courts and the State

Governments. He further submitted that the SNJPC itself

had    observed         that   the    Assam      Rules     of    2018     were

comprehensive and suggested that the other High Courts and

the State Governments, should frame the rules taking the

Assam Rules of 2018 as model rules subject to certain
4 Officers and servants and the expenses of High Courts.
5 Recruitment and conditions of service of persons serving the Union or a State.
20
changes and modifications as needed by the concerned High

Courts   and    State   Governments   to   meet   its   peculiar

requirements.
23. The learned amicus curiae submitted that in various

High Courts and District Courts, the Court Managers have

been functioning on contractual or consolidated pay basis for

a long period. He further submits that asking them to

undergo regular selection process at this stage would be

harsh on them. He, however, submits that in order to remove

the deadwood, it would be appropriate that a suitability test

of all such Court Managers who are working on contractual

or consolidated pay basis be conducted and only those who

are found suitable in the said test be continued. He submits

that only those Court Managers who do not pass the

suitability test, should be discontinued. He further submits

that taking into consideration that for a long period such

Court Managers have only been paid a consolidated amount

without any other service benefits, it would also be

appropriate that those Court Managers, who are found

suitable in the suitability test, be regularized by giving

retrospective effect to their services from the date of their
21
initial appointment. He also submits that while undertaking

the said exercise, the Rules Committee of the High Courts

should be guided by the directions given by this Court in the

judgment in the present proceedings dated 2nd August 2018.
24. The learned amicus curiae further submitted that the

Court Managers be provided uniform promotional avenues

and     career     progression        and   for   that   purpose,   the

Chhattisgarh High Court Services (Appointment, Conditions of

Service and Conduct) Rules, 2017 6 may be considered as the

model rules.
25. It is lastly submitted by the learned amicus curiae that

preparation of the roster/chart regarding the responsibilities

and duties of the Court Managers be specifically left to the

Rules Committee of the respective High Courts and that the

Rules Committees of these High Courts should frame the

roster/chart while keeping in mind the specific requirements

of their respective High Court and the District/Sessions

Courts within its jurisdiction.
26. The various Senior Counsel/counsel appearing on

behalf of the various High Courts, State Governments and
6 “Chhattisgarh Rules of 2017” for short.
22
intervenors/petitioners also advanced submissions as per the

peculiar requirements prevailing in their High Courts and

District Courts.
IV.   ISSUE FOR CONSIDERATION
27. Having considered the submissions of the learned

amicus curiae as well as the submissions made by various

learned Senior Counsel and learned counsel appearing on

behalf of various High Courts, State Governments and

intervenors/petitioners,    the        issue   we     frame   for   our

consideration is as to “whether in light of the Thirteenth

Finance Commission, SNJPC Report and the judgment of

this Court in the present proceedings dated 2nd August 2018,

any further direction needs to be issued to various High

Courts    and      State   Governments          for    framing      and

implementation of rules for the Court Managers”.
V.    ANALYSIS
28. It can be seen that, for the first time, the post of Court

Managers was proposed to be created by the Thirteenth

Finance Commission. The said Commission recognized the

importance of Court Managers for enhancing the efficiency of

court management. It has found that this would, in turn,
23
result in the improvement in the discharge of duties by the

Judicial Officers which resultantly provides access to speedy

justice. The said Commission, therefore, not only suggested

the roles and qualifications of Court Managers but also went

ahead to estimate and allocate funds required for the creation

of these posts and for appointment of Court Managers.
29. It will be relevant to note that after the Report of the

Thirteenth Finance Commission, certain guidelines came to

be issued by the Ministry of Finance which recommended the

roles,   responsibilities   and   the   qualifications   of   Court

Managers in great detail.
30. Though the said guidelines elaborately provided for

various aspects regarding the duties of the Court Managers,

most of the High Courts had not framed any such rules and

had appointed the Court Managers only on contractual basis

or ad hoc basis. This Court, therefore, was required to

reiterate the need of the Court Managers in its judgment

dated 2nd August 2018 in the present proceedings.
31. No doubt that this Court in the said judgment was

discussing the issue of infrastructure in subordinate courts,

however, while doing so, this Court also discussed about the
24
necessity of appointing Court Managers to be a part of the

“Court Complex”. It will be relevant to refer to the following

directions issued by this Court in the said case:
"12.9 Professionally qualified court managers,
     preferably with an MBA degree, must also be
     appointed to render assistance in performing the
     court administration. The said post of Court
     managers must be created in each judicial district
     for assisting Principal District and Sessions Judges.
     Such Court Managers would enable the District
     Judges to devote more time to their core work, that
     is, judicial functions. This, in turn, would enhance
     the efficiency of the District Judicial System. These
     court managers would also help in identifying the
     weaknesses in the court management systems and
     recommending        workable     steps   under    the
     supervision of their respective judges for rectifying
     the same. The services of any person already
     working as a Court Manager in any district
     should be regularised by the State Government
     as we are of the considered view that their
     assistance is needed for a proper administrative
     set up in a Court."
(Emphasis Supplied)
32. A perusal of the aforesaid direction given by this Court

would reveal that this Court found that, the provisionally

qualified    Court    Managers       were      necessary   to    render

assistance    to     the   courts        in   performing   the    court

administration. This Court found that the appointment of

Court Managers in the district judicial system would enable

the District Judges to devote more time to their core work,
25
that is, judicial functions. This Court further found that the

Court   Managers    would    also   help   in   identifying   the

weaknesses in the court management systems and for

rectifying the same, recommend appropriate steps under the

supervision of their respective judges. This Court directed

that the services of any person already working as a Court

Manager in any district should be regularised by the State

Government. This Court emphasized that this was necessary

inasmuch as their assistance was needed for a proper

administrative set up in a court.
33. It will also be relevant to refer to the following

observations of this Court in the aforesaid case:
“6. It has to be firmly borne in mind and accepted
     as a reality that raising the infrastructure standards
     in the court complexes is the need of the hour as it
     is the basic requirement for the courts in the
     twenty-first century. We are absolutely clear that
     when people are aware of their rights, their desire to
     get the rights realised is enhanced and they would
     like to knock at the doors of the Court to shape their
     aspiration into reality. It is a welcome phenomenon
     and conceptually, Rule of Law nourishes and
     garners the said idea. The idea of speedy and quality
     justice dispensation system cannot be treated with
     status quoist approach, for the definition of
     infrastructure and the understanding of the same in
     all associated contexts changes with the passage of
     time and introduction of modern technology in
     many a sphere of life. The consumers of justice
26
expect prompt and effective delivery of justice in an
     atmosphere     that   is   acceptable.     Therefore,
     infrastructure enhancement will go a long way in
     strengthening functioning of the court and would
     improve the productivity in the justice delivery
     system.
7. Be it noted, a court complex is not just a building.
It is the building of justice which breathes and
     infuses life into the exalted and sublime ideals of
     justice. The widening gap between the ideal and the
     real and between the vision and the pragmatic
     realisation of justice has to be bridged by proper
     access to justice for all.
8. It brings us to the focal point i.e. judicial
     infrastructure which has been given relatively low
     importance, if not long neglected. That needs an
     overhaul. Apart from the metropolitan cities and
     State capitals, infrastructure in courts, especially in
     the interior parts of the country, is dying out. It
     would not be wrong to say that some of them are
     just on the ventilator. A decrepit or crumbling court
     infrastructure    inevitably     results in    causing
     impediment in access to justice. Undeniably, access
     to justice and rule of law is intrinsically linked. No
     democracy can afford to undermine the core values
     of rule of law. Thus, strengthening of court
     infrastructure requires immediate attention in the
     form of planning, enhanced budgeting and
     structured implementation or execution of the
     plans. Presently, most of the States are making
     budgetary provision as low as less than 1% of their
     total budget for the judiciary.”
34. It can be seen that this Court recognised the need for

raising the standard of infrastructure in the court complexes.

It observed that it was the need of the hour as it was the
27
basic requirement for the courts in the twenty-first century.

It was observed that the idea of speedy and quality justice

dispensation system could not be treated with a status quoist

approach.
35. We are at pains to say that even though the SNJPC in

its Report had recommended and this Court in the judgment

dated 2nd August 2018 in the present proceedings had

specifically directed the rules to be framed for determining

the service conditions, the duties etc., of Court Managers,

various High Courts and various State Governments have not

yet complied with the said direction.
36. In spite of specific observations issued by this Court

that the persons already working as Court Managers should

be regularised, till date in many Courts, the Court Managers

are still working on either contractual basis or on ad hoc

basis. Leave aside the issue with regard to regularization,

allowances, other benefits and promotional avenues being

addressed to, it has also been brought to our notice that in

some of the States, a decision had been taken to discontinue

the services of Court Managers and some of the State
28
Governments have decided to discontinue the post of Court

Managers citing the ground of shortage of funds.
37. We are of the considered view that since this Court has

been consistently observing that the service conditions of all

the Judges in the entire country should be uniform, it is also

necessary that the system as approved by this Court for

providing the services of the Court Managers to the courts to

enhance the efficiency of administration of justice also needs

to be largely uniform throughout the country.
38. At the cost of repetition, we observe that this Court has

already emphasized the need of the Court Managers to assist

the District Judges in administrative works so that the

Judges can devote their time to their core functions, that is,

adjudication of cases. In that view of the matter, it becomes

imperative that this Court reiterates its earlier directions so

that the rules with regard to service conditions of the Court

Managers are framed and approved in a time-bound manner.
39. We have perused the Assam Rules of 2018. The said

Rules provide for regularization of the services of the Court

Managers and provide for the other benefits and allowances.
29
The said Rules also specify the method of recruitment and

training required to be undergone by the Court Managers.

Most importantly, the said Rules also enlist the various

duties and responsibilities of the Court Managers in Rule 14,

which is set out below:
“14.
(i) The Court Manager, in case of High Court, shall
     assist the Registrar General and other Registrars in
     the Principal Seat of the High Court, and Court
     Manager, in case of Judicial District, shall assist the
     District Judge of the respective Judicial Districts, in
     administrative functioning of the Courts, to enhance
     efficiency of Court Management.
(ii) The Court Manager in the High Court and
     Judicial District shall work under the control of the
     Registrar General or the District Judge, respectively.
(iii) The Court Manager shall maintain professional
     secrecy and shall not divulge any information which
     may come to his or her knowledge to anyone under
     any circumstances. Breach of this condition shall
     amount to misconduct.
(iv) The Court Manager shall perform the duties
     enumerated in Schedule- I.
(v) In addition to the duties enumerated in Schedule
     I, the Court Manager shall discharge and perform
     such other duties as may be assigned to him or her
     by the Registrar General or the District Judge.”
40. Thus, it can be seen that the Assam Rules of 2018

clearly outline the role of the Court Managers in assisting the

Registrar General and the District Judges. The said Rules
30
also set out that the Court Managers are to work as per the

assignments given by the Registrar General or the District

Judge. Further, Schedule-I of the Assam Rules of 2018 goes

into much more detail about the duties and the work of the

Court Managers. Broadly, the duties are in consonance with

the recommendations as given by the Thirteenth Finance

Commission. Some other duties have also been prescribed to

Court Managers as per the needs of the High Court or the

District Courts. We, therefore, agree with the SNJPC Report

whereby the Assam Rules of 2018 were recognized as being

comprehensive in their scope.
41. We find, that as in other services, the promotional

avenues are necessary for the employees who would be

joining the base post of “Court Manager”. The stagnation at

one particular level would reduce the efficiency in the

functioning of such Court Managers. If promotional avenues

are available, it will lead to better performance and efficiency

of the Court Managers. In the alternative, the High Courts

and the State Governments should also consider providing a

scheme in the rules for Assured Career Progression (ACP) to

incentivise the functioning of the Court Managers. We
31
therefore agree with the submissions of the learned amicus

curiae that the High Courts and the State Governments

should also consider providing for promotional avenues or in

the alternative, an ACP Scheme contingent upon the

exigencies that exist in the particular High Court and the

State.
42. We find that the Assam Rules of 2018 should be

considered as the model rules when the other High Courts

frame their rules. Needless to state that the High Courts and

the State Governments can always make certain changes and

modifications in order to take care of certain exigencies which

may be peculiar to their particular High Court and the

particular State.
43. We further find that the directions issued by this Court

in the judgment dated 2nd August 2018 in the present

proceedings with regard to the regularization of the services

of the Court Managers who were already in employment

needs to be reiterated. The Court Managers having served for

years, after rendering their services for such a long period; if

they are not made permanent and are to be thrown away at
32
this stage, it would cause a great hardship to them. We are

also in agreement with the submission of the learned amicus

curiae that for separating the deadwood, a suitability test can

be    conducted      so    that     the      Court     Managers    who    are

functioning properly are continued and only such Court

Managers       who        are    not      found      suitable   should     be

discontinued. The rules in this regard can be formulated

accordingly.
VI.   CONCLUSION AND DIRECTIONS
44. In the result, the present batch of IAs and Writ Petition

are disposed of in the following terms:
(i)      We direct that all the High Courts in the

               country          shall   frame     or    amend     the    rules

               providing for recruitment and conditions of

               service of Court Managers, by taking the Assam

               Rules of 2018 as the model Rules, and submit it

               to the State Government for approval within a

               period of 3 months from the date of this

               judgment. Needless to state that the High

               Courts and the State Governments would be at
33
liberty to make suitable modifications/changes

        so as to suit their peculiar needs;
(ii)    We further direct that upon receipt of the rules

        framed or amendments thereof by the High

        Courts, the respective State Governments shall

        finalise and grant approval to the same within a

        further period of 3 months;
(iii)   We clarify that the minimum rank/class of such

        Court Managers should be of a Class-II Gazetted

        Officer for the purpose of basic pay, allowances

        and other service benefits;
(iv)    We further clarify that the Court Managers

        appointed in the High Courts shall work under

        the directions and supervision of the Registrar

        General/Registrars of the High Courts. Insofar

        as the Court Managers appointed in the District

        Courts are concerned, they shall work under the

        supervision      and       control      of        the

        Registrars/Superintendents      (Head        of   the

        Ministerial Staff) of the concerned courts;
34
(v)     While determining the duties, functions and the

        responsibilities of the Court Managers, the

        Rules Committee of the High Courts shall

        ensure      that     their     duties,       functions        and

        responsibilities do not overlap with that of the

        Registrars of the High Court/District Courts;
(vi)    Insofar as the Court Managers, who are already

        working either on contractual or consolidated

        pay basis or on ad hoc basis are concerned,

        their     services        shall     be    continued           and

        regularized        subject     to    their        passing     the

        suitability test as will be provided in the rules to

        be framed by the respective High Courts and

        approved by the respective State Governments;
(vii)   We clarify that such of the Court Managers who

        are     already    working        would      be    entitled    to

        regularization from the date of their initial

        appointment.         We      further     clarify     that     the

        benefits of such a regularization though would

        entitle them for continuity in service for all the
35
purposes      including    terminal    benefits,   they

         would not be entitled for the arrears, if any, on

         account of difference between salary for the

         period from the date on which they are working

         till the date of their actual regularization;
(viii)   We direct that the process of regularization of

         the Court Managers shall commence and be

         completed within a period of 3 months from the

         date of approval of the rules by the respective

         State Governments;
(ix)     We clarify that the respective Registrar Generals

         of the High Courts and the Chief Secretaries of

         the State Governments shall be personally

         responsible     for    adhering   to   the   aforesaid

         timelines; and
(x)      I.A. No. 135045 of 2023 is disposed of with a

         request to the concerned Division Bench of the

         Punjab and Haryana High Court to decide the

         matter captioned as LPA 1951/2019 pending

         before it in terms of this judgment.
36
45. We place on record our deep gratitude for the assistance

rendered by Shri Siddharth Bhatnagar, learned amicus curiae

ably assisted by Mr. Ankit Yadav and Mr. Aditya Sidhra,

learned counsel. We also place on record our appreciation for

the Senior Counsel and counsel appearing on behalf of the

various    High     Courts,       State        Governments             and

intervenors/petitioners.
..............................CJI
                                                          (B.R. GAVAI)



                              ............................................J
                              (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)



                                         …..............................J
                                        (K. VINOD CHANDRAN)
NEW DELHI;
MAY 16, 2025.
37