[Cites
27
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Jaipur Vidyut Vitran Nigam Ltd vs Adani Power Rajasthan Ltd on 23 May, 2025
Author:
Rajesh Bindal
Bench:
Rajesh Bindal
2025 INSC 770




                                                                                 REPORTABLE

                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4336 OF 2025
                               (Arising out of CIVIL APPEAL DIARY NO. 26876 OF 2024)


                         JAIPUR VIDYUT VITRAN NIGAM
                         LTD. & ORS.                                            …APPELLANT(S)


                                                                VERSUS


                         ADANI POWER RAJASTHAN LTD. & ANR.                    … RESPONDENT(S)


                                                           JUDGMENT
M. M. Sundresh, J.
1. Admit.
2. We have heard the learned Senior Counsel, Mr. Shyam Divan and learned

                            Counsel, Mr. Karthik Seth appearing for the appellants and the learned

                            Senior Counsel, Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi appearing for the respondent

                            No. 1, at length. All the relevant documents, including the written
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ASHA SUNDRIYAL
Date: 2025.05.23
16:17:00 IST
submissions of the parties, have been perused.
Reason:
Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                             1 of 32
3. In pursuance of the Letter of Intent issued to Adani Power Rajasthan Ltd.
(respondent No.1-Power Generator), on 17.12.2009, a Power Purchase

   Agreement (hereinafter referred to as the “PPA”) dated 28.01.2010 was

   entered into between appellant Nos.1, 2 and 3, who are the Rajasthan

   Discoms engaged in the distribution and supply of electricity, on one side

   and respondent No.1 on the other, for the supply of 1200 MW Aggregate

   Contracted Capacity at a levelized tariff of Rs.3.238 per unit. The same

   was duly approved by respondent No.2.
4. While the agreement was in operation, a Notification came to be issued at

   the instance of M/s. Coal India Limited (hereinafter referred to as “CIL”),

   dated 19.12.2017, imposing a levy of Evacuation Facility Charges

   (hereinafter referred to as the “EFC”) with effect from 20.12.2017.
Immediately, on the very next day i.e. 20.12.2017, respondent No.1

   informed appellant No. 4 that the Notification dated 19.12.2017

   constituted a ‘change in law’ event. The Notification dated 19.12.2017 is

   extracted below:
Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                  2 of 32
     “COAL INDIA LIMITED
     A Maharatna Company
     (A Govt. of India Enterprise)
     COAL BHAWAN
     Sales & Marketing Division
Ground & Floor, Premises No, 04 MAR, Plot No. AF-III, Action Area -1A
     Rajarhat, New Town, Kolkata - 700156
     Phone: 033-71104143, Fax: 033-23244229, Website:
………………………………
     CIN: L23 L09WB1973GO1028844

     PRICE NOTIFICATION: CIL:S&M: GM(F)Pricing 2017/ 1005 dated
     19th Dec. 2017

     Charge of Rs. 50 (Fifty) per tonne shall be levied as ‘Evacuation Facility
     Charges’ on all despatches except despatch through rapid loading arrangement.
     This is effective from 00:00 hour of 20" Dec. 2017. This issues with the
     approval of the competent authority.
General Manager (M&S)
                                                             Marketing & Sales”
5. On its failure in eliciting a suitable reply, respondent No.1 filed a Petition

   bearing No.1373/2018 before the Rajasthan Electricity Regulatory

   Commission (hereinafter referred to as the “RERC”), invoking
Section 86
of the Electricity Act, 2003 (hereinafter referred to as the “2003 Act”) read

   with
Article 10
of the PPA. While rejecting some of the reliefs, the RERC

   did allow some of the other prayers sought for by respondent No.1. Against

Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                           3 of 32
   the refusal of some of the claims, the respondent No. 1 filed an appeal

   before the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity (hereinafter referred to as the

   “APTEL”).
6. The appeal under
Section 111
of the 2003 Act was so made along with an

   application seeking condonation of delay of 332 days in filing. Another

   application was filed seeking to condone the delay of 236 days in re-filing

   the appeal. Upon hearing both sides, the aforesaid applications were

   allowed and, thereafter, the appeal was decided on merits. It is pertinent to

   note that the common order by the APTEL, dated 23.01.2023, condoning

   the delay on both counts, has attained finality for want of further challenge.
7. The APTEL, inter alia, held by its judgment dated 18.04.2024, after

   elaborately considering the submissions made by both sides, that the

   Notification dated 19.12.2017 would amount to a change in law, and the

   respondent No. 1 would be entitled to the grant of compensation from the

   date of the Notification, by taking note of the decision rendered by this

   Court in
GMR Warora Energy Ltd. v. CERC
(2023) 10 SCC 401

   (hereinafter referred to as “GMR Warora”) which, in turn, also placed


Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                    4 of 32
   reliance upon the earlier decisions of this Court. While doing so, it also

   took into consideration, the fair submission made on behalf of the

   appellants that the principal issue of levy of EFC, and consequently, the

   date from which the respondent No. 1 would be entitled to the grant of

   compensation, is covered by the aforementioned judgement. Further

   reliance was placed on
the said decision
by the APTEL, for the purpose of

   granting carrying cost at the rate of Late Payment Surcharge (hereinafter

   referred to as “LPS”), on a compounding basis, which is to be reckoned

   from the date of the Notification. The submission made by the appellants

   before the APTEL that a supplementary bill is mandatory before seeking

   relief for the LPS was also considered and rejected. Once again, the impact

   of delay was argued and considered with specific reference to carrying

   cost. Accordingly, the following conclusion was arrived at:
“X.CONCLUSION:
The Appellant shall, in terms of what has been indicated hereinabove, be
     entitled for the benefit of the change in law event on account of evacuation
     facility charges from the date on which the notification, issued by Coal India
     Limited, was made applicable to them. The sum representing this benefit shall
     be paid by Respondents 2 to 5 to the appellant along with carrying cost at LPS
     rates. While the Appellant shall not be entitled for carrying cost (much less at
     LPS rates), for the delay of 332 days in filing the Appeal, they shall be given


Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                             5 of 32
     credit for the sum of Rs.5 lakhs paid by them earlier as a condition for
     condoning the delay in filing the Appeal, since they are now being denied
     carrying cost for the said period of delay. The matter is remanded to the
     Respondent-Commission to compute the amounts which the Appellant is
     entitled to in terms of this Judgment. The Appeal is disposed of accordingly.”
8. When the appeal was filed before this Court, it was entertained, limiting

   its scope only to the interpretation of Article 10.2.1 vis-à-vis 10.5 of the

   PPA, with specific reference to 10.5.1 (ii). The following is the order

   passed by this Court on 09.09.2024:
“We have heard learned senior counsel for the parties at length.
     Most of the issues raised in the present matter are covered by earlier decisions
     of this Court in
‘GMR Warora Energy Ltd. v. CERC & Ors.’
, (2023) 10 SCC
     401, ‘UHBVNL v. Adani Power (Mundra) Limited’, (
2023) 2 SCC 624,
     ‘UHBVNL v. Adani Power Limited’
, (2019) 5 SCC 325 and ‘MSEDCL v.
     MERC & Ors.’, (2022) 4 SCC 657. We may note that the delay in refiling has
     been duly considered earlier by the APTEL while condoning it. The said order
     has attained finality.
The only issue which might arise for consideration in this appeal pertains
     to the interpretation of Article 10.2.1 vis-à-vis
Article 10.5
of the PPA with
     specific reference to 10.5.1 (ii).
Learned senior counsel for the respondents seeks and is granted two weeks’
     time to file a counter affidavit.
Rejoinder affidavit shall be filed within a period of two weeks thereafter.
List on 26.11.2024.”
                                                               (emphasis supplied)




Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                               6 of 32
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS
9. Notwithstanding the aforesaid order passed on 09.09.2024, the learned

   Senior Counsel and learned Counsel appearing for the appellants, made

   elaborate submissions on the other issues as well. It is submitted that the

   delay has occasioned only due to the fault of respondent No.1 through the

   litigation process and, therefore, what is to be applied is Article 10.5.1 (ii).
The APTEL was wrong in condoning the delay by allowing the

   applications filed by respondent No.1. There is no basis for awarding

   carrying cost at the rate of LPS, and the APTEL ought not to have awarded

   the same as the LPS is granted only when there is a delay in the payment

   of a supplementary bill. The learned Senior Counsel placed substantial

   reliance on the PPA to contend that it is respondent No.1 who did not raise

   the supplementary bill at the earliest point of time, as mandated under
Article 8
of the PPA. The decision rendered by this Court in
GMR Warora
(supra) does not apply to the case of respondent No.1, considering that in

   the said case, a supplementary bill was indeed raised. Unless a demand is

   raised, there is no question of payment that would arise, as there is a clear


Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                      7 of 32
   distinction between the liability to pay, as against an obligation to pay.
In

   support of his contention, the learned Senior Counsel has also
placed

   reliance upon
the decision of this Court in
Prem Cottex v. Uttar Haryana

   Bijli Vitran Nigam Ltd.
, (2021) 20 SCC 200.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS
10.The learned Senior Counsel Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi appearing for the

   respondent No. 1, submits that there exists a preliminary objection as

   arguments have been made by the appellants beyond the scope of not only

   the present appeal but also the order, dated 09.09.2024, of this Court. The

   issues sought to be raised by the appellants have already been settled by

   this Court in not only
GMR Warora
(supra) but also in two other

   decisions of this Court in Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Ltd. v.
Adani Power Ltd., (2019) 5 SCC 325 (hereinafter referred to as

   “UHBVNL 2019”) and Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Ltd. v. Adani

   Power (Mundra) Ltd., (2023) 2 SCC 624 (hereinafter referred to as

   “UHBVNL 2023”).
Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                    8 of 32
11.There is no question of raising a supplementary bill earlier, in view of the

   definite stand taken by the appellants on the notification made by

   respondent No.1 on 20.12.2017. It is nobody’s case that the appellants were

   going to honour the bill if raised at the earliest point of time, as contended

   by them. The APTEL itself has held that respondent No.1 is not entitled to

   carrying cost for the period of delay in filing the appeal. The orders passed

   on that count have attained finality. The appellants are making a futile

   attempt at reopening the issues which are closed. Thus, it is a fit case where

   the appeal has to be dismissed with costs, particularly when appropriate

   orders have been passed by the RERC in pursuance of the order of remand

   made by the APTEL.
12.Before we deal with the submissions made by the parties, we deem it

   appropriate to discuss and elaborate on the scope of appeals under the 2003

   Act.
SCOPE OF APPEALS UNDER THE ELECTRICITY ACT, 2003
13.Whenever a statute provides for an appeal, a Court is expected to restrain

   itself to the contours of the powers conferred under it. The nature and status

Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                    9 of 32
   of the Court loses its significance as it only draws its powers from the

   statute alone, and not beyond. After all, judicial restraint and sobriety,

   when consciously restricted by the Legislature, forms an integral part of

   the duties and functions of the Court.
Section 111
of the 2003 Act

     “111. Appeal to Appellate Tribunal.— (1) Any person aggrieved by an order
     made by an adjudicating officer under this Act (except under
Section 127
) or
     an order made by the Appropriate Commission under this Act may prefer an
     appeal to the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity:
Provided that any person appealing against the order of the adjudicating officer
     levying any penalty shall, while filing the appeal, deposit the amount of such
     penalty:
Provided further that where in any particular case, the Appellate Tribunal is of
     the opinion that the deposit of such penalty would cause undue hardship to such
     person, it may dispense with such deposit subject to such conditions as it may
     deem fit to impose so as to safeguard the realisation of penalty.
     (2) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be filed within a period of forty-
five days from the date on which a copy of the order made by the adjudicating
     officer or the Appropriate Commission is received by the aggrieved person and
     it shall be in such form, verified in such manner and be accompanied by such
     fee as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry
     of the said period of forty-five days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient
     cause for not filing it within that period.
(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (1), the Appellate Tribunal may,
     after giving the parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such
     orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or setting aside the order
     appealed against.
Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                               10 of 32
     (4) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the
     parties to the appeal and to the concerned adjudicating officer or the
     Appropriate Commission, as the case may be.
(5) The appeal filed before the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (1) shall
     be dealt with by it as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by
     it to dispose of the appeal finally within one hundred and eighty days from the
     date of receipt of the appeal:
Provided that where any appeal could not be disposed of within the said period
     of one hundred and eighty days, the Appellate Tribunal shall record its reasons
     in writing for not disposing of the appeal within the said period.
     (6) The Appellate Tribunal may, for the purpose of examining the legality,
     propriety or correctness of any order made by the adjudicating officer or the
     Appropriate Commission under this Act, as the case may be, in relation to any
     proceeding, on its own motion or otherwise, call for the records of such
     proceedings and make such order in the case as it thinks fit.”
Section 125
of the 2003 Act

     “125. Appeal to Supreme Court.—Any person aggrieved by any decision or
     order of the Appellate Tribunal, may, file an appeal to the Supreme Court,
     within sixty days from the date of communication of the decision or order of
     the Appellate Tribunal, to him, on any one or more of the grounds specified in
Section 100
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908):
Provided that the Supreme Court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was
     prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal within the said period,
     allow it to be filed within a further period not exceeding sixty days.”
Section 100
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908

     “100. Second appeal.— (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in the body
     of this Code or by any other law for the time being in force, an appeal shall lie
     to the High Court from every decree passed in appeal by any Court subordinate
     to the High Court, if the High Court is satisfied that the case involves a
     substantial question of law.
Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                              11 of 32
     (2) An appeal may lie under this section from an appellate decree passed ex-
parte.
(3) In an appeal under this section, the memorandum of appeal shall precisely
     state the substantial question of law involved in the appeal.
     (4) Where the High Court is satisfied that a substantial question of law is
     involved in any case, it shall formulate that question.
     (5) The appeal shall be heard on the question so formulated and the respondent
     shall, at the hearing of the appeal, be allowed to argue that the case does not
     involve such question:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to take away or
     abridge the power of the Court to hear, for reasons to be recorded, the appeal
     on any other substantial question of law, not formulated by it, if it is satisfied
     that the case involves such question.”
14.Under
Section 111
of the 2003 Act, the APTEL is vested with all the

   powers that can possibly be exercised by the Regulatory Commission. In

   other words, it is the final Court of fact and law.
15.However, under
Section 125
of the 2003 Act, the powers expected to be

   exercised by this Court is circumscribed and controlled by the pari materia

   provision contained under
Section 100
of the Code of Civil Procedure,

   1908 (hereinafter referred to as “
the CPC
”). Thus, it is axiomatic that an

   appellant has to raise a substantial question of law, which if the Court finds

   to be in existence, shall accordingly frame it in whatever manner it deems

   fit and proper, and put it to the other side to respond. It is for this Court to


Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                               12 of 32
   ultimately consider the existence of a substantial question of law and if it

   does so, answer it accordingly. We will only clarify that there is no bar for

   this Court to add any number of substantial questions of law even after

   framing one earlier, in which case the respondents will have to be given

   due notice of the same.
16.
Section 100
of the CPC, after its amendment in the year 1978, consciously

   concerns itself with a question of law which shall be substantial in nature.
Therefore, a mere question of law would not be sufficient enough to

   entertain an appeal under
Section 125
of the 2003 Act. Added to that, it

   should be such that the substantial question of law, if answered in the

   affirmative in favour of the appellant, shall have the effect of reversing the

   decision of the APTEL. While deciding a substantial question of law, this

   Court shall do so, based upon the findings of fact rendered by the APTEL,

   unless by way of an exception, a perversity is found thereunder. In a case

   where a finding is rendered contrary to the records, without assigning any

   reason, and/or on a total misconception of the fact seen apparently on the

   face of the record, may in a given case, give rise to a substantial question


Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                    13 of 32
   of law. Suffice it is to state that a substantial question of law has to be

   framed by this Court in exercise of the power under
Section 125
of the

   2003 Act and, thereafter, to be answered accordingly.
17.In the facts of the instant case, we have indeed framed only one substantial

   question of law vide order dated 09.09.2024, as aforementioned. Though

   we did permit the appellants to raise all the other issues and considered

   them as not feasible, the fact remains that they do not constitute substantial

   questions of law.
DISCUSSION
18.The issue with respect to change in law over a notification issued by a

   public authority and the resultant date to be reckoned has indeed attained

   finality pursuant to the judgments delivered by this Court in
GMR Warora

   Energy Ltd.
(supra), UHBVNL 2019 (supra) and UHBVNL 2023

   (supra).
GMR Warora Energy Ltd. v. CERC
(2023) 10 SCC 401
     “95. For appreciating the rival submissions, we will have to construe the term
     “Law”, which has been defined in the PPAs, which reads thus:
“ “Law” means, in relation to this Agreement, all laws including
        Electricity laws in force in India and any statute, ordinance,

Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                            14 of 32
        regulation, notification or code, rule, or any interpretation of any of
        them by an Indian Governmental Instrumentality and having force of
        law and shall further include all applicable rules, regulations, orders,
        notifications by an Indian Governmental Instrumentality pursuant to
        or under any of them and shall include all rules, regulations, decisions
        and orders of CERC and MERC.”
96. Perusal of the definition of the term “Law” itself would clearly show that
     the term “Law” would mean all laws including Electricity laws in force in India
     and any statute, ordinance, regulation, notification or code, rule, or any
     interpretation of any of them by an Indian governmental instrumentality and
     having force of law. It would further reveal that the term “Law” shall also
     include all applicable rules, regulations, orders, notifications by an Indian
     governmental instrumentality and shall also include all rules, regulations,
     decisions and orders of CERC and MERC.
97. In any case, the issue as to what would amount to “Law” is no more res
     integra. This Court, in Energy Watchdog [Energy Watchdog v. CERC, (2017)
     14 SCC 80 : (2018) 1 SCC (Civ) 133] , has observed thus : (SCC p. 131, para
57)
        “57. Both the letter dated 31-7-2013 and the revised Tariff Policy are
        statutory documents being issued under
Section 3
of the Act and have the
        force of law. This being so, it is clear that so far as the procurement of
        Indian coal is concerned, to the extent that the supply from Coal India and
        other Indian sources is cut down, the PPA read with these documents
        provides in Clause 13.2 that while determining the consequences of
        change in law, parties shall have due regard to the principle that the
        purpose of compensating the party affected by such change in law is
        to restore, through monthly tariff payments, the affected party to the
        economic position as if such change in law has not occurred. Further,
        for the operation period of the PPA, compensation for any
        increase/decrease in cost to the seller shall be determined and be effective
        from such date as decided by the Central Electricity Regulation
        Commission. This being the case, we are of the view that though change
        in Indonesian law would not qualify as a change in law under the
        guidelines read with the PPA, change in Indian law certainly would.”
98. The aforesaid view of this Court taken in Energy Watchdog [Energy
     Watchdog v. CERC, (2017) 14 SCC 80 : (2018) 1 SCC (Civ) 133] has been
     approved by a Bench of three learned Judges of this Court in Adani Rajasthan


Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                              15 of 32
     case [
Jaipur Vidyut Vitaran Nigam Ltd. v. Adani Power Rajasthan Ltd.
, (2021)
     18 SCC 478] and also followed by this Court when the two linked matters out
     of this batch of appeals were decided by this Court in
Maharashtra State
     Electricity Distribution Co. Ltd. v. Adani Power Maharashtra Ltd.
[(2023) 7
     SCC 401] It cannot be denied that CIL is an instrumentality of the
     Government of India and its orders, insofar as price of fuel is concerned,
     are binding on all its subsidiaries.
***
100. As discussed hereinabove, the term “Law” would also include all
     applicable rules, regulations, orders, notifications issued by an Indian
     governmental instrumentality.
101. It would thus be clear that all such additional charges which are
     payable on account of orders, directions, notifications, regulations, etc.
     issued by the instrumentalities of the State, after the cut-off date, will have
     to be considered to be “change in law” events. The generators would be
     entitled to compensation on the restitutionary principle on such changes
     occurring after the cut-off date.
***
111. Undisputedly, EFC was imposed by CIL vide its Circular dated 19-12-
     2017.
112. As already discussed hereinabove, CIL is an instrumentality of the
     State. It is thus clear that, on the cut-off date, there was no requirement of
     EFC, which has been brought into effect only on 19-12-2017. As such, the
     circular of CIL dated 19-12-2017 would also amount to “change in law”.
***
117. For considering the rival submissions, it will be apposite to refer to the
     following articles, which are almost common in most of the PPAs:
“11. Billing and payment.—
                                            ***
      11.3. Payment of monthly bills.—
                                            ***
      11.3.4. In the event of delay in payment of a monthly bill by any procurer
      beyond its due date, a late payment surcharge shall be payable by the
      procurer to the seller at the rate of two (2) per cent in excess of the applicable

Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                                  16 of 32
      SBAR per annum, on the amount of outstanding payment, calculated on a
      day-to-day basis (and compounded with monthly rest), for each day of the
      delay.
***
      11.8. Payment of supplementary bill.—
      11.8.1. Either party may raise a bill on the other party (“supplementary bill”)
      for payment on account of:
(i) Adjustments required by the Regional Energy Account (if applicable);
(ii) Tariff payment for change in parameters, pursuant to provisions in
      Schedule 5; or
(iii) Change in law as provided in
Article 13
and such bill shall be paid by
      the other party.
***
      11.8.3. In the event of delay in payment of a supplementary bill by either
      party beyond one month from the date of billing, a late payment surcharge
      shall be payable at same terms applicable to the monthly bill in Article
      11.3.4.”
118. A perusal of Article 11.3.4 of the PPA would reveal that in the event of
     delay in payment of a monthly bill by any procurer beyond its due date, a late
     payment surcharge shall be payable by the procurer to the seller @ of 2% in
     excess of the applicable State Bank Advance Rate (“SBAR” for short) per
     annum, on the amount of outstanding payment, calculated on a day-to-day
     basis (and compounded with monthly rest), for each day of the delay.
Article
     11.8
of the PPA deals with payment of supplementary bill. It enables either
     party to raise a supplementary bill on the other party for payment on account
     of certain events. Clause (iii) of Article 11.8.1 of the PPA deals with “change
     in law” as provided in
Article 13.
It requires the bill to be paid by the other
     party. Article 11.8.3 of the PPA also provides that in the event of delay in
     payment of a supplementary bill by either party beyond one month from the
     date of billing, a late payment surcharge shall be payable at same terms
     applicable to the monthly bill in Article 11.3.4.
***
120. It could thus be seen that this Court in
Adani Power [Uttar Haryana Bijli
     Vitran Nigam Ltd. v. Adani Power Ltd.
, (2019) 5 SCC 325 : (2019) 2 SCC (Civ)

Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                               17 of 32
     657] has held that insofar as the “operation period” is concerned, compensation
     for any increase/decrease in revenues or costs to the seller is to be determined
     and effected from such date as is decided by the appropriate Commission. It
     has further been held that the compensation is only payable for
     increase/decrease in revenue or cost to the seller if it is in excess of an amount
     equivalent to 1% of the letter of credit in aggregate for a contract year. It has
     been held that restitutionary principles apply in case a certain threshold
     limit is crossed. It has been held that an inbuilt restitutionary principle
     compensates the party affected by such “change in law” and the affected
     party must be restored through monthly tariff payment to the same
     economic position as if such “change in law” had not occurred.
121. From the perusal of para 9 of
Adani Power [Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran
     Nigam Ltd. v. Adani Power Ltd.
, (2019) 5 SCC 325 : (2019) 2 SCC (Civ) 657],
     it would also be clear that in case the “change in law” happens to be by
     way of adoption, promulgation, amendment, re-enactment or repeal of the
     law or “change in law”, it has to be effected from the date on which such
     change occurs.
122.
In this respect, it will also be apposite to refer to the following
     observations of this Court in
Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Co.
     Ltd. v. Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory Commission
[(2022) 4 SCC 657] :
(SCC pp. 719-20, paras 173-78)
      “173. APTEL correctly found that: (
Maharashtra Pradesh Electricity
      Regulatory Commission
case [
Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution
      Co. Ltd. v. Maharashtra Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission
, 2021
      SCC OnLine APTEL 13], SCC OnLine APTEL para 13)
        ‘13. … On the contrary, there is a conscious exclusion regarding any suo
        motu change in the rate to be applied while calculating LPS, it being
        incorrect to argue on the assumption that the contract permits automatic
        change in system.’
174. This Court is unable to accept Mr Singh's submission that the
      conclusion of APTEL that LPS is not tariff is erroneous. The meaning of the
      expression tariff has to be considered, and has rightly been considered by
      APTEL in the context of the relevant provision of the power purchase
      agreements. The dictionary meaning of tariff may be charge. However, in
Article 13
of Stage 1 and
Article 10
of Stage 2 power purchase agreements,
      tariff means monthly tariff and tariff adjustment consequential to change in
      law, is of monthly tariff in respect of supply of electricity.
Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                               18 of 32
175. As argued by the respondent power generating companies appearing
      through Mr Rohatgi, Mr Singhvi, Mr Mukherjee and Ms Anand respectively,
      LPS is only payable when payment against monthly bills is delayed and not
      otherwise.
176. The object of LPS is to enforce and/or encourage timely payment
      of charges by the procurer i.e. the appellant. In other words, LPS
      dissuades the procurer from delaying payment of charges. The rate of
      LPS has no bearing or impact on tariff. Changes in the basis of the rates
      of LPS do not affect the rate at which power was agreed to be sold and
      purchased under the power purchase agreements. The principle of
      restitution under the change in law provisions of the power purchase
      agreements are attracted in respect of tariff.
177. LPS cannot be equated with carrying cost or actual cost incurred for the
      supply of power. The appellant has a contractual obligation to make timely
      payment of the invoices raised by the power generating companies, subject,
      of course, to scrutiny and verification of the same. Mr Mukul Rohatgi has a
      point that if the funding cost was so much lesser than the rate of LPS, as
      contended by the appellant, the appellant could have raised funds at a lower
      rate of interest, made timely payment of the invoices raised by the power
      generating companies, and avoided LPS.
178. The proposition that courts cannot rewrite a contract mutually
      executed between the parties, is well settled. The Court cannot, through
      its interpretative process, rewrite or create a new contract between the
      parties. The Court has to simply apply the terms and conditions of the
      agreement as agreed between the parties, as observed by this Court in
Shree
      Ambica Medical Stores v. Surat People
's Coop. Bank [(2020) 13 SCC 564] ,
      para 20, cited by Ms Divya Anand. This appeal is an attempt to renegotiate
      the terms of the PPA, as argued by Ms Divya Anand as also other counsel. It
      is well settled that courts cannot substitute their own view of the presumed
      understanding of commercial terms by the parties, if the terms are explicitly
      expressed.
The explicit terms of a contract are always the final word with
      regard to the intention of the parties, as held by this Court in Nabha Power
      Ltd. v. Punjab SPCL [(2018) 11 SCC 508 : (2018) 5 SCC (Civ) 1] , paras 45
      & 72, cited by Ms Anand.”
                                                           (emphasis in original)
123. This Court has clearly held in Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution
     Co. [Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Co. Ltd. v. Maharashtra

Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                             19 of 32
     Electricity Regulatory Commission, (2022) 4 SCC 657] that the DISCOMS
     have a contractual obligation to make timely payment of the invoices
     raised by the power generating companies, subject to scrutiny and
     verification of the same. This Court has rejected the contention that the
     funding cost was much lesser than the rate of LPS. This Court has reiterated
     the proposition that the courts cannot rewrite a contract which is executed
     between the parties. This Court has emphasised that it cannot substitute its own
     view of the presumed understanding of commercial terms by the parties, if the
     terms are explicitly expressed. It has been held that the explicit terms of a
     contract are always the final word with regard to the intention of the parties.
124. As already discussed hereinabove,
Article 11.8
of the PPA entitles either
     party to raise a supplementary bill on the other party on account of “change in
     law” as provided in
Article 13
and such bills are required to be paid by the
     either party. Article 11.8.3 of the PPA specifically provides that in the event of
     delay in payment of a supplementary bill by either party beyond one month
     from the date of billing, a late payment surcharge shall be payable at the same
     terms applicable to the monthly bill in Article 11.3.4. Article 11.3.4 of the PPA
     specifically provides a late payment surcharge to be paid by the procurer to the
     seller @ of 2% in excess of the applicable SBAR per annum on the amount of
     outstanding payment calculated on day-to-day basis (and compounded with
     monthly rest), for each day of the delay.
***
126. It is thus clear that this Court has reiterated in
Adani Power (Mundra)
     [Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Ltd. v. Adani Power (Mundra) Ltd.
,
     (2023) 2 SCC 624 : (2023) 1 SCC (Civ) 31] that once carrying cost has been
     granted, it cannot be urged that interest on carrying cost should be
     calculated on simple interest basis instead of compound interest basis. It
     has been held that grant of compound interest on carrying cost and that
     too from the date of the occurrence of the “change in law” event is based
     on sound logic. It has been held that it is aimed at restituting a party that
     is adversely affected by a “change in law” event and restore it to its original
     economic position as if such a “change in law” event had not taken place.
127. The argument that there is no provision in the PPAs for payment of
     compound interest from the date when the “change in law” event had
     occurred, has been specifically rejected by this Court.
128. In view of this consistent position of law and application of restitutionary
     principles and privity of contractual obligations between the parties as


Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                               20 of 32
     contained in the PPAs, we do not find that the view taken by the learned APTEL
     with regard to carrying cost warrants interference.
***
177. It is further to be noted that this Court in
Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam
     Ltd. v. Adani Power Ltd.
[(2019) 5 SCC 325 : (2019) 2 SCC (Civ) 657], has
     specifically observed that the “change in law” events will have to accrue
     from the date on which rules, orders, notifications are issued by the
     instrumentalities of the State. Even in spite of this finding, the DISCOMS
     are pursuing litigations after litigations.
178. We find that, when the PPA itself provides a mechanism for payment
     of compensation on the ground of “change in law”, unwarranted litigation,
     which wastes the time of the Court as well as adds to the ultimate cost of
     electricity consumed by the end-consumer, ought to be avoided.
     Ultimately, the huge cost of litigation on the part of DISCOMS as well as
     the generators adds to the cost of electricity that is supplied to the end-
     consumers.”
                                                                (
emphasis supplied)

Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Ltd. v. Adani Power (Mundra) Ltd.
(2023) 2 SCC 624
     “20. It is clear that the restitutionary principles encapsulated in
Article
     13.2
would take effect for computing the impact of change in law.
We see
     no reason to interfere with the impugned judgment [Adani Power (Mundra)
     Ltd. v. CERC, 2021 SCC OnLine APTEL 67] , wherein it has been held by the
     Appellate Tribunal that Respondent 1 Adani Power had started claiming
     change in law event compensation in respect of installation of FGD unit along
     with carrying cost, right from the year 2012 and that it has approached several
     fora to get this claim settled. Respondent 1 Adani Power finally succeeded in
     getting compensation towards FGD unit only on 28-3-2018, but the carrying
     cost claim was denied.
The relief relating to carrying cost was granted to
     Respondent 1 Adani Power by the Appellate Tribunal vide order dated 13-4-
     2018 [
Adani Power Ltd. v. CERC
, 2018 SCC OnLine APTEL 5] which was
     duly tested by this Court and upheld on 25-2-2019 [
Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran
     Nigam Ltd. v. Adani Power Ltd.
, (2019) 5 SCC 325 : (2019) 2 SCC (Civ) 657].
     Once carrying cost has been granted in favour of Respondent 1 Adani
     Power, it cannot be urged by the appellants that interest on carrying cost
     should be calculated on simple interest basis instead of compound interest


Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                               21 of 32
     basis. Grant of compound interest on carrying cost and that too from the
     date of the occurrence of the change in law event is based on sound logic.
     The idea behind granting interest on carrying cost is not far to see, it is
     aimed at restituting a party that is adversely affected by a change in law
     event and restore it to its original economic position as if such a change in
     law event had not taken place.
21. In the instant case, Respondent 1 Adani Power had to incur expenses to
     purchase the FGD unit and install it in view of the terms and conditions of the
     environment clearance given by the Ministry of Environment and Forests,
     Union of India, in the year 2010. For this, it had to arrange finances by
     borrowing from banks. The interest rate framework followed by scheduled
     commercial banks and regulated by Reserve Bank of India mandates that
     interest shall be charged on all advances at monthly rests. In this view of the
     matter, Respondent 1 Adani Power is justified in stating that if the banks
     have charged it interest on monthly rest basis for giving loans to purchase
     the FGD unit, any restitution will be incomplete, if it is not fully
     compensated for the interest paid by it to the banks on compounding basis.
22. We are of the opinion that interest on carrying cost is nothing but time
     value for money and the only manner in which a party can be afforded the
     benefit of restitution in every which way. In the facts of the instant case, the
     Appellate Tribunal was justified in allowing interest on carrying cost in favour
     of Respondent 1 Adani Power for the period between the year 2014, when the
     FGD unit was installed, till the year 2021. There was no justification for the
     Central Commission to have excluded the period between 2014 and 2018
     and grant relief from the date of the passing of the order i.e. from 28-3-
     2018 [
Adani Power Ltd. v. Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Ltd.
, 2018 SCC
     OnLine CERC 8] to 2021; nor is there any logic to such a segregation of
     timelines, particularly when Respondent 1 Adani Power was prompt in raising
     a claim on the appellants and pursuing its legal remedies.
23. We are not persuaded by the submission made on behalf of the
     appellants that since no fault is attributable to them for the delay caused
     in determination of the amount, they cannot be saddled with the liability
     to pay interest on carrying cost; nor is there any substance in the argument
     sought to be advanced that there is no provision in the PPAs for payment
     of compound interest from the date when the change in law event had
     occurred.
Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                             22 of 32
24. The entire concept of restitutionary principles engrained in
Article 13
of the PPAs has to be read in the correct perspective. The said principle
     that governs compensating a party for the time value for money, is the very
     same principle that would be invoked and applied for grant of interest on
     carrying cost on account of a change in law event. Therefore, reliance on
     Article 11.3.4 read with Article 11.8.3 on the part of the appellants cannot take
     their case further. Nor does the decision in Priya Vart case [
Priya Vart v. Union
     of India
, (1995) 5 SCC 437] have any application to the facts of the present
     case as the said case relates to payment of compensation under the
Land
     Acquisition Act
and the interest that would be payable in case of delayed
     payment of compensation.”
                                                               (
emphasis supplied)

Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Ltd. v. Adani Power Ltd.
(2019) 5
SCC 325

     “9. It will be seen that Article 13.4.1 makes it clear that adjustment in
     monthly tariff payment on account of change in law shall be effected from
     the date of the change in law [see sub-clause (i) of clause 4.1], in case the
     change in law happens to be by way of adoption, promulgation,
     amendment, re-enactment or repeal of the law or change in law. As opposed
     to this, if the change in law is on account of a change in interpretation of
     law by a judgment of a Court or Tribunal or governmental
     instrumentality, the case would fall under sub-clause (ii) of clause 4.1, in
     which case, the monthly tariff payment shall be effected from the date of
     the said order/judgment of the competent authority/Tribunal or the
     governmental instrumentality. What is important to notice is that Article
     13.4.1 is subject to
Article 13.2
of the PPAs.
10.
Article 13.2
is an in-built restitutionary principle which compensates
     the party affected by such change in law and which must restore, through
     monthly tariff payments, the affected party to the same economic position
     as if such change in law has not occurred. This would mean that by this
     clause a fiction is created, and the party has to be put in the same economic
     position as if such change in law has not occurred i.e. the party must be
     given the benefit of restitution as understood in civil law.
Article 13.2
,
     however, goes on to divide such restitution into two separate periods. The first
     period is the “construction period” in which increase/decrease of capital cost


Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                              23 of 32
     of the project in the tariff is to be governed by a certain formula. However, the
     seller has to provide to the procurer documentary proof of such
     increase/decrease in capital cost for establishing the impact of such change in
     law and in the case of dispute as to the same, a dispute resolution mechanism
     as per
Article 17
of the PPA is to be resorted to. It is also made clear that
     compensation is only payable to either party only with effect from the date on
     which the total increase/decrease exceeds the amount stated therein.
11. So far as the “operation period” is concerned, compensation for any
     increase/decrease in revenues or costs to the seller is to be determined and
     effected from such date as is decided by the appropriate Commission. Here
     again, this compensation is only payable for increase/decrease in revenue or
     cost to the seller if it is in excess of an amount equivalent to 1% of the Letter
     of Credit in aggregate for a contract year. What is clear, therefore, from a
     reading of
Article 13.2
, is that restitutionary principles apply in case a
     certain threshold limit is crossed in both sub-clauses (a) and (b). There is
     no dispute that the present case is covered by sub-clause (b) and that the
     aforesaid threshold has been crossed. The mechanism for claiming a
     change in law is then set out by
Article 13.3
of the PPA.
***
13. A reading of
Article 13
as a whole, therefore, leads to the position that
     subject to restitutionary principles contained in
Article 13.2
, the adjustment in
     monthly tariff payment, in the facts of the present case, has to be from the date
     of the withdrawal of exemption which was done by administrative orders dated
     6-4-2015 and 16-2-2016. The present case, therefore, falls within Article
     13.4.1(i). This being the case, it is clear that the adjustment in monthly
     tariff payment has to be effected from the date on which the exemptions
     given were withdrawn. This being the case, monthly invoices to be raised by
     the seller after such change in tariff are to appropriately reflect the changed
     tariff. On the facts of the present case, it is clear that the respondents were
     entitled to adjustment in their monthly tariff payment from the date on which
     the exemption notifications became effective. This being the case, the
     restitutionary principle contained in
Article 13.2
would kick in for the simple
     reason that it is only after the order dated 4-5-2017 [
Adani Power Ltd. v. Uttar
     Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Ltd.
, 2017 SCC OnLine CERC 66] that CERC
     held that the respondents were entitled to claim added costs on account of
     change in law w.e.f. 1-4-2015. This being the case, it would be fallacious to say
     that the respondents would be claiming this restitutionary amount on some
     general principle of equity outside the PPA. Since it is clear that this amount of


Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                               24 of 32
     carrying cost is only relatable to
Article 13
of the PPA, we find no reason to
     interfere with the judgment of the Appellate Tribunal.”
                                                             (emphasis supplied)
19.Notwithstanding the aforesaid clear pronouncements of this Court, we

   would like to throw a little more light on what constitutes a ‘change in law’

   event, in view of the persuasive submissions made by Mr. Shyam Divan,

   the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellants.
20.While
Article 10
of the PPA, with specific reference to
Article 10.2
, deals

   with application and principles for computing impact of change in law,
Article 10.5
, being a facet of
Article 10.2
of the PPA, concerns itself with

   tariff adjustment payment on account of change in law.
Article 10.2
and
Article 10.5
of the PPA are extracted as below:
“10.2 Application and Principles for computing impact of Change in Law

     10.2.1 While determining the consequence of Change in Law under this
Article
     10
, the Parties shall have due regard to the principle that the purpose of
     compensating the Party affected by such Change in Law is to restore through
     monthly Tariff Payment, to the extent contemplated in this
Article 10
, the
     affected Party to the same economic position as if such Change in Law has not
     occurred.
***

     10.5 Tariff Adjustment Payment on account of Change in Law



Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                            25 of 32
     l0.5.1 Subject to
Article 10.2
, the adjustment in monthly Tariff Payment shall
     be effective from:
(i) the date of adoption, promulgation, amendment, re-enactment or repeal of
     the Law or Change in Law; or
(ii) the date of order/ judgment of the Competent Court or tribunal or Indian
     Governmental Instrumentality, if the Change in Law is on account of a change
     in interpretation of Law.
10.5.2 The payment for Change in Law shall be through Supplementary Bill as
     mentioned in
Article 8.8.
However, in case of any change in Tariff by reason
     of Change in Law, as determined in accordance with this Agreement, the
     Monthly Invoice to be raised the Seller after such change in Tariff shall
     appropriately reflect the changed Tariff.”
21.As held by this Court in the decisions referred to supra, Article 10.2.1 in

   the instant PPA was incorporated based on the principle of restitution. The

   idea of this principle is to compensate the affected party in order to restore

   it to the same economic position, but for the change in law. This particular

   provision is a substantive one, which in a normal circumstance, has to be

   given effect to in letter and spirit.
22.Article 10.5 of the PPA deals with tariff adjustment payment occasioned

   on account of change in law. Under Article 10.5.1 (i) of the PPA, the

   adjustment would start from the date of change in law. Therefore, as a

   matter of course, the adjustment in monthly tariff payment shall become

   effective from the date notified in the change in law.
Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                           26 of 32
23.Article 10.5.1 (ii) of the PPA might emerge in a factual scenario where

   there is an adjudication by way of an order/judgment of a competent Court

   or Tribunal or an Indian Governmental Instrumentality, as the case may be.
Rendering of an order/judgement would require an interpretation of law.
When there is a change in the interpretation of law in rendering the

   order/judgement, the date of such an order/judgment would constitute a

   ‘change in law’ under Article 10.5.1 (ii) of the PPA.
24.Hence, a mere difference in the understanding of a ‘change in law’ by one

   party to the PPA, does not, by itself, preclude the other party from deriving

   a benefit by invoking Article 10.5.1 (i) of the PPA. In other words, a

   different understanding would not result in a different interpretation of law,

   that would bar entitlement under Article 10.5.1 (i) of the PPA and,

   therefore, such a situation would not fall within the purview of Article

   10.5.1 (ii) of the PPA.
25.To make this position clear, Article 10.5.1 (ii) of the PPA is not applicable

   to the facts of the instant case since there is no change in law which has

   occasioned by way of an interpretation given by a Court or a Tribunal or


Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                    27 of 32
   an Indian Governmental Instrumentality. Recognising a change in law is

   different from interpreting a notification as the one applicable to the

   parties. We are only clarifying the position that there is no change in the

   interpretation of law involved in the case at hand, particularly when the

   said issue was not before the APTEL, for which the author of the change

   in law should have been made a party to the proceedings, in order to defend

   it. The Notification, dated 19.12.2017, and its application are not in

   dispute. What is in dispute is whether it constitutes a change in law or not.
So long as there is no interpretation on the Notification with respect to its

   applicability to the parties before us, Clause (ii) of Article 10.5.1 of the

   PPA will have no application.
26.Article 10.5.2 of the PPA kicks in thereafter. Hence, a supplementary bill

   has to be raised only after due adjudication by the competent forum. Our

   view is fortified on a proper reading of
Article 8
of the PPA.
“ARTICLE 8: BILLING AND PAYMENT

                                       ***

     8.3 Payment of Monthly Bills



Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                    28 of 32
8.3.1 The Procurers shall pay the amount payable under the Monthly Bill on
     the Due Date to such account of the Seller, as shall have been previously
     notified by the Seller in accordance with Article 8.3.4 below.
8.3.2 All payments made by the Procurer(s) shall be appropriated by the Seller
     in the following order of priority:
i) towards Late Payment Surcharge, if any;
ii) towards the earlier unpaid Monthly Bill(s), if any; and
iii) towards the then current Monthly Bill.
***

     8.3.5 In the event of delay in payment of a Monthly Bill by the Procurers
     beyond its Due Date, a Late Payment Surcharge shall be payable by such
     Procurers to the Seller at the rate of two percent (2%) in excess of the applicable
     SBAR per annum, on the amount of outstanding payment, calculated on a day
     to day basis (and compounded with monthly rest), for each day of the delay.
     The Late Payment Surcharge shall be claimed by the Seller through the
     Supplementary Bill.
***

     8.6 Disputed Bill

     8.6.1 If a Party does not dispute a Monthly Bill, Provisional Bill or a
     Supplementary Bill raised by the other Party by the Due Date, such Bill shall
     be taken as conclusive.
8.6.2 If a Party disputes the amount payable under a Monthly Bill, Provisional
     Bill or a Supplementary Bill, as the case may be, that Party shall, within thirty
     (30) days of receiving such Bill, issue a notice (the “Bill Dispute Notice”) to
     the invoicing Party setting out:
i) the details of the disputed amount;
ii) its estimate of what the correct amount should be; and
iii) all written material in support of its claim.
***

     8.8 Payment of Supplementary Bill


Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                                29 of 32
     8.8.l Either Party may raise a bill on the other Party ("Supplementary Bill”) for
     payment on account of:
i) Adjustments required by the Regional Energy Account (if applicable);
ii) Tariff Payment for change in parameters, pursuant to provisions in Schedule
     4; or
iii) Change in Law as provided in
Article 10
,
     and such Supplementary Bill shall be paid by the other Party.
***

     8.8.3 In the event of delay in payment of a Supplementary Bill by either Party
     beyond its Due Date, a Late Payment Surcharge shall be payable at the same
     terms applicable to the Monthly Bill in· Article 8.3.5.”

   It is not in dispute that a supplementary bill is not a monthly bill.
Article 8
of the PPA deals with billing and payment alone. Under
Article 8.8
, the

   other party is duty-bound to make the payment when a supplementary bill

   is raised due to a change in law event having occurred, as provided under
Article 10
of the PPA. This can happen only after due adjudication by the

   competent forum, has taken place. For more clarity, one has to read Article

   10.5.2 along with
Article 8.8
of the PPA. It is only thereafter that
Article

   8.6
of the PPA might come into the picture when there exists a dispute on

   the quantum of amount claimed in the supplementary bill raised after the

   completion of due adjudication by the competent forum, on the issue

   pertaining to the change in law.
Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                              30 of 32
27.The incidental issue raised with respect to carrying cost at the rate of LPS

   has also been dealt with in the decisions referred to in
GMR Warora

   Energy Ltd.
(supra), UHBVNL 2019 (supra) and UHBVNL 2023

   (supra) and, therefore, any fresh consideration would only be an academic

   exercise. We also find that the decision relied upon by the learned Senior

   Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants, have no application to the

   facts of the case.
28.For the aforesaid reasons, we find absolutely no reason to interfere with

   the impugned judgment. Liability has been fastened upon the appellants

   under the agreement. The contention that the supplementary bill ought to

   have been raised earlier and, therefore, the payment can only be made

   thereafter has neither a factual basis nor a legal one. We would only point

   out the fact that respondent No.1 did notify the change in law event

   immediately on the very next day of the notification having been issued.
In any case, we have been informed that in pursuance of the order of

   remand made by the APTEL, further orders have been passed by the RERC

   on 19.06.2024, which has not been challenged before this Court.
Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                                   31 of 32
29.In view of the aforesaid analysis, we find no merit in this appeal. The

   appeal stands dismissed, accordingly.
30.Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
...………………………. J.
(M. M. SUNDRESH)


                                                  …………………………. J.
(RAJESH BINDAL)
NEW DELHI;
MAY 23, 2025




Civil Appeal Diary No. 26876 of 2024                              32 of 32