[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
All India Judges Association vs Union Of India on 20 May, 2025
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
B.R. Gavai
2025 INSC 735                                                                                         REPORTABLE

                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                              INHERENT/ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                                          I.A. NO.93974 OF 2019
                                                                        WITH
                                        I.A. NOS. 72900, 73015 AND 40695 OF 2021
                                                                        WITH
                                              I.A. NOS.50269 AND 201893 OF 2022
                                                                           IN
                                             WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 1022 OF 1989


                            ALL INDIA JUDGES ASSOCIATION
                            AND OTHERS                                                            …PETITIONERS

                                                                      VERSUS

                            UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS                                        …RESPONDENTS
INDEX



                            I.     PREFACE ................................................................................ 3
                            II. RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS .................................................... 6
                            III.     DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS ................................................. 9
                                 Issue No.1: As to whether the 10% quota reserved for Limited
                                             Departmental Competitive Examination (for short,
                                             ‘LDCE’) for promotion to Higher Judicial Service i.e.
                                             cadre of District Judge, needs to be restored to 25%
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by                       as determined by this Court in the case of All India
POOJA SHARMA
Judges’ Association and others v. Union of India and
   Date: 2025.05.20
   15:34:42 IST
   Reason:
others, reported in (2002) 4 SCC 247?...................... 9
1
Issue No.2: As to whether the minimum qualifying experience
              for appearing in the aforesaid examination needs to
              be reduced, and if so, by how many years? ............ 20
  Issue No.3: As to whether a quota needs to be reserved for
              meritorious candidate from the Civil Judge (Junior
              Division) to Civil Judge (Senior Division) so that there
              is an incentive for merit in the cadre of Civil Judge
              (Junior Division)? ................................................... 29
  Issue No.4: If yes, then what should be the percentage thereof
              and what should be the minimum experience as a
              Civil Judge (Junior Division)? ................................. 29
  Issue No.5: As to whether the quota to be reserved for the
              aforementioned departmental examinations in a
              particular year should be calculated on the cadre
              strength or on the number of vacancies occurring in
              the particular recruitment year? ........................... 31
  Issue No.6: As to whether some suitability test should also be
              introduced while promoting the Civil Judge (Senior
              Division) to the Cadre of District Judges against the
              existing 65% quota for promotion to Higher Judicial
              Services on the basis of merit-cum-seniority. ......... 32
  Issue No.7: As to whether the requirement of having minimum
              three years practice for appearing in the
              examination of Civil Judge (Junior Division), which
              was done away by this Court in the case of All India
              Judges Association & Ors. (supra), needs to be
              restored? And if so, by how many years? ............... 38
  Issue No.8: If the requirement of certain minimum years of
              practice for appearing in the examination of Civil
              Judge (Junior Division) is restored, should the same
              be calculated from the date of the provisional
              enrolment/registration or from the date of the
              passing of the AIBE? .............................................. 38
IV.   CONCLUSION AND DIRECTIONS ......................................... 57
2
JUDGMENT


B.R. GAVAI, CJI


I.          PREFACE
1.          This batch of applications raises issues pertaining to

the qualification, promotion and selection of candidates who

are desirous of either entering the Judicial Services as Civil

Judge (Junior Division) or Higher Judicial Service, and with

regard to the promotions at different levels within the

Judicial Services.
2.          Before   we   consider   the   issues   in   light   of   the

submissions made on behalf of the various stakeholders, we

first set out below the prayers sought in the various

applications.
I.A. NO.93974 OF 2019
3.          This I.A. has been filed seeking the following reliefs:
(i)      For clarification/directions whether the quota for

              LDCE for induction in the West Bengal Higher

              Judicial Service is to be maintained on the cadre

              strength of District Judge (Entry Level) or on the

              basis of the vacancies arising each year; or
(ii)     In the alternative, modify the order dated 20th April
3
2010 passed in the writ petition by restoring the

               share and/or quota for LDCE for introduction in

               West Bengal Higher Judicial Service to 25% of the

               cadre strength of District Judge (Entry Level) and by

               granting liberty to the High Court at Calcutta to fill

               up the vacancies for promotion on merit through

               LDCE in such manner that 10% of the total

               vacancies arising in a particular recruitment year is

               earmarked for LDCE or else the object and/or

               purpose of carving out such channel might be

               frustrated in so far as State of West Bengal is

               concerned.
I.A. NOS. 72900 AND 40695 OF 2021 AND I.A. NO.50269
OF 2022
4.           These I.As. have been filed seeking directions in respect

of:
(i)      Method of regular promotion (Objective Suitability

               Test); and
(ii)     Enhancement of percentage of quota for accelerated

               promotion strictly on the basis of merit through

               competitive examination for the post of District

               Judges.
4
I.A. NO. 73015 OF 2021
5.         This I.A. has been filed seeking the following relief:
(i)          For modification of order dated 20th April 2010

                  passed in I.A. No.77 of 2000 in W.P.(C) No.1022 of

                  1989 (i.e. to increase and restore the quota to 25%

                  from 10% for accelerated promotion to the post of

                  District Judges) and to stay regular promotion

                  initiated by the Hon’ble Bombay High Court until a

                  suitability test is conducted in terms of the judgment

                  dated 21st March 2002 passed by this Court.
I.A. NO. 201893 OF 2022
6.         This I.A. has been filed seeking the following reliefs:
(i)      Modify orders dated 21st March 2002 and 20th

                    April 2010 in W.P.(C) No.1022 of 1989 to suitably

                    amend the LDCE eligibility conditions for all States

                    and Union Territories, so that the LDCE quota is

                    fully utilized; and
(ii)     Modify the judgment and order dated 20th April

                    2010 in W.P.(C) No.1022 of 1989, to restore the

                    LDCE quota to 25% instead of 10%.
5
II.          RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
7.           When the aforesaid IAs were listed before this Court on

25th April 2023, we had heard the learned amicus curiae as

well          as   the   learned   counsel   for   the   various   State

Governments and High Courts and found it necessary to

decide certain larger issues concerning the administration of

justice. We, therefore, framed the following seven issues for

consideration:
(i)      As to whether the 10% quota reserved for Limited

               Departmental Competitive Examination (for short,

               ‘LDCE’) for promotion to Higher Judicial Service i.e.

               cadre of District Judge, needs to be restored to 25%

               as determined by this Court in the case of
All India

               Judges’ Association and Others v. Union of India

               and others
, reported in (2002) 4 SCC 247?
(ii)     As to whether the minimum qualifying experience for

               appearing in the aforesaid examination needs to be

               reduced, and if so, by how many years?
(iii)    As to whether a quota needs to be reserved for

               meritorious candidate from the Civil Judge (Junior

               Division) to Civil Judge (Senior Division) so that there
6
is an incentive for merit in the cadre of Civil Judge

       (Junior Division)?
(iv)   If yes, then what should be the percentage thereof

       and what should be the minimum experience as a

       Civil Judge (Junior Division)?
(v)    As to whether the quota to be reserved for the

       aforementioned   departmental      examinations   in   a

       particular year should be calculated on the cadre

       strength or on the number of vacancies occurring in

       the particular recruitment year?
(vi)   As to whether some suitability test should also be

       introduced while promoting the Civil Judge (Senior

       Division) to the Cadre of District Judges against the

       existing 65% quota for promotion to Higher Judicial

       Services on the basis of merit-cum-seniority.
(vii) As to whether the requirement of having minimum

       three years practice for appearing in the examination

       of Civil Judge (Junior Division), which was done away

       by this Court in the case of
All India Judges

       Association & Ors.
(supra), needs to be restored?
And if so, by how many years?
7
8.   On the next date of hearing i.e., 18th May 2023, another

issue (hereinafter referred to as, “Issue No.8”) was flagged by

learned      Senior    Counsel    Shri   B.H.    Marlapalle   for

consideration. The relevant portion of the order reads thus:
“Mr. B.H. Marlapalle, learned Senior Counsel,
     submitted that as per the Bar Council of India
     Regulations, initially provisional registration is
     required to be made for a period of 2 years. He
     further submitted that only if a candidate passes
     the All-India Bar Examination (AIBE), a permanent
     registration can be granted. He further submitted
     that while considering the issue as to whether a
     minimum number of years of practice should be
     made mandatory for permitting a candidate to
     appear for the examination of Civil Judge (Junior
     Division), it will also be necessary to take into
     consideration the aforesaid Regulations of the Bar
     Council of India.
We would also request the Union of India, all
     the State Governments and the High Courts to
     consider the aforesaid issue of Bar Council of India
     Regulations, while considering as to whether a
     minimum number of years of practice should be
     made mandatory before applying for the post of Civil
     Judge (Junior Division).”
9.   It can thus be seen that Issue No.8 which was sought to

be raised was that: “If the requirement of certain minimum

years of practice for appearing in the examination of Civil

Judge (Junior Division) is restored, should the same be

calculated      from     the     date    of     the   provisional
8
enrolment/registration or from the date of passing of the All-

India Bar Examination (AIBE)?”
10. On the said date of hearing i.e., 18th May 2023, this

Court has directed the Union of India, all the State

Governments and all the High Courts to furnish their

responses in form of an affidavit.
11. Accordingly, various State Governments as well as the

High Courts and the other stakeholders have filed their

affidavits. The learned amicus curiae has meticulously

tabulated the information as emerging from the said

affidavits    and     produced   the   same   along   with   his

comprehensive note.
12. We have heard Shri Sidharth Bhatnagar, learned

amicus curiae and learned Senior Counsel/counsel appearing

for the various stakeholders on several dates. By way of the

present judgment, we are deciding all the 8 issues.
III.   DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS

Issue No.1:         As to whether the 10% quota reserved for
                    Limited    Departmental      Competitive
                    Examination (for short, ‘LDCE’) for
                    promotion to Higher Judicial Service i.e.,
                    cadre of District Judge, needs to be
                    restored to 25% as determined by this
                    Court in the case of
All India Judges’
9
Association and others v. Union of India
                   and others
, reported in (2002) 4 SCC 247?
13. For considering the aforesaid issue, we will have to

consider the background for providing the reservation for

LDCE for promotion to Higher Judicial Service.
14. In pursuance to the directions given by this Court in the

judgment in the present proceedings dated 13th November

19911 (hereinafter referred to as “First AIJA Case”), the

Government of India by a resolution dated 21st March 1996

constituted the First National Judicial Pay Commission

under the Chairmanship of Justice K.J. Shetty, Former

Judge of this Court (hereinafter referred to as “Shetty

Commission”). After thorough deliberations, the Shetty

Commission submitted its Report on 11th November 1999.
15. This Court, in the judgment in the present proceedings

dated 21st March 20022 (hereinafter referred to as “Third

AIJA Case”), considered various recommendations of the

Shetty Commission, and the responses made thereto by

various      stakeholders.           This   Court   considered   the

recommendations made by the Shetty Commission that the

1 (1992) 1 SCC 119 : 1991 INSC 290
2 (2002) 4 SCC 247 : 2002 INSC 165
10
recruitment to the Higher Judicial Service i.e., the District

Judge Cadre from amongst the advocates should be 25% and

appointment on the basis of promotion should be 75%.
16. While considering this recommendation, this Court

observed thus:
“27. Another question which falls for consideration
     is the method of recruitment to the posts in the
     cadre of Higher Judicial Service i.e. District Judges
     and Additional District Judges. At the present
     moment, there are two sources for recruitment to
     the Higher Judicial Service, namely, by promotion
     from amongst the members of the Subordinate
     Judicial Service and by direct recruitment. The
     subordinate judiciary is the foundation of the edifice
     of the judicial system. It is, therefore, imperative,
     like any other foundation, that it should become as
     strong as possible. The weight on the judicial
     system essentially rests on the subordinate
     judiciary.    While    we     have     accepted    the
     recommendation of the Shetty Commission which
     will result in the increase in the pay scales of the
     subordinate judiciary, it is at the same time
     necessary that the judicial officers, hard-working as
     they are, become more efficient. It is imperative that
     they keep abreast of knowledge of law and the latest
     pronouncements, and it is for this reason that the
     Shetty     Commission     has    recommended       the
     establishment of a Judicial Academy, which is very
     necessary. At the same time, we are of the opinion
     that there has to be certain minimum standard,
     objectively adjudged, for officers who are to enter
     the Higher Judicial Service as Additional District
     Judges and District Judges. While we agree with the
     Shetty Commission that the recruitment to the
     Higher Judicial Service i.e. the District Judge cadre
     from amongst the advocates should be 25 per cent
     and the process of recruitment is to be by a
11
competitive examination, both written and viva
voce, we are of the opinion that there should be an
objective method of testing the suitability of the
subordinate judicial officers for promotion to the
Higher Judicial Service. Furthermore, there should
also be an incentive amongst the relatively junior
and other officers to improve and to compete with
each other so as to excel and get quicker promotion.
In this way, we expect that the calibre of the
members of the Higher Judicial Service will further
improve. In order to achieve this, while the ratio of
75 per cent appointment by promotion and 25 per
cent by direct recruitment to the Higher Judicial
Service is maintained, we are, however, of the
opinion that there should be two methods as far as
appointment by promotion is concerned : 50 per
cent of the total posts in the Higher Judicial Service
must be filled by promotion on the basis of principle
of merit-cum-seniority. For this purpose, the High
Courts should devise and evolve a test in order to
ascertain and examine the legal knowledge of those
candidates and to assess their continued efficiency
with adequate knowledge of case-law. The
remaining 25 per cent of the posts in the service
shall be filled by promotion strictly on the basis of
merit through the limited departmental competitive
examination for which the qualifying service as a
Civil Judge (Senior Division) should be not less than
five years. The High Courts will have to frame a rule
in this regard.
28. As a result of the aforesaid, to recapitulate, we
direct that recruitment to the Higher Judicial
Service i.e. the cadre of District Judges will be:
(1)(a) 50 per cent by promotion from
     amongst the Civil Judges (Senior
     Division) on the basis of principle of
     merit-cum-seniority and   passing    a
     suitability test;
(b) 25 per cent by promotion strictly on
     the basis of merit through limited
     competitive examination of Civil Judges
12
(Senior Division) having not less than five
          years' qualifying service; and
(c) 25 per cent of the posts shall be filled
          by direct recruitment from amongst the
          eligible advocates on the basis of the
          written and viva voce test conducted by
          respective High Courts.
(2) Appropriate rules shall be framed as
          above by the High Courts as early as
          possible.”
17. It can thus be seen that though this Court had

approved the recommendation of the Shetty Commission that

the recruitment to the Higher Judicial Service i.e., the

District Judge Cadre from amongst the advocates should be

25% and appointment by way of promotion should be 75%, it

opined that there should be two methods insofar as

appointment by promotion is concerned. This Court opined

that 50% of the total posts in the Higher Judicial Service

must be filled up by promotion on the basis of principle of

merit-cum-seniority. This Court therefore directed that, for

the said purpose, the High Courts should devise and evolve a

test in order to ascertain and examine the legal knowledge of

those candidates and to assess their continued efficiency

with adequate knowledge of case-law. This Court further

directed that the remaining 25% of the posts in the service
13
shall be filled up by promotion strictly on the basis of merit

through LDCE. This Court further directed that, for being

entitled to appear in the said LDCE, the qualifying service as

a Civil Judge (Senior Division) should be not less than 5

years. This Court therefore directed the High Courts to frame

the necessary rules so as to implement the aforesaid

directions.
18. In pursuance of the aforesaid directions, the High

Courts had amended the Service Rules and 25% of the posts

of District Judges were reserved for being filled up through

LDCE. However, many of the High Courts found it difficult to

fill up 25% of posts through such a process. In some of the

States, as many as 50 posts of District Judges to be filled up

by such exercise remained vacant and there was no

alternative method provided by which these vacant posts

could be filled up. Though the Rules framed by some of the

High Courts provided that such unfilled posts could be filled

up by regular promotion, in some of the States no such Rules

were framed. Many of the States therefore were of the opinion

that the said 25% reservation needed to be reduced. Though

some of the States like Gujarat, Delhi, Madhya Pradesh,
14
Jammu & Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh wanted that 25%

reservation for LDCE should be continued but they also

suggested that in case any post has remained unfilled in the

said LDCE quota, they be filled by regular promotion. Some

of the States also faced the difficulty that sufficient number

of candidates were not available for being promoted under

the LDCE category from the Cadre of Civil Judge (Senior

Division). This was so, because in such States even in normal

course, a Civil Judge (Senior Division) could be promoted

through the 50% quota for merit-cum-seniority before the

completion of his/her mandatory 5 years as a Civil Judge

(Senior Division) for the purpose of LDCE. This Court

therefore considered this issue in its judgment in the present

proceedings dated 20th April 20103 (hereinafter referred to as

“Fourth AIJA Case”). This Court found that a large number

of unfilled vacancies in the 25% LDCE category was not good

for judicial administration. Therefore, this Court found that it

was desirable that 25% quota reserved for LDCE be reduced

to 10%. This Court therefore issued the following directions:
“6. Having regard to various strategies available, we
      are of the considered view that suitable amendment

3 (2010) 15 SCC 170
15
is to be made for this 25% quota of limited
departmental competitive examination. We are also
of the view, with the past experience, that it is
desirable that 25% quota be reduced to 10%. We
feel so as the required result, which was sought to
be achieved by this process could not be achieved,
thus it calls for modification.
7. Thus, we direct that henceforth only 10% of the
cadre strength of District Judges be filled up by
limited departmental competitive examination with
those candidates who have qualified service of five
years as Civil Judge (Senior Division). Every year
vacancies are to be ascertained and the process of
selection shall be taken care of by the High Courts.
If any of the post is not filled up under 10% quota,
the same shall be filled up by regular promotion. In
some of the High Courts, process of selection of
these 25% quota by holding limited departmental
competitive examination is in progress, such
process can be continued and the unfilled seats, if
meritorious candidates are available, should be
filled up. But if for some reason the seats are not
filled up, they may be filled up by regular promotion
and apply the usual mode of promotion process.
Thus we pass the following order.
8. Hereinafter, there shall be 25% of seats for direct
recruitment from the Bar, 65% of seats are to be
filled up by regular promotion of Civil Judge (Senior
Division) and 10% seats are to be filled up by
limited departmental competitive examination. If
candidates are not available for 10% seats, or are
not able to qualify in the examination then vacant
posts are to be filled up by regular promotion in
accordance with the Service Rules applicable.
9. All the High Courts are hereby directed to take
steps to see that existing Service Rules be amended
positively with effect from 1-1-2011. If the Rules are
not suitably amended, this order shall prevail and
further recruitment from 1-1-2011 shall be
continued accordingly as directed by us. The time
schedule prescribed in the order dated 4-1-2007
16
(in Malik Mazhar Sultan case [
Malik Mazhar Sultan
     (3) v. U.P. Public Service Commission
, (2008) 17 SCC
     703 : (2010) 1 SCC (L&S) 942] ) shall be strictly
     adhered to for the purpose of selection. All the
     vacancies are to be filled up in that particular year
     and there shall not be any carry forward of the
     unfilled posts.”
19. Accordingly, in pursuance to the directions issued by

this Court, the Recruitment Rules insofar as the recruitment

in the Cadre of District Judges were amended. The earlier

recruitment ratio of District Judge Cadre i.e., 50:25:25 for

promotion and direct recruitment, was modified to 65:10:25

and the quota for LDCE was reduced.
20. However, since with the passage of time, sufficient

number of candidates in the Cadre of Civil Judge (Senior

Division) were eligible to be promoted as District Judge

through LDCE, certain I.As. were filed before this Court for

restoring the said 10% quota to 25%.
21. In response to the directions issued by this Court vide

order dated 25th April 2023, various High Courts have filed

their responses.
22. From the data compiled by learned amicus curiae, it

would reveal that the High Courts of Chhattisgarh, Patna,
17
Kerala,    Manipur,         Madras       and   Uttarakhand         have

recommended that the quota of LDCE be restored to 25%.

However, the High Courts of Gauhati, Andhra Pradesh,

Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Punjab

& Haryana, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tripura, Calcutta, Delhi and

Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh have recommended to retain

the same position.
23. It is further to be noted that even those High Courts

that have recommended that the LDCE quota to be restored

to 25%, have further recommended that if any seat remains

vacant, the same shall be filled up by regular promotion in

the same year.
24. We find that if the quota of LDCE is restored to 25% as

originally recommended in the Third AIJA Case, which was

reduced to 10% in the Fourth AIJA Case, it will provide an

incentive amongst the officers in the Cadre of Civil Judge

(Senior   Division).   It    will   also   provide   them   with    an

opportunity to get accelerated promotion in the Cadre of

District Judge if they are meritorious and deserving.
25. Another difficulty that has come to our notice is that

sufficient number of candidates are not available for
18
appearing in LDCE on account of requirement of having

minimum 5 years’ experience as Civil Judge (Senior Division)

which is prescribed as an eligibility criterion for appearing in

the LDCE for the Higher Judiciary.
26. In some of the States, a Judicial Officer who completes

about 5 years’ service in the Cadre of Civil Judge (Senior

Division), in normal course, becomes entitled to be promoted

in the Cadre of District Judge. We have already framed Issue

No.2 dealing with this very conundrum, which we are

considering immediately after this issue.
27. We find that in view of the answer that we propose for

Issue No.2, sufficient number of Judicial Officers from the

Cadre of Civil Judge (Senior Division) would be available who

would be eligible for appearing in LDCE.
28. If, in a particular year sufficient candidates are not

selected from the LDCE quota, it will be appropriate that

such posts would revert back to the regular promotion quota

based on merit-cum-seniority, to be filled up in the same

year. Therefore, in such a case, we find that no adverse

impact on the administration of justice would occur even if

the LDCE quota is increased to 25%. In our view, this apart
19
from avoiding any adverse effect on administration of justice

due to sufficient number of seats not being filled up would

also ensure that no prejudice would be caused to the regular

promotees and at the same time, the said exercise would

provide an incentive to the meritorious Judicial Officers, if

their merit deserves the same.
Issue No.2:        As to whether the minimum qualifying
                   experience for appearing in the aforesaid
                   examination needs to be reduced, and if
                   so, by how many years?
29. The difficulty of the requirement of having 5 years’

experience as Civil Judge (Senior Division) was noticed by

this Court in its order dated 19th April 2022 passed in the

present proceedings4 (hereinafter referred to as “Fifth AIJA

Case”). No doubt that the said decision of this Court

pertained     only    to    the      Delhi   Judicial   Services.   After

considering the rival submissions, a three-Judges Bench of

this Court to which one of us (Gavai, J.) was a Member

observed thus:
“17. The very purpose for providing the channel of
      promotion through LDCE was to provide an
      incentive to the officers amongst the relatively junior
      officers to improve and to compete with each other
      so as to excel and get quicker promotion. In the

4 (2022) 7 SCC 494 : 2022 INSC 445
20
peculiar situation prevailing in the High Court of
Delhi, the very purpose is frustrated. We are,
therefore, of the considered view that in the peculiar
facts and circumstances, both IA No. 249 of 2009
and IA No. 89454 of 2021 deserve to be allowed.
18. Shri Rao, learned Senior Counsel appearing on
behalf of the High Court of Delhi has fairly stated
that the High Court of Delhi, on its own, has
reserved two seats for the present judicial officers-
applicants so that their claims are not defeated by
passage of time or by delay in holding of the
examination.
19. In view of the submission made by Shri Rao, no
orders are necessary to be passed in IA No. 89450 of
2021, IA No. 44132 of 2022 in IAs Nos. 89450 and
88976 of 2021.
20. In the result, IA No. 89454 of 2021 filed by the
judicial officers-applicants and IA No. 249 of 2009
filed by the High Court of Delhi are allowed in the
following terms:
20.1. Para 28(1)(b) of the order dated 21-3-2002 [
All
India Judges Assn. (3) v. Union of India
, (2002) 4
SCC 247 : 2002 SCC (L&S) 508] passed by this
Court, is modified and substituted as under:
“25% by promotion strictly on the basis of
     merit through LDCE of Civil Judges having
     7 years' qualifying service [5 years as Civil
     Judge (Junior Division) and 2 years as
     Civil Judge (Senior Division)] or 10 years'
     qualifying service as Civil Judge (Junior
     Division).”
20.2. Similarly, in the order dated 20-4-2010 [
All
India Judges Assn. v. Union of India
, (2010) 15 SCC
170 : (2013) 1 SCC (L&S) 548] passed by this Court,
the direction in para 7 i.e. “Thus, we direct that
henceforth only 10% of the cadre strength of
District Judges be filled up by Limited Departmental
Competitive Examination with those candidates who
have qualified service of five years as Civil Judge
21
(Senior Division)”, is modified and substituted as
      under:
“Thus, we direct that henceforth only 10%
           of the cadre strength of District Judges be
           filled up by Limited Departmental
           Competitive Examination with those
           candidates who have qualified service of 7
           years [5 years as Civil Judge (Junior
           Division) and 2 years as Civil Judge
           (Senior Division)] or 10 years' qualifying
           service as Civil Judge (Junior Division).””
30. Though in the said order, this Court considered the

aforesaid requirement of 5 years’ experience, only insofar as

High Court of Delhi is concerned, from the responses we have

received   from   various   High     Courts    and   the   State

Governments, we are of the view that the said requirement

requires reconsideration.
31. As can be seen from the affidavits filed, the High Courts

of   Gauhati,   Chhattisgarh,    Himachal     Pradesh,   Madhya

Pradesh, Orissa, Punjab & Haryana, Rajasthan, Sikkim,

Madras, Tripura, Calcutta and Jammu & Kashmir and

Ladakh have opposed the reduction of experience of 5 years.
The Governments of these States have also adopted the

suggestions made by their High Courts. However, the High
22
Court of Patna has recommended the qualifying service as a

Civil Judge (Senior Division) should be 3 years.
32. The State of Haryana has observed that the average

time taken by a Civil Judge (Junior Division) to be eligible for

LDCE is 14 years. The State Government has therefore

recommended that the qualifying service as Civil Judge

(Senior Division) may be reduced to 2 or 3 years for being

eligible to appear for LDCE.
33. Insofar as the State of Kerala is concerned, both the

State Government and the High Court of Kerala have

recommended that the minimum requirement of having an

experience of 5 years as Civil Judge (Senior Division) should

be brought down to 3 years.
34. High Court of Uttarakhand has recommended for

reducing the minimum qualifying service of 5 years to 2

years. Further, the High Court of Allahabad has also

recommended for reducing the minimum qualifying service of

5 years to 3 years.
35. Insofar as the States of Chhattisgarh and Manipur are

concerned, it appears that the State Governments and the

High Courts are not on the same pitch.
23
36. Insofar as the State of Chhattisgarh is concerned, the

State Government has given a positive opinion with regard to

amending    the   provision   for   reducing    the   minimum

requirement of having an experience of 5 years as a Civil

Judge (Senior Division) to 2 years. However, High Court of

Chhattisgarh has opposed for reduction of the minimum

qualifying experience.
37. The situation is converse insofar as State of Manipur is

concerned. In the State of Manipur, though the High Court

has recommended reduction of minimum experience from 5

years to 2 years, it has also recommended that the minimum

years of service as a Judicial Officer including that of a Civil

Judge (Junior Division) should not be less than 7 years.

However, the State of Manipur though has opposed such a

reduction, it has left the final decision to the wisdom of this

Court.
38. Insofar as the State of Gujarat is concerned, it has not

given any opinion. From the affidavit filed by the High Court

of Gujarat, it appears that there exists a completely

anomalous situation. Rule 5(3)(i) of the Gujarat State Judicial

Service Rules, 2005 provides that 2 years of qualifying service
24
as Civil Judge (Senior Division) is required for being eligible

for promotion in the cadre of District Judge against 65%

quota. However, Rule 5(3)(ii) of the said Rules provides that 5

years of qualifying service as Civil Judge (Senior Division) is

required for being eligible for promotion in the Cadre of

District Judge against 10% quota. In the affidavit of High

Court of Gujarat itself, it is stated that the said position has

been holding the field since the year 2005 and is working out

well. The position that emerges in the State of Gujarat

though is that, for being eligible for a promotional quota in a

regular course, only 2 years’ experience is required. However,

to compete from LDCE, which is supposed to be for the

purpose of providing incentive, a Judicial Officer must have 5

years’ service as Civil Judge (Senior Division). We find that

such a position is totally inconsistent with the idea of

providing an incentive to a meritorious Civil Judge (Senior

Division) to have an opportunity to get an accelerated

promotion to the Cadre of District Judge.
39. We find that it will be appropriate to compare the

position in some of the States with regard to average time

taken by a Civil Judge (Junior Division) to get eligible for
25
LDCE as against the average time taken by a Civil Judge

(Junior Division) to become a District Judge by regular

promotions. In this respect, a Chart was submitted by the

learned amicus curiae, extracted as under:
i.     “Bihar
a) average time taken by a Civil Judge (JD) to be
            eligible for LDCE - 9 to 10 years
b) average time taken by a Civil Judge (JD) to
            become a District Judge by regular promotions
            – 9 to 10 years


  ii.    Himachal Pradesh
a) average time taken by a Civil Judge (JD) to be
            eligible for LDCE - 15 to 16 years
b) average time taken by a Civil Judge (JD) to
            become a District Judge by regular promotions
            – 19 to 20 years


  iii.   Maharashtra
a) average time taken by a Civil Judge (JD) to be
            eligible for LDCE - 11 years
b) average time taken by a Civil Judge (JD) to
            become a District Judge by regular promotions
            – 13 years


  iv.    Manipur
a) average time taken by a Civil Judge (JD) to be
            eligible for LDCE - 10 years 7 months
b) average time taken by a Civil Judge (JD) to
            become a District Judge by regular promotions
            – 11 years
26
v.     Punjab
a) average time taken by a Civil Judge (JD) to be
            eligible for LDCE - 14 to 15 years
b) average time taken by a Civil Judge (JD) to
            become a District Judge by regular promotions
            – 15 years


  vi.    Haryana
a) average time taken by a Civil Judge (JD) to be
            eligible for LDCE - 14 years
b) average time taken by a Civil Judge (JD) to
            become a District Judge by regular
            promotions – 12 years


  vii.   Uttar Pradesh
a) average time taken by a Civil Judge (JD) to be
            eligible for LDCE - 9 to 10 years
b) average time taken by a Civil Judge (JD) to
            become a District Judge by regular
            promotions – 9 to 10 years”
40. The comparative position would reveal that in most of

the States, the average time taken by a Civil Judge (Junior

Division) to climb the ladder of regular promotion and

ultimately, be promoted as a District Judge is almost the

same as the time it takes to become eligible for a Civil Judge

(Senior Division) to appear for LDCE.
27
41. As such, there will be no actual incentive for a Judicial

Officer to appear for LDCE and such incentive cannot be

frustrated by actual working of the said scheme.
42. As has been discussed hereinabove, the purpose behind

providing a special quota for LDCE is to enable the

meritorious Judicial Officers to get accelerated promotion

and enter the Cadre of District Judge at an earlier point of

time than other less meritorious candidates. If a Judicial

Officer even otherwise gets entry in the Cadre of District

Judge after completion of 5 years of service as a Civil Judge

(Senior Division), there will be no incentive available to

him/her. As already discussed hereinabove, in some of the

High Courts, a Judicial Officer gets into the Cadre of District

Judge   through    regular   promotion   itself   after   he/she

completes 5 years’ service as Civil Judge (Senior Division).

Therefore, in our considered view, it will be desirable to

modify the requirement to become eligible for LDCE for the

Higher Judicial Services and reduce the minimum number of

years of experience as a Civil Judge (Senior Division) from 5

years to 3 years. However, at the same time, we are also of

the opinion that, as recommended by some of the States, the
28
total number of years of experience for a Judicial Officer for

being eligible for LDCE should be a minimum cumulative of 7

years including service as Civil Judge (Junior Division) and

Civil Judge (Senior Division).
Issue No.3:     As to whether a quota needs to be reserved
                for meritorious candidate from the Civil
                Judge (Junior Division) to Civil Judge
                (Senior Division) so that there is an
                incentive for merit in the cadre of Civil
                Judge (Junior Division)?
AND

Issue No.4:     If yes, then what should be the percentage
                thereof and what should be the minimum
                experience as a Civil Judge (Junior
                Division)?
43. The High Courts across the country have given varying

opinions with regard to the aforesaid two issues. Whereas

some of the High Courts have opposed for providing such a

quota for promotion from Civil Judge (Junior Division) to

Civil Judge (Senior Division), on the other hand, some of the

High Courts have recommended the same. There are also

diverse views on minimum number of years to be put in by a

Civil Judge (Junior Division) before they are considered as
29
eligible for being promoted as Civil Judge (Senior Division)

through LDCE mechanism.
44. In this respect, it will be apposite to refer to the

judgment of this Court in the Third AIJA Case.
45. This Court, while considering the recommendation of

the Shetty Commission for providing 25% quota for Direct

Recruitment from the Bar and 75% quota for promotion on

the basis of the principle of merit-cum-seniority, was of the

view that in the 75% quota, 25% posts are required to be

filled up through LDCE so as to provide an incentive to the

meritorious candidates. We are of the view that there should

be no reason as to why the said principle also cannot be

adopted for promotion of Civil Judge (Junior Division)

candidates to the Cadre of Civil Judge (Senior Division).
46. Therefore, we are of the view that a system wherein 10%

of the posts in the Cadre of Civil Judge (Senior Division)

would be reserved for promotion of Civil Judge (Junior

Division) through    the LDCE      mechanism    needs to    be

introduced so as to provide incentive at an earlier promotion

to the meritorious candidates working in the Cadre of Civil

Judge (Junior Division). The said seats would be filled up
30
through the same mechanism adopted for filling up the

vacancies reserved through LDCE for entry into the Cadre of

District Judge. The minimum experience of a Judicial Officer

in the Cadre of Civil Judge (Junior Division) for appearing in

such an examination should be 3 years.
Issue No.5:     As to whether the quota to be reserved for
                the      aforementioned      departmental
examinations in a particular year should
                be calculated on the cadre strength or on
                the number of vacancies occurring in the
                particular recruitment year?
47. Insofar as this issue is concerned, most of the State

Governments except the four States of Haryana, Madhya

Pradesh, Punjab and West Bengal have recommended filling

up of vacant seats as per the total cadre strength and not as

per the vacancies arising in a particular year. The learned

amicus curiae has placed on record a chart depicting the said

position of all the States who had filed their responses.
48. We are of the view that a uniform practice needs to be

followed by all the States in the country. Since most of the

States are already filling up the vacant posts as per the total

cadre strength, keeping uniformity in mind, we are of the
31
view that the quota to be reserved for LDCE should be

calculated on the basis of the cadre strength.

Issue No.6:    As to whether some suitability test should
               also be introduced while promoting the
               Civil Judge (Senior Division) to the Cadre
               of District Judges against the existing 65%
               quota for promotion to Higher Judicial
               Services on the basis of merit-cum-
seniority.
49. For considering this issue, it will be relevant to refer to

the following observations made by this Court in the Third

AIJA Case:
“27. Another question which falls for consideration
     is the method of recruitment to the posts in the
     cadre of Higher Judicial Service i.e. District Judges
     and Additional District Judges. At the present
     moment, there are two sources for recruitment to
     the Higher Judicial Service, namely, by promotion
     from amongst the members of the Subordinate
     Judicial Service and by direct recruitment. The
     subordinate judiciary is the foundation of the edifice
     of the judicial system. It is, therefore, imperative,
     like any other foundation, that it should become as
     strong as possible. The weight on the judicial
     system essentially rests on the subordinate
     judiciary.    While    we    have      accepted    the
     recommendation of the Shetty Commission which
     will result in the increase in the pay scales of the
     subordinate judiciary, it is at the same time
     necessary that the judicial officers, hard-working as
     they are, become more efficient. It is imperative that
     they keep abreast of knowledge of law and the latest
     pronouncements, and it is for this reason that the
     Shetty     Commission     has    recommended       the
     establishment of a Judicial Academy, which is very
     necessary. At the same time, we are of the opinion
32
that there has to be certain minimum standard,
objectively adjudged, for officers who are to enter
the Higher Judicial Service as Additional District
Judges and District Judges. While we agree with
the Shetty Commission that the recruitment to
the Higher Judicial Service i.e. the District
Judge cadre from amongst the advocates should
be 25 per cent and the process of recruitment is
to be by a competitive examination, both written
and viva voce, we are of the opinion that there
should be an objective method of testing the
suitability of the subordinate judicial officers for
promotion to the Higher Judicial Service.
Furthermore, there should also be an incentive
amongst the relatively junior and other officers to
improve and to compete with each other so as to
excel and get quicker promotion. In this way, we
expect that the calibre of the members of the Higher
Judicial Service will further improve. In order to
achieve this, while the ratio of 75 per cent
appointment by promotion and 25 per cent by direct
recruitment to the Higher Judicial Service is
maintained, we are, however, of the opinion that
there should be two methods as far as appointment
by promotion is concerned : 50 per cent of the
total posts in the Higher Judicial Service must
be filled by promotion on the basis of principle
of merit-cum-seniority. For this purpose, the
High Courts should devise and evolve a test in
order to ascertain and examine the legal
knowledge of those candidates and to assess
their continued efficiency with adequate
knowledge of case-law. The remaining 25 per cent
of the posts in the service shall be filled by
promotion strictly on the basis of merit through the
limited departmental competitive examination for
which the qualifying service as a Civil Judge (Senior
Division) should be not less than five years. The
High Courts will have to frame a rule in this regard.
28. As a result of the aforesaid, to recapitulate, we
direct that recruitment to the Higher Judicial
Service i.e. the cadre of District Judges will be:
33
(1)(a) 50 per cent by promotion from
                amongst the Civil Judges (Senior
                Division) on the basis of principle of
                merit-cum-seniority and   passing    a
                suitability test;
(b) 25 per cent by promotion strictly on
                the basis of merit through limited
                competitive examination of Civil Judges
                (Senior Division) having not less than five
                years' qualifying service; and
(c) 25 per cent of the posts shall be filled
                by direct recruitment from amongst the
                eligible advocates on the basis of the
                written and viva voce test conducted by
                respective High Courts.
(2) Appropriate rules shall be framed as
                above by the High Courts as early as
                possible.”
                                              [Emphasis supplied]
50. It can be seen that, in the Third AIJA Case, while this

Court had accepted the recommendations of the Shetty

Commission, which recommended an increase in the Pay-

Scales     of     the   subordinate      judiciary,   this   Court   also

emphasized the necessity of Judicial Officers becoming more

efficient. This Court observed that it was imperative that they

keep abreast of the developments in law and the latest

judicial pronouncements. This Court further observed that, it

was      for     that   reason,   the     Shetty      Commission     had

recommended the establishment of a Judicial Academy. This
34
Court also expressed that there should be an objective

method for testing the suitability of the Judicial Officers who

are in line for promotion to the Higher Judicial Service. This

Court had observed that 50% of the total posts in the Higher

Judicial Service must be filled by promotion based on the

principle of merit-cum-seniority. It has further been observed

that for the said purpose, the High Courts should devise and

evolve a test in order to ascertain and examine the legal

knowledge of such candidates and to assess their continued

efficiency with adequate knowledge of case-law. This Court

further emphasized the necessity of postulating the basis of

determining the suitability of the candidate while he/she was

being considered to be promoted to the Cadre of Higher

Judicial Service. The said determination was on the basis of

various factors including as to whether such candidate

possesses adequate legal knowledge or not.
51. Perusal of the affidavits filed by various High Courts as

well as State Governments would reveal that in some of the

High Courts, the Rules have been framed for determining the

suitability of a candidate for being promoted to the Cadre of

Higher Judicial Service from the Cadre of Civil Judge (Senior
35
Division). Perusal of the affidavits of the High Courts and the

States where such suitability is being determined would

reveal that various factors are taken into consideration while

determining the suitability of a candidate like: (i) evaluation

of judgments rendered by the Judicial Officer in the

preceding five years; (ii) Annual Confidential Reports (ACRs)

of the Judicial Officer in the preceding five years; (iii) disposal

rate in the preceding five years; (iv) pendency of the

disciplinary proceedings; and (v) the performance of the

candidate in the viva voce.
52. We are of the view that though every High Court would

be required to frame the Rules for determining the suitability

of a candidate for being promoted to the Cadre of Higher

Judicial Service from the Cadre of Civil Judge (Senior

Division), no straight-jacket formula can be laid down for the

said purpose. We however find that, in such of the States

where the Rules have not been framed for determining the

suitability of a candidate for being promoted to the Cadre of

Higher Judicial Service from the Cadre of Civil Judge (Senior

Division),   such   of   the   High   Courts    and    the   State

Governments should frame the Rules forthwith. We further
36
find that the High Courts and the State Governments shall

also examine, as to whether the Rules already existing are

sufficient to determine the suitability of a candidate for being

promoted to the Cadre of Higher Judicial Service from the

Cadre of Civil Judge (Senior Division). We find that while

providing a Rule for determining the suitability of a

candidate, it would be relevant to consider factors referred to

by us in the preceding paragraphs amongst other factors:
(i)     Whether the candidate possesses updated knowledge

          of law;
(ii)    The quality of judgments rendered by the Judicial

          Officer;
(iii)   ACRs of the Judicial Officer of the preceding five

          years;
(iv)    Disposal rate in the preceding five years;
(v)     Performance of the Judicial Officer in the viva voce;
and
(vi)    General    perceptions     and   awareness   as   also

          communication skills.
37
Issue No.7:        As to whether the requirement of having
                   minimum     three   years    practice   for
                   appearing in the examination of Civil
Judge (Junior Division), which was done
                   away by this Court in the case of
All India
                   Judges Association & Ors.
(supra), needs
                   to be restored? And if so, by how many
                   years?
AND

Issue No.8:        If the requirement of certain minimum
                   years of practice for appearing in the
                   examination of Civil Judge (Junior
                   Division) is restored, should the same be
                   calculated from the date of the provisional
                   enrolment/registration or from the date of
                   the passing of the AIBE?
53. These issues pertain to the question as to whether the

requirement of minimum 3 years’ practice for appearing in

the examination for the post of Civil Judge (Junior Division)

which was done away by this Court in Third AIJA Case

requires to be restored or not. The ancillary question that is

framed by us is as to how many years of experience should

be    prescribed    for   practicing    before    appearing   in   the

examination of Civil Judge (Junior Division).
54. While we had called upon the responses of various High

Courts and the State Governments in the country vide order

dated 25th April 2023, when the matter was listed on 18th

May     2023,   Shri      Marlapalle,   learned     Senior    Counsel
38
submitted that as per the Bar Council of India Regulations,

initially provisional registration is required to be made for a

period of 2 years. It was further submitted that only if a

candidate passes the AIBE, a permanent registration can be

granted. He, therefore, submitted that for considering the

aforesaid issue No.7, it will also be necessary to take into

consideration the aforesaid Regulations of the Bar Council of

India. We, therefore, vide order dated 18th May 2023

requested the Union of India, all the State Governments and

the High Courts to consider the aforesaid issue with regard

to the Regulations of the Bar Council of India.
55. The Law Commission of India in its 117th Report, dated

28th November 1986 titled - “Training of Judicial Officers”,

though recommended the fresh law graduates to enter into

the judicial service, it emphasized the need for intensive

training for such fresh law graduates entering into the

judicial service. It will be relevant to refer to the following

observations of the Law Commission of India:
“4.6 …….The Law Commission is of the opinion that
     the two years intensive training would outweigh the
     advantage, if any, of three years practice at the Bar
     which often enough hardly helps in the matter of
     equipping oneself.”
39
56. The said recommendations were considered by this

Court in the present proceedings in its judgment dated 24th

August 19935 (hereinafter referred to as “Second AIJA

Case”). This Court observed thus:
“20. It has, however, become imperative, in this
      connection, to take notice of the fact that the
      qualifications prescribed and the procedure adopted
      for recruitment of the Judges at the lowest rung are
      not uniform in all the States. In view of the
      uniformity in the hierarchy and designations as well
      as the service conditions that we have suggested, it
      is necessary that all the States should prescribe
      uniform qualifications and adopt uniform procedure
      in recruiting the judicial officers at the lowest rung
      in the hierarchy. In most of the States, the
      minimum qualifications for being eligible to the post
      of    the    Civil     Judge-cum-Magistrate       First
      Class/Magistrate First Class/Munsiff Magistrate is
      minimum three years' practice as a lawyer in
      addition to the degree in law. In some States,
      however, the requirement of practice is altogether
      dispensed with and judicial officers are recruited
      with only a degree in law to their credit. The
      recruitment of raw graduates as judicial officers
      without any training or background of lawyering
      has not proved to be a successful experiment.
      Considering the fact that from the first day of his
      assuming office, the Judge has to decide, among
      others, questions of life, liberty, property and
      reputation of the litigants, to induct graduates fresh
      from the Universities to occupy seats of such vital
      powers is neither prudent nor desirable. Neither
      knowledge derived from books nor pre-service
      training can be an adequate substitute for the first-
      hand experience of the working of the court-system
      and the administration of justice begotten through

5 (1993) 4 SCC 288 : 1993 INSC 272
40
legal practice. The practice involves much more
     than mere advocacy. A lawyer has to interact with
     several components of the administration of justice.
Unless the judicial officer is familiar with the
     working of the said components, his education and
     equipment as a Judge is likely to remain
     incomplete. The experience as a lawyer is, therefore,
     essential to enable the Judge to discharge his duties
     and functions efficiently and with confidence and
     circumspection. Many States have hence prescribed
     a minimum of three years' practice as a lawyer as
     an essential qualification for appointment as a
     judicial officer at the lowest rung. It is, hence,
     necessary that all the States prescribe the said
     minimum practice as a lawyer as a necessary
     qualification for recruitment to the lowest rung in
     the judiciary. In this connection, it may be pointed
     out that under
Article 233(2)
of the Constitution, no
     person is eligible to be appointed a District Judge
     unless he has been an advocate or a pleader for not
     less than seven years while
Articles 217(2)(b)
and
124(3)(b)
require at least ten years' practice as an
     advocate of a High Court for the appointment of a
     person to the posts of the Judge of the High Court
     and the Judge of the Supreme Court, respectively.
     We, therefore, direct that all States shall take
     immediate steps to prescribe three years' practice as
     a lawyer as one of the essential qualifications for
     recruitment as the judicial officer at the lowest
     rung.”
57. It can thus be seen that this Court noted that though

there is no uniformity in all the States with regard to

minimum qualifications for being eligible to the post of Civil

Judge-cum-Magistrate      First    Class/Magistrate      First

Class/Munsiff Magistrate, most of the States provided

minimum three years' practice as a lawyer in addition to the
41
degree in law. This Court noted that in some of the States,

the requirement of practice was altogether dispensed with,

and judicial officers were recruited with only a degree in law

to their credit. This Court observed that the recruitment of

“raw graduates” as Judicial Officers without any training or

background of lawyering has not proved to be a successful

experiment. This Court further noted that from the first day

of his/her assuming office, a Judge has to decide, among

others, questions of life, liberty, property and reputation of

the litigants. This Court further noted that to induct

graduates fresh from the Universities to occupy seats of such

vital powers was neither prudent nor desirable.
58. This Court further found that neither knowledge derived

from books nor pre-service training could be an adequate

substitute for the first-hand experience of the working of the

court-system and the administration of justice begotten

through legal practice. This Court found that the experience

as a lawyer was therefore essential to enable the Judge to

discharge his/her duties and functions efficiently and with

confidence   and   circumspection.   This   Court,   therefore,

directed all the States to prescribe a minimum of three years'
42
practice as a lawyer as an essential qualification for

appointment as a Judicial Officer at the lowest rung.
59. Subsequent thereto, the Shetty Commission, in its

Report dated 11th November 1999, noted that though
Articles

217
and
233
of the Constitution of India prescribe a

minimum experience of 10 years to be appointed as High

Court Judge and 7 years to be appointed as District Judge,

no such requirement was provided for being eligible to be

appointed as a Civil Judge (Junior Division). It will be

relevant to refer to some of the observations made in the

Shetty Commission Report, which read thus:
“8.30 As to the observation of the Law Commission
     in its 14th Report recommending three years
     practice at the Bar, we may state that observation
     was evidently based on the then existing system of
     legal education. The Law Commission made that
     report in 1958 when the LL.B. degree course was
     only of two years duration for which law practice as
     a subject was not in the curriculum.
8.31 In the present system of legal education 3
     years or 5 years, law practice is one of the subjects
     prescribed for the students. Particularly in the
     curriculum under the present 5 years law degree
     course, the students have to attend Court
     compulsorily to get themselves educated in the
     practical training in Court craft.
8.32 It would be, therefore, futile to prescribe three
     years practice as an Advocate to have intimate
     knowledge of the Court work as a condition for
     recruitment to the cadre of Civil Judges (Jr. Divn.).
43
8.33 If it is not out of place to mention, that the
students coming out of the Institute like National
Law School of India University, Bangalore to be
better equipped and more informed than a junior
advocate with three years standing. The students
from National Law School of India University are the
favourites for campus selection by multinationals.
Every year, multinational Companies land at the
school campus and select students of the final year
by offering them a fat salary of Rs. 20,000 to Rs.
25,000. The entire purpose of establishing the
National Law School of India University is to
produce good law graduates for enriching the Indian
Bar. That purpose has been practically defeated by
insisting upon three years Bar practice as a
precondition for entering the judicial service.
8.34 Further, in our opinion, 3 years standing at
the Bar as the minimum qualification for entry into
the judicial service may be wholly unnecessary and
uncalled for in view of the Commission’s
recommendations on Institutional training for the
selected candidates. Attention of the concerned
authorities is invited to the report of the
Commission on judicial education and training an
in particular the broad themes of the curriculum for
induction training. It includes among other things,
practical training through field placement. The
Commission has recommended the induction
training course for about one year by qualified
trainers.
RECOMMENDATION BY THE COMMISSION
8.35 If intensive training is given to young and
brilliant law graduates, it may be unnecessary to
prescribe three years practice in the Bar as a
condition for entering the judicial service. It is not
the opinion of any High Court or State Government
that induction to service of fresh law graduates with
brilliant     academic       career     would       be
counterproductive. We consider that it is proper and
necessary to reserve liberty to High Court and State
Governments, as the case may be, to select either
44
Advocates with certain standing at the Bar or
     outstanding law graduates with aptitude for service.
     It is not correct to deny such discretion to High
     Authorities   like,  High   Courts    and     State
     Governments.
8.36 Those High Courts and State Governments
     who are interested in selecting the fresh law
     graduates with a scheme of intensive induction
     training may move the Supreme Court for
     reconsidering the view taken in
All India Judges’
     Association
Case for deleting the condition of three
     years standing as Advocate for recruitment to the
     cadre of Civil Judges (Jr. Divn.). We trust and hope
     that the Supreme Court will reconsider that aspect.”
60. The recommendations of the Shetty Commission were

considered by this Court in the Third AIJA Case. This Court

observed thus:
“32.
In
All India Judges' Assn.
case [(1993) 4 SCC
     288 : 1994 SCC (L&S) 148 : (1993) 25 ATC 818]
     (SCC at p. 314) this Court has observed that in
     order to enter the judicial service, an applicant
     must be an advocate of at least three years'
     standing. Rules were amended accordingly. With
     the passage of time, experience has shown that the
     best talent which is available is not attracted to the
     judicial service. A bright young law graduate after 3
     years of practice finds the judicial service not
     attractive enough. It has been recommended by the
     Shetty Commission after taking into consideration
     the views expressed before it by various authorities,
     that the need for an applicant to have been an
     advocate for at least 3 years should be done away
     with. After taking all the circumstances into
     consideration, we accept this recommendation of
     the Shetty Commission and the argument of the
     learned amicus curiae that it should be no longer
45
mandatory for an applicant desirous of entering the
      judicial service to be an advocate of at least three
      years' standing.
We, accordingly, in the light of
      experience gained after the judgment in
All India
      Judges
case direct to the High Courts and to the
      State Governments to amend their rules so as to
      enable a fresh law graduate who may not even have
      put in three years of practice, to be eligible to
      compete and enter the judicial service. We, however,
      recommend that a fresh recruit into the judicial
      service should be imparted training of not less than
      one year, preferably two years.”
61. This Court accordingly directed all the High Courts and

the State Governments to amend their Rules so as to enable

fresh law graduates who may not even have a single day’s

experience in practice as a lawyer to be eligible to compete

and    enter   the   judicial   service.   This   Court   further

recommended that a fresh recruit into the judicial service

should be imparted training of not less than one year,

preferably two years.
62. When the matter was subsequently heard, learned

amicus curiae as well as counsel appearing for most of the

High Courts were of the view that the time has come to

review as to whether the requirement for minimum years of

practice as provided by this Court in the Second AIJA Case

is required to be restored.
46
63. In response to the orders passed by this Court dated

25th April 2023 and 18th May 2023, various High Courts have

submitted their affidavits. It will be relevant to note that most

of the High Courts are in agreement that the earlier

requirement of having minimum 3 years’ experience at the

Bar for appearing in the examination of Civil Judge (Junior

Division) needs to be restored.
64. The High Court of Andhra Pradesh has stated that some

instances have come to the notice of the High Court that

some of the Civil Judges (Junior Division) who did not

possess any experience at the Bar, appointed straight away

from the college to the court, are not treating the bar

members and staff members in good spirits and that the

officers are finding it difficult to handle the courts when faced

with procedural issues. It has therefore been recommended

that there should be a minimum experience of 2 years at the

Bar before a candidate is considered to be eligible for

appointment as a Civil Judge (Junior Division). At the same

time, it is also recommended that the existing training

module for 2 years (1 year practical training + 1 year

institutional training) should be continued so that the
47
candidates, on selection into judicial service, would discharge

their functions more efficiently. The State Government has

also agreed with the views expressed by the High Court.
65. The High Court of Gauhati has recommended for a

minimum 2 years of practice to be made a requirement for a

candidate being eligible to appear in the examination of Civil

Judge (Junior Division).
66. The High Court of Patna as well as the Government of

Bihar have opined that minimum 3 years’ practice as an

advocate should be introduced as a requirement for Civil

Judge (Junior Division) as it would be helpful in appointing

experienced lawyers which would benefit the judicial service

and improve standards of judicial dispensation.
67. The State of Karnataka has stated that it is the

experience of the Bar members and Principal District Judges

that due to the lack of practical professional experience of

such Civil Judges, inconvenience is caused during the

discharge of duty and day-to-day proceedings, especially

when they are passing urgent orders. The State has therefore

recommended minimum 2 years’ practice as an advocate

after completion of law degree to be made as a requirement
48
for a candidate being eligible to appear in the examination of

Civil Judge (Junior Division).
68. The State of Kerala as well as the High Court of Kerala

have also recommended that the requirement of minimum 3

years’ practice at the Bar needs to be restored.
69. The High Court of Madhya Pradesh has opined that

experience has shown that even candidates who are brilliant

in academics having no experience at the Bar were not able

to handle court proceedings properly. It is also stated that

many oral or written complaints regarding their behavioural

attitude towards advocates, litigants, their superiors and

staff are being received in the High Court on a regular basis.

It is further stated that fresh law graduates having no

experience at the Bar lack maturity and experience in

handling court proceedings. It has therefore recommended to

restore the requirement of experience or practice at the Bar

prior to appointment of Civil Judge (Junior Division).
70. Both the State of Manipur and the High Court of

Manipur have recommended restoration of 3 years’ prior

experience of practice so as to understand the practical

difficulties, challenges faced by lawyers and litigants. It goes
49
on to state that actual practicing experience is invaluable

and irreplaceable.
71. The High Court of Orissa has stated that inexperienced

candidates    take     time   to   acquaint    themselves    to   the

environment of a court which ultimately enables them to

smoothly handle the day-to-day court proceedings. It is

further stated that they are often unaware about the court

decorum      and     this   causes      inconvenience   in   judicial

administration. It is therefore opined by the High Cout of

Orissa that the candidates before entering into the judicial

service should have some practical knowledge about the day-

to-day court proceedings and the manner in which the cases

are conducted by the advocates. It has therefore been

recommended that there must be reintroduction of the

requirement of minimum 3 years’ practice before being

considered    for appointment as           a Civil Judge (Junior

Division).
72. The High Court of Madras as well as the High Court of

Uttarakhand have also recommended that there should be a

reintroduction of the requirement of 3 years’ minimum

practice. The High Court of Uttarakhand has stated that
50
fresh   law   graduates   with    no   exposure   to   the   court

environment are not steeped into the culture, etiquette,

temper and conduct of the court proceedings. It further

states that this leads to advocates’ complaining about

misbehaviour and giving ill-treatment to the advocates and

litigants by such new officers. The State of Uttarakhand has

also supported the views of the High Court of Uttarakhand.
73. The High Court of Allahabad as well as the High Court

of Calcutta have also supported the reintroduction of the

requirement of some prior practice to appear for such

examination.
74. The High Court of Delhi has recommended that the

minimum requirement be 1 year of practice at the Bar.
75. Insofar as High Court of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh

and the High Court of Gujarat are concerned, they have

recommended 2 years’ minimum practice.
76. It is further to be noted that though one or two High

Courts have stated that the experience should be counted

from the date on which AIBE is passed, most of the High

Courts have not given their opinion on the same. It is only

the State of Orissa, the High Court of Punjab & Haryana, the
51
High Court of Delhi and the High Court of Jammu & Kashmir

and Ladakh who have recommended that the date of

experience should be counted from the date on which the

provisional registration was granted to a candidate.
77. Insofar as the State of Chhattisgarh is concerned,

though the High Court of Chhattisgarh has recommended

reintroduction of a practice of minimum 3 years, it is the

Government of Chhattisgarh which has opposed the same.
78. Though the High Court of Punjab & Haryana has

recommended the reintroduction of the requirement of

minimum 2 years of experience, the State of Haryana has

opposed the same.
79. The States of Nagaland and Tripura have opposed such

reintroduction.
80. It is further to be noted that insofar as the High Courts

are concerned, except the High Courts of Rajasthan and

Sikkim,   no      other   High    Court   has   opposed       such

reintroduction of the pre-requisite of practice at the Bar.
81. From the affidavits of almost all the High Courts, it is

seen that for the last 20 years during which the recruitment
52
of fresh law graduates as Judicial Officers without a single

day of practice at the Bar has been permitted, the said

endeavour has not been a successful experience. The

appointment of such fresh law graduates has led to many

problems as have been enumerated by us in the aforesaid

paragraphs on the basis of the affidavits filed by the High

Courts.
82. We are conscious of the fact that in the initial years, the

opportunities available to a young lawyer, fresh from college

will be minimal. However, the exposure to courts and more

particularly litigants and their briefs would acquaint them

with the onerous duties and responsibilities of every

stakeholder in the judicial system. It would bring in a

sensitivity to human problems, more clarity in the decision

making process and educate them of the role of the Bar in

justice dispensation.
83. The Judges from the very day on which they assume

office have to deal with the questions of life, liberty, property

and reputation of litigants. As rightly observed, neither

knowledge derived from books nor pre-service training can be

an adequate substitute for the first-hand experience of the
53
working of the court-system and the administration of

justice. This is possible only when a candidate is exposed to

the atmosphere in the court by assisting the seniors and

observing how the lawyers and the Judges function in the

court. The candidate should be equipped to understand the

intricacies of the functions of a Judge. The experience of

various High Courts has also shown that such fresh law

graduates, upon their entry in judicial service, begin to show

behavioural and temperament problems.
84. We are therefore in agreement with the views expressed

by most of the High Courts that the requirement of

reintroduction of a certain number of years of practice would

be necessary.
85. That leaves us with the question as to whether such

experience should be counted from the date on which the

provisional registration/enrolment is granted or from the

date on which the candidates pass the AIBE. Though Shri

Marlapalle, learned Senior Counsel, who had raised this

question has recommended that such an experience should

be counted from passing of the AIBE, which has also been

supported   by   Ms.   Radhika     Gautam,   learned   counsel
54
appearing for the Bar Council of India, the Court will have to

balance the requirement of having a minimum experience at

the Bar and also provide an opportunity to the young

meritorious law graduates to appear in the said examination.
86. There    could   be   various   reasons   as   to   why   the

candidates are not in a position to appear for AIBE. Different

Universities may declare their results at different time which

may lead to a candidate losing the opportunity to appear for

such an examination in a particular year. It will be relevant

to note that after a candidate receives the provisional

registration, he/she is entitled to practice within the State of

which the Bar Council has given the said provisional

registration. In that view of the matter, we are of the view

that the experience should be counted from the date on

which provisional registration has been granted to a

candidate.
87. Another concern that is expressed is that some

candidates may only keep the provisional registration and

would be entitled to appear for the Civil Judge (Junior

Division) Examination after they complete 2 years from the

date of provisional registration. It is submitted that a
55
candidate may not actually practice even for a single day and

may only on the basis of provisional registration apply for the

Civil Judge (Junior Division) Examination and this would, in

turn, frustrate the very purpose of providing an experience.
88. We find that the said concern can be addressed by

providing certain safeguards. In a Mofussil Court, there

would not be much difficulty inasmuch as taking into

consideration the number of lawyers appearing before the

Court at such places, the Judicial Officers working at that

station can certify that such a candidate has practiced before

such court for a requisite number of years. The difficulty may

arise at larger stations or in metropolitan cities. At such

places, it could be provided that a certificate by an advocate

having a minimum standing of 10 years duly endorsed by a

Principal Judicial Officer of such a District or a Principal

Judicial Officer at a station, certifying that such a candidate

has actually practiced for the requisite number of years

would take care of the said concern. Insofar as the

candidates who are practicing before the High Courts or this

Court, they shall be certified by an advocate who has a

minimum standing of 10 years duly endorsed by an officer
56
designated by that High Court or this Court. We are also of

the view that the experience of the candidates which they

have gained while working as Law Clerks with any of the

Judges or Judicial Officers in the country should also be

considered while calculating their total number of years of

practice.
IV.    CONCLUSION AND DIRECTIONS
89. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we issue the

following directions:
(i)    All the High Courts and the State Governments

             in the country shall amend the relevant service

             Rules to the effect that the quota of reservation

             for LDCE for promotion from the cadre of Civil

             Judge (Senior Division) to the Higher Judicial

             Service is increased to 25%;
(ii)   All the High Courts and the State Governments

             in the country shall amend the relevant service

             rules to the effect that the minimum qualifying

             service required to appear in the LDCE for

             promotion from the cadre of Civil Judge (Senior

             Division) to the Higher Judicial Service be
57
reduced to 3 years’ service as a Civil Judge

        (Senior Division) and the total service required to

        be undertaken, including service rendered as a

        Civil Judge (Junior Division) and Civil Judge

        (Senior Division), be set at a minimum of 7 years’

        service;
(iii)   All the High Courts and the State Governments

        in the country shall amend the relevant service

        rules to the effect that 10% of the posts in the

        Cadre of Civil Judge (Senior Division) be reserved

        for accelerated promotion of Civil Judge (Junior

        Division) candidates through LDCE mechanism.
The minimum qualifying service required for

        appearing in the said LDCE shall be three years’

        service as Civil Judge (Junior Division);
(iv)    Needless to state that if any post reserved for

        LDCE for either Civil Judge (Senior Division) or

        for the Higher Judiciary remains vacant, the

        same shall be filled through regular promotion on

        the   basis   of   ‘merit-cum-seniority’    in   that

        particular year. Filling up of the vacant posts in
58
the ratio considered for LDCE will have to be

       carried out from the simultaneous selection

       process carried out for regular promotions of the

       same year;
(v)    The High Courts and the Governments of the

       States where the vacancies for the LDCE are not

       being calculated based on the cadre strength

       shall amend the relevant service rules to the

       effect that the vacancies for LDCE be calculated

       on the basis of cadre strength;
(vi)   All the High Courts and the State Governments

       in the country where the Rules are not framed or

       if they are framed but are not adequate to judge

       the suitability of a candidate for being promoted

       to the Cadre of Higher Judicial Service from the

       Cadre of Civil Judge (Senior Division) shall frame

       fresh Rules or amend the existing Rules keeping

       in mind various factors like: (i) whether the

       candidate possesses updated knowledge of law;
(ii) the quality of judgments rendered by the

       Judicial Officer; (iii) ACRs of the Judicial Officer
59
of the preceding five years; (iv) disposal rate in

        the preceding five years; (v) performance of the

        Judicial Officer in the viva voce; and (vi) general

        perceptions     and      awareness      as     also

        communication skills;
(vii)   All the High Courts and the State Governments

        in the country shall amend the relevant service

        rules to the effect that candidates desirous of

        appearing in the examination for the post of Civil

        Judge (Junior Division) must have practiced for a

        minimum period of 3 years to be eligible for the

        said examination. To fulfill the said requirement,

        the Rules shall mandate that the candidate

        produces a certificate to that effect duly certified

        either by the Principal Judicial Officer of that

        Court or by an advocate of that Court having a

        minimum standing of 10 years duly endorsed by

        the Principal Judicial Officer of such a District or

        a Principal Judicial Officer at such a station.

        Insofar as the candidates who are practicing

        before the High Courts or this Court, they shall
60
be certified by an advocate who has a minimum

         standing of 10 years duly endorsed by an officer

         designated by that High Court or this Court. We

         further     direct   that   the   experience    of    the

         candidates which they have gained while working

         as Law Clerks with any of the Judges or Judicial

         Officers in the country should also be considered

         while calculating their total number of years of

         practice. The Rules shall also mandate that the

         candidates who are appointed to the post of Civil

         Judge     (Junior    Division)    pursuant     to    their

         selection     through       the   examination        must

         compulsorily undergo at least 1 year of training

         before presiding in a Court;
(viii)   It is directed that the number of years of practice

         completed by a candidate desirous of appearing

         in the examination for the post of Civil Judge

         (Junior Division) be calculated from the date of

         their provisional enrolment/registration with the

         concerned State Bar Council;
61
(ix)      It is further directed that the said requirement of

                minimum       years        of   practice    shall   not    be
applicable in cases where the concerned High

                Court has already initiated the selection process

                for the post of Civil Judge (Junior Division) prior

                to the date of this judgment and shall be

                applicable    only     from      the   next    recruitment

                process; and
(x)       All the amendments in terms of the aforesaid

                directions shall be carried out by the High Courts

                within a period of three months from the date of

                this   judgment        and       the   concerned       State

                Governments shall consider and approve the

                same within a further period of three months.
90. Needless to state that all such recruitment processes

which have been kept in abeyance, in view of the pendency of

the present proceedings, shall proceed in accordance with

the     Rules     which      were     applicable       on   the     date   of

advertisement/notification.
91. We place on record our deep gratitude for the assistance

rendered by Shri Siddharth Bhatnagar, learned amicus
62
curiae ably assisted by Mr. Ankit Yadav and Mr. Aditya

Sidhra, learned counsel. Shri Bhatnagar has tirelessly

consolidated the stands of various High Courts and various

State Governments and also given his valuable suggestions

with regard to the directions to be issued by this Court. We

also place on record our appreciation for the Senior Counsel

and counsel appearing on behalf of the various High Courts,

State Governments and other stakeholders.
.............................CJI
                                                      (B.R. GAVAI)



                            ............................................J
                            (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)




                                      …..............................J
                                      (K. VINOD CHANDRAN)

NEW DELHI;
MAY 20, 2025.
63