[Cites
56
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Ganeshkumar Rajeshwarrao Selukar vs Mahendra Bhaskar Limaye on 21 May, 2025
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
2025 INSC 752




                                                                                    REPORTABLE


                                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9982 OF 2024
                                             (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 25612 of 2023)


                            GANESHKUMAR RAJESHWARRAO                            ..…APPELLANT(S)
                            SELUKAR AND ORS.

                                                                   VERSUS


                            MAHENDRA BHASKAR LIMAYE AND ORS.                    …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                                     WITH
                                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9987 OF 2024
                                             (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 26881 of 2023)

                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 9983-9985 OF 2024
                                         (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 26172-26174 of 2023)

                                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9988 OF 2024
                                             (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 26582 of 2023)

                                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9989 OF 2024
                                             (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 26581 of 2023)

                                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9990 OF 2024
   Signature Not Verified
                                             (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 27352 of 2023)
   Digitally signed by
   ASHA SUNDRIYAL
   Date: 2025.05.21
   17:13:35 IST
   Reason:
                                            CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 9965-9967 OF 2024
                                          (Arising out of SLP (C) No(s). 639-641 of 2024)


                            Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters             Page 1 of 92
                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10029 OF 2024
                    (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 5866 of 2024)

                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9964 OF 2024
                    (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 8081 of 2024)

                                            AND

               REVIEW PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1313 OF 2024
                     (In Civil Appeal No. 831/2023)

                                           WITH

               REVIEW PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1315 OF 2024
                     (In Civil Appeal No. 833/2023)

                                           WITH
               REVIEW PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1314 OF 2024
                     (In Civil Appeal No. 832/2023)

                                    JUDGMENT
M. M. Sundresh, J.
1. Man is what he consumes. It is generally stated that one becomes a

     consumer from the time of his birth but, in reality, the journey begins

     much earlier. It extends from before the cradle to beyond the grave. A

     mother and her child are inseparable in the womb. Medical treatment

     received and commodities consumed by the mother, such as food,

     water, medicine, etc., enure to her child. Consumption is shared

     between the two, making them joint consumers. Similarly, even after
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters             Page 2 of 92
one dies, consumption continues in multifarious ways. From donation

   of organs to the needy, to families conducting funeral rites and rituals

   annually, consumption is a reality that cannot be ignored, especially in

   an interconnected and interdependent world.
2. ‘Consumerism’ is therefore, one of the most integral aspects of human

   life. How then does one define it? It is indeed a rather difficult task to

   comprehensively do so, as every act or omission of an individual might

   attract the definition, given the impact it may have on others. Perhaps,

   its essence is best expressed in the words of Mahatma Gandhi, the

   Father of the Nation.
“A customer is the most important visitor on our premises. He is not
      dependent on us. We are dependent on him. He is not an interruption
      on our work. He is the purpose of it. He is not an outsider on our
      business. He is a part of it. We are not doing him a favour by serving
      him. He is doing us a favour by giving us an opportunity to do so.”

                                                         (emphasis supplied)
3. He elevated a consumer above every other entity, transforming the

   concept of consumerism through the principles of truth and dharma. He

   galvanised people from all walks of life to participate in the freedom

   struggle, by incorporating the spirit of consumerism in the pivotal

   Indian Independence Movement, through methods such as non-

   cooperation and civil disobedience. One classic instance where politics,
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                  Page 3 of 92
economics and social order were consciously integrated, was the Dandi

   March of 1930, whereby civil disobedience was extended through the

   Salt Satyagraha opposing the taxation of salt. It can be rightfully said

   that democracy was won, not only by the strength of our words and the

   sweat of our brow, but also over the price of salt. Hence, at its core, the

   Indian Independence Movement can be seen as a citizen-consumer

   movement.
4. The concept of consumerism has evolved in India since ancient times. A

   solemn duty was ordained on the King, to hold the trader accountable

   to a standard of fairness in every transaction with a consumer. Any

   violation by traders was dealt with by the Ruler, not only by retributive,

   but also by reformative action. This was because the knowledge and

   character of his citizens depended upon their consumption, and would

   have been substantially impacted, if consumption was either inadequate

   or the quality poor. The relevance of the same has become even more

   pronounced today.
5. Consumer movements have deeply impacted the revolutionary

   struggles for a liberal democracy across the globe. One can view the

   American Revolution through the lens of the Boston Tea Party incident,
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters               Page 4 of 92
wherein the monopoly of the British traders was sought to be checked

   by the American citizens, posing as Red Indians and throwing away

   imported tea into the water. Similarly, the French Revolution can be

   viewed from the lens of the Bread Riots, particularly the Flour War of

   1775 and the Women’s March on Versailles in 1789. Since bread was a

   crucial component of the French diet, especially for the working class

   who spent a large portion of their income on it, the shortage of grain to

   make bread and the consequent rise in the price of bread, ignited popular

   anger in the towns of the Paris Basin, leading to the Bread Riots, and

   thereafter the French Revolution. Both the aforementioned instances of

   the American and the French Revolutions, like the Dandi March, were

   actions on political, economic and social grounds.

ESSENCE OF CONSUMERISM IN THE CONSTITUTION
6. Understanding the concept of consumerism entails rising above any

   distinction between the public and the private. It is inherently an all-

   encompassing concept. Therefore, subjects such as politics, economics,

   sociology, and the environment, become important facets of

   consumerism. Only by understanding consumerism through the lens of

   these different facets, can one appreciate the true impact of it on the
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters              Page 5 of 92
daily life - of an individual, a family, a community, a country and the

   world at large. As E P Mcguire put it succinctly,


      “Consumerism is both an idea and a contagious spirit and national
      boundaries have never proved much of an obstacle to either of these.
      Thus, consumerism has become an international social force.”

                                                       (emphasis supplied)
7. Consumerism, thus, constitutes the very spirit of the Constitution of

   India, 1950 (hereinafter referred to as “the Constitution”). It does not

   end with recognizing and protecting the rights of a consumer vis-à-vis

   a trader or a service provider, as the case may be, but travels far beyond.

   The rights of a consumer are not merely constitutional or statutory

   guarantees, but are in fact, natural, and therefore, inalienable. The fact

   that the society, economy, polity and the environment, are inseparable

   from each other, is something that was envisioned even by the framers

   of the Constitution. Though not explicitly in the context of

   consumerism, the said vision is reflected in the much-celebrated

   statement of Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, in his closing speech before the

   Constituent Assembly of India, on 25.11.1949.
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                Page 6 of 92
Constituent Assembly of India, Friday, the 25th November, 1949

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar:
“The third thing we must do is not to be content with mere political
      democracy. We must make our political democracy a social democracy
      as well. Political democracy cannot last unless there lies at the base of
      it social democracy. What does social democracy mean? It means a way
      of life which recognises liberty, equality and fraternity as the principles
      of life. These principles of liberty, equality and fraternity are not to be
      treated as separate items in a trinity. They form a union of trinity in
      the sense that to divorce one from the other is to defeat the very purpose
      of democracy. Liberty cannot be divorced from equality, equality
      cannot be divorced from liberty. Nor can liberty and equality be
      divorced from fraternity. Without equality, liberty would produce the
      supremacy of the few over the many. Equality without liberty would
      kill individual initiative. Without fraternity, liberty and equality could
      not become a natural course of things. It would require a constable to
      enforce them. We must begin by acknowledging the fact that there is
      complete absence of two things in Indian society. One of these is equality.
      On the social plane, we have in India a society based on the principle of
      graded inequality which means elevation for some and degradation for
      others. On the economic plane, we have a society in which there are some
      who have immense wealth as against many who live in abject poverty. On
      the 26th January, 1950, we are going to enter into a life of contradictions.
      In politics we will have equality and in social and economic life we will
      have inequality. In politics we will be recognizing the principle of one
      man one vote and one vote one value. In our social and economic life,
      we shall, by reason of our social and economic structure, continue to
      deny the principle of one man one value. How long shall we continue to
      live this life of contradictions? How long shall we continue to deny
      equality in our social and economic life? If we continue to deny it for
      long, we will do so only by putting our political democracy in peril. We
      must remove this contradiction at the earliest possible moment or else
      those who suffer from inequality will blow up the structure of political
      democracy which this Assembly has so laboriously built up.”

                                                             (emphasis supplied)
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                        Page 7 of 92
8. Our understanding of consumerism must also be shaped by the

   Directive Principles of State Policy enshrined under Part IV of the

   Constitution.
Article 38
of the Constitution
      “38. State to secure a social order for the promotion of welfare of the
      people.— (1) The State shall strive to promote the welfare of the people
      by securing and protecting as effectively as it may a social order in
      which justice, social, economic and political, shall inform all the
      institutions of the national life.
(2) The State shall, in particular, strive to minimise the inequalities in
      income, and endeavour to eliminate inequalities in status, facilities and
      opportunities, not only amongst individuals but also amongst groups
      of people residing in different areas or engaged in different vocations.”

                                                            (emphasis supplied)
Article 39
of the Constitution
      “39. Certain principles of policy to be followed by the State.—The State
      shall, in particular, direct its policy towards securing—
                             xxx          xxx         xxx
(b) that the ownership and control of the material resources of the
         community are so distributed as best to subserve the common good;
(c) that the operation of the economic system does not result in the
         concentration of wealth and means of production to the common
         detriment;
xxx          xxx         xxx
(e) that the health and strength of workers, men and women, and
         the tender age of children are not abused and that citizens are not
         forced by economic necessity to enter avocations unsuited to their
         age or strength;
xxx          xxx         xxx

                                                            (emphasis supplied)
Article 47
of the Constitution
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                      Page 8 of 92
“47. Duty of the State to raise the level of nutrition and the standard of
      living and to improve public health.—The State shall regard the raising
      of the level of nutrition and the standard of living of its people and the
      improvement of public health as among its primary duties and, in
      particular, the State shall endeavour to bring about prohibition of the
      consumption, except for medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of
      drugs which are injurious to health.”

                                                              (
emphasis supplied)



Murlidhar Dayandeo Kesekar v. Vishwanath Pandu Barde
, 1995
Supp (2) SCC 549
      “14. Providing adequate means of livelihood for all the citizens and
      distribution of the material resources of the community for common
      welfare, enable the poor, the Dalits and Tribes, to fulfil the basic needs to
      bring about a fundamental change in the structure of the Indian society
      which was divided by erecting impregnable walls of separation between the
      people on grounds of caste, sub-caste, creed, religion, race, language and
      sex. Equality of opportunity and status thereby would become the bedrocks
      for social integration. Economic empowerment thereby is the foundation
      to make equality of status, dignity of person and equal opportunity a
      truism. The core of the commitment of the Constitution to the social
      revolution through rule of law lies in effectuation of the fundamental
      rights and directive principles as supplementary and complementary
      to each other. The Preamble, fundamental rights and directive
      principles — the trinity — are the conscience of the Constitution.
      Political democracy has to be stable. Socio-economic democracy must
      take strong roots and should become a way of life. The State, therefore,
      is enjoined to provide adequate means of livelihood to the poor, weaker
      sections of the society, the Dalits and Tribes and to distribute material
      resources of the community to them for common welfare etc.”

                                                              (emphasis supplied)
9.
In India, the Consumer Protection Act, 1986
(hereinafter referred to as

   “the 1986 Act”) and thereafter, the
Consumer Protection Act, 2019
(hereinafter referred to as “the 2019 Act”) have been brought forth to

   give effect to the discovery and progressive realization of our
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                        Page 9 of 92
constitutional rights, culture and ethos. It was felt that a dedicated

   consumer legislation was needed for citizens, to attain exposure to

   participative democracy, day-to-day economics, ongoing politics and

   environmental protection, endeavouring towards socio-economic,

   political and environmental justice. Perhaps, that might be the reason as

   to why the 1986 Act, being the first consumer protection legislation in

   India, does not even draw its origins from any specific provision of the

   Constitution, as all the salient features of the Constitution are put in a

   basket and offered to the citizen, for whose benefit it has been enacted.
10.It is needless to state that, while dealing with consumer disputes, the

   Consumer fora created under the 1986 Act and, thereafter, retained

   under the 2019 Act, must be mindful of the aforesaid constitutional

   basis, as a mere dictionary meaning can never do complete justice to

   the word ‘consumer’.
Spring Meadows Hospital v. Harjol Ahluwalia
, (1998) 4 SCC 39
      “8. Before we examine the aforesaid questions it would be appropriate to
      notice the scenario in which Parliament enacted the
Consumer Protection
      Act
(hereinafter referred to as “the Act”). The United Nations had passed a
      resolution in April 1985 indicating certain guidelines under which the
      Government could make law for better protection of the interest of the
      consumers. Such laws were necessary more in the developing countries
      to protect the consumers from hazards to their health and safety and
      make them available speedier and cheaper redress. Consumerism has
      been a movement in which the trader and the consumer find each other
      as adversaries. Till last two decades in many developed and developing
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                       Page 10 of 92
countries powerful consumer organisations have come into existence
      and such organisations have been instrumental in dealing with the
      consumer protection laws and in expansion of the horizon of such laws.
      In our country the legislation is of recent origin and its efficacy has not
      been critically evaluated which has to be done on the basis of
      experience. Undoubtedly the Act creates a framework for speedy
      disposal of consumer disputes and an attempt has been made to remove
      the existing evils of the ordinary court system.
The Act
gives a
      comprehensive definition of consumer who is the principal beneficiary
      of the legislation but at the same time in view of the comprehensive
      definition of the term “consumer” even a member of the family cannot
      be denied the status of consumer under the Act and in an action by any
      such member of the family for any deficiency of service, it will not be
      open for a trader to take a stand that there is no privity of contract.
The Consumer Protection Act
confers jurisdiction on the Commission
      in respect of matters where either there is defect in goods or there is
      deficiency in service or there has been an unfair and restrictive trade
      practice or in the matter of charging of excessive price.
The Act
being
      a beneficial legislation intended to confer some speedier remedy on a
      consumer from being exploited by unscrupulous traders, the
      provisions thereof should receive a liberal construction.”

                                                            (emphasis supplied)

State of Karnataka v. Vishwabharathi House Building Coop. Society,
(2003) 2 SCC 412
      “38.
The scope and object of the said legislation came up for consideration
      before this Court in
Common Cause, A Registered Society v. Union of India
[(1997) 10 SCC 729] . It was held : (SCC p. 730, para 2)
         “2. The object of the legislation, as the preamble of the Act
         proclaims, is ‘for better protection of the interests of consumers’.
         During the last few years preceding the enactment there was in this
         country a marked awareness among the consumers of goods that
         they were not getting their money's worth and were being exploited
         by both traders and manufacturers of consumer goods. The need
         for consumer redressal fora was, therefore, increasingly felt.
         Understandably, therefore, legislation was introduced and enacted
         with considerable enthusiasm and fanfare as a path-breaking
         benevolent legislation intended to protect the consumer from
         exploitation by unscrupulous manufacturers and traders of
         consumer goods. A three-tier fora comprising the District Forum, the
         State Commission and the National Commission came to be envisaged
         under the Act for redressal of grievances of consumers.”
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                       Page 11 of 92
xxx          xxx           xxx
42. We may in this connection also notice that in
Laxmi Engg. Works v.
      P.S.G. Industrial Institute
[(1995) 3 SCC 583] this Court held : (SCC p.
      591, para 10)
         “10. A review of the provisions of the Act discloses that the quasi-
         judicial bodies/authorities/agencies created by the Act known as District
         Forums, State Commissions and the National Commission are not
         courts though invested with some of the powers of a civil court. They
         are quasi-judicial tribunals brought into existence to render
         inexpensive and speedy remedies to consumers. It is equally clear
         that these Forums/Commissions were not supposed to supplant but
         supplement the existing judicial system. The idea was to provide an
         additional forum providing inexpensive and speedy resolution of
         disputes arising between consumers and suppliers of goods and
         services. The forum so created is uninhibited by the requirement of
         court fee or the formal procedures of a court. Any consumer can go
         and file a complaint. Complaint need not necessarily be filed by the
         complainant himself; any recognized consumers' association can
         espouse his cause. Where a large number of consumers have a
         similar complaint, one or more can file a complaint on behalf of all.
         Even the Central Government and State Governments can act on
         his/their behalf. The idea was to help the consumers get justice and
         fair treatment in the matter of goods and services purchased and
         availed by them in a market dominated by large trading and
         manufacturing bodies. Indeed, the entire Act revolves round the
         consumer and is designed to protect his interest.
The Act
provides
         for ‘business-to-consumer’ disputes and not for ‘business-to-
         business’ disputes. This scheme of the Act, in our opinion, is
         relevant to and helps in interpreting the words that fall for
         consideration in this appeal.”

                          xxx              xxx           xxx
44.
In
Lucknow Development Authority v. M.K. Gupta
[(1994) 1 SCC 243]
      this Court held : (SCC p. 251, para 2)
          “The importance of the Act lies in promoting welfare of the society
          by enabling the consumer to participate directly in the market
          economy. It attempts to remove the helplessness of a consumer
          which he faces against powerful business, described as, ‘a network
          of rackets’ or a society in which, ‘producers have secured power’ to
          ‘rob the rest’ and the might of public bodies which are degenerating
          into storehouses of inaction where papers do not move from one
          desk to another as a matter of duty and responsibility but for
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                       Page 12 of 92
extraneous consideration leaving the common man helpless,
          bewildered and shocked.”
      It has further been held : (SCC pp. 254 & 252, para 3)
The Act
thus aims to protect the economic interest of a consumer as
          understood in commercial sense as a purchaser of goods and in the
          larger sense of user of services.
… It is a milestone in history of
          socio-economic legislation and is directed towards achieving public
          benefit.”

                                                            (emphasis supplied)

Nivedita Sharma v. Cellular Operators Assn. of India, (2011) 14 SCC
337
“18. The 1986 Act was enacted for the better protection of the interests of
      consumers by making provision for the establishment of consumer councils
      and other authorities for the settlement of consumer disputes. The object
      and purpose of enacting the 1986 Act is to provide for simple,
      inexpensive and speedy remedy to the consumers who have grievance
      against defective goods and deficient services. This benevolent piece of
      legislation intended to protect a large body of consumers from
      exploitation.”

                                                            (emphasis supplied)

CONSUMERISM VIS-À-VIS PUBLIC INTEREST
11.Though a consumer seeking to redress his grievance may do so for

   himself, the benefit of the same often enures to the public, which

   transacts with various entities, including State instrumentalities. In this

   way, the exercise of the power vested in a single consumer, to hold any

   entity accountable, transforms him into a flag bearer of public justice.

   This was seen way back in the year 1932, when Mrs. Donoghue, who

   fell sick after drinking ginger beer containing a decomposed snail,

   approached the House of Lords. The House of Lords, in its landmark
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                       Page 13 of 92
decision in M’Alister (Or Donoghue) (Pauper) v. Stevenson, [1932]

   A.C. 562, popularly referred to as the ‘snail in the bottle case’, held the

   manufacturer liable for negligence, and ordered it to pay damages to

   Mrs. Donoghue, establishing the principle of ‘duty of care’, which can

   be stated to have paved the way for modern consumer protection

   jurisprudence.
12.The Consumer fora in India, have time and again rendered decisions

   beneficial to the public at large.
In
Indian Medical Association v. V.P.

   Shantha
, (1995) 6 SCC 651, this Court brought the medical profession

   within the ambit of the 1986 Act.
The National Commission in
Ambrish

   Kumar Shukla and Others v. Ferrous Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. Seth

   Farms
, 2016 SCC OnLine NCDRC 1117 : (2017) 1 CPJ 1 (NC) set a

   precedent for homebuyers across the country to sue developers for delay

   in handing over possession of flats.
In Vodafone Idea Cellular Ltd. v.

   Ajay Kumar Agarwal, (2022) 6 SCC 496, this Court held that telecom

   services would be amenable to the relevant consumer protection

   legislation. At the first glance, these may seem like private reliefs.

   However, these reliefs have prospectively and progressively shaped the
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters               Page 14 of 92
relationship between consumers and producers/manufacturers, with

   greater accountability on the latter.
13.Therefore, consumer litigation is a form of public interest litigation,

   which builds an active citizenry, enhancing participatory democracy.

   Participatory democracy is one of the basic features of the Constitution.

   The principle of participation in the governance of the country, is not

   only a constitutional right, but also a human right. It is thus imperative

   that consumer litigation should be allowed to grow multi-fold, for a

   democracy to flourish.
CONSUMERISM VIS-À-VIS SOCIAL JUSTICE
14.Social justice exists when everyone in the society enjoys equal rights,

   opportunities, and access to resources, goods and services, regardless

   of where they come from. It entails the creation of a society where

   issues including but not limited to discrimination, and unequal access

   to food, water, clothing, shelter, education, healthcare and the like, are

   addressed proactively. A democratic society is premised on the

   attainment of social justice. Only when the standard of living is

   equitable, and equality of opportunities are the order of the day, can a
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters              Page 15 of 92
society be said to have truly achieved social justice and hence,

   democracy.
15.To bring about this social revolution, ‘consumerism’ must be accepted

   as a social force, as it substantially informs the trajectory of one’s life.

   The manner in which a growing child’s basic needs of nutrition and

   education are fulfilled, plays a huge role in the abilities he acquires and

   the opportunities he receives and may ultimately avail as an adult. A

   child consuming sub-standard food, growing in abject poverty, will be

   materially different from his counterpart, who may have exposure to the

   best of what the world has to offer. Similarly, a child acquiring

   knowledge through sound and stable education, equipped with

   necessary learning tools, ranging from something as basic as a pen and

   paper, to something as advanced as smart classrooms, might be able to

   avail more opportunities than one growing up without the same. Plainly

   speaking, if there is no equality of consumption, there can be no equality

   of life.
16.If commodities are enjoyed solely by a particular section of the society,

   becoming a mirage to the unfortunate majority, then the Fundamental

   Right conferred under
Article 14
of the Constitution steps in. If a
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                Page 16 of 92
classification has been wrongly drawn, leading to the perpetration of

   inequality, and a consumer is deprived of what he is otherwise entitled

   to, on extraneous considerations, the resultant malice must be

   accordingly dealt with. Especially in an emerging and developing

   democracy like ours, where human resources are abundant, and the

   aspirational youth constitute the majority of the population, refusing

   them their rightful entitlement would be an affront to the Fundamental

   Rights enshrined in the Constitution.
17.Societal structure has far evolved from the rudimentary hunter-gatherer

   society, to the modern one. Just as the needs and wants of citizens have

   multiplied and metamorphosed, so have the ways in which inequalities

   manifest, especially on the anvil of caste, community, religion,

   language and culture. Therefore, on this count also, empowering

   consumerism would be the most effective way to remove social

   inequalities.
18.Though bringing about equality amongst all citizens must be the

   constant endeavour of stakeholders such as the State and independent

   goods/service providers, absolute equality may not be possible at all

   times. The State, as the custodian of national resources, is expected to
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters             Page 17 of 92
ensure equitable consumption of material goods by the public at large,

   while independent goods/service providers are expected to strive

   towards competitive innovation and continuous improvement in

   product quality.
19.And yet, what remains is the role of a citizen. Where does his role lie?

   We feel that the attainment of social justice may be most effective when

   driven by the smallest unit of the society - a citizen, who is exposed to

   inequalities through his day-to-day consumption.
20.To put it succinctly, it is not only the duty of the State or a goods/service

   provider, but also of every individual, to make sure that the concept of

   consumerism flourishes in every possible way, in order to give effect to

   the Fundamental Rights ensured to the citizens, in adherence with the

   constitutional mandate. The Directive Principles of State Policy and the

   Fundamental Duties enshrined under Part IV and Part IVA of the

   Constitution respectively, reflect the very same understanding.

CONSUMERISM VIS-À-VIS POLITICS
21.Man is by nature a political animal. This thought, espoused by the Greek

   philosopher and polymath Aristotle in the 4th century BCE, has attained

   tremendous significance in the present day and age. Across the globe,
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                 Page 18 of 92
the seeds of political consumerism sprouted during the struggles for a

   liberal democracy, becoming their very backbone, particularly in light

   of the fact that consumption has always been an intrinsic part of

   people’s lives. These saplings have today grown into undercurrents in

   everyday transactions.
22.The choice to consume a particular good or service, or not, reflects our

   political considerations. It might also be a symbol of class or power. In

   the words of the acclaimed Polish Nobel Laureate, Olga Nawoja

   Tokarczuk, “In today's world everything is political. We are a statement
- our clothes, haircut, the way we act”.
23.A nation's political stability, and its international relations, are

   influenced by its fiscal, monetary and sector-specific policies on

   education, health and the environment, amongst others. These in turn

   affect and are affected by consumerism. From an international

   perspective, trade agreements, import and export policies, military

   alliances, and international cooperation hinge on the global

   understanding of consumerism.
24.The aforesaid policies of the government in power, influence citizens

   when they set out to exercise their vote during upcoming elections, as
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters              Page 19 of 92
every voter is a consumer. Political manifestos are often built on the

   consumption demands of citizens. Free ration, free electricity, and free

   bus tickets are only some of the promises that have, in the recent past,

   sparked strong public discourse. These promises, in some sense,

   determine who forms the government, which thereafter takes policy

   decisions influenced by consumption patterns. These policy decisions,

   in turn, influence who forms the next government. Consumerism thus,

   runs through the cycle of cause-and-effect vis-à-vis politics. Therefore,

   the importance of a voter to politics would be felt only when there is

   social and economic equality. Consumerism is the appropriate tool in

   achieving this valued objective for a mature democracy.
25.Thus, there is a pressing need to understand consumerism from the lens

   of its political implications. This is particularly so, in light of the

   growing complexities in our relationship with the polity and the

   dynamic interplay of rights, duties, and the State's role in governance.

CONSUMERISM VIS-À-VIS ECONOMICS
26.Consumers are the ‘invisible hand’ of the market. It is through their

   spending decisions, that producers are informed about the kinds and

   quantities of goods and services to provide. When there is higher
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters              Page 20 of 92
consumer demand, businesses are incentivised to produce more, leading

   to economic growth and development. Increased consumer spending

   also leads to a higher demand for labour, as businesses need more

   employees to produce and sell goods and services. Key economic

   indicators like the Consumer Price Index (CPI) and the Consumer

   Confidence Index (CCI) are closely observed by businesses, investors,

   and policymakers, to gauge the health of the economy. Thus, the success

   of all economic activity depends upon the consumer.
27.The world is transforming into a global village, with India growing at a

   rapid pace to make a permanent place for itself. We may note that

   according to ‘India’s Outlook 2025-2026 Story’, published by the

   Union Bank of Switzerland, India is set to become the 3rd largest

   consumer market in the world by 2026, only behind the United States

   of America and the People's Republic of China. Demographic studies

   also show that the population size in India has surpassed all other

   nations, a factor that is certainly contributing to the expansion of the

   consumer base, thereby leading to an increase in consumption

   expenditure. This is corroborated by the statistics released by the

   National Statistics Office (NSO), Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters             Page 21 of 92
Implementation (MoSPI) vide its Press Note in February 2025, which

   indicates that Private Final Consumption Expenditure (PFCE) at current

   prices stood at ₹181.30 lakh crore for the year 2023-24, as against

   ₹165.28 lakh crore in 2022-23, and that in relation to the Gross

   Domestic Product (GDP), the PFCE to GDP ratio at current prices

   during 2022-23 and 2023-24 were 61.5% and 60.2% respectively.
28.With rising household income, coupled with development in all spheres,

   the demand and supply of goods and services, as well as expenditure,

   are undergoing drastic changes. The aspirational youth, who form a

   majority of the population and represent the future of our country, crave

   qualitative commodities at all times. In all, the constant evolution and

   expansion of the consumer basket will remain a key indicator of the

   nation’s economic progress and potential to transform as an economy.

CONSUMERISM VIS-À-VIS ENVIRONMENT
29.At the first blush, the concepts of consumerism and the environment

   might look distinct and different. However, they are more than

   interconnected and are, in fact, inseparable.
30.Let us take the example of the basic commodity of water. An inadequate

   or impure supply of water would have drastic effects. From an
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters              Page 22 of 92
environmental perspective, it would lead to widespread digging of

   borewells, causing groundwater depletion and transforming land into a

   desert. Another example is the demand and supply of a Liquified

   Petroleum Gas (LPG) cylinder. If an LPG cylinder is not available in a

   common household, the option that remains is the usage of wood and

   dry leaves. This would affect the environment, as there would be more

   pressure on the forests. The use of the aforementioned alternatives

   would also cause pollution. Therefore, there is a distinct spiralling effect

   in a simple case of unavailability of an LPG cylinder.
31.These situations may have a drastic impact on public health, leading to

   increased demand for medicine and medical supplies. Such increased

   demand, especially for cheaper options, may then affect the

   environment. We only give this as an example to drive home the point

   that the development of the society must be seen holistically, and not in

   piecemeal.
32.Today, consumerism has taken a new shape in the form of Green

   Consumerism. Growing concerns about climate change and resource

   depletion have spurred consumers, especially in the younger

   generations, to seek sustainable options. Green consumers are
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                Page 23 of 92
motivated by the environmental impact of their consumption choices.

   Some examples of such choices would be the consumption of organic

   food, sustainable clothing, energy efficient appliances, products made

   of recycled material, and the usage of sustainable transportation. The

   demand for such products and services drives businesses to adopt more

   sustainable practices, and regulatory bodies to implement policies that

   promote green consumption and encourage businesses to do so. The

   relevance of green consumerism is multi-fold. It can lead to reduced

   environmental pollution with less waste generation, lower levels of

   carbon emissions, and improved air, water, and soil quality and

   therefore contribute to better public health. Sustainable choices can help

   conserve natural resources and reduce reliance on finite resources. On

   the ancillary front, it can stimulate innovation and create new jobs in

   the renewable energy sector and sustainable industries.
33.Thus, green consumerism would lead the country closer towards

   achieving its milestones under the United Nations Sustainable

   Development Goals, with better implementation of the polluter pays

   principle, the precautionary principle, the intergenerational equity

   principle and the theory of trusteeship. In fact, the urgent need to make
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters              Page 24 of 92
sustainable and healthy lifestyle choices available, accessible, and

   affordable for all consumers – while ensuring that these transitions

   uphold people’s basic rights and needs, has been recognised in the

   theme for this year’s World Consumer Rights Day, ‘A Just Transition to

   Sustainable Lifestyles.’

NEED FOR A CHANGE
34.The importance of consumerism has been sufficiently dealt with by us.

   The primary question for consideration now is as to whether the

   grievance redressal mechanism provided to a consumer, is adequate or

   not. As consumer justice includes social, economic, political, and

   environmental justice, the time has now come to test the apparatus

   available to deal with pressing consumer issues.
35.While every Court of Law, of which a consumer is also part, is expected

   to uphold constitutional principles, a Consumer forum has its primary

   objective in ensuring the same. This is more so as consumerism is ever-

   evolving and is likely to take different dimensions in the coming years.

   It is not going to disappear or pale into insignificance in the foreseeable

   future. Unless policy-makers are conscious about the emergent need to
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters               Page 25 of 92
effect necessary changes, including but not limited to structural

   changes, the existing system might crumble.
36.Since the essence of consumerism is embedded within the Constitution,

   there is absolutely no reason to fill up the Consumer fora with tenure-

   based offices for the Staff, Members and Presidents. While we leave it

   to the wisdom of the Union of India to revamp the existing structure

   with holistic changes, we would only implore upon it, to appreciate the

   pressing need for a permanent structure. Consumer fora can be given

   permanency through permanent staff and officers, including Presidents

   and Members at different levels.
37.The security of tenure attached to an office administering justice,

   enhances its efficiency and functionality. Any person appointed to an

   office with a fixed tenure would not be as motivated as one appointed

   on a permanent basis. Impermanence would affect the quality of

   decisions and thus, cause injury to consumers. A consumer is ideally

   expected to get a qualitative and timely decision from the concerned

   Consumer forum. Such a decision is the best advertisement for the

   concept of consumerism. We feel that the time has come to effect a

   change in mindset qua revamping the tenure of office in Consumer fora.
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters            Page 26 of 92
This will go a long way in developing and enhancing the concept of

   consumerism. We hope and trust that the Union of India would take a

   deeper look into this issue and act appropriately.
38.We may also point out that though provisions for taking action against

   those who have erred is part of the current legal framework, there is no

   clear mechanism available, similar to the one provided for under
Article

   227
of the Constitution.
39.At this juncture, we deem it fit to suggest that the Union of India may

   consider increasing the strength of Consumer fora at all levels.

ON MERITS
40.Based on the aforesaid deliberation on the concept of consumerism, we

   shall strive to address the issues at hand. For doing so, certain factual

   narrations would be required.
41.Though we are concerned with three different sets of facts in the present

   Civil Appeals, two sets pertaining to the State of Maharashtra and one

   pertaining to the State of Telangana, we are dealing with all of them

   together, as the issues involved are overlapping.
42.The lacunae prevalent in the implementation of the 1986 Act, was

   substantially addressed for the first time by this Court in
State of Uttar
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters              Page 27 of 92
Pradesh and Others v. All Uttar Pradesh Consumer Protection Bar

   Association
(2017) 1 SCC 444 (hereinafter referred to as “UPCPBA”),

   wherein directions had been issued to the Union of India, to frame

   Model Rules under the aforementioned statute.
State of U.P. v. All U.P. Consumer Protection Bar Assn.
, (2017) 1 SCC
444
“28. Hence in terms of the above discussion we issue the following
      directions:
28.1. The Union Government shall for the purpose of ensuring uniformity
      in the exercise of the rule-making power under
Section 10(3)
and
Section
      16(2)
of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 frame model rules for adoption
      by the State Governments. The model rules shall be framed within four
      months and shall be submitted to this Court for its approval;
      28.2. The Union Government shall also frame within four months model
      rules prescribing objective norms for implementing the provisions of
Section 10(1)(b)
,
Section 16(1)(b)
and
Section 20(1)(b)
in regard to the
      appointment of members respectively of the District Fora, State
      Commissions and National Commission;
28.3. The Union Government shall while framing the model rules have due
      regard to the formulation of objective norms for the assessment of the
      ability, knowledge and experience required to be possessed by the members
      of the respective fora in the domain areas referred to in the statutory
      provisions mentioned above. The model rules shall provide for the payment
      of salary, allowances and for the conditions of service of the members of
      the consumer fora commensurate with the nature of adjudicatory duties and
      the need to attract suitable talent to the adjudicating bodies. These rules
      shall be finalised upon due consultation with the President of the National
      Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, within the period stipulated
      above;
28.4. Upon the approval of the model rules by this Court, the State
      Governments shall proceed to adopt the model rules by framing appropriate
      rules in the exercise of the rule-making powers under
Section 30
of the
      Consumer Protection Act, 1986;
28.5. The National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission is requested
      to formulate regulations under
Section 30-A
with the previous approval of
      the Central Government within a period of three months from today in order
      to effectuate the power of administrative control vested in the National
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                       Page 28 of 92
Commission over the State Commissions under
Section 24-B(1)(iii)
and in
      respect of the administrative control of the State Commissions over the
      District Fora in terms of
Section 24-B(2)
as explained in this judgment to
      effectively implement the objects and purposes of the
Consumer Protection
      Act, 1986
.”
43.Thus, this Court was pleased to hold that it would only be just and fair

   to ensure uniformity by way of a common set of rules applicable to the

   Consumer fora in all the States. Based upon the Model Rules framed by

   the Union Government in compliance with the aforestated decision, the

   Consumer        Protection      (Appointment,     Salary, Allowances,           and

   Conditions of Service of President and Members of State Commission

   and District Forum) Rules, 2019 (hereinafter referred to as “the 2019

   Rules”) were notified by the State of Maharashtra, invoking its power

   to make rules under
Section 10(3)
,
Section 13(1)(c)
,
Section 14(3)
,
Section 16(2)
and
Section 30(2)
of the 1986 Act.
44.Thereafter, the 1986 Act was substituted by the 2019 Act, with effect

   from 09.08.2019. While dealing with the
Finance Act, 2017
, this Court,

   in
Rojer Mathew v. South Indian Bank Limited
(2020) 6 SCC 1

   (hereinafter referred to as “Rojer Mathew”), was pleased to hold that

   the composition of the concerned Selection Committee must have

   maximum participation of the judiciary and that it would only be
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                      Page 29 of 92
appropriate to have a minimum tenure of 5 years for the Presiding

   Officers and Members of the Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal.
45.Thereafter, the Union of India came out with a fresh set of Rules, being

   the Consumer Protection (Qualification for appointment, method of

   recruitment, procedure of appointment, term of office, resignation and

   removal of the President and members of the State Commission and

   District Commission) Rules, 2020 (hereinafter referred to as “the 2020

   Rules”) in exercise of the powers conferred under Sections 101(2)(n)

   and 101(2)(w) read with
Sections 29
and 43 of the 2019 Act.
Section 29
of the 2019 Act

      “29. Qualifications, etc., of President and members of District
      Commission.—The Central Government may, by notification, make rules
      to provide for the qualifications, method of recruitment, procedure for
      appointment, term of office, resignation and removal of the President and
      members of the District Commission.”

Section 43 of the 2019 Act

      “43. Qualifications, etc., of President and members of State
      Commission.—The Central Government may, by notification, make rules
      to provide for the qualification for appointment, method of recruitment,
      procedure of appointment, term of office, resignation and removal of the
      President and members of the State Commission.”

Section 101 of the 2019 Act

      “101. Power of Central Government to make rules.—(1) The Central
      Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out any of the
      provisions contained in this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules
      may provide for, —
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                      Page 30 of 92
xxx          xxx       xxx
(n) the qualifications for appointment, method of recruitment,
      procedure for appointment, term of office, resignation and removal of
      President and members of the District Commission under
Section 29
;
xxx          xxx       xxx

      (w) the qualifications for appointment, method of recruitment,
      procedure for appointment, term of office, resignation and removal of
      the President and members of the State Commission under Section
      43;”

                                                          (emphasis supplied)
46.We may point out that even under the 2020 Rules, the tenure of the

   Presidents and Members of the State Commission and District

   Commission, was fixed as 4 years. This Court, in
Madras Bar

   Association v. Union of India and Another
(2021) 7 SCC 369

   (hereinafter referred to as “MBA – III”) and Madras Bar Association

   v. Union of India and Another (2022) 12 SCC 455 (hereinafter

   referred to as “MBA – IV”) vide decisions dated 27.11.2020 and

   14.07.2021 respectively, reiterated the views expressed in
Rojer

   Mathew
(supra) to the effect that the tenure of office under the

   legislations impugned therein, must be a minimum of 5 years.
47.In the first round of litigation, a writ petition and a public interest

   litigation had been filed before the High Court of Bombay, laying a

   challenge to Rules 3(2)(b), 4(2)(c) and 6(9) of the 2020 Rules.
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                    Page 31 of 92
Rule 3 of the 2020 Rules

      “3. Qualifications for appointment of President and members of the
      State Commission. — (1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment
      as President, unless he is, or has been, a Judge of the High Court;
        (2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a member unless he
        is of not less than forty years of age and possesses-—
(a) an experience of at least ten years as presiding officer of a
            district court or of any tribunal at equivalent level or combined
            service as such in the district court and tribunal:
Provided that not more than fifty percent of such members shall be
            appointed; or
(b) a bachelor's degree from a recognised university and is a
            person of ability, integrity and standing, and has special
            knowledge and professional experience of not less than twenty
            years in consumer affairs, law, public affairs, administration,
            economics, commerce, industry, finance, management,
            engineering, technology, public health or medicine:
(3) At least one member or the President of the State Commission shall be
        a woman.”
                                                               (emphasis supplied)

Rule 4 of the 2020 Rules

      “4. Qualifications for appointment of President and member of District
      Commission. — (1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as
      President, unless he is, or has been, or is qualified to be a District Judge.
        (2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as member unless
        he—(a) is of not less than thirty-five years of age;
(b) possesses a bachelor's degree from a recognised University; and
(c) is a person of ability, integrity and standing, and having special
           knowledge and professional experience of not less than fifteen
           years in consumer affairs, law, public affairs, administration,
           economics, commerce, industry, finance, management,
           engineering, technology, public health or medicine.
        (3) At least one member or the President of the District Commission shall
        be a woman.”

                                                              (emphasis supplied)

Rule 6 of the 2020 Rules

      “6. Procedure of appointment. —
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                        Page 32 of 92
xxx          xxx          xxx

      (9) The Selection Committee shall determine its procedure for making
      its recommendation keeping in view the requirements of the State
      Commission or the District Commission and after taking into account
      the suitability, record of past performance, integrity and adjudicatory
      experience.”

                                                             (emphasis supplied)
48.Vide judgment and order dated 14.09.2021, the Division Bench of the

   High      Court     of    Bombay,       declared   the    aforesaid     Rules         as

   unconstitutional, placing reliance on UPCPBA (supra) and MBA - III

   (supra). While Rule 3(2)(b) and Rule 4(2)(c) of the 2020 Rules

   unreasonably fixed the eligibility criteria as experience of 20 years and

   15 years for the Non-Judicial members of the State Commission and

   members of the District Commission respectively, Rule 6(9) of the 2020

   Rules gave uncanalised power to the Selection Committee, to adopt its

   own procedure.
49.The decision rendered by the Division Bench of the High Court of

   Bombay, was challenged before this Court in
The Secretary Ministry

   of Consumer Affairs v. Dr. Mahindra Bhaskar Limaye & Ors.
, 2023

   SCC OnLine SC 231 (hereinafter referred to as “Limaye – I”). Vide

   judgment dated 03.03.2023, it was held that the requirement of 20 years

   and 15 years of experience for eligibility as Non-Judicial members of
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                        Page 33 of 92
the State Commission and the members of the District Commission

   respectively, was arbitrary and that 10 years of experience is sufficient.

   It was also held that Rule 6(9) of the 2020 Rules, which conferred

   unfettered and unbridled powers on the Selection Committee, without

   the mandate of conducting a written examination followed by a viva

   voce, cannot be sustained in the eye of law. This was because the 1986

   Act and the 2019 Act are pari materia as regards Consumer fora, and

   the 2019 Rules framed under the 1986 Act, provided for the conduct of

   written examinations qua appointment to the Consumer fora.

   Incidentally, the power conferred under
Article 142
of the Constitution

   was exercised, issuing directions to conduct a written examination

   followed by viva voce for the posts of Presidents and Members of the

   State and District Commissions. Suggestions had been given on the

   manner in which the written examination, followed by viva voce, was

   to be conducted.
The Secretary Ministry of Consumer Affairs v. Dr. Mahindra Bhaskar

Limaye & Ors.
, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 231

      “44. Similarly providing 20 years' experience under Rule 3(2)(b) also
      rightly held to be arbitrary and violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution. It
      is required to be noted that under
Section 3(2)(b)
, a presiding officer of a
      Court having experience of 10 years is eligible for becoming President of
      the State Commission. Even under
Section 3(1)
a judge of the High Court,
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                           Page 34 of 92
present or former, shall be qualified for appointment of the President. As
      per
Article 233
of the Constitution, a lawyer needs to have only 7 years of
      practice as an advocate in High Court. Under the circumstances to provide
      20 years' experience under Rule 3(2)(b) is rightly held to be
      unconstitutional, arbitrary and violative of the
Article 14
of the Constitution
      of India. We are in complete agreement with the view taken by the High
      Court.
At this stage, it is required to be noted that in the case of
Madras Bar
      Association
(supra) - MBA III, this Court directed to consider 10 years'
      experience, after detail reasoning.
45. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, we see no reason
      to interfere with the impugned judgment and order passed by the High
      Court declaring Rule 3(2)(b), Rule 4(2)(c) and Rule 6(9) of the Consumer
      Protection (Qualification for appointment, method of recruitment,
      procedure of appointment, term of office, resignation and removal of
      President and Members of State Commission and District Commission)
      Rules, 2020 as arbitrary, unreasonable and violative of
Article 14
of the
      Constitution of India. The Central Government and the concerned State
      Governments have to amend Rules, 2020, more particularly, Rule 6(9) of
      the Rules, 2020, providing that the Selection Committee shall follow the
      procedure for appointment as per Model Rules, 2017 and to make the
      appointment of President and Members of the State Commission and the
      District Commission on the basis of the performance in written test
      consisting of two papers of 100 marks each and 50 marks for viva voce and
      the written test consisting of two papers may be as per the following
      schemes:—
       Paper     Topics                Nature of test Max. marks Duration

       Paper-I (a)          General Objective Type 100                  2 hours
               Knowledge       and
               current affairs
(b) Knowledge of
                 Constitution  of
                 India
(c) Knowledge of
                 various Consumers
                 related Laws as
                 indicated in the
                 Schedule
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                          Page 35 of 92
Paper-    (a) One Essay on Descriptive           100           3 hours
       II        topics chosen from type
                 issues on trade and
                 commerce
                 consumer     related
                 issues or Public
                 Affairs.
(b) One case study
                 of a consumer case
                 for     testing   the
                 abilities of analysis
                 and cogent drafting
                 of orders.
46. The Central Government and the concerned State Governments have
      also to come with an amendment in the Rules, 2020 to provide 10 years'
      experience to become eligible for appointment of President and Member of
      the State Commission as well as the District Commission instead of 20
      years and 15 years respectively, provided in Rule 3(2)(b) and Rule 4(2)(c)
      which has been struck down to the extent providing 20 years and 15 years
      of experience, respectively. Till the suitable amendments are made in
      Consumer Protection (Qualification for appointment, method of
      recruitment, procedure of appointment, term of office, resignation and
      removal of President and Members of State Commission and District
      Commission) Rules, 2020 as above, in exercise of powers under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India and to do complete justice, we direct that in
      future and hereinafter, a person having bachelor's degree from a recognized
      University and who is a person of ability, integrity and standing, and having
      special knowledge and professional experience of not less than 10 years in
      consumer affairs, law, public affairs, administration, economics, commerce,
      industry, finance, management, engineering, technology, public health or
      medicine, shall be treated as qualified for appointment of President and
      Members of the State Commission. Similarly, a person of a person of
      ability, integrity and standing, and having special knowledge and
      professional experience of not less than 10 years in consumer affairs, law,
      public affairs, administration, economics, commerce, industry, finance,
      management, engineering, technology, public health or medicine, shall be
      treated as qualified for appointment of President and Members of the
      District Commissions. We also direct under
Article 142
of the Constitution
      of India that for appointment of President and Members of the State
      Commission and District Commission, the appointment shall be made on
      the basis of performance in written test consisting of two papers as per the
      following scheme: —
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                        Page 36 of 92
Paper       Topics               Nature of test   Max.
marks     Duration

       Paper-I     (a)      General     Objective        100       2 hours
                   Knowledge and        Type
                   current affairs

                   (b) Knowledge
                   of Constitution
                   of India

                   (c) Knowledge
                   of       various
                   Consumers
                   related Laws as
                   indicated in the
                   Schedule
       Paper-      (a) One Essay on     Descriptive      100       3 hours
       II          topics    chosen     type
                   from issues on
                   trade        and
                   commerce
                   consumer related
                   issues or Public
                   Affairs.

                   (b) One case
                   study      of   a
                   consumer case
                   for testing the
                   abilities      of
                   analysis      and
                   cogent drafting
                   of orders.
47. The qualifying marks in each paper shall be 50 per cent and there
      shall be viva voce of 50 marks. Therefore, marks to be allotted out of
      250, which shall consist of a written test consisting two papers, each of
      100 marks and the 50 marks on the basis of viva voce.”

                                                               (emphasis supplied)
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                         Page 37 of 92
50.After the judgment was pronounced by this Court on 03.03.2023, a

   notice had been issued on 23.05.2023 by the State of Maharashtra,

   inviting applications for the posts of Members of the State Commission

   and Presidents and Members of the District Commission (hereinafter

   referred to as “the advertisement”). Prior to the aforesaid

   advertisement, a Selection Committee had been constituted by the State

   of Maharashtra, in which a nominee of the Hon’ble the Chief Justice of

   the High Court of Bombay, was made the Chairperson vide notification

   dated 10.04.2023, which was reconstituted vide notification dated

   13.06.2023 (hereinafter referred to as “the notifications”).
51.Three writ petitions had been filed before the High Court of Bombay,

   bearing Writ Petition Nos. 3680/2023, 2107/2023 and 2496/2023,

   laying a challenge to Rules 6(1) and 10(2) of the 2020 Rules, the

   advertisement and the notifications. Incidentally, in two of the aforesaid

   writ petitions, reappointment had also been sought for. We may hasten

   to add that all the writ petitions had been filed by interested persons.

   Broadly, the writ petitioners comprised practicing advocates seeking

   appointment, and functioning Members and Presidents of the District

   Commissions in the State of Maharashtra, who sought reappointment to
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters              Page 38 of 92
their respective posts. There were also intervenors, some of whom

   supported the case of the writ petitioners, while the others supported the

   stand taken by the State of Maharashtra.
Rule 6 of the 2020 Rules

      “6. Procedure of appointment.—(1) The President and members of the
      State Commission and the District Commission shall be appointed by the
      State Government on the recommendation of a Selection Committee,
      consisting of the following persons, namely:—
(a) Chief Justice of the High Court or any Judge of the High Court
         nominated by him- Chairperson;
(b) Secretary in charge of Consumer Affairs of the State
         Government − Member;
(c) Nominee of the Chief Secretary of the State—Member.

       (2) The Secretary in charge of Consumer Affairs of the State Government
       shall be the convener of the Selection Committee.

       (3) No appointment of the President, or of a member shall be invalid
       merely by reason of any vacancy or absence in the Selection Committee
       other than a vacancy or absence of the Chairperson.”

                                                            (emphasis supplied)


Rule 10 of the 2020 Rules
      “10. Term of office of President or Member.—(1) The President of the
      State Commission shall hold office for a term of four years or upto the age
      of sixty-seven years, whichever is earlier and shall be eligible for
      reappointment for another term of four years subject to the age limit of
      sixty-seven years, and such reappointment shall be made on the basis of the
      recommendation of the Selection Committee.
(2) Every member of the State Commission and the President and
      every member of the District Commission shall hold office for a term
      of four years or upto the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier
      and shall be eligible for reappointment for another term of four years
      subject to the age limit of sixty-five years, and such reappointment shall
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                       Page 39 of 92
be made on the basis of the recommendation of the Selection
      Committee.”

                                                    (emphasis supplied)
52.We also take note of a separate writ petition filed before the High Court

   of Bombay, bearing Writ Petition No. 3756/2023 (
Suhas Milind

   Untwale v. State of Maharashtra
), whereby the petitioner therein sought

   appointment to the post of a Judicial Member of the State Commission,

   having already served as a President of the concerned District

   Commission for two consecutive terms.
In essence, clarification of the

   directions issued by this Court in
Limaye - I
(supra), was sought for,

   qua appointment under Rule 3(2)(a) of the 2020 Rules.
53.In the meanwhile, the Consumer Protection (Qualification for

   appointment, method of recruitment, procedure of appointment, term of

   office, resignation and removal of the President and members of the

   State Commission and District Commission) Amendment Rules, 2023

   were notified by the Union of India, with effect from 21.09.2023,

   incorporating the directions issued in Limaye – I (supra).
54.It has been brought to our attention that 112 persons, including some of

   the appellants before us, have been appointed to the posts of Members

   of the State Commission, and Presidents and Members of the District
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters               Page 40 of 92
Commissions, vide order dated 05.10.2023, by the State of

   Maharashtra, pursuant to a written examination, followed by viva voce.

   Consequently, the requests seeking reappointment were rejected by the

   State of Maharashtra, vide order dated 06.10.2023.
55.The High Court of Bombay, vide judgment dated 20.10.2023

   (hereinafter referred to as “Impugned Order - I”), impugned before us

   in Civil Appeal Nos. 9982/2024, 9987/2024, 9983-9985/2024,

   9989/2024, 9990/2024 and 9965-9967/2024, has partly allowed the writ

   petitions and struck down Rules 6(1) and 10(2) of the 2020 Rules,

   finding them to be legally unsustainable, and has also quashed the

   notifications, and the advertisement insofar as Paper II is concerned.
56.As regards Rule 6(1) of the 2020 Rules, the High Court of Bombay

   found that it suffered from the following infirmities:
a. Since the Chairperson is the sole representative of the Judiciary in

         the three Member Selection Committee, there is a lack of judicial

         dominance, which is a direct contravention of the doctrine of

         separation of powers and also an encroachment on the judicial

         domain.
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters              Page 41 of 92
b. There is excessive interference of the Executive in the appointment

         of Presidents and Members of the State and District Commissions.

   Accordingly, the said Rule was found to be in violation of the law laid

   down in
Rojer Mathew
(supra), MBA-III (supra) and MBA-IV

   (supra). The contention of the State, that Rule 6(3) of the 2020 Rules

   would save the constitution of the Selection Committee from being

   declared invalid, was rejected. Consequently, the notifications were

   also quashed.
57.As regards Rule 10(2) of the 2020 Rules, it was found that the reduction

   of the tenure of office from five years as it existed under the 2019 Rules,

   to four years, was not legally sustainable, especially in view of the

   dictum in MBA – III (supra).
58.On the issue of reappointment under Rule 10(2) of the 2020 Rules, it

   was held that since Rule 6(9) of the 2020 Rules, dealing with the power

   of the Selection Committee to determine its procedure, had been struck

   down previously, no power was available with the Selection Committee

   to determine its procedure for making recommendations for

   reappointments. It was held that until Rule 6(9) of the 2020 Rules was

   suitably amended, the Selection Committee could be guided by the
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters               Page 42 of 92
procedure for reappointment that was prevailing under Rule 8(18) of

   the 2019 Rules.
59.As regards the advertisement, upon finding deviations in the conduct of

   the written examination vis-à-vis the directions issued in
Limaye- I
(supra), Paper II of the said advertisement was held to be without

   jurisdiction.
The High Court of Bombay deemed it necessary for the

   written examination qua Paper II, to be re-conducted, adhering to the

   directions issued in
Limaye - I
(supra).
Finally, on the issue regarding

   inclusion of important consumer related laws in the syllabus for the

   written examination, the High Court of Bombay found that it was

   impermissible to make any addition, alteration or modification to the

   directions issued in Limaye – I (supra).
60.The High Court of Bombay, taking note of the facts of the case, had

   stayed the effect and operation of Impugned Order – I for a period of

   four weeks.
61.At this juncture, we may point out that most of the candidates appointed

   vide order dated 05.10.2023, by the State of Maharashtra, had not been

   arrayed as parties before the High Court of Bombay in the

   aforementioned writ petitions aggrieved by which, some of the present
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters             Page 43 of 92
appeals have been filed. The State of Maharashtra as well as the Union

   of India are also before us challenging Impugned Order - I, apart from

   one of the writ petitioners before the High Court of Bombay himself.

   Intervention applications have also been filed before us, by persons

   similarly placed as some of the appellants.
62.The High Court of Bombay, vide a separate judgment dated 20.10.2023

   (hereinafter referred to as “Impugned Order - II”), impugned before

   us in Civil Appeal No. 9988/2024, has held that the directions issued by

   this Court in
Limaye - I
(supra) qua the conduct of the written

   examination, relate only to the appointment of Non-Judicial members

   of the State Commission and members of the District Commissions.
It

   held so on the basis that this Court in
Limaye - I
(supra), was only

   concerned with the validity of Rules 3(2)(b) and 4(2)(c) of the 2020

   Rules, which pertain to the posts of Non-Judicial Members of the State

   and Members of the District Commissions, and no challenge to the

   validity of Rule 3(2)(a) of the 2020 Rules, which deals with the post of

   a Judicial Member of the State Commission, had been made.

   Accordingly, the advertisement was also restricted to appointments of

   Non-Judicial members of the State Commission alone and the
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters             Page 44 of 92
candidature of the writ petitioner therein was directed to be considered

   under Rule 3(2)(a) of the 2020 Rules.
63.The Division Bench of the High Court of Telangana, vide judgment

   dated 22.02.2024 (hereinafter referred to as “Impugned Order - III”),

   impugned before us in Civil Appeal Nos. 10029/2024 and 9964/2024,

   was pleased to confirm the order of the learned Single Judge of the High

   Court of Telangana dated 31.01.2024, wherein the appointments of the

   respondents therein, to the post of Members of the District Commission,

   pursuant to a written examination and viva voce, was set aside. This

   was done on the premise that the Rules, based on which the respondents

   therein had been appointed, had been struck down by the Division

   Bench of the High Court of Bombay vide judgment and order dated

   14.09.2021, prior to the issuance of the selection notification in

   Telangana, and at the time that the said notification had been issued, the

   operation of the aforementioned judgment had not been suspended, and

   was subsequently upheld in
Limaye- I
(supra).
Despite having taken

   note of the fact that the entire selection process was concluded prior to

   the directions issued in
Limaye - I
(supra), it was found that the

   examination was not conducted in tune with the same.
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters              Page 45 of 92
64.Before we deal with the submissions of the parties, we take note of the

   interim order passed by us on 10.11.2023, wherein this Court had taken

   note of the fact that appointments had been made by the State of

   Maharashtra on 05.10.2023, after the judgment had been reserved by

   the High Court of Bombay on 01.09.2023, but before it was pronounced

   on 20.10.2023, and since the persons who were working at the time

   would stand to be removed as a consequence of Impugned Order -

   I, the interim stay granted by the High Court of Bombay was directed

   to remain in operation till 24.11.2023. The said interim order has been

   extended from time to time.
SUBMISSIONS
65.We have heard the learned Additional Solicitor General (ASG)

   Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, appearing for the Union of India, learned Senior

   counsel and learned counsel appearing for the respective parties. We

   have also carefully perused the written arguments along with the

   documents, filed by all the parties in respect of their respective

   contentions.
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters            Page 46 of 92
Qua the Review Petitions seeking clarification of Limaye - I
66.Learned counsel appearing for the review petitioners submitted that
Limaye - I
(supra) had mandated the conduct of a written examination

   followed by a viva voce, despite several States having expressed their

   difficulty in doing so. It is their contention that it is virtually impossible

   for persons seeking appointment to the posts of President of the State

   Commission who must be a former Judge of the High Court, Judicial

   Members of the State Commission and Presidents of the District

   Commissions, having a judicial background, to undergo a written

   examination followed by a viva voce. Reliance has been placed on the

   Rules framed by the Government of Tamil Nadu under the 1986 Act,

   following the Model Rules framed by the Central Government,

   including Rule 5(7) of the Model Rules, which indicated the manner in

   which judicial persons could be considered for membership to the

   Consumer fora.
Qua Impugned Order - I
67.Learned counsel appearing for the appellants in Civil Appeal Nos.

   9982/2024, 9987/2024 and 9983-9985/2024, submitted that Impugned
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                  Page 47 of 92
Order – I cannot be sustained in the eye of law on the following

   grounds:
a) It had not been brought to the notice of the High Court of Bombay

       that the entire recruitment process had been completed, and that the

       appellants have been duly appointed by the State of Maharashtra

       vide order dated 05.10.2023.
b) The High Court of Bombay had no opportunity to consider the

       amended Rules 3(2)(b), 4(2)(c) and 6(9) of the 2020 Rules, which

       were notified while the matter was heard and reserved for orders.
c) The principles of natural justice have been violated inasmuch as the

       new appointees, who include the appellants, were not made parties

       before the High Court of Bombay.
d) Despite having been selected, Dr. Mahendra Bhaskar Limaye, the

       respondent herein, had challenged the 2020 Rules, instead of joining

       the service.
e) Rule 8(18) of the 2019 Rules, having been repealed, could not have

       been brought into operation as an interim arrangement.
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters               Page 48 of 92
f) Any possible contingency that might arise in giving effect to Rule

       6(1) of the 2020 Rules is taken care of under Rule 6(3) of the 2020

       Rules.
g) Section 102 of the 2019 Act, which specifically empowers the State

       Government to prescribe the mode of recruitment, has been

       completely ignored and glossed over.
h) The ratio in
Rojer Mathew
(supra), MBA- III (supra) and MBA -
IV (supra), are inapplicable to the facts of the present case, as the

       aforesaid judgments dealt with Tribunals where the State is usually

       the litigant.
68.Learned counsel appearing for the appellants in Civil Appeal No.

   9990/2024 submitted that having gone through the examination process

   for selection for the first term, the appellants are not required to undergo

   the said process once again for the purpose of reappointment. It is

   contended that Rule 6(9) and Rule 10(2) of the 2020 Rules, are

   independent of each other, and that the process for fresh appointment

   and reappointment of candidates cannot be equated with each other. To

   buttress the aforesaid submissions, learned counsel has placed reliance

   on the decision of the High Court of Bombay dated 18.02.2019 in Writ
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                Page 49 of 92
Petition No. 4974/2018 (
Mukund v. State of Maharashtra
). Learned

   counsel has also submitted that all the appointments made under the

   1986 Act, were saved under
Section 31
read with Section 107 of the

   2019 Act. Hence, the ‘right accrued for re-appointment’ as per Rule 10

   of the 2020 Rules, would have to be recognised on the basis of Rule 34

   of the Maharashtra Consumer Protection Appointment Rules, 2012 and

   Rule 8(18) of the 2019 Rules read with Rule 14 of the Consumer

   Protection (Salary, allowance and conditions of service of President and

   Members of State and District Commission) Model Rules, 2020 made

   under Section 102(1) of the 2019 Act, by the Central Government. The

   said Rule 14 clearly specifies that the terms and conditions of service

   of the Presidents and Members of the State and District Commissions

   shall not be varied to their disadvantage during the tenure of their

   office.
69.Similar submissions have been made by some of the intervenors, with

   a few seeking reappointments for a second term and others for a third.

   As regards those who were seeking reappointment for the third term,

   we have already held, vide order dated 27.06.2024, that no one is
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters             Page 50 of 92
entitled to continue for a third term on the basis of our interim order

   dated 10.11.2023.
70.Learned counsel appearing for the appellant Dr. Mahendra Bhaskar

   Limaye in Civil Appeal No. 9989/2024 seeking quashing of the

   advertisement qua Paper I, submitted that the syllabus for the written

   examination was in complete contradiction to and in violation of the

   directions issued in Limaye – I (supra). The High Court of Bombay

   failed to note that the rules of the game qua negative marking were

   changed by the State of Maharashtra, just 24 hours before the date of

   the written examination. The High Court of Bombay also failed to take

   cognizance of events subsequent to the judgment being reserved on

   01.09.2023, despite the appellant bringing them to its notice on

   06.10.2023, by mentioning the matter and subsequently filing a pursis.

   The results were declared on 15.09.2023, which displayed that the total

   marks for Paper I of the advertisement had been arbitrarily reduced to

   90 marks, so as to give an undue advantage to undeserving candidates.

   The State of Maharashtra had arbitrarily added marks for candidates,

   despite there being no such provision for doing so under the 2020 Rules.

   Furthermore, candidates were asked to write their names on their
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters             Page 51 of 92
respective answer sheets, which resulted in the violation of the principle

   of impartiality. It is thus contended that the appointment order issued

   by the State of Maharashtra on 05.10.2023, is illegal. To buttress his

   submission, learned counsel has placed reliance on the 2019 Act, to

   contend that rule making powers are only with the Union of India and

   the State Government has no power to introduce its own manner of

   conducting the examination, in the absence of a rule in place of Rule

   6(9) of the 2020 Rules struck down in Limaye – I (supra). Any attempt

   by the State Government to determine its own process of conducting

   the examination, otherwise than in accordance with the process

   provided for in Limaye – I (supra), is illegal.
71.Learned ASG appearing for the Union of India in Civil Appeal Nos.

   9965-9967/2024, submitted that any possible contingency that might

   arise in giving effect to Rule 6(1) of the 2020 Rules, is taken care of by

   Rule 6(3) of the 2020 Rules. On the validity of Rule 10(2) of the 2020

   Rules, she submitted that the term of office of the President and

   Members of the National Commission is 4 years, and therefore, there

   cannot be two different tenures of office within the hierarchy of

   Consumer fora. In any case, the term of office is purely a policy
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters              Page 52 of 92
decision, in view of the Central Government having been empowered

   to make rules under clauses (n) and (w) of Section 101(2) of the 2019

   Act. She also submitted that the phrase ‘another term’ used in Rule

   10(2) of the 2020 Rules, means one more term and thus, none would be

   entitled to reappointment for a third term. The decision of the High

   Court of Bombay dated 18.02.2019, in Writ Petition No. 4974/2018

   (
Mukund v. State of Maharashtra
), is not applicable to the facts of the

   present case as the rules concerned therein have ceased to operate after

   the enactment of the 2019 Act. Upon making these submissions, it has

   been fairly conceded on behalf of the Union of India that a fresh set of

   Rules would be enacted replacing the existing Rules, after taking note

   of the lacunae pointed out by the concerned stakeholders. We have also

   been informed that the Department of Consumer Affairs, vide Letter

   dated 26.11.2024, emphasised on the need to expedite the process of

   appointments and that under Rule 6(9) of the 2020 Rules, as amended

   in 2023, many States such as Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal,

   and the Union Territory of the Andaman & Nicobar Islands had started

   advertising       vacancies      in    the       Commissions   and    conducting

   examinations.
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                       Page 53 of 92
72.The Union of India in IA No. 97449/2024 has proposed an amendment

   to the 2020 Rules, amended in 2023, as follows:
2020 Rules as amended in 2023                    Proposed Amendment
4.       Qualifications          for        4.       Qualifications         for
    appointment of President and                appointment of President and
    member            of        District        member            of       District
    Commission.—                                Commission.—
    (1) A person shall not be qualified         (1) A person shall not be qualified
    for appointment as President,               for appointment as President,
    unless he is, or has been, or is            unless he is, or has been a District
    qualified to be a District Judge.           Judge.
6. Procedure of appointment.—               6. Procedure of appointment.—
    (1) The President and members of            (1) The President and members of
    the State Commission and the                the State Commission and the
    District Commission shall be                District Commission shall be
    appointed      by      the    State         appointed      by      the    State
    Government            on        the         Government            on        the
    recommendation of a Selection               recommendation of a Selection
    Committee, consisting of the                Committee, consisting of the
    following persons, namely:-                 following persons, namely:-
(a) Chief Justice of the High Court         (a) Chief Justice of the High Court
    or any Judge of the High Court              or any Judge of the High Court
    nominated by him- Chairperson;              nominated by him- Chairperson;
(b) Secretary in charge of                  (b) President of the State
    Consumer Affairs of the State               Commission- Member;
    Government – Member;                        (c) Secretary in charge of
(c) Nominee of the Chief                    Consumer Affairs of the State
    Secretary of the State – Member.            Government – Member;
(d) Nominee of the Chief
                                                Secretary of the State, not below
                                                the level of Secretary to the State
                                                Government– Member.
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                      Page 54 of 92
Provided that in case of the
                                                President of the State Consumer
                                                Disputes Redressal Commission is
                                                seeking re-appointment, there
                                                shall be a retired Judge of the
                                                Supreme Court or a retired Chief
                                                Justice of a High Court, to be
                                                nominated by the Chief Justice of
                                                India.
6. Procedure of appointment.—               6. Procedure of appointment.—
    (9) The Selection Committee shall           (9) The Selection Committee shall
    short-list the applicant on the basis       shortlist the applicants for the
    of performance in a written test            office of President of the State
    consisting of two papers as                 Commission or the District
    specified in the table below, with          Commission, as the case may be,
    the qualifying marks of fifty               on the basis of a personal
    percent in each paper and there             interaction and shall give due
    shall be viva voce of 50 marks.             weightage inter alia to the
                                                personality, knowledge of law,
                                                quality of the judgments,
                                                adjudicatory experience, integrity
                                                and special achievements.
(9A) The President of the State
                                                Commission maybe appointed on
                                                whole time basis or by assigning
                                                additional charge to a sitting Judge
                                                of the High Court.
Provided that appointment of a
                                                sitting Judge of High Court, either
                                                on whole time basis or on
                                                additional charge, shall not be
                                                made without the concurrence of
                                                the Chief Justice of the High
                                                Court.
(9B) The Selection Committee
                                                shall determine its procedure for
                                                shortlist of the applicants for the
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                      Page 55 of 92
office of Member of the State
                                                Commission or of the District
                                                Commission, as the case may be,
                                                and make its recommendation
                                                keeping in view the requirements
                                                of the State Commission or the
                                                District Commission, and after
                                                taking into account the suitability,
                                                record of past performance,
                                                integrity     and     adjudicatory
                                                experience.
73.IA No. 180566/2024 and IA No. 27612/2025 in Civil Appeal Nos. 9965-

   9967/2024, have been filed by an advocate and by persons who are

   currently serving as Presidents of District Commissions, respectively.

   They oppose the proposed amendment to Rule 4(1) of the 2020 Rules,

   as amended in 2023. It is their contention that the omission of the phrase

   “qualified to be a District Judge”, from the qualification for

   appointment to the post of President of the District Commissions,

   violates principles of Administrative Law and is contrary to
Article

   233(2)
of the Constitution.
Qua Impugned Order - II
74.Learned counsel appearing for the State of Maharashtra in Civil Appeal

   No. 9988/2024 submitted that Impugned Order - II cannot be

   sustained in the eye of law, as appointments to the posts of Judicial and
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                      Page 56 of 92
Non-Judicial Members of the State Commission under Rule 3(2)(a) and

   Rule 3(2)(b) of the 2020 Rules respectively, have merged in view of the

   directions issued in
Limaye - I
(supra).
Thus, without undergoing the

   process as contemplated in
Limaye - I
(supra) vis-à-vis the written

   examination and the viva voce, the writ petitioner therein, would not be

   eligible to seek appointment to the post of Judicial Member of the State

   Commission.
Qua Impugned Order - III
75.Learned counsel appearing for the appellants in Civil Appeal Nos.

   10029/2024 and 9964/2024 submitted that Impugned Order – III

   cannot be sustained, as Limaye – I (supra) operates prospectively and

   that the judgment and order dated 14.09.2021 passed by the Division

   Bench of the High Court of Bombay, which was impugned and upheld

   in
Limaye- I
(supra), is inapplicable to the facts of the aforementioned

   appeals. Learned counsel also submitted that the appointments of the

   appellants were protected by virtue of the interim orders of this Court

   in Suo Motu Writ Petition (Civil) No. 2/2021 and Civil Appeal No.

   9982/2024. Moreover, the respondent herein had herself participated in
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters             Page 57 of 92
the recruitment process, and therefore, was not entitled to question the

   same.
DISCUSSION
76.Having heard the learned Additional Solicitor General (ASG)

   Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, appearing for the Union of India, learned Senior

   counsel and learned counsel appearing for the respective parties, we

   shall now proceed to analyse the merit in their respective submissions.
77.Considering that the issues raised in the Review Petitions are similar to

   the ones raised in the Civil Appeals, we deem it fit to tag them and pass

   a common judgment.
Qua the Review Petitions seeking clarification of Limaye - I
78.Vide interim order dated 07.03.2024, this Court had already taken note

   of the anomaly created in
Limaye - I
(supra), vis-à-vis the requirement

   of holding written examinations and viva voce for persons with a

   judicial background, seeking appointment under Rules 3(1), 3(2)(a) and

   4(1) of the 2020 Rules. Accordingly, on a concession by the parties, the

   requirement of holding a written examination and viva voce was relaxed

   for the post of President of the State Commission, as an interim

   measure, clarifying that appointments would be made in consultation
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters              Page 58 of 92
with and subject to the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High

   Court.
“1.
In the judgment of this Court in
The Secretary Ministry of Consumer
      Affairs vs Dr Mahindra Bhaskar Limaye (Civil Appeal No.831
of 2023),
      directions were issued on 3 March 2023, inter alia, in the exercise of the
      jurisdiction under
Article 142
of the Constitution that for the appointment
      of the President and Members of the State Consumer Disputes Redressal
      Commission (SCDRC) and the District Consumer Redressal Commissions,
      the basis for selection would be а written test consisting of two papers, each
      of 100 marks followed by а viva voce. The judgment sets out the total marks
      to be assigned as well as the minimum qualifying marks by directing that
      the total marks would comprise of 250, of which the written test would
      carry 200 marks and viva voce 50 marks.
2. А considerable difficulty has been faced in working out of the
      directions under
Article 142
of the Constitution. In this backdrop, аn
      interlocutory Application has been filed by the Union Government.
xxx          xxx            xxx
4. During the course of the hearing, it is conceded on both the sides that
      no written test would be either feasible or practical for the appointment
      of the President of the SCDRC for which а former Judge of the High
      Court is eligible for appointment. Hence, insofar as appointments to
      the post of President of the SCDRC are concerned, we direct that the
      requirement of holding а written examination and viva voce in the
      terms as envisaged shall stand relaxed for the present. At the same time,
      it is clarified that the appointments to the office of President of the SCDRC
      shall be made in consultation with and subject to the concurrence of the
      Chief Justice of the High Court.”

                                                               (emphasis supplied)
79.We also take note of our order dated 11.11.2024 in Miscellaneous

   Application No. 2449/2023 in Civil Appeal No. 831/2023, filed by the

   Secretary, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, wherein it was clarified that

   the aforesaid relaxation would enure to the benefit of persons seeking
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                         Page 59 of 92
appointment to the post of President of the State Commissions across

   the country.
80.It appears to us that by inadvertence, the directions issued in Limaye –

   I (supra) were made applicable to the posts of President of the State

   Commission, Judicial Members of the State Commission and the

   President of the District Commission.
The lis before this Court in
Limaye - I
(supra), being only with respect to the constitutional validity

   of Rules 3(2)(b), 4(2)(c) and 6(9) of the 2020 Rules, the directions

   issued therein shall not be applicable to the posts of President of the

   State Commission, Judicial Members of the State Commission, and

   President of the District Commission.
81.In light of the aforesaid discussion, the review petitions seeking to

   clarify the directions issued in
Limaye - I
(supra) stand allowed to the

   extent that there shall be no requirement of a written examination

   followed by a viva voce for selection to the posts of President of the

   State Commission, Judicial Members of the State Commission and

   President of the District Commission under Rules 3(1), 3(2)(a) and 4(1)

   of the 2020 Rules, respectively.
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters              Page 60 of 92
Qua Impugned Order - I
82.Before we proceed to deal with the submissions in these appeals, we

   deem it fit to extract the directions issued by the High Court of Bombay

   in Impugned Order - I.

      “31. In the light of aforesaid discussion, the following order is passed:—
      (A) Rule 6(1) of the Rules of 2020 is struck down on the ground that the
      same results in diluting the involvement of the judiciary in the process of
      appointment of the President and members of the State Commission and
      the District Commission. The said Rule is against the spirit of the decision
      of the Constitution Bench in
Rojer Mathew
(supra).
      (B) Since Rule 6(1) of the Rules of 2020 has been struck down the
      notifications dated 10.04.2023 and 13.06.2023 would not survive.
(C) Rule 10(2) of the Rules of 2020 to the extent it prescribes the tenure of
      the members of the State Commission and the President and members of
      the District Commission to be four years is struck down as not being in
      consonance with the spirit of the law
laid down in
the Madras Bar
      Association III (supra).
(D) Since re-appointment of members of the State Commission and the
      President as well as members of the District Commission under Rule 10(2)
      of the Rules of 2020 is on the basis of recommendation to be made by the
      Selection Committee and as Rule 6(9) of the Rules of 2020 has been struck
      down in Vijaykumar Bhima Dighe (supra), till the time Rule 6(9) of the
      Rules of 2020 is suitably amended the Selection Committee can consider
      following the procedure for the appointment of members of the State
      Commission and the President as well as members of the District
      Commission by taking into consideration the procedure that was prevailing
      vide Rule 8(18) of the Rules of 2019.
(E) The notice issued by the Department of Food, Civil Supplies and
      Consumer Affairs alongwith the advertisement dated 23.05.2023 in relation
      to Paper-II is held to be without jurisdiction. Consequently, it would be
      necessary for the Department to re-conduct the test in Paper-II by following
      the directions issued by the Hon'ble Supreme Court under
Article 142
of
      the Constitution of India in
The Secretary, Ministry of Consumer Affairs
(supra).
(F) In view of the decision in Suhas Milind Untwale Versus The State of
      Maharashtra [Writ Petition No. 3756 of 2023] decided today, it is held
      that the notice annexed to the advertisement dated 23.05.2023 that pertains
      to the appointment on the post of Member, State Commission would be
      applicable only to a candidate seeking appointment in terms of Rule 3(2)(b)
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                        Page 61 of 92
and not a candidate seeking appointment in terms of Rule 3(2)(a) of the
      Rules of 2020.”
a) Rule 6(1) and Rule 10(2) of the 2020 Rules
83.Upon a perusal of the Impugned Order - I, we find that the decision

   of the High Court of Bombay, in striking down Rule 6(1) of the 2020

   Rules and the consequent notifications, cannot be found fault with. Rule

   6(1) of the 2020 Rules, which provides for the composition of the

   Selection Committee, has been rightly struck down, placing reliance

   upon the doctrine of separation of powers and earlier decisions of this

   Court in
Rojer Mathew
(supra), MBA - III (supra) and MBA - IV

   (supra), as the composition of the Selection Committee as per the said

   Rule indicates executive dominance. The setting aside of the

   notifications is merely consequential.
Rojer Mathew v. South Indian Bank Ltd.
, (2020) 6 SCC 1
      “148. Composition of a Search-cum-Selection Committee is contemplated
      in a manner whereby appointments of Member, Vice-President and
      President are predominantly made by nominees of the Central Government.
      A perusal of the Schedule to the Rules shows that save for token
      representation of the Chief Justice of India or his nominee in some
      committees, the role of the judiciary is virtually absent.
149. We are in agreement with the contentions of the learned counsel for
      the petitioner(s), that the lack of judicial dominance in the Search-cum-
      Selection Committee is in direct contravention of the doctrine of separation
      of powers and is an encroachment on the judicial domain. The doctrine of
      separation of powers has been well recognised and reinterpreted by
      this Court as an important facet of the basic structure of the
      Constitution, in its dictum in
Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala
[
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                       Page 62 of 92
(1973) 4 SCC 225] , and several other later decisions. The exclusion of
      the judiciary from the control and influence of the executive is not
      limited to traditional courts alone, but also includes Tribunals since
      they are formed as an alternative to courts and perform judicial
      functions.
150. Clearly, the composition of the Search-cum-Selection Committees
      under the Rules amounts to excessive interference of the executive in
      appointment of members and Presiding Officers of statutory tribunals
      and would undoubtedly be detrimental to the independence of
      judiciary besides being an affront to the doctrine of separation of
      powers.
151.
In
R.K. Jain v. Union of India [R.K. Jain
v. Union of India, (1993) 4
      SCC 119 : 1993 SCC (L&S) 1128], a three-Judge Bench of this Court
      asserted the need for independent system of appointment and
      administration of Tribunals to maintain public trust in the judiciary while
      expressing its agony over inefficacy of the working of tribunals in the
      country. In addition to discussing the perils of providing direct statutory
      appeals to the Apex Court from the tribunals, it was also suggested that
      there is an imminent need for reform in the manner of recruitment of
      Members of tribunals to maintain public faith in the institution of judiciary.
      Adjudication of disputes by Technical Members should be confined only to
      cases requiring specialised technical knowledge.
(Union of India v. Madras
      Bar Assn. [(
2010) 11 SCC 1] and Madras Bar Assn. v. Union of
      India
[(2014) 10 SCC 1] , SCC paras 107 and 126)
152. Subsequently, in its dictum in
L. Chandra Kumar v. Union of
      India
[(1997) 3 SCC 261 : 1997 SCC (L&S) 577], a seven-Judge Bench of
      this Court noted the observations in the Malimath Committee Report,
      discussing the administration of the tribunals established under
Article 323-
      A
and
Article 323-B
of the Constitution. The Malimath Committee Report
      had pointed out that a tribunal constituted in substitution of any other court
      should have similar standards of appointment, qualifications and conditions
      of service, to inspire the confidence of the public at large. Shortcomings in
      composition, tenure, conditions of service, etc. of the Members of tribunals
      were also highlighted in the Report as reasons for increased intervention by
      the executive in the working of judicial institutions. The relevant extract is
      reproduced below : (SCC pp. 305-06, para 88)
        “88. … The observations contained in the Report, to this extent they
        contain a review of the functioning of the tribunals over a period of three
        years or so after their institution, will be useful for our purpose. Chapter
        VIII of the second volume of the Report, “Alternative Modes and Forums
        for Dispute Resolution”, deals with the issue at length. After forwarding
        its specific recommendations on the feasibility of setting up “Gram
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                         Page 63 of 92
Nyayalayas”, Industrial Tribunals and Educational Tribunals, the
       Committee has dealt with the issue of tribunals set up under
Articles 323-
       A
and
323-B
of the Constitution. The relevant observations in this regard,
       being of considerable significance to our analysis, are extracted in full as
       under:
‘Functioning of tribunals
           8.63. Several tribunals are functioning in the country. Not all of them,
           however, have inspired confidence in the public mind. The reasons are
           not far to seek. The foremost is the lack of competence, objectivity and
           judicial approach. The next is their constitution, the power and
           method of appointment of personnel thereto, the inferior status and
           the casual method of working. The last is their actual composition;
men of calibre are not willing to be appointed as Presiding Officers
           in view of the uncertainty of tenure, unsatisfactory conditions of
           service, executive subordination in matters of administration and
           political interference in judicial functioning. For these and other
           reasons, the quality of justice is stated to have suffered and the cause
           of expedition is not found to have been served by the establishment of
           such tribunals.
8.64. Even the experiment of setting up of the Administrative
           Tribunals under the
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985
, has not been
           widely welcomed. Its members have been selected from all kinds of
           services including the Indian Police Service. The decision of the State
           Administrative Tribunals are not appealable except under
Article 136
of the Constitution. On account of the heavy cost and remoteness of
           the forum, there is virtual negation of the right of appeal. This has led
           to denial of justice in many cases and consequential dissatisfaction.
           There appears to be a move in some of the States where they have
           been established for their abolition.
Tribunals—Tests for Including High Court's Jurisdiction
           8.65. A Tribunal which substitutes the High Court as an alternative
           institutional mechanism for judicial review must be no less efficacious
           than the High Court. Such a tribunal must inspire confidence and
           public esteem that it is a highly competent and expert mechanism with
           judicial approach and objectivity. What is needed in a tribunal, which
           is intended to supplant the High Court, is legal training and
           experience, and judicial acumen, equipment and approach. When
           such a tribunal is composed of personnel drawn from the
           judiciary as well as from services or from amongst experts in the
           field, any weightage in favour of the service members or expert
           members and value-discounting the Judicial Members would
           render the tribunal less effective and efficacious than the High
           Court.
The Act
setting up such a tribunal would itself have to be
           declared as void under such circumstances. The same would not
           at all be conducive to judicial independence and may even tend,
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                         Page 64 of 92
directly or indirectly, to influence their decision-making process,
           especially when the Government is a litigant in most of the cases
           coming before such tribunal. (See
S.P. Sampath Kumar v. Union of
           India
[(1987) 1 SCC 124].) The protagonists of specialist tribunals,
           who simultaneously with their establishment want exclusion of the
           writ jurisdiction of the High Courts in regard to matters entrusted for
           adjudication to such tribunals, ought not to overlook these vital and
           important aspects. It must not be forgotten that what is permissible to
           be supplanted by another equally effective and efficacious
           institutional mechanism is the High Courts and not the judicial review
           itself. Tribunals are not an end in themselves but a means to an end;
           even if the laudable objectives of speedy justice, uniformity of
           approach, predictability of decisions and specialist justice are to be
           achieved, the framework of the tribunal intended to be set up to attain
           them must still retain its basic judicial character and inspire public
           confidence. Any scheme of decentralisation of administration of
           justice providing for an alternative institutional mechanism in
           substitution of the High Courts must pass the aforesaid test in order to
           be constitutionally valid.’ ”
                                                            (emphasis in original)
153. We are of the view that the Search-cum-Selection Committee as
      formulated under the Rules is an attempt to keep the judiciary away
      from the process of selection and appointment of Members, Vice-
      Chairman and Chairman of Tribunals. This Court has been lucid in its
      ruling in Supreme Court
Advocates-on-Record Assn. v. Union of
      India
[(2016) 5 SCC 1] (Fourth Judges case), wherein it was held that
      primacy of judiciary is imperative in selection and appointment of
      judicial officers including Judges of the High Court and the Supreme
      Court. Cognizant of the doctrine of separation of powers, it is
      important that judicial appointments take place without any influence
      or control of any other limb of the sovereign. Independence of judiciary
      is the only means to maintain a system of checks and balances on the
      working of legislature and the executive. The executive is a litigating
      party in most of the litigation and hence cannot be allowed to be a
      dominant participant in judicial appointments.
154. We are in complete agreement with the analogy elucidated by the
      Constitution Bench in Fourth Judges case [(2016) 5 SCC 1] for
      compulsory need for exclusion of control of the executive over quasi-
      judicial bodies of tribunals discharging responsibilities akin to courts. The
      Search-cum-Selection Committees as envisaged in the Rules are
      against the constitutional scheme inasmuch as they dilute the
      involvement of judiciary in the process of appointment of Members of
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                        Page 65 of 92
tribunals which is in effect an encroachment by the executive on the
      judiciary.”

                                                            (emphasis supplied)

Madras Bar Assn. v. Union of India, (2021) 7 SCC 369
      “33. It has been repeatedly held by this Court that the Secretaries of the
      sponsoring departments should not be members of the Search-cum-
      Selection Committee.
We are not in agreement with the submission of the
      learned Attorney General that the Secretary of the sponsoring department
      being a member of the Search-cum-Selection Committee was approved by
      this Court in Union of India v. Madras Bar Assn. [(2010) 11 SCC 1] and it
      would prevail over the later judgment in
Madras Bar Assn. v. Union of
      India
(2014) [(2014) 10 SCC 1] . We have already referred to the findings
      recorded in para 70 [Ed. : See also para 120(xii) for the direction in this
      regard.]
of the judgment in Union of India v. Madras Bar Assn. [(2010) 11
      SCC 1] that the sponsoring department should not have any role to play
      in the matter of appointment to the posts of Chairperson and members
      of the tribunals. Though the ultimate direction of the Court was to
      constitute a Search-cum-Selection Committee for appointment of
      members to NCLT and NCLAT of which Secretary, Ministry of
      Finance and Company Affairs is a member, the ratio of the judgment
      is categorical, which is to the effect that Secretaries of the sponsoring
      departments cannot be members of the Search-cum-Selection
      Committee. We, therefore, see no conflict of opinion in the two judgments
      as argued by the learned Attorney General. However, we find merit in the
      submission of the learned Attorney General that the presence of the
      Secretary of the sponsoring or parent department in the Search-cum-
      Selection Committee will be beneficial to the selection process. But, for
      reasons stated above, it is settled that the Secretary of the parent or
      sponsoring Department cannot have a say in the process of selection
      and service conditions of the members of tribunals. Ergo, the Secretary
      to the sponsoring or parent Department shall serve as the Member-
      Secretary/Convener to the Search-cum-Selection Committee and shall
      function in the Search-cum-Selection Committee without a vote.
34. The Government of India is duty-bound to implement the directions
      issued in the earlier judgments and constitute the Search-cum-Selection
      Committees in which the Chief Justice of India or his nominee shall be the
      Chairperson along with the Chairperson of the Tribunal if he is a retired
      Judge of the Supreme Court or a retired Chief Justice of a High Court and
      two Secretaries to the Government of India. In case the tribunal is headed
      by a Chairperson who is not a judicial member, the Search-cum-
      Selection Committee shall consist of the Chief Justice of India or his
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                       Page 66 of 92
nominee as Chairperson and a retired Judge of the Supreme Court or
      a retired Chief Justice of a High Court to be nominated by the Chief
      Justice of India and Secretary to the Government of India from the
      Ministry of Law and Justice and a Secretary of a department other
      than the parent or sponsoring department to be nominated by the
      Cabinet Secretary. As stated above, the Secretary of the parent or
      sponsoring department shall serve as the Member-Secretary or
      Convener, without a vote.”

                                                             (emphasis supplied)

Madras Bar Assn. v. Union of India, (2022) 12 SCC 455
      “62. The tenure of the Chairperson and Member of a tribunal is fixed at
      four years by Section 184(11), notwithstanding anything contained in any
      judgment, order or decree of any court. It is relevant to mention that sub-
      section (11) of Section 184 has been given retrospective effect from 26-5-
      2017. Rule 9 of the 2020 Rules had specified the term of appointment of
      the Chairperson or Member of the Tribunal as four years.
The learned
      Amicus Curiae while making his submissions in
MBA (3) [Madras Bar
      Assn. v. Union of India
, (2021) 7 SCC 369] had insisted that the
      Chairperson and Members of a tribunal should have a minimum term of
      five years by placing reliance on the judgment of this Court in
S.P.
      Sampath [S.P. Sampath Kumar v. Union of India
, (1987) 1 SCC 124]
      , MBA (1) [Union of India v. Madras Bar Assn., (
2010) 11 SCC 1]
      and Rojer Mathew [Rojer Mathew v. South Indian Bank Ltd.
, (2020) 6 SCC
      1] . The stand taken by him was that a short tenure would be a disincentive
      for competent persons to seek appointment as Members of Tribunals. The
      learned Attorney General submitted that the term of four years is subject to
      reappointment. He contended that advocates who are appointed at an early
      age can get more than one extension and continue till they reach the age of
      superannuation.
After perusing the law
laid down by
this Court in MBA
      (1) [Union of India v. Madras Bar Assn., (
2010) 11 SCC 1] and Rojer
      Mathew [Rojer Mathew v. South Indian Bank Ltd.
, (2020) 6 SCC 1]
      which held that a short stint is anti-merit, we directed the modification
      of tenure in Rules 9(1) and 9(2) as five years in respect of Chairpersons
      and Members of Tribunals in
MBA (3) [Madras Bar Assn. v. Union of
      India
, (2021) 7 SCC 369] . This Court declared in SCC para 60.4 that
      the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and the Members of the tribunals
      shall hold office for a term of five years and shall be eligible for
      reappointment.
The insertion of Section 184(11) prescribing a term of
      four years for the Chairpersons and Members of Tribunals by giving
      retrospective effect to the provision from 26-5-2017 is clearly an
      attempt to override the declaration of law by this Court under
Article
      141
in
MBA (3) [Madras Bar Assn. v. Union of India
, (2021) 7 SCC 369]
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                       Page 67 of 92
. Therefore, clauses (i) and (ii) of Section 184(11) are declared as void
      and unconstitutional.”

                                                          (emphasis supplied)
84.The striking down of Rule 10(2) of the 2020 Rules as invalid, with

   respect to the term of office of the President of the District Commission,

   and Members of the State and District Commissions, can also not be

   found fault with, in light of the settled position of law, on the aspect of

   tenure of office in special fora.
85.Before we proceed with the next aspect, we may note that most of the

   writ petitioners before the High Court of Bombay underwent the

   impugned selection process. Having participated in the selection

   process, it was not open for them to have continued to challenge the

   same. To put it differently, the writ petitioners before the High Court of

   Bombay would not have continued to press the reliefs sought for, had

   they been selected. One cannot be permitted to approbate and reprobate

   at the same time.
b) Paper II
86.The question that arises for our consideration herein, is with respect to

   the non-compliance of the directions issued in
Limaye - I
(supra) under
Article 142
of the Constitution, especially with respect to Paper II. A
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                     Page 68 of 92
direction issued by this Court in exercise of the power conferred under
Article 142
of the Constitution, with specific reference to the conduct

   of a written examination followed by a viva voce, may not be read like

   a statute. It is only suggestive and can only be construed to be a guiding

   factor. What must be seen is the substantial compliance of the directions

   issued, which we find to be present in the instant case. One must ensure

   that justice is rendered, and mere technicalities shall not stand in the

   way of substantive justice. There is nothing wrong in the question paper

   that was set and there is no glaring error in the same. Accordingly, both

   Paper I and Paper II of the advertisement are valid.
c) Validity of the appointments made by the State of Maharashtra vide

   order dated 05.10.2023
87.Admittedly, the appointed candidates had not been arrayed as parties

   before the High Court of Bombay. We are conscious of the fact that Writ

   Petition No. 3680/2023 had been filed before the High Court of Bombay

   at the initial stage of the selection process itself and also that

   appointments by the State of Maharashtra were made vide order dated

   05.10.2023, subsequent to the matter having been reserved for

   judgment. However, considering the nature of the lis and the grievance
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters              Page 69 of 92
sought to be espoused, the appointed candidates are certainly proper and

   necessary parties to the litigation, as they have gone through the entire

   selection process. A decision taking away the civil rights that accrued

   to them, could not have been rendered, without hearing them.
88.The High Court, under
Article 226
of the Constitution, is also a Court

   of equity and good conscience, and ought to have taken note of the fact

   that the selection process had almost been completed during the

   pendency of the writ petitions before it. Thus, we are inclined to hold

   that the 112 candidates appointed by the State of Maharashtra are

   entitled to continue and complete their tenure.
89.We are inclined to grant the said relief on one more count. The

   candidates merely participated in the selection process pursuant to the

   advertisement made by the State of Maharashtra. Thus, their

   participation in the selection process was bona fide and genuine. As

   already held by us, Paper II is valid. Therefore, in the absence of any

   proof that the selection process was tainted, appointments made

   pursuant to the same, are upheld.
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters              Page 70 of 92
d) Reappointment
90.Even though the suggestion of the High Court of Bombay in Impugned

   Order - I, as regards reappointments, is infructuous on account of the

   amendment in 2023 to Rule 6(9) of the 2020 Rules, we deem it fit to

   deal with it and clarify the question of law that has been raised.
91.The High Court of Bombay has suggested that since reappointments

   under Rule 10(2) of the 2020 Rules were on the basis of the

   recommendations to be made by the Selection Committee, and as Rule

   6(9) of the 2020 Rules had been struck down in
Limaye - I
(supra), till

   the time Rule 6(9) of the 2020 Rules is suitably amended, the Selection

   Committee can consider following the procedure for the appointment

   of Members of the State Commission, and President as well as Members

   of the District Commission by taking into consideration the procedure

   that was prevailing under Rule 8(18) of the 2019 Rules. In our

   considered view, this cannot be sustained in the eye of law. We say so

   for two reasons. The 2019 Rules were notified under the 1986 Act,

   which has been repealed by virtue of Section 107 of the 2019 Act. Rules

   formulated under a repealed statute, stand repealed in their entirety,

   once new Rules under the new/re-enacted statute have come into being.
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters              Page 71 of 92
There cannot be two sets of Rules operating the field simultaneously,

   when the latter has replaced the former. Merely because a particular

   Rule in the latter Rules, which replaced the earlier Rules, has been

   struck down, there is no deemed revival of a corresponding Rule in the

   earlier one. The State Rules are no longer in the statute and there is no

   question of revival of any particular Rule. Reviving an arm of a dead

   person would amount to injecting life into him, especially when his role

   has been taken over by another, after his departure.

      Rule 8(18) of the 2019 Rules                  Rule 10(2) of the 2020 Rules
8. Procedure for Appointment of               10. Term of office of President or
  Members.—                                     Member.—
  (18) In case of re-appointment of             (2) Every member of the State
  the President and Member of                   Commission and the President and
  District Forum, as at the time of             every member of the District
  appointing the President and                  Commission shall hold office for a
  Member, the concerned candidate               term of four years or upto the age
  have undergone the selection                  of sixty-five years, whichever is
  process as stated in the rules, it            earlier and shall be eligible for
  shall not be necessary for the said           reappointment for another term of
  candidates to undergo the same                four years subject to the age limit
  process of selection. However, the            of sixty-five years, and such
  re-appointment of the President               reappointment shall be made on the
  and Member shall be done, if he               basis of the recommendation of the
  satisfies the qualifications, on a            Selection Committee.
recommendation of the Selection
  Committee.       The      Selection
  Committee        while      making
  recommendation shall take into
  consideration the Confidential
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                     Page 72 of 92
Reports, the disposal of cases, the
  performance during the time of
  first appointment, a general
  reputation of a candidate and the
  complaints, if any, pending against
  the candidate.
92.Rule 8(18) of the 2019 Rules, though not comparable with Rule 10(2)

   of the 2020 Rules in its entirety, is in fact, narrower in scope qua

   reappointments, as it restricts the discretion of the Selection Committee,

   and therefore, a glaring inconsistency comes forth qua Rule 10(2) of the

   2020 Rules read with Rule 6(9) of the 2020 Rules. The inconsistency is

   also evident in other Rules, including the rules pertaining to the

   composition of the Selection Committee.
Rule 5 of the 2019 Rules
      “5. Selection of the President and Members of the District Fora.—

                             xxx          xxx        xxx


      (5) Selection of President and Members of District Fora shall be made by
      the Selection Committee constituted under sub-section (1A) of
section 10
of the Act.”

Rule 10 of the 2019 Rules
      “10. Selection of Members of the State Commission.—

                             xxx          xxx        xxx
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                    Page 73 of 92
(4) Selection of Members of the State Commission shall be made by the
      Selection Committee constituted under sub-section (1A) of
section 16
of the
      Act.”
Section 10
of the 1986 Act
      “10. Composition of the District Forum.—

                             xxx            xxx             xxx

      (1-A) Every appointment under sub-section (1) shall be made by the State
      Government on the recommendation of a selection committee consisting of
      the following, namely:—
(i)        the President        of    the    State           Chairman;
Commission

       (ii)       Secretary, Law Department of the                  Member;
                  State

       (iii)      Secretary in charge of the                        Member.
                  Department dealing with consumer
                  affairs in the State
Provided that where the President of the State Commission is, by reason of
      absence or otherwise, unable to act as Chairman of the Selection
      Committee, the State Government may refer the matter to the Chief Justice
      of the High Court for nominating a sitting Judge of that High Court to act
      as Chairman.”
Section 16
of the 1986 Act
      “16. Composition of the State Commission.—

                             xxx            xxx             xxx


      (1-A) Every appointment under sub-section (1) shall be made by the State
      Government on the recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting
      of the following members, namely:—
(i)                the President of the State                Chairman;
Commission
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                       Page 74 of 92
(ii)               Secretary of the Law                     Member;
                          Department of the State

       (iii)              Secretary incharge of the                Member.
                          Department dealing with
                          Consumer Affairs in the State
Provided that where the President of the State Commission is, by reason of
      absence or otherwise, unable to act as Chairman of the Selection
      Committee, the State Government may refer the matter to the Chief Justice
      of the High Court for nominating a sitting Judge of that High Court to act
      as Chairman.”
93.Rule 5(5) and Rule 10(4) of the 2019 Rules provide that the selection

   of the President and Members of the District Commission and Members

   of the State Commission, respectively, would be made by the Selection

   Committee constituted under
Section 10(1A)
and
Section 16(1A)
of the

   1986 Act. The said Selection Committee comprised the President of the

   State Commission as Chairman, the Secretary of the Law Department

   of the State and the Secretary in charge of the Department dealing with

   Consumer Affairs in the State as Members, and in the event of the

   President of the State Commission being unable to act as Chairman of

   the Selection Committee, the matter could be referred to the Chief

   Justice of the High Court for nominating a sitting Judge of that High

   Court to act as Chairman.
94.The 2020 Rules, on the other hand, vide Rule 6(1), provides that the

   Selection Committee would comprise the Chief Justice of the High
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                      Page 75 of 92
Court or any Judge of the High Court nominated by him as Chairperson,

   a Secretary in charge of Consumer Affairs of the State Government and

   a Nominee of the Chief Secretary of the State, as Members. It is thus

   evident that the President of the State Commission does not form part

   of the Selection Committee in the 2020 Rules. This being so, there is no

   legal basis for the applicability of Rule 8(18) of the 2019 Rules.
95.We may also point out the logical and practical difficulty in giving effect

   to the suggestion made by the High Court of Bombay. The striking

   down of Rule 6(1) of the 2020 Rules, and the consequent setting aside

   of the notifications, left the State of Maharashtra without any Selection

   Committee at all. Thus, no question of the Selection Committee

   considering reappointments under Rule 8(18) of the 2019 Rules, would

   arise at all, as the said Committee is not in existence. We further note

   that it was nobody’s case that the 2019 Rules would be applicable, and

   many of the parties had already been reappointed for a second term

   under the 2020 Rules. In such view of the matter, Impugned Order -

   I, to the extent of suggesting the applicability of Rule 8(18) of the 2019

   Rules qua reappointments, stands set aside.
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters               Page 76 of 92
96.Having set aside the said suggestion made by the High Court of

   Bombay, we now deal with the submissions made by those persons

   seeking reappointment. While some persons before us are seeking

   reappointment for a second term, others are seeking reappointment for

   a third. We have been informed that for most of them, their services had

   been terminated vide the order of the State of Maharashtra dated

   06.10.2023. Vide interim order dated 27.06.2024, we had clarified that

   in the case of Presidents/Members whose appointments were

   terminated and who had filed writ petitions before the High Court of

   Bombay, it would be open for the High Court of Bombay to decide their

   petitions in accordance with law. Vide the same interim order, we had

   also made it clear that the benefit of our interim order dated 10.11.2023,

   would be available only to those persons who were actually in service

   on the date of Impugned Order - I, provided that their second term had

   not expired.
97.In light of the same, we make it clear that all persons seeking

   reappointment can be considered for the same under the new Rules

   proposed to be notified by the Union of India. We deem it fit to mention

   that in a tenure-based post, there is no vested right to seek
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters              Page 77 of 92
reappointment, but only a limited one to seek consideration under the

   relevant provisions. Such consideration is subject to the satisfaction of

   the Selection Committee, as per the prevalent Rules. Thus, the persons

   seeking reappointment can only be considered after the new Rules are

   notified.
98.In this connection, we deem it fit to clarify that the consideration for

   reappointment under the new Rules can be made, subject to the

   satisfaction of the Selection Committee, qua the posts of President of

   the State Commission, Judicial Members of the State Commission and

   President of the District Commission, while for Non-Judicial Members

   of the State Commissions and Members of the District Commissions, it

   would depend upon the eligibility and qualification that shall be fixed

   by the Union of India under the new Rules, subject to the condition that

   a written examination followed by a viva voce must be conducted. The

   same would apply for reappointment even beyond a second term. At this

   juncture, we also deem it fit to clarify that the writ petitions pending

   before the High Court of Bombay, challenging the termination order

   dated 06.10.2023 and seeking reappointment on the ground of not being

   required to give the written examination followed by a viva voce, will
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters              Page 78 of 92
have to be decided in terms of this judgment and larger principles of

   law.
99.Accordingly, Impugned Order - I stands set aside to the extent

   indicated above. Consequently, Civil Appeal Nos. 9982/2024,

   9987/2024, 9983-9985/2024, 9990/2024 and 9965-9967/2024 stand

   partly allowed, while Civil Appeal No. 9989/2024 stands dismissed.

Qua Impugned Order - II
100. In Civil Appeal No. 9988 of 2024, challenge is to Impugned Order
- II, wherein the High Court of Bombay had directed that the

   candidature of the respondent herein/writ petitioner before the High

   Court, be considered for the post of Judicial Member of the State

   Commission, sans a written examination followed by a viva voce, as

   contemplated under the advertisement. We find no reason to interfere

   with the said order. As held by us in the earlier portions of this judgment,
Limaye - I
(supra) would have no bearing on appointments to be made

   under Rule 3(2)(1), 3(2)(a) and Rule 4(1) of the 2020 Rules i.e., posts

   of President of the State Commission, Judicial Members of the State

   Commission and President of the District Commission. The respondent

   herein had earlier served as the President of the District Commission
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                Page 79 of 92
for two terms, which makes her eligible to be considered for

   appointment under Rule 3(2)(a) of the 2020 Rules, to the post of a

   Judicial Member of the State Commission, provided she fulfils the

   criteria of being at least forty years of age. In such view of the matter,

   we are inclined to uphold Impugned Order - II. Consequently, Civil

   Appeal No. 9988 of 2024 stands dismissed.
Qua Impugned Order - III
101. In Civil Appeal No. 10029 of 2024 and Civil Appeal No. 9964 of

   2024, challenge is to Impugned Order - III, wherein the High Court

   of Telangana had set aside the appointment of the appellants to the post

   of Members of the District Commission. This was done on the ground

   that the selection process did not adhere to the directions issued in
Limaye-I
(supra), amongst others. We find that the said order cannot

   be sustained in the eye of law, as the appointment of the appellants was

   done pursuant to a written examination as well as a viva voce.
The entire

   selection process had been concluded prior to
Limaye - I
(supra).
The

   directions issued in
Limaye - I
(supra) would only apply prospectively,

   and therefore, the appointments of the appellants shall not be affected

   by the same. Accordingly, Impugned Order - III stands set aside and
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters              Page 80 of 92
Civil Appeal No. 10029 of 2024 and Civil Appeal No. 9964 of 2024 are

   allowed. Consequently, the appellants are directed to be reinstated in

   service, if not currently serving, and be allowed to complete their tenure

   in entirety.
DIRECTIONS
102. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we deem it fit to pass the

   following directions, in exercise of the powers conferred under
Article

   142
of the Constitution:-
1) The Union of India is directed to file an affidavit on the feasibility

       of a permanent adjudicatory forum for consumer disputes, either in

       the form of a Consumer Tribunal or a Consumer Court, within a

       period of 3 months from today, on the touchstone of the

       constitutional mandate. Such a forum shall consist of permanent

       members, including both staff and the Presiding officers. The Union

       of India may also consider facilitating sitting Judges to head the fora.
The strength may be increased adequately.
2) In view of the submission made on behalf of the Union of India, we

       direct the Union of India to notify the new Rules within a period of
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                Page 81 of 92
4 months from the date of this Judgment, strictly adhering to the

       following:
a. The earlier view of this Court in
Rojer Mathew
(supra),

               MBA - III (supra) and MBA - IV (supra), with respect to the

               tenure of office being five years, being both logical and

               necessary, must be incorporated in the new Rules to be

               notified.
b. The composition of the Selection Committee shall be such

               that the members from the Judiciary must constitute the

               majority. To achieve the same, the Selection Committee shall

               comprise two members from the Judiciary, one of whom shall

               be the Chairperson, and the third member from the Executive,

               all of whom shall have voting rights. However, this shall not

               preclude the concerned Secretary from being an ex-officio

               Member of the Selection Committee, without voting rights.

               The proposal made by the Union of India qua Rule 6(1) of the

               2020 Rules, may be accordingly modified.
c. No written examination, followed by a viva voce, shall be

               required for appointment and reappointment to the posts of
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters              Page 82 of 92
President of the State Commission, Judicial Members of the

               State Commission and President of the District Commission.

           d. A written examination followed by a viva voce shall be

               required only for appointment and reappointment to the posts

               of Non-Judicial Members of the State Commission and

               Members of the District Commission.
e. The written examination for appointments to the State and

               District Commissions shall be conducted in consultation with

               the respective State Service Commissions.
f. The proposal made by the Union of India qua Rule 4(1) of the

               2020 Rules, as recorded by us in Para 72 of this Judgement,

               that the qualification for appointment to the post of President

               of the District Commission, shall be restricted to either a

               serving or a retired District Judge, stands accepted.
3) Upon notification of the new Rules by the Union of India, all the

       States are directed to complete the process of recruitment under the

       same, within a period of 4 months from the date of the notification

       of the said Rules.
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                Page 83 of 92
4) As regards the status of appointment to the posts of Presidents and

       Members of the State and District Commissions, we are pleased to

       issue the following directions:
SUMMARY OF THE RELIEFS

           Category of Persons                               Relief
1. Persons           appointed         as They shall be allowed to complete

      Members         of     the     State their tenure in entirety. In the event

      Commission and Presidents of their tenure ending before the

      and Members of the District completion                 of   the   recruitment

      Commission in the State of process under the new Rules to be

      Maharashtra, vide order dated notified, their appointment shall be
05.10.2023 pursuant to the allowed                to   continue    until     the

      written examination and viva completion of the said recruitment

      voce.                                  process.
2. Persons                        seeking They     can      be   considered       for

      reappointment in the State of reappointment in the State and

      Maharashtra,         after     their District Commissions, based on the

                                             new Rules to be notified, subject to
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                       Page 84 of 92
services had been terminated the condition that persons seeking

      vide order dated 06.10.2023.           reappointment to the posts of

                                             President and Judicial Members of

                                             the State Commission and President

                                             of the District Commission, shall not

                                             be required to undergo a written

                                             examination followed by a viva

                                             voce, while Non- Judicial Members

                                             of     the    State    and      District

                                             Commissions, shall be required to

                                             undergo a written examination

                                             followed by a viva voce.
The writ petitions pending before

                                             the    High    Court    of   Bombay

                                             challenging the said termination

                                             order of the State of Maharashtra

                                             dated 06.10.2023, will have to be

                                             decided in terms of this judgment

                                             and larger principles of law.
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                     Page 85 of 92
3. Presidents and Members of They shall be allowed to complete

      the     State      and      District their tenure in entirety.
In the event

      Commissions who have been of their tenure ending before the

      appointed and serving prior to completion                of   the   recruitment
Limaye - I
(supra).                   process under the new Rules to be

                                            notified, their appointment shall be

                                            allowed       to   continue    until     the

                                            completion of the said recruitment

                                            process.
4. Presidents of the State and (a) Those who are appointed and

      District Commissions, and the                 serving shall be allowed to

      Judicial Members of the State                 complete their tenure in entirety.
Commission, in other States,                  In the event of their tenure

      with/without having given the                 ending before the completion of

      written examination followed                  the recruitment process under the

      by a viva voce.                               new Rules to be notified, their

                                                    appointment shall be allowed to
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                         Page 86 of 92
continue until the completion of

                                                    the said recruitment process.
(b) Those who have been selected,

                                                    but not appointed, on account of

                                                    the concerned States having

                                                    stayed the appointment process

                                                    during the pendency of these

                                                    appeals, shall be appointed to the

                                                    respective post, and shall be

                                                    allowed to continue in office till

                                                    the entirety of their tenure.
5. Persons who are selected to (a) If already appointed and serving:
the posts of Non-Judicial                     (i) In case the selection process

      Members         of     the     State          had been completed prior to the

      Commission and Members of                     decision of this Court in
Limaye

      the     District     Commission,              - I
(supra), such persons shall be

      without having undergone a                    entitled to complete their tenure

                                                    in entirety. In the event of their
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                          Page 87 of 92
written examination followed                  tenure    ending       before     the

      by a viva voce.                               completion of the recruitment

                                                    process under the new Rules to

                                                    be notified, their appointment

                                                    shall be allowed to continue

                                                    until the completion of the said

                                                    recruitment process.
(ii) In case the selection process

                                                    has been completed post the

                                                    decision of this Court in Limaye
- I (supra), such persons shall be

                                                    entitled to continue in their

                                                    respective     posts     till     the

                                                    completion of the recruitment

                                                    process under the new Rules to

                                                    be notified.
(b) If selected but not appointed,

                                                    such persons shall not be entitled

                                                    to be appointed.
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                          Page 88 of 92
6. Non-Judicial Members of the (a) If already appointed and serving,

      State Commission and the they shall be allowed to continue in

      Members        of    the    District service for the entirety of their

      Commission, who have given tenure. In the event of their tenure

      the written examination and ending before the completion of the

      viva voce.                             recruitment process under the new

                                             rules   to    be     notified,       their

                                             appointment shall be allowed to

                                             continue until the completion of the

                                             said recruitment process.
(b) If selected, but not appointed, on

                                             account of the State having stayed

                                             the appointment process during the

                                             pendency of these appeals, such

                                             persons shall be appointed to the

                                             respective posts, and shall be

                                             allowed to continue in office for the

                                             entirety of their tenure.
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                        Page 89 of 92
7. Persons                       seeking They        can    be     considered     for

      reappointment in other States reappointment in the State and

      after termination of their District Commissions, based on the

      services.                              new Rules to be notified, subject to

                                             the condition that persons seeking

                                             reappointment to the posts of

                                             President and Judicial Members of

                                             the State Commission and President

                                             of the District Commission, shall not

                                             be required to undergo a written

                                             examination followed by a viva

                                             voce, while Non- Judicial Members

                                             of     the     State    and     District

                                             Commissions, shall be required to

                                             undergo a written examination

                                             followed by a viva voce.
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters                       Page 90 of 92
We make it clear that for all those appointments which have been

   allowed to continue vide this Judgment, the tenure shall be a period of 4

   years. Such persons shall not be entitled to claim the benefit of this

   Judgment qua a five-year tenure, subject to the directions issued

   hereinabove. We also make it clear that this Judgment shall apply

   prospectively, except to the extent indicated in the directions

   hereinabove.
103.   Review Petition (Civil) No. 1313/2024 in Civil Appeal No.

   831/2023, Review Petition (Civil) 1315/2024 in Civil Appeal No.

   833/2023 and Review Petition (Civil) 1314/2024 in Civil Appeal No.

   832/2023 are allowed in the aforesaid terms. Civil Appeal No.

   10029/2024 and Civil Appeal No. 9964/2024 are allowed. Civil Appeal

   No. 9982/2024, Civil Appeal No. 9987/2024, Civil Appeal Nos. 9983-

   9985/2024, Civil Appeal No. 9990/2024 and Civil Appeal Nos. 9965-

   9967/2024 are partly allowed, and Civil Appeal No. 9988/2024 and Civil

   Appeal No. 9989/2024 stand dismissed. The intervention applications,

   not already disposed of by us, stand disposed of in the aforesaid terms.
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters              Page 91 of 92
104.   Pending applications, if any, shall also stand disposed of.
...………………………. J.
(ABHAY S. OKA)



                                                    …………………………. J.
(M. M. SUNDRESH)

NEW DELHI;
MAY 21, 2025
Civil Appeal No. 9982 of 2024 & Connected Matters               Page 92 of 92