[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
In Re : T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad vs Union Of India on 21 May, 2025
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
B.R. Gavai
2025 INSC 748                                                              REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       INHERENT/ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                            IN RE:     PERFORMANCE APPRAISAL REPORTS OF THE
                                       OFFICERS OF THE INDIAN FOREST SERVICE

                                             I.A. NO.172422 OF 2024
                                          [Applications for Impleadment]
                                                       WITH
                                              I.A. NO.172425 OF 2024
                                            [Applications for Direction]
                                                       WITH
                                            I.A. NO. 172427 OF 2024
                                 [Application for Exemption from filing Official
                                                   Translation]
                                                       WITH
                                            I.A. NO. 172429 OF 2024
                               [Application for appearing as Petitioner-in-Person]
                                                       WITH
                                              I.A. NO. 179359 OF 2024
                                     [Application for Ex-Party and Interim Stay]
                                                       WITH
                                             I.A. NO. 290215 OF 2024
                                           [Application for Impleadment]
                                                       WITH
                                              I.A. NO. 290217 OF 2024
                                             [Application for Direction]
                                                       WITH
                                             I.A. NO. 105862 OF 2025
                                          [Applications for Impleadment]
                                                       WITH
   Signature Not Verified

   Digitally signed by
   NARENDRA PRASAD


                                              I.A. NO. 105864 OF 2025
   Date: 2025.05.21
   12:30:22 IST
   Reason:


                                             [Application for Direction]



                                                          1
                                                WITH
                            I.A. NO. 105865 OF 2025
                 [Application for Exemption from filing Official
                                   Translation]
                                                  IN
                       WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 202 OF 1995

IN RE: T.N. GODAVARMAN THIRUMULPAD
                                  …PETITIONERS
                                             VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS                                             …RESPONDENTS
IN THE MATTER OF:
GAURAV KUMAR BANSAL                                                         …APPLICANT

UNNAMATLA PRAKASHAM                                                         …APPLICANT

INDIAN FOREST SERVICE ASSOCIATION
(STATE UNIT)                                                                …APPLICANT

                                               INDEX


I.         INTRODUCTION ...................................................................... 3
II. SUBMISSIONS ......................................................................... 4
III.         DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS ................................................. 7
(i)     Statutory Provisions ............................................................ 7
(ii)        Internal Communications ............................................... 10
(iii)       Legal Precedents ............................................................. 17
(
a)   State of Haryana v. P.C. Wadhwa, IPS, Inspector General
           of Police and Another
........................................................... 17
(
b)     Santosh Bharti v. State of Madhya Pradesh
................ 21
(iv) Order of this Court in I.A. No.776 of 2002 in the present
     proceedings ............................................................................. 26
(v)  Recent judgment of this Court in
State of Assam and
     Others v. Binod Kumar and Others
.......................................... 30
(vi)        Impugned G.O. dated 29th June 2024.............................. 32
IV.          DIRECTIONS ...................................................................... 37
2
JUDGMENT


B.R. GAVAI, CJI

I.   INTRODUCTION
1.   The present batch of applications pertains to an issue as

to whether the officers in the Indian Administrative Service

(hereinafter referred to as, “IAS”) would be a “reporting

authority”, “reviewing authority” and “accepting authority” of

the officers working in the Indian Forest Service (hereinafter

referred to as, “IFS”).
2.   The    present       applications   basically   challenge   the

Government Order dated 29th June 2024 (hereinafter referred

to as the, “said G.O.”) notified by the Government of Madhya

Pradesh with regard to writing Performance Appraisal Report

(hereinafter referred to as, “PAR”) of the officers belonging to

the IFS. The relevant part of the said G.O. reads thus:
“2. Before evaluating the performance of the
     Divisional Forest Officer (Territorial), the concerned
     Conservator or Chief Conservator of Forest
     (Reporting Authorities) will seek a note from the
     District Collector. Similarly and before evaluating the
     performance of the Conservator of Forests and Chief
     Forest Conservator (Territorial), the Additional
     Principal Chief Forest Conservator (Development) will
     seek a note from the Divisional Commissioner and
3
these notes shall be considered during the time of
      Performance Appraisal Report (PAR).
3. Comments by Collector and Divisional
      Commissioner on performance of Indian Forest
      Service officers in field positions on areas such as
      MANREGAS, Joint Forest Management, Forest
      Rights Act, land acquisition for development projects,
      mining, district planning committee decisions,
      livelihood     and    skill   development,    district
      archeological and tourism council, implementation
      initiatives related to any other development will be
      sent on a separate sheet.”
3.    The applicants have a grievance with regards to the

“reporting authority”, “reviewing authority” and “accepting

authority” as prescribed in the said G.O., insofar as certain

posts in the IFS are concerned. The applicants also have a

grievance with regard to the aforementioned paragraphs 2 and

3 of the said G.O.

II.   SUBMISSIONS
4.    We have heard Shri K. Parameshwar, learned amicus

curiae and Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General

appearing on behalf of the State of Madhya Pradesh.
5.    Shri Parameshwar, learned amicus curiae submits that

the said G.O issued by the Government of Madhya Pradesh is

directly in violation of the judgments delivered by this Court in

the cases of
State of Haryana v. P.C. Wadhwa, IPS,
4
Inspector General of Police and Another1
,
Santosh Bharti

v. State of Madhya Pradesh2
, and the order passed by this

Court in the present proceedings dated 19th April 2004. The

learned amicus curiae therefore submits that the said G.O. is

liable to be quashed and set aside.
6.    Per contra, Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General

appearing on behalf of the State of Madhya Pradesh submits

that as per the Order of Precedence of the Government of

Madhya Pradesh dated 23rd December 2011, the Additional

Chief Secretary (hereinafter referred to as, “ACS”) and the

Principal Secretary (hereinafter referred to as, “PS”) hold ranks

superior to that of the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests

(hereinafter referred to as, “PCCF”). He further submits that in

accordance with the provisions as contained in clauses (2) and

(3) of
Article 166
of the Constitution of India, the Governor of

Madhya Pradesh has framed the Madhya Pradesh Government

Business (Allocation) Rules. He submits that under the said

Rules, each Secretariat Department is required to have a

Secretary to the Government (ACS/PS). It is submitted that for




1 (1987) 2 SCC 602
2 (2007) 15 SCC 273
5
the Forest Department, ACS/PS is the official administrative

head of the IFS.
7.   The learned Solicitor General submits that the Forest

Officers   and   particularly     the   Divisional   Forest    Officer

(hereinafter referred to as, “DFO”) who is the Head of the

Division, discharges diverse responsibilities. It is submitted

that the DFO is also responsible for various duties like

conservation     of   forests,   implementation      of   government

schemes, enforcement of forest laws, forest fire management,

legal matters, financial administration, and interdepartmental

coordination, amongst others. He submits that therefore, it is

necessary that the evaluation of the performance of DFOs

should be accepted by the Secretary of the Forest Department

who is normally an ACS/PS. He submits that similarly even

insofar as the PAR of the Chief Conservators of Forests

(hereinafter referred to as, “CCFs”) is concerned, the

“accepting authority” should be only ACS or PS. He further

submits that assigning PCCF or the Head of Forests as

“reviewing   authority”     or   “accepting   authority”      for   the

Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forest (hereinafter

referred to as, “APCCF”) working in vertical roles at the
6
headquarters is not consistent with the revised appraisal

rules. He submits that the performance must be evaluated by

those who have continuing engagement with the officer’s work.
8.         Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General fairly

submits that ignoring the role of the ACS/PS in the PAR

channel of IFS officers would not only be contrary to legislative

intent but also inconsistent with principles of governance,

accountability and equity in public administration that

demand accountability through real supervision. He fairly

submits that in order to alleviate the fear in the minds of the

IFS officers, the State of Madhya Pradesh has agreed that it

will not insist on marking by the ACS/PS, instead, only

comments of the reviewing officers would be called for.
III.       DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
     (i)    Statutory Provisions
9.         For examining the controversy, it will be relevant to refer

to sub-section (1) of
Section 3
of the All-India Services Act,

1951 (hereinafter referred to as, “AIS Act”), which reads thus:
“3. Regulation of recruitment and conditions of
           service.—(1) The Central Government may, after
           consultation with the Governments of the States
           concerned including the State of Jammu and
           Kashmir and by notification in the Official Gazette,
           make rules for the regulation of recruitment, and the
7
conditions of service of persons appointed, to an all-
India Service.”
10. In exercise of powers conferred by sub-section (1) of

Section 3 of the AIS Act, the Central Government, after

consultation with the Governments of the States concerned,

has made the All-India Services (Confidential Rolls) Rules,

1970 (hereinafter referred to as, “1970 Rules”).
11. Rule 2 of the 1970 Rules provides various definitions. It

will be relevant to refer to the following definitions provided in

the 1970 Rules:
“2. Definitions.—In these rules, unless the context
     otherwise requires:—
(a) ‘accepting authority’ means the authority who
     was, during the period for which the confidential
     report is written, immediately superior to the
     reviewing authority and such other authority as may
     be specifically empowered in this behalf by the
     Government”;
………..
(e) ‘reporting authority’ means the authority who
     was, during the period for which the confidential
     report is written, immediately superior to the
     member of the Service and such other authority as
     may be specifically empowered in this behalf by the
     Government;
(f) ‘reviewing authority’ means the authority who
     was, during the period for which the confidential
     report is written, immediately superior to the
     reporting authority and such other authority as may
     be specifically empowered in this behalf by the
     Government;”
8
12. In exercise of powers conferred by sub-section (1) of

Section 3 of the AIS Act, the Central Government, after

consultation with the Governments of the States concerned,

by a notification dated 8th December 1987, has made the All-

India Services (Confidential Rolls) Second Amendment Rules,

1970, by which the definitions of “accepting authority”,

“reporting authority” and “reviewing authority” were amended,

which read thus:
“(a) ‘accepting authority’ means such authority or
     authorities supervising the performance of the
     reviewing authority as may be specifically empowered
     in this behalf by the Government”;
………..
(e) ‘reporting authority’ means such authority or
     authorities supervising the performance of the
     member of the Service reported upon as may be
     specifically empowered in this behalf by the
     Government;
(f) ‘reviewing authority’ means authority or
     authorities supervising the performance of the
     reporting authority as may be specifically empowered
     in this behalf by the Government;”
13. In exercise of powers conferred by sub-section (1) of

Section 3 of the AIS Act, the Central Government, after

consultation with the Governments of the States concerned,

made the All-India Services (Performance Appraisal Report)
9
Rules, 2007 (hereinafter referred to as, “2007 Rules”). The

definitions of “accepting authority”, “reporting authority” and

“reviewing authority” as provided in the 2007 Rules, read thus:
“(a) ‘accepting authority’ means the authority which
     supervises the performance of the reviewing
     authority as may be specifically empowered in this
     behalf by the Government”;
………..
(j) ‘reporting authority’ means such authority or
     authorities supervising the performance of the
     member of the Service reported upon as may be
     specifically empowered in this behalf by the
     Government;
(k) ‘reviewing authority’ means such authority or
     authorities supervising the performance of the
     reporting authority as may be specifically empowered
     in this behalf by the Government;”
(ii) Internal Communications
14. For deciding the issue in question, it will also be

necessary to refer to certain clarifications and Office

Memorandum (hereinafter referred to as, “O.M.”) issued by the

Union of India.
15. Clause 4 of the clarification dated 28th December 1990

reads thus:
“4. Reporting Authority should be in a higher
     grade of pay than the officers reported upon and
     the Reviewing Authority should be in a higher
     grade than the Reporting Authority.- I am directed
10
to refer to Rule 2(e) of the AIS (CR) Rules, 1970,
     wherein the reporting authority has been defined as
     the authority or authorities supervising the
     performance of the member of the Service reported
     upon as may be specifically empowered in this behalf
     by the Government.
2. It appears that some States have kept in view the
     seniority and pay scale of the reporting officer vis-à-
vis the Member of the Service reported upon while
     assigning reporting authorities whereas others have
     not. Instances have come to the notice of this
     Department wherein ACRs of the members of All
     India Service have been initiated by officers belonging
     to the same batch or drawing pay in the same scale
     as that of the officer reported upon.
3. It is suggested to the State Govts. that while
     assigning reporting/reviewing authorities efforts may
     be made to ensure that a member of the Service or
     any other officer does not initiate the C.R. of another
     member of the Service in the same grade of pay. It is
     also desirable that the reviewing authority is in a
     higher grade than the reporting authority within the
     limits of administrative convenience.”
16. It can thus be seen that seniority and pay-scales of the

reporting officer vis-à-vis the Member of the Service reported

upon is required to be taken into consideration while assigning

reporting authorities. It further states that various instances

have come to notice wherein Annual Confidential Reports

(hereinafter referred to as, “ACRs”) of the Members of All India

Service have been initiated by officers belonging to the same

batch or drawing pay in the same scale as that of the officer

reported upon. It has therefore been suggested to the State
11
Governments     that   while   assigning    reporting/reviewing

authorities, efforts should be made to ensure that a Member

of the Service or any other officer does not initiate the

Confidential Report (hereinafter referred to as, “C.R.”) of

another Member of the Service in the same grade or pay. It

further provides that it is desirable that the reviewing

authority is in a higher grade than the reporting authority

within the limits of administrative convenience.
17. It will also be relevant to refer to a letter of the Ministry

of Environment & Forest (hereinafter referred to as, “MoEF”)

dated 8th November 2001, which reads thus:
“(V) WRITING OF REPORTS OF MEMBERS OF THE
     INDIAN FOREST SERVICE
1. Writing of Reports of members of the Indian
     Forest Service.- Attention of the State Government
     is invited to this Ministry’s letter No. 14/20/2000-SU
     dated 28th September, 2000 vide which a copy of
     order dated 22/09/2000 passed by the Hon’ble
     Supreme Court in I.A. No. 424 (Civil Writ Petition No.
     202 of 1995) : T.N. Godavarman Thirumulkpad had
     been forwarded for implementation of various
     directions given by the Apex Court.
2. One of the directions of the Apex Court was in
     regard to writing of Annual Confidential report of the
     members of the Indian Forest Service. The Hon’ble
     Supreme Court had directed that upto the officers of
     the rank of Addl. Principal Chief Conservator of
     Forests the reporting authority has to be the
     immediately superior officer within the Forest
     Department. It is only in the case of Principal Chief
12
Conservator of Forest that the reporting authority
      would be a person other than the one belonging to
      the Service because there is no one superior to him
      within the EFS. Therefore, in his case the reporting
      authority would be a person to whom he reports and
      who is superior to him in hierarchy.
3. Keeping in view the directions given by the Hon’ble
      Supreme Court, all the State Governments are
      advised to ensure that for writing the Annual
      Confidential Reports of the IFS officers upto the rank
      of Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests,
      the reporting authority should be their immediate
      superior authorities in the Forest Department. As
      regards reviewing/reporting authority in relation to
      officers of the rank of Addl. Principal Chief
      Conservator of Forests and Principal Chief
      Conservator of Forests, the concerned authority
      would person who is familiar with their work and that
      will be the person to whom addl. PCCF/PCCF reports
      and who is superior to them in rank and hierarchy.
4. The State Government may, if necessary direct the
      Collectors and Commissioners to record their
      comments on a separate sheet about the
      performance of the IFS officers in relation to
      implementation of developmental work (including 20-
point programme)       funded by        the District
      Administration for being considered by the superior
      departmental officers at the time of writing of ACRs.
5. The State Governments are requested to ensure
      that the directions given by the Hon’ble Supreme
      Court in the matter of writing of ACRs, as explained
      above, are strictly followed.”
18. It can thus be seen that the said letter specifically noted

the order passed by this Court in the present proceedings

titled dated 22nd September 20003, wherein this Court had

3 (2007) 15 SCC 273
13
directed that up to the rank of APCCF, the “reporting

authority” had to be an immediate superior officer within the

Forest Department. It further noted that this Court had also

directed that it was only in the case of PCCF that the “reporting

authority” would be a person other than the one belonging to

the Forest Service because there was no one superior to

him/her within the IFS. It noted that this Court further

directed that
in that case
, the “reporting authority” would be a

person to whom he reported and who was superior to him in

hierarchy.
19. The aforesaid communication of the MoEF directed all

the State Governments to ensure that for writing the ACRs of

the IFS officers up to the rank of APCCF, the “reporting

authority” should be their immediate superior authorities in

the Forest Department. It further directed that regarding the

reviewing/reporting authority in relation to officers of the rank

of APCCF and PCCF, the concerned authority would be a

person who was familiar with their work and that would be the

person to whom APCCF/PCCF reported and who was superior

to them in rank and hierarchy. It further directed that the

State Governments may, if necessary, direct the Collectors and
14
Commissioners to record their comments on a separate sheet

about the performance of the IFS officers in relation to the

implementation of developmental work (including 20 point

programme) funded by the District Administration for being

considered by the superior departmental officers at the time of

writing of ACRs.
20. It will be relevant to refer to the O.M. dated 2nd September

2004 notified by the Department of Personnel and Training

(hereinafter referred to as, “DoPT”), which reads thus:
“2. Writing of ACRs of All India Services Officers
     – instructions regarding.- The Hon’ble Supreme
     Court in I.A. No.424 in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 202 of
     1995 (
T.N. Godavarman Thirumulkpad Vs. Union of
     India & Others
) had considered the issue of the
     competent authority to write the confidential report
     of Forest Department Officers (implementation of the
     judgement of the Hon’ble Supreme Court). The
     Ministry of Environment & Forests issued
     instructions vide letter No. 22019/1/2001-IFS-I
     dated 8th November, 2001 (Copy enclosed).
     2.1 This Department filed I.A.No. 477/2003 for
     modification or clarification of the above order of the
     Hon’ble Supreme Court. The Hon’ble Supreme Court
     directed that the matter be heard by the Central
     Empowered Committee (CEC), constituted by the
     Hon’ble Supreme Court of India. The CEC has agreed
     with the views of Department of Personnel & Training
     (DOP&T) that the Hon’ble Court’s order dated
     22.09.2000 was issued in a particular context and
     should not be generalized to cover other Services. It
     has also agreed with the view of the DOP&T that if
     the Forest Officer is working in the Secretariat or
15
other Departments where his immediate supervising
officer is a non-forest officer, his C.R should be
written by such an officer [para 8(x)].
2.2 The relevant recommendation of the CEC is
reproduced below:-
“In the light of the above, the Committee is
     of the considered view that this Hon’ble
     Court’s order dated 22.09.2000 requires
     no modification. The Hon’ble Court’s order
     has set right the anomaly that existed in
     the State of Madhya Pradesh regarding
     CRs of the Forest Officers. The Hon’ble
     Court’s order is not inconsistent with the
     amended CR Rules. It may be clarified that
     the order of 22.09.2000 of this Hon’ble
     Court is applicable only for reporting,
     reviewing or accepting the confidential
     reports of the Forest Officers working
     within the Forest Department and is not
     applicable for Forest Officers working
     outside the Department or for other
     Services”.(para 10).
2.3 In pursuance of the recommendations of CEC,
the Hon’ble Supreme Court has in its order of 26th
April, 2004 in I.A.No. 1035, (Report of the Central
Empowered Committee in I.A. No. 776) in WP (Civil)
No. 202 of 1995 , agreed with the same and has
dismissed I.A.No. 424 and disposed of I.A.No. 1035.
A copy of the Recommendation of the CEC can be
made available on request.
2.4 It is therefore, clarified that the order passed by
Hon’ble Supreme Court on 22.9.2000 is applicable to
Forest Officers working within the Forest Department
and is not applicable to Forest Officers working
outside the Department. It is also clarified that if the
Forest Officer is working in the Secretariat or other
Department where his immediate superior officer is a
non-Forest officer, his CR should be written by that
superior officer. This order of the Hon’ble Apex Court
is also not applicable to other Services viz., the Indian
Administrative Service and the Indian Police Service.”
16
21. It can thus be seen that the DoPT had clarified that the

order passed by this Court in the present proceedings on 22nd
September 2000 (Santosh Bharti
case) was applicable to

Forest Officers working within the Forest Department and was

not applicable to Forest Officers working outside the

Department. It further clarified that if the Forest Officer was

working in the Secretariat or other Department where his

immediate superior officer was a non-Forest Officer, his CR

should be written by that officer superior to him. It further

provided that the order of this Court was not applicable to

other Services viz., IAS and Indian Police Service (hereinafter

referred to as, “IPS”).
(iii) Legal Precedents
(
a) State    of    Haryana     v.    P.C.     Wadhwa,    IPS,
           Inspector General of Police and Another
22. It will also be relevant to refer to some judgments and

orders of this Court.
23. An     issue   with   regard     to    whether    the   provision

empowering the Home Secretary as the reporting authority for

the purpose of writing a Confidential Report (hereinafter

referred to as “CR”) in respect of the Inspector General of Police
17
arose for consideration before this Court in the case of
P.C.

Wadhwa, IPS, Inspector General of Police
(supra). This

Court had an occasion to consider clauses ‘e’, ‘f’ and ‘a’ of Rule

2 of the 1970 Rules. It will be relevant to refer to paragraphs 8

and 11 of
the said judgment
, which read thus:
“8. Now the question is whether the State
     Government can specifically empower any authority
     to be the reporting authority of the Inspector General
     of Police under the second part of clause (e). Apart
     from any legal provision, it is just and proper that
     a reporting authority must be a person to whom
     the member of the Service is answerable for his
     performances. In other words, the reporting
     authority should be a person higher in rank than
     the member of the Service. Indeed, that is
     apparent from the first part of clause (e). It is true
     that under the second part of clause (e), there is
     no indication as to the status and position of the
     authority who may be specifically empowered by
     the Government as the reporting authority, but
     from the point of view of propriety and
     reasonableness and having regard to the
     intention behind the rule which is manifest, such
     an authority must be one superior in rank to the
     member of the Service concerned. If that be not
     so, there will be an apparent conflict between the
     first part and second part of clause (e). We are,
     therefore, of the view that the State Government
     can specifically empower only such authority as
     the reporting authority as is superior in rank to
     the Inspector General of Police.
………………
11. In view of
Sections 3
and
4
of the Police Act read
     with Rule 1.2 of the Punjab Police Rules, the
     Inspector General of Police, Haryana, is the head of
     the Police Department. The immediate authority
18
superior to the Inspector General of Police is the
     Minister-in-Charge of the Police Department. The
     only authority who could be specifically empowered
     as the reporting authority in regard to the Inspector
     General of Police under clause (e) of Rule 2 of the
     Rules is the Minister-in-Charge and the Chief
     Minister, being superior to the Minister-in-Charge,
     may be the reviewing authority under clause (f) of
     Rule 2. In acting as the reporting authority the
     Minister-in-Charge may be assisted by the Home
     Secretary, but the confidential report relating to the
     performances of the Inspector General of Police has
     to be written by the Minister-in-Charge. The
     Minister-in-Charge of the Police Department is
     supposed to be aware of the performances of the
     Inspector General of Police. As the Chief Minister is
     the reviewing authority, he will also act as the
     accepting authority on the basis of the principle
     as laid down under Rule 6-B of the Rules
     providing that where the accepting authority
     writes or reviews the confidential report of any
     member of the Service, it shall not be further
     necessary to review or accept any such report. In
     other words, the Chief Minister will act both as
     the reviewing authority and the accepting
     authority.
[Emphasis supplied]
24. It can thus be seen that this Court observed that apart

from any legal provision, it was just and proper that the

“reporting authority” must be a person to whom the member

of the Service was answerable for his performance. This Court

observed that the “reporting authority” should be a person

higher in rank than the member of the Service. This Court held

that from the point of view of propriety and reasonableness
19
and in light of the manifest intention underlying the rule, the

“reporting authority” must be an individual holding a rank

superior to that of the Service member concerned. This Court

particularly observed that the State Government could

empower only such authority as the “reporting authority”

which was superior in rank to the Inspector General of Police

(hereinafter referred to as, “IGP”). This Court further observed

that in view of
Sections 3
and
4
of the Police Act, 1861 read

with Rule 1.2 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934, the IGP,

Haryana, was the head of the Police Department. It observed

that the immediate authority superior to IGP was the Minister-

in-Charge of the Police Department. It observed that the only

authority who could be specifically empowered as the

“reporting authority” in regard to the IGP under clause (e) of

Rule 2 of the said Rules was the Minister-in-Charge and the

Chief Minister, being superior to the Minister-in-Charge, may

be the “reviewing authority” under clause (f) of Rule 2 of the

said Rules. It further observed that in acting as the “reporting

authority” the Minister-in-Charge may be assisted by the

Home Secretary, but the confidential report relating to the

performance of the IGP has to be written by the Minister-in-
20
Charge. It further observed that the Chief Minister would act

as the “reviewing authority” as well as the “accepting

authority” on the basis of the principle as laid down under

Rule 6-B of the said Rules providing that where the “accepting

authority” writes or reviews the C.Rs. of any member of the

Service, it shall not be further necessary to review or accept

any such report.
(
b) Santosh Bharti v. State of Madhya Pradesh
25. It will further be relevant to note that an application being

I.A. No.424 of 1998 came to be filed before this Court in the

present proceedings with regard to the question as to who is

the authority competent to write the C.R. with regard to an

officer belonging to the Forest Department. It will be relevant

to refer to the following observations of this Court in the

aforementioned I.A. vide order dated 22nd
September 2000

(Santosh Bharti
case):
“17. The question which arises for consideration is
     as to who is the authority competent to write a
     confidential report with regard to an officer belonging
     to the Forest Department.
18. The Indian Forest Service is one of the All-India
     Services. The officers selected on the basis of an all-
India competitive examination, like the officers
     belonging to the Indian Administrative Service, are
21
then deployed in different States. That becomes the
cadre for them.
19. In the State of Madhya Pradesh, persons
belonging to the Indian Forest Service are also
deployed, just as they are deployed to other States.
In the Forest Department in the State, the lowest
rung for a direct recruit belonging to the Indian
Forest Service is the post of Assistant Conservator of
Forests. Below the Assistant Conservator of Forests
are three levels starting with that of a Guard,
Forester and Range Forest Officer. These three lowest
rungs are manned by officers belonging to the State
Forest Service. Recruitment to the post of Assistant
Conservator of Forests is made partly by promotion
from an officer belonging to the State Forest
Department (being a Range Forest Officer) and partly,
as already noticed, by direct recruitment to the
Indian Forest Service.
20. The hierarchy in the Indian Forest Service is that
above the Assistant Conservator of Forests is the
Divisional Forest Officer, thereafter on promotion a
person becomes Conservator of Forests, then Chief
Conservator of Forests followed by Additional
Principal Chief Conservator of Forests and at the
pinnacle of the pyramid is the Principal Chief
Conservator of Forests.
21. The practice which has been adopted so far in the
State of Madhya Pradesh and possibly in some other
States also, is that the confidential reports of the
officers belonging to the Forest Department holding
any of the posts between that of a Guard and the
Principal Chief Conservator of Forests is not written
by the superiors within the same service but is
written by the officers belonging to the office of the
District Collector and superior officers on the civil
side.
22. For writing of the confidential reports, the
Central Government has, under
Section 3
of the All
India Services Act, 1951, framed All India Services
(Confidential Rolls) Rules, 1970. According to Rule
2(e), the “reporting authority” is defined as follows:
22
“2. (e) ‘reporting authority’ means the
     authority who was, during the period for
     which the confidential report is written,
     immediately superior to the member of the
     service and such other authority as may
     be specifically empowered in this behalf by
     the Government;”
23. The “reviewing authority” is defined in Rule 2(f)
as follows:
“2. (f) ‘reviewing authority’ means the
     authority who was, during the period for
     which the confidential report is written,
     immediately superior to the reporting
     authority and such other authority as may
     be specifically empowered in this behalf by
     the Government;”
24. It seems that Rule 2(e) had been interpreted by
the State to mean that the confidential report of an
officer could be written by a person who is superior
to him and also by such other officer who may be
specified in this behalf. In view of the latter portion
of the said Rule 2(e), the State Government has
authorised officers of service other than of the Forest
Department to write the confidential reports. In this
manner, in effect, the administrative control of
officers belonging to the Forest Department is not
within the Department itself.
25. The aforesaid Rule 2(e) came up for consideration
before this Court in
State of Haryana v. P.C.
Wadhwa
[(1987) 2 SCC 602 : (1987) 3 ATC 690 :
(1987) 2 SCR 1030] . While interpreting the said Rule
2(e), this Court at p. 1035 observed as follows: (SCC
pp. 606-07, para 5)
     “5. In this connection, it may be pointed
     out that it is not disputed that the
     conjunction ‘and’ occurring in clauses (e),
(f) and (a) should be read as ‘or’. Under
     clause (e), the ‘reporting authority’ may be
     either immediately superior to the member
     of the service or such other authority as
23
may be specifically empowered in this
     behalf by the Government. The expression
     ‘immediately superior’ obviously indicates
     that the reporting authority should be the
     immediate superior officer in the same
     service to which the member of the service
     belongs. The position is the same as in the
     cases of ‘reviewing authority’ and
     ‘accepting authority’. So, under the first
     part of clause (e), the reporting authority
     of the respondent could be a person who
     is immediately superior to him in the
     police service.”
26. It appears to us, and which is logical, that up
to the officer of the rank of Additional Principal
Chief Conservator of Forests the reporting
authority has to be the immediately superior
officer within the Forest Department. For
example, for the Assistant Conservator of Forests,
the reporting authority can only be the Divisional
Forest Officer and for him the reporting authority
would be the Conservator of Forests for whom the
reporting authority has to be the Chief
Conservator of Forests and his reporting
authority would be Additional Principal Chief
Conservator of Forests and lastly his reporting
authority would be the Principal Chief
Conservator of Forests. Likewise the reviewing
authority would also be the person within the
same Department. It is only in case of the
Principal Chief Conservator of Forests that the
reporting authority will be a person other than
the one belonging to the service because there is
no one superior to the Principal Chief
Conservator of Forests within the service. As far
as he is concerned, the reporting authority would
be a person who is familiar with the work of
Principal Chief Conservator of Forests and that
will be the person to whom he reports and who is
superior to him in rank and hierarchy.
24
27. We, therefore, direct the State of Madhya
     Pradesh to pass appropriate orders enumerating the
     reporting authorities in the manner indicated
     hereinabove.
28. The Union of India is directed to bring to the
     notice of the other States the ratio of this decision as
     well as the decision in
P.C. Wadhwa
case [(1987) 2
     SCC 602 : (1987) 3 ATC 690 : (1987) 2 SCR 1030] for
     issuing suitable orders wherever necessary.”
                                       [Emphasis supplied]
26. It can thus be seen from the aforesaid observations that

this Court in detail had considered the hierarchy in IFS. This

Court noted the practice in the State of Madhya Pradesh that

the C.Rs. of the officers belonging to the Forest Department

holding any of the posts between that of a Guard and the PCCF

were not written by the superiors within the same service but

were written by the officers belonging to the office of the

District Collector and superior officers on the civil side. After

considering the definitions of “reporting authority” and

“reviewing authority” as contained in the 1970 Rules and the

judgment of this Court in the case of
P.C. Wadhwa, IPS,

Inspector General of Police
(supra), this Court reiterated

that up to the officer of the rank of APCCF, the “reporting

authority” has to be the immediately superior officer within the

Forest Department. This Court has given the entire illustration
25
in paragraph 26 as to who would be the “reporting authority”

and the “reviewing authority” in respect of an officer.
(iv) Order of this Court in I.A. No.776 of 2002 in the
      present proceedings
27. It is further relevant to note that the State of Madhya

Pradesh, in the present proceedings, had also filed an

application    being     I.A.   No.776      of    2002     seeking

modification/clarification of the order of this Court dated 22nd
September 2000 (Santosh Bharti
case). It will be relevant to

refer to the prayers made in the said I.A., which read thus:
“(i) Modify/clarify the order dated 22.09.2000 that
     the Reporting Authority and Reviewing Authority up
     to the rank of Additional Chief Conservator of Forests
     should be immediately superior officer as per
     amended provisions of Rule 2 (a), 2 (e) and 2(f) All
     India Service (Confidential Rolls) Rules, 1970.
(ii) The amended provisions of the All-India Services
     (Confidential Rolls) Rules, 1970. In
Section 2 (e)
,
2(f)
and
2(a)
be given full effect to in its letter and spirit.”
28. This Court, vide order dated 1st August 2003 passed in

the present proceedings, directed the Central Empowered

Committee (hereinafter referred to as, “CEC”) to examine the

issue and submit a report.
26
29. The CEC, accordingly, submitted its report on 22nd

January 2004. It will be relevant to refer to the following

extract of the said report:
“(i) In all the States and Union Territories except the
     State of Madhya Pradesh, the CR's of the Assistant
     Conservator of Forests, the Divisional Forest Officer
     and the Conservator of Forests working in the Forest
     Department are written by their immediate superiors
     in the Forest Department i.e. the Divisional Forest
     Officer, the Conservator of Forests and the Chief
     Conservator of Forests respectively. In the State of
     Madhya Pradesh the CR's of these Forest Officers
     were being written by their counterparts in the
     Revenue Department i.e. Assistant Collector, District
     Collector and Divisional Commissioner,
(ii) the primary responsibility of the forest officers
     working in the field is forest protection, wildlife
     management, implementation of FC Act, Indian
     Forest Act, Wildlife (Protection) Act, preparation and
     Implementation of Working Plans and other forestry
     activities. These officers work under the direct
     supervision and administrative control of their
     superior forest officers. It is, therefore, logical that
     their CR's are written by their superior officers in the
     Forest Department and not by their counterparts in
     the Revenue Department;
(iii) though the forest officers may be involved in
     implementation of various welfare and development
     schemes of the State Government, this should not
     normally become their primary responsibility;
(iv) in view of above, the system of writing of CR's of
     the Forest Officers working in the field by their
     counterparts in the Revenue Department may not be
     appropriate. If required, a report about the
     performance of the Forest Officer (s) in
     implementation of the welfare schemes may be sent
     by the Assistant Collector, Collector or the Divisional
     Commissioner to the designated Reporting Officer (s),
27
which could be taken into consideration by the
Reporting Officer (s) while writing the CR(s);
(v) the CR should normally be written by the officer
of higher rank and pay scale. In exceptional cases it
may be allowed to be written by the officer in the
same pay scale provided he is senior. It should never
be allowed to be written by an officer of a lower rank
or who is in a lower pay scale. There are many
Divisional Forest Officers who are in a higher pay
scale and/or of higher seniority vis-à-vis the District
Collectors;
(vi) Rule 2(e), 2(f) and 2(a) of the All India Services
(Confidential Rolls) Rules, 1970 as amended on
8.12.1987 deal with the "reporting authority",
"reviewing authority" and "accepting authority".
respectively. As per the amended rules, the reviewing
authority and the accepting authority shall be the
authority supervising the performance of the
reporting authority and reviewing authority,
respectively. Since the Divisional Commissioner is
the supervising authority for the District Collectors
and Revenue Secretary is the supervising authority
for the Divisional Commissioner, if a District
Collector is designated as the reporting authority for
the DFO, the Divisional Commissioner and the
Revenue Secretary will be the Reviewing Officer and
Accepting Officer, respectively. Under these
circumstances none of the officers working in the
Forest Department would be involved at any level in
assessing the performance of the Divisional Forest
Officer;
(vii) in view of above the practice of designating the
District Collector as the reporting authority and the
Conservator of Forests as the reviewing authority for
writing the CR of the DFO was not in consonance
with the amended CR rules. Similar situation existed
for other field officers of the Forest Department;
(viii) the amendments made in the All India Services
(Confidential Rolls) Rules, 1970 on 8.12.1987
resulted in nullifying the Hon'ble Court's judgment
dated 16.4.1987 delivered in
State of Haryana vs.
28
Shri P.C. Wadhwa, IPS, Inspector General of Police &
     Anr.
, 1987 (2) SCR 1030.. The amendment to the said
     rules was not made to cure any defect in pursuant to
     any order of this Hon'ble Court's. The amended rules
     permit the Government to designate an officer in a
     lower pay scale or rank to write the CR of another
     officer in higher pay scale or rank from the same
     service or another service, which is not appropriate.
     Although there may be situations in which the
     reporting officer, reviewing officer or the accepting
     officer are from different services or departments, it
     is necessary that the reporting officer should be in a
     higher pay scale than the officer reported upon.
     Similarly the reviewing officer and the accepting
     officer should normally be in a higher-pay scale and
     rank and in no case in a lower pay scale or rank than
     the reporting officer and the reviewing officer,
(ix) the amended rules could have been brought to
     the notice of this Hon'ble Court by the applicant
     during the hearing which was not done. In any case
     the Hon'ble Court's order is not contrary to or
     inconsistent with the amended rules;
(x) the Committee agrees with the views of the DOPT
     that the Hon'ble Court's order dated 22.9.2000 was
     issued in a particular context and should not be
     generalised to cover other services. Similarly, it also
     agrees with the contention of the DOPT that if the
     Forest Officer is working in the Secretariat or other
     departments where his immediate supervising officer
     is a non-forest officer, his CR should be written by
     such an officer;”
30. After considering the aforesaid report of the CEC, this

Court passed an order in the present proceedings on 19th April

2004, extract of which reads thus:
“Despite the order of this Court the State of Madhya
     Pradesh has not filed its response. We are in
     agreement with the recommendations of the CEC. IA
29
No.776 in IA No.424 is accordingly dismissed. It
      appears that several States are not following the
      recommendations of the CEC and the Order dated
      22.9.2000. We, therefore direct that since the matter
      has already been decided all the States including the
      State of Chhattisgarh shall abide by the order dated
      22.9.2000. I.A.No.1035 is disposed of”
31. It can thus be seen that this Court has reiterated that all

the States shall abide by the order passed in the present

proceedings by a 3-Judges Bench of this Court dated 22nd
September 2000 (Santosh Bharti
case).
(v) Recent judgment of this Court in
State of Assam
        and Others v. Binod Kumar and Others
32. Recently, this Court in the case of
State of Assam and

Others v. Binod Kumar and Others4
had an occasion to

consider a similar controversy with regard to who shall be the

“reporting authority” or recording of the Annual Performance

Appraisal Report (hereinafter referred to as, “APAR”) of the

officers belonging to the IPS. This Court also had an occasion

to consider the 1970 Rules as amended in 1987 and also the

2007 Rules. It will be relevant to refer to the following

paragraphs of
the said judgment
:
“21. The definition of “reporting authority” in the
      1970 Rules, post 1987, and in the 2007 Rules, did
4 (2024) 3 SCC 611
30
away with the mandate of having the “immediate
superior” of the officer reported upon undertaking
that exercise but it still requires the “reporting
authority” to be someone who supervises the
performance of the said officer. Ordinarily, such
supervision would be by an officer from within the
same department, who is higher in rank than the
officer reported upon. The Government was, no
doubt, given discretion to empower any of the
authorities who supervise the performance of the
officer reported upon to assume such role. This
discretion, however, cannot be construed to mean
that someone from outside the department can be
given such power, in the light of the “reviewing
authority” being defined as someone who supervises
the performance of such “reporting authority”. This
clearly implies that both authorities must belong to
the same service or department. In effect, Rule 63(iii)
of the Manual does not fit in with the scheme
obtaining under the 1970 Rules and the 2007 Rules.
30. In this regard, we may also note that,
in SBI v. Kashinath Kher [SBI v. Kashinath Kher,
(1996) 8 SCC 762 : 1996 SCC (L&S) 1117] , this Court
held that officers reporting upon performance must
show objectivity, impartiality and fair assessment,
without any prejudices whatsoever, and the highest
sense of responsibility so as to inculcate devotion to
duty, honesty and integrity. It was further observed
that as officers may get demoralised by negative
ACRs, which would be deleterious to the efficacy and
efficiency of public service, such ACRs should be
written by a superior officer of high rank.
Earlier,
in
State of Haryana v. P.C. Wadhwa [State of
Haryana
v. P.C. Wadhwa, (1987) 2 SCC 602] , this
Court considered whether the State Government
could empower any authority to be the “reporting
authority” of the Inspector General of Police under
Rule 2(e) of the 1970 Rules. It was observed that,
from the point of view of propriety and
reasonableness and having regard to the intention
behind the Rule, which is manifest, such an
authority must be one superior in rank to the
31
member of the service concerned. No doubt, these
     observations were made in the context of the
     unamended Rule 2(e) of the 1970 Rules, but the
     principle culled out is sound and still holds good.”
33. This Court in the aforesaid judgment recorded that

though the Government had been given discretion to empower

any of the authorities who supervise the performance of the

officer reported upon to assume such role, such a discretion

could not be construed to mean that someone from outside the

department could be given such power, in the light of the

“reviewing   authority”   being    defined   as   someone   who

supervises the performance of such “reporting authority”. It

clearly implied that both authorities must belong to the same

service or department. This Court reiterated the position as

held by this Court in the case of
P.C. Wadhwa, IPS, Inspector

General of Police
(supra).
(vi) Impugned G.O. dated 29th June 2024
34. It appears that, while other States were adhering to the

practice wherein the “reporting authority” and the “reviewing

authority” belonged to the same service, with the “reporting

authority” being immediately superior to the officer being

reported upon, and the “reviewing authority” being the
32
authority supervising the performance of the “reporting

authority”, the State of Madhya Pradesh was not following this

established practice. The practice of ACRs of the IFS officers

being recorded by the officers from the IAS i.e., the District

Collectors and superior officers was followed in the State of

Madhya Pradesh. This practice was specifically challenged in

the present proceedings by way of an application and it was

found that the said practice as followed by the State of Madhya

Pradesh was not correct. This Court specifically in its order

dated 22nd September 2000 observed that insofar as Assistant

Conservator   of   Forests   are   concerned,   the   “reporting

authority” could only be the DFO and for DFO, the “reporting

authority” would be the Conservator of Forests. This Court

further observed that for the Conservator of Forests, the

“reporting authority” has to be the CCFs and for CCFs, the

“reporting authority” would be APCCF and for APCCF, the

“reporting authority” would be the PCCF. This Court observed

that up to the APCCF, the “reporting authority” and the

“reviewing authority” would be the person within the same

department. This Court observed that it was only in the case

of PCCF that the “reporting authority” would be a person other
33
than the one belonging to the service because there was no

one superior to the PCCF within the service. This Court

observed that in such a case, the “reporting authority” would

be a person who was familiar with the work of PCCF and that

would be the person to whom he reported and who was

superior to him in rank and hierarchy.
35. It can further be seen that in view of the order passed by

this Court in the present proceedings dated 22nd September

2000, MoEF issued specific directions to the various State

Governments.
36. It is to be noted that the State of Madhya Pradesh had

also filed an application being I.A. No.776 of 2002 in the

present   proceedings   for   modification   of   the   aforesaid

directions of this Court. This Court directed the CEC to submit

its report. The CEC accordingly submitted its report on 22nd

April 2004. This Court, vide order dated 19th April 2004,

expressed its agreement with the said report of the CEC and

recorded that several States including the State of Madhya

Pradesh were not following the recommendations made by the

CEC in its report and the directions of this Court issued vide

order dated 22nd September 2000 in the present proceedings.
34
This Court therefore reiterated its said order dated 22nd

September 2000 and directed all the State Governments to

follow the same.
37. The legal position as approved by this Court in two

separate orders of this Court and as rightly understood by the

MoEF as could be seen from its letter dated 8th November 2001

is that insofar as writing of ACRs up to the rank of APCCF is

concerned, the “reporting authority” should be the immediate

superior authority in the Forest Department. The position is

clear as regards “reviewing authority” or “reporting authority”

in relation to officers up to the rank of APCCF. It is clear that

except the PCCF, the “reporting authority” has to be a superior

officer from the IFS. It is only with regard to PCCF that the

“reporting authority” would be a person to whom he reports

and who is superior to him in rank. No doubt that, if

necessary, the State Governments can provide that the

Collectors and Commissioners can record their comments on

a separate sheet about the performance of the IFS officers in

relation to the implementation of developmental work funded

by the district administration. However, the same is again
35
required to be considered by a superior departmental officer of

the IFS.
38. It is further to be noted that even the DoPT has also

issued an O.M. dated 2nd September 2004 informing all the

States about the order passed by this Court in the present

proceedings dated 22nd
September 2000 (Santosh Bharti
case) and the instructions issued by MoEF vide its letter dated

8th November 2001. However, the DoPT clarified that the said

order passed by this Court on 22nd September 2000 would not

be applicable to the forest officers who are working in a

separate department where his immediate superior officer is a

non-forest officer.
39. We are of the considered view that the G.O. dated 29th

June 2024 is totally in violation of the specific directions

issued by this Court vide its orders dated 22nd September 2000

in the present proceedings (
Santosh Bharti
case) and 19th

April 2024. Perusal of the table annexed at Annexure-8 with

the compilation of the learned amicus curiae would reveal that

except the State of Madhya Pradesh, all the other States are

scrupulously adhering to the directions issued by this Court

in the aforesaid orders. We have no hesitation to hold that the
36
impugned G.O. is rather contemptuous in nature inasmuch as

the said G.O. which is in violation of the aforesaid orders of

this Court dated 22nd September 2000 and 19th April 2024 has

been issued without even seeking clarification/modification of

this Court. We could have very well proceeded to initiate

contempt proceedings against the officers responsible for

issuance of such G.O.       However, we refrain ourselves from

doing so. The said G.O. being in violation of the directions of

this Court is liable to be quashed and set aside.
IV.      DIRECTIONS

40. We      are,   therefore,   inclined   to   allow   the   present

applications.
41. In the result, we pass the following order:
(i)     The present applications are allowed;
(ii)    The impugned G.O. dated 29th June 2004 is held to be

          in violation of the order passed by this Court in the

          present proceedings dated 22nd
September 2000

          (Santosh Bharti
case) which is reiterated and is

          consequently quashed and set aside;
(iii)   The State of Madhya Pradesh is directed to reframe the

          rules by strictly adhering to the directions issued by
37
this Court vide order dated 22nd September 2000 in

         the present proceedings (
Santosh Bharti
case) which

         has been clarified by the MoEF in its letter dated 8th

         November 2001 and also clarified by the DoPT vide its

         letter dated 2nd September 2004; and
(iv)   The same shall be done within a period of one month

         from the date of this judgment.
42. We place on record our appreciation for the efforts put in

by Shri K. Parameshwar, learned amicus curiae for extending

support and suggestion and Shri Tushar Mehta, learned

Solicitor General for taking a fair stand on behalf of the State

of Madhya Pradesh.
..............................CJI
                                                        (B.R. GAVAI)




                              ............................................J
                              (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)




NEW DELHI;
MAY 21, 2025.
38