[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Tukesh Singh vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 14 May, 2025
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
,
Abhay S Oka
2025 INSC 683


                                                                         Reportable
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                       Criminal Appeal No.1157 of 2011


                            Tukesh Singh & Ors.                        … Appellants


                                                     versus


                            State of Chhattisgarh                    … Respondent
                                                      with
                                       Criminal Appeal No.1608 of 2011
                                                      and
                                       Criminal Appeal No.1713 of 2012


                                                JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1.   These appeals take exception to the judgment dated
                            10th September 2010 of the High Court of Chhattisgarh. A
                            total of nine accused were prosecuted for the offences
                            punishable under Sections 147, 148, 307, read with
Signature Not Verified   Section 149 and Section 302, read with Section 149 of the
Digitally signed by
Indian Penal Code
, 1860 (for short, ‘the
IPC
’). The Trial
   ANITA MALHOTRA
   Date: 2025.05.14
   18:40:19 IST
   Reason:
Court convicted them under the aforesaid sections. For
Criminal Appeal No.1157 of 2011, etc.                           Page 1 of 22
the offences punishable under
Section 302
read with
Section 149
of the IPC, the sentence of life imprisonment
        was imposed. The present appellants are accused nos.1
        to 8. They and accused no.9 (Ramesh Singh) had preferred
        an appeal before the High Court.              By the impugned
        judgment, the High Court confirmed the judgment of the
        Sessions Court.
2.     One Kashiram Rathore, a resident of a place called
        Masturi, had borrowed a certain amount from one Ganpat
        Singh. As he could not repay the loan, he gave his shop
        and the land adjacent to it to Ganpat Singh, who, in turn,
        gave the shop to his relative Rajendra Singh (PW-11) and
        opened a medical store through him. After commencing
        business, PW-11 purchased the shop and the adjacent
        vacant land from Kashiram by way of a Sale Deed.
3.     The case of the prosecution is that on 23rd March
        2001, the accused, with a common object, armed with
        deadly weapons like sword, rod, knife, poleaxe, club, etc.
        went to the disputed shop and murdered Manrakhan
        Singh and Narayan Singh and attempted to kill PW-1
        (Shivraj Singh), PW-3 (Virendra Singh), PW-4 (Judawan
        Singh), PW-5 (Visheshwar Singh Thakur) and PW-8
        (Rakesh        Singh       Thakur).   These   are   the     injured
        eyewitnesses. The First Information Report (FIR) was
        registered at the instance of PW-8. The Police claimed that
Criminal Appeal No.1157 of 2011, etc.                             Page 2 of 22
recovery of a sword was made from the 1st appellant
        (Tukesh Singh–accused no.1). Another sword was allegedly
        recovered at the instance of the 3rd appellant (Baba alias
        Rajesh Singh–accused no.3). A dagger like weapon stained
        with blood was allegedly recovered at the instance of
        accused no.7 (Mangal Das).           A sword was allegedly
        recovered from the 2nd appellant (Basant Singh–accused
        no.2). A bloodstained club was allegedly recovered at the
        instance of the 4th appellant (Pappu Singh–accused no.6).
        A wooden plank was recovered at the instance of accused
        no.4 (Anil Singh) and one rod at the instance of accused
        no.5 (Vishnu Singh).
SUBMISSIONS
4.      The learned senior counsel appearing for the
        appellants has taken us through the notes of evidence and
        other documents on record. The learned senior counsel
        submitted that there was a counter case in which
        prosecution witnesses and others were shown as accused.
        Tukesh Singh (Appellant) had filed the FIR Crime Number
        – 49 of 2001 on 24.03.2001 at 03:00 PM. The counter case
        (Criminal Case No.79 of 2001) registered based on the said
        FIR ought to have been tried with the case subject matter
        of these appeals. Therefore, prejudice has been caused to
        the appellants/accused.         He relied upon the following
        decisions of this Court in support of his contention:
Criminal Appeal No.1157 of 2011, etc.                      Page 3 of 22
Sudhir & Ors. v. State of M.P.1, Kuldip Yadav & Ors.
v. State of Bihar2 and Nand Lal & Ors. v. State of
        Chhattisgarh3.            He submitted that the accused also
        sustained injuries which were not explained by the
        prosecution. He pointed out that the complainant’s party
        was the aggressor as seen from the evidence. Moreover,
        there was a delay of five and a half hours in lodging the
        FIR. There were two Police Constables who arrived at the
        spot immediately after the incident. Moreover, the Police
        Station was between two to three furlongs away. There
        was a delay in recording the statements of PW-4 (Judawan
        Singh) and PW-11 (Rajendra Singh). He pointed out that
        PW-13 (Dilip Singh), PW-14 (Shiv Kumar Dubey) and PW-
15 (Ishwari Srivas) were independent witnesses who did
        not support the prosecution.
5.     He submitted that the account given by the
        eyewitnesses PW-1, PW-3, PW-4, PW-5 and PW-8 of the
        incident differs in material particulars. He submitted that
        omnibus statements made by the witnesses regarding the
        involvement of the accused are not sufficient to bring home
        the prosecution’s case.            He pointed out that the
        eyewitnesses are related to each other and the deceased.
        Hence, they were interested witnesses.            But, three


        1 (2001) 2 SCC 688
        2 (2011) 5 SCC 324
        3 (2023) 10 SCC 470
Criminal Appeal No.1157 of 2011, etc.                       Page 4 of 22
independent         eye-witnesses        have   not     supported       the
        prosecution. He pointed out that the depositions of the
        prosecution witnesses indicated that there were large
        number of independent witnesses present, as the incident
        happened in the market area. The learned senior counsel
        submitted that the evidence of the defence witness Dr Smt
        Subhadra Painkra (DW-1) established that accused no.9
        (Ramesh Singh) was an injured patient in the hospital from
        23rd March 2001 to 24th March 2001. She stated that even
        accused no.8 (Tamesh Singh) accompanied accused no.9
        (Ramesh Singh) in the hospital.
6.     The learned senior counsel, therefore, submitted that
        the prosecution’s case has not been established, and even
        assuming         that     it    is    established,     looking     to   the
        prosecution's evidence, the case will fall in one of the
        exceptions to
Section 300
of the IPC. Therefore, at the
        highest, the offence under the second part of
Section 304
of the IPC will be attracted.               Considering the sentence
        undergone, the appellants/accused should be let off on the
        punishment          undergone.         He    pointed    out      that   the
        appellants have undergone sentences between 9 and 14
        years until this Court released them on bail.
7.     The learned Deputy Advocate General appearing for
        the respondent-State of Chhattisgarh has supported the
        impugned judgments.                  He submitted that the injuries
Criminal Appeal No.1157 of 2011, etc.                                    Page 5 of 22
sustained by the four accused persons were very minor.
He pointed out that there was no evidence on record to
        show that the complainant’s side was the aggressor and
        that any of them had assaulted the accused. He submitted
        that no prejudice has been caused to the accused on the
        ground that the trial of the cross case was conducted
        separately.         He urged that the testimony of injured
        witnesses has been rightly believed by both the Courts. He
        submitted that minor contradictions and omissions
        brought       to    light       in   the   cross-examination     of   the
        eyewitnesses are not sufficient to discard their testimony.
        He would, therefore, submit that no case is made out for
        interference with the concurrent findings recorded by both
        the Courts.
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
8.     Firstly, we will deal with the evidence of injured
        witnesses.         PW-1 (Shivraj Singh) is the father of PW-11
        (Rajendra Singh). Deceased Narayan Singh was the elder
        son of PW1.          The deceased Manrakhan Singh was the
        father-in-law of PW-11 (Rajendra Singh). PW-1 stated that
        the incident happened on 24th March 2001, which was a
        Saturday. He stated that he was not aware of the events
        of the previous day. He stated that he knew accused no.1
        (Tukesh Singh), accused no.8 (Tamesh Singh), accused
        no.9 (Ramesh Singh), and accused no.3 (Baba alias Rajesh
Criminal Appeal No.1157 of 2011, etc.                                  Page 6 of 22
Singh). He stated that these accused were present at the
        time of the incident. He stated that he did not know the
        rest of the accused.             He stated that he does not know
        whether the rest of the accused were involved in the
        incident. He stated that at 8 a.m. on 24th March 2001,
        PW-11 (Rajendra Singh) told him about the incident that
        nine to ten boys intruded into his house next to the
        medical shop.           They started abusing PW-11 (Rajendra
        Singh).        At that time, deceased Manrakhan Singh
        intervened and tried to restrain the boys. However, he was
        told to go out of the shop. Thereafter, PW-1 accompanied
        PW-11 to lodge a complaint at the Police Station and first
        reached the medical shop. He stated that at that time,
        deceased Manrakhan Singh was in the medical shop of
        PW-11 (Rajendra Singh). PW-1 asked his sons to go to the
        police station to lodge a complaint regarding the incident
        of    the     previous          night.   Accordingly,   PW-11,     one
        Sukhnandan Singh and Kanhaiya Singh, left for the police
        station. At that time, the other deceased, Narayan Singh,
        was coming towards the shop. Nine to ten persons came
        running and abused Narayan Singh.                       Accused no.8
        (Tamesh Singh) assaulted deceased Narayan Singh with a
        sword and a lathi. Accused no.1 (Tukesh Singh) assaulted
        deceased Narayan Singh by causing injury to his hands
        with an axe. When the PW-1 sought help, PW-3 (Virendra
        Singh), his son, went to the shop when nine to ten boys
Criminal Appeal No.1157 of 2011, etc.                               Page 7 of 22
started assaulting him with axes, swords and lathis. The
        witness        stated    that   accused   no.9   (Ramesh   Singh)
        assaulted him on his right wrist and shoulder with a lathi.
        He stated that he was not in his senses. Therefore, he did
        not tell that the accused assaulted PW-8 (Rakesh Singh).
        In the cross-examination, many material omissions have
        been brought on record. The same are as follows:
(i)     The witness accepted that though accused no.9
                     (Ramesh Singh) had assaulted on the head of
                     deceased Manrakhan Singh with a lathi, it is not
                     so mentioned in his Police statement;
(ii)    He accepted that though he had told the Police
                     that accused no.3 (Baba) had assaulted deceased
                     Manrakhan Singh, it was not found in the Police
                     statement; and
(iii) Even the case that accused no.9 (Ramesh Singh)
                     assaulted him on the wrist, near the shoulder and
                     head with a lathi was not mentioned in the Police
                     report.
9.         PW-1 stated that while recording his statement, he
        had told the Police that he would identify some of the
        accused. However, the Police did not get the identification
        done. There is something very crucial. As he stated, he
        knew only four of the accused, he was not called upon to
Criminal Appeal No.1157 of 2011, etc.                          Page 8 of 22
identify any of the accused present in the Court, and
        therefore, he did not depose that the accused present in
        the Court were the same accused he had seen committing
        the offence.
10. Now, we turn to the evidence of PW-3 (Virendra
        Singh), a son of PW-1 (Shivraj Singh). The witness stated
        that he knew accused no.1 (Tukesh Singh), accused no.2
        (Basant Singh), accused no.4 (Anil Singh), accused no.6
        (Pappu Singh) and accused no.7 (Mangal Das). He said
        that apart from accused nos.1, 2, 4, 6 and 7, others were
        not known to him. He stated that he knew the rest of the
        accused by their faces. In paragraphs nos.4 to 7 of his
        deposition, PW-3 (Virendra Singh) stated thus:
“4. In the medical store of Masturi my
                    father Shivraj Singh, brother Narayan
                    Singh, Sukhnandan Singh, niece Rakesh
                    Singh, relative Lakhan Singh were also
                    present. We were sitting in the shop itself,
                    near the counter and were talking. At that
                    time, all of a sudden, 9-10 persons armed
                    with weapons like sword, poleaxe, rod &
                    lathi came from the road side, saying
                    attack-attack and directly assaulted
                    Narayan Singh. Tamesh Singh and
                    Tukesh Singh assaulted him with sword
                    and when Narayan Singh shrieked, I ran
                    to save him. Mangaldas, Pappu, Anil,
                    Tamesh & Tukesh started assaulting me.
5. Mangaldas assaulted my nose with
                    poleaxe, Tamesh & Tukesh assaulted my
                    head with sword, Anil assaulted my back
Criminal Appeal No.1157 of 2011, etc.                         Page 9 of 22
with rod, Pappu assaulted with sword,
                    which hurt near left eyebrow and face
                    below the eye (left eye). At the very
                    moment, Manrakhan Singh rushed to
                    save me, and then Ramesh Singh
                    assaulted his head with lathi, with him his
                    companion Baba also assaulted with
                    sword. Vishnu & Basant assaulted with
                    sword. Vishnu & Basant assaulted my
                    father with sword and lathi. Ramesh also
                    assaulted him with lathi. At that time,
                    Vishveshwar Singh & Judawan Singh,
                    were trying to save, then they were also
                    assaulted by Tukesh Singh, Tamesh
                    Singh & their companions. They also
                    assaulted Rakesh Singh.
6. Amongst accused, poiting towards
                    Baba, the witness states that he was also
                    one of the assailants, but I do not know
                    his hame. I was blood smeared. The
                    blood was oozing out, around my eye also,
                    therefore, I could not see further. After
                    committing maarpeet, the accused went
                    away.
7. I received injuries on my head at three
                    places. Nose was cut. I was assaulted
                    with rod on my back. I also received a
                    sword injury on my left hand’s little
                    finger.”

        In the evidence of PW-3 (Virendra Singh), the following
        significant omissions were brought on record:
(i)   Accused no.1 (Tukesh Singh) and accused no.8
                (Tamesh Singh) assaulted on the neck of his brother
                and when he raised his voice and rushed to save him,
Criminal Appeal No.1157 of 2011, etc.                        Page 10 of 22
accused no.7 (Mangal Das) with a poleaxe, accused
               no.6 (Pappu Singh) with a sword and accused no.4
               (Anil Singh) assaulted him with a rod. The blow by
               accused no.6 (Pappu Singh) hit his left eyebrow and
               below the left eye. Accused no.1 (Tukesh Singh) and
               accused no.8 (Tamesh Singh) assaulted him on the
               head with a sword. Accused no.9 (Ramesh Singh)
               assaulted the deceased Manrakhan Singh with a
               lathi. The witness stated that he is unable to assign
               reasons why these facts have not been recorded in
               the statement recorded by the Police;
(ii) Accused no.7 (Mangal Das) was holding a poleaxe,
               and accused no.6 (Pappu Singh) was holding a sword
               in his hand. The witness accepted that this does not
               find a place in his Police statement;
(iii) Accused no.6 (Pappu Singh) was holding a rod and a
               club in his hands. Even this is not mentioned in his
               Police statement; and
(iv) Accused no.6 (Pappu Singh) assaulted him with an
               iron rod.
In his examination in chief, PW3 merely states without
        ascribing any specific roles, that:
“Out of the accused persons, I know
                    Mangal Das, Pappu, Anil, Tukesh &
                    Basant. I know rest of the accused
Criminal Appeal No.1157 of 2011, etc.                     Page 11 of 22
persons by their faces. Amongst accused,
                    Ramesh Singh and Tamesh Singh are not
                    present in the Court today.”

        He was not called upon to identify any of the accused
        present in the Court, and therefore, he did not depose that
        the accused present in the Court were the same accused
        he had seen committing the offence.
11. PW-3 (Virendra Singh) stated that in the afternoon of
        24th March 2001, his father PW-1 (Shivraj Singh), brother
        deceased Narayan Singh, PW-8 (Rakesh Singh) and their
        relative Lakhan Singh were present in the medical shop.
        At that time, nine to ten persons armed with weapons like
        sword, poleaxe, rod and lathi came from the roadside and,
        while calling upon everyone to attack, assaulted the
        deceased Narayan Singh. Accused no.1 (Tukesh Singh)
        and accused no.8 (Tamesh Singh) assaulted deceased
        Narayan Singh with a sword. When the witness ran to save
        him, accused nos.1, 4, 6, 7 and 8 started assaulting him.
        Accused no.7 (Mangaldas) assaulted him on the nose with
        a poleaxe. Accused nos. 1 and 8 assaulted him on the
        head with a sword. He has ascribed a role to accused no.4
        (Anil Singh) and accused no.6 (Pappu Singh) in the assault
        on him. Thereafter, the witness stated that accused no.9
        (Ramesh Singh) assaulted deceased Manrakhan Singh on
        the head with a lathi. Accused no.3 (Baba alias Rajesh
        Singh) assaulted deceased Manrakhan Singh with a
Criminal Appeal No.1157 of 2011, etc.                     Page 12 of 22
sword. Even accused no.2 (Basant Singh) and accused
        no.5 (Vishnu Singh) assaulted deceased Manrakhan Singh
        with a sword.           The witness stated that both of them
        assaulted his father with a sword and a lathi.                  It is
        pertinent to note that even if, according to the case of the
        witness, he knew the accused, it was important for him to
        state that the accused present in the Court were the same
        accused whom the witness in his examination-in-chief had
        ascribed roles. However, he did not identify the accused
        in the Court, as in the examination-in-chief, he was not
        called upon to do so.
12. Even in his evidence, there are omissions which read
        thus:
(i)   Though he knew accused no.1 (Tukesh Singh)
                          and accused no.4 (Anil Singh), he did not
                          disclose their names in his Police statement;
(ii) The fact that accused no.1 (Tukesh Singh)
                          and accused no.8 (Tamesh Singh) assaulted
                          the head of the deceased and accused no.4
                          (Anil Singh) assaulted with a rod on his back,
                          has    not    been   mentioned   in   his   Police
                          statement; and
(iii) Accused no.2 (Basant Singh) and accused
                          no.5 (Vishnu Singh) assaulted PW-1 (Shivraj
Criminal Appeal No.1157 of 2011, etc.                            Page 13 of 22
Singh) with a sword and a lathi. This fact was
                          not stated in his police statement.
In the cross-examination, the witness admitted that on
        28th March 2001, he did not give his complete statement.
        He admitted that he was unable to tell after how many
        days that he had given his remaining statement.
        Therefore, it is not clear when his further statement was
        recorded.       That      is    not    brought        on       record   by   the
        prosecution.
13. Now, we come to the evidence of PW-4 (Judawan
        Singh). He stated that PW-11 (Rajendra Singh) called him
        around 11 p.m. on 24th March 2001. Somebody knocked
        on the door and tried to take him out. In paragraph 7, the
        witness stated thus:
“7. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
Firstly, accused Tukesh Singh and
                    Tamesh Singh assaulted Narayan Singh,
                    again said, assaulted with sword, the said
                    assault hit the neck of Narayan Singh, at
                    that time when Manrakhan Singh, who
                    was sitting there i.e. near the shop, ran
                    towards that side to save, accused
                    Ramesh Singh assaulted him with lathi on
                    his head and thereafter, from his back
                    Baba Singh assaulted on occipital region
                    of head. Virendra Singh rushed to save
                    him, then Tamesh, Tukesh Singh, Pappu,
                    Mangaldas & Anil started assaulting him
                    with sword and rod.”
Criminal Appeal No.1157 of 2011, etc.                                       Page 14 of 22
His statement was belatedly recorded on 14th April 2001,
        i.e. twenty-one days after the incident. Even this witness
        did not identify any accused in the Court by ascribing
        them a specific role. He merely stated that he knew all the
        accused present in the Court, and he named two of them.
        Even in the cross-examination of PW-4 (Judawan Singh),
        vital omissions have been brought on record.
14. The following significant omissions were brought on
        record in his cross-examination:
(i) Accused no.9 (Ramesh Singh) assaulted on the
                        head of deceased Manrakhan Singh with a
                        lathi;
(ii) Accused no.9 (Ramesh Singh) was holding a
                        sword in one hand and a poleaxe in another;
and
(iii)Accused no.1 (Tukesh Singh) assaulted him on
                        the head.
15. Now, we turn to the evidence of PW-5 (Visheshwar
        Singh Thakur). He described the incident of 24th March
        2001. He stated that the prosecution witnesses and others
        were sitting in the medical store of PW-11 (Rajendra
        Singh).      At that time, nine to ten persons armed with
        weapons like sword, poleaxe, lathi, rod, etc., came running
        from the side of the motorcycle garage of accused no.8
Criminal Appeal No.1157 of 2011, etc.                     Page 15 of 22
(Tamesh Singh).             Accused no.1 (Tukesh Singh) and
        accused no.8 (Tamesh Singh) assaulted deceased Narayan
        Singh with a sword and a poleaxe. Even accused no.9
        (Ramesh Singh) and accused no.3 (Baba alias Rajesh
        Singh) assaulted the deceased Manrakhan Singh with a
        sword and a lathi.
16. In the cross-examination, he admitted that his
        statement was belatedly recorded on 14th April 2001. The
        omissions brought on record in his cross-examination are
        as follows:
(i) Accused no.1 (Tukesh Singh) and accused no.8
                 (Tamesh Singh) started assaulting PW-3 (Virendra
                 Singh);
(ii) Accused no.1 (Tukesh Singh) and accused no.8
                 (Tamesh Singh) assaulted deceased Narayan Singh
                 with a sword and poleaxe;
(iii) Accused no.9 (Ramesh Singh) and accused no.3
                 (Baba alias Rajesh Singh) assaulted deceased
                 Manrakhan Singh with a sword and lathi; and
(iv) Accused no.6 (Pappu Singh), accused no.4 (Anil
                 Singh) and accused no.7 (Mangal Das) assaulted
                 PW-3 (Virendra Singh).
Criminal Appeal No.1157 of 2011, etc.                     Page 16 of 22
Again, to this witness, the accused were not shown in the
        Court for establishing their identity. PW-4 also stated that
        he knows all the accused present in the Court and names
        two of them.
17. In       the     cross-examination,   he   stated   that     his
        statement was recorded on 14th April 2001. There is a
        delay of twenty days in recording his statement, though he
        was available.          In the cross-examination, the witness
        admitted that in the assault on deceased Manrakhan
        Singh, only accused no.3 (Baba alias Rajesh Singh) and
        accused no.9 (Ramesh Singh) were the participants.
18.     Then, we come to the evidence of PW-8 (Rakesh
        Singh Thakur). His version in the examination-in-chief
        reads thus:
“5. At about 12.30 in the noon, Narayan
                    Singh came from Jalso. At about 1.45
                    p.m., Virendra Singh, Visheshwar Singh
                    and his elder brother also came to the
                    shop from Korba. After some time
                    Rajendra Singh along with Kanhaiya
                    Singh also came to medical store from
                    Jalso.
6. On the direction of elders, Sukhnandan
                    Singh, Rajendra Singh & Kanhaiya went
                    to Police Station Masturi to lodge report
                    regarding the incident occurred in the
                    previous night. 2-3 minutes thereafter 9-
                    10 persons armed with sword, polcaxe,
                    lathi etc. came from the side of Ramesh
Criminal Appeal No.1157 of 2011, etc.                           Page 17 of 22
Travels' office and attacked on the persons
                    sitting there, saying 'attack-attack'.
7. On this accused Tamesh Singh &
                    Tukesh Singh assaulted my elder
                    maternal uncle Narayan Singh, who was
                    returning after consuming betel, with the
                    sword as a result he sustained injuries on
                    his neck. Virendra Singh when tried to
                    save him, Mangaldas, Pappu, Tamesh,
                    Tukesh assaulted him with sword, lathi
                    etc., as a result he sustained injuries over
                    his head and his lips & nose were cut.
Ramesh and Baba alias Rajesh started
                    assaulting Manrakhan Singh, father-in-
                    law of Rajendra Singh, with sword & lathi.
                    Baba assaulted with sword and Ramesh
                    assaulted with lathi.
8. Thereafter, Basant & Baba Singh
                    assaulted my maternal grandfather
                    Shivraj Singh and when I came out to save
                    them, Baba, Basant & Tamesh Singh
                    attacked on me, they assaulted me with
                    sword and lathi as a result I sustained
                    injuries over my head, back & shoulder.”

        Even in the case of this witness, he has not identified the
        accused in the Court in his examination-in-chief. In the
        cross-examination, the witness merely stated that he
        knows accused no.8 (Tamesh Singh) and accused no.9
        (Ramesh Singh), who were present in the Court and the
        other accused. However, he did not individually identify
        the accused.          PW-8 (Rakesh Singh Thakur) lodged the
        Police report at about 8 p.m.
Criminal Appeal No.1157 of 2011, etc.                        Page 18 of 22
19. The following significant omissions were brought on
        record in his cross-examination:
(i) He had told the names of three accused on the
                     night of 23rd March 2001;
(ii) Accused no.1 (Tukesh Singh) and accused no.8
                     (Tamesh Singh) assaulted PW-3 (Virendra Singh);
and
(iii) Accused no.8 (Tamesh Singh) assaulted PW-1
                     (Shivraj Singh).
20. As regards the PW-11 (Rajendra Singh), he is not an
        eyewitness. He only described the incident which occurred
        on 23rd March 2001. The evidence of this witness is not
        material.        He is examined basically to prove what
        transpired on 16th March 2001 and 23rd March 2001.
        Again, he has not identified the accused in the Court.
21. In a case where there are eyewitnesses, one situation
        can be that the eyewitness knew the accused before the
        incident. The eyewitnesses must identify the accused
        sitting in the dock as the same accused whom they had
        seen committing the crime. Another situation can be that
        the eyewitness did not know the accused before the
        incident.      In the normal course, in case of the second
        situation, it is necessary to hold a Test Identification
        Parade.       If it is not held and if the evidence of the
Criminal Appeal No.1157 of 2011, etc.                     Page 19 of 22
eyewitness is recorded after a few years, the identification
        of such an accused by the eyewitness in the Court
        becomes vulnerable. Identification of the accused sitting in
        the Court by the eyewitness is of utmost importance. For
        example, if an eyewitness states in his deposition that “he
        had seen A, B and C killing X and he knew A, B and C”.
        Such a statement in the examination-in-chief is not
        sufficient to link the same to the accused. The eyewitness
        must identify the accused A, B and C in the Court. Unless
        this is done, the prosecution cannot establish that the
        accused are the same persons who are named by the
        eyewitness in his deposition. If an eyewitness states that
        “he had seen one accused assaulting the deceased with a
        sword, another accused assaulting the deceased with a
        stick and another accused holding the deceased to enable
        other accused to assault the deceased.” In such a case, the
        eyewitness must identify the accused in the open Court
        who, according to him, had assaulted the accused with a
        stick, who had assaulted the deceased with a sword and
        who was holding the deceased. Unless the eyewitnesses
        identify the accused present in the Court, it cannot be said
        that, based on the testimony of the eyewitnesses, the guilt
        of the accused has been proved.
22. In the present case, in case of two eyewitnesses, in
        the cross-examination, it is brought on record that the
Criminal Appeal No.1157 of 2011, etc.                    Page 20 of 22
accused persons named by them were sitting in the Court.
However, they did not identify a particular accused by
        ascribing him a role.            None of the eyewitnesses has
        specifically identified any of the accused in the Court.
23. In this case, the failure of the eyewitnesses to identify
        the accused in the court as the accused they had seen
        committing the crime is fatal to the prosecution's case.
        There are material omissions brought on record in the
        cross-examination of the eyewitnesses.            They are so
        relevant that the same constitute contradictions in view of
        the explanation to
Section 162
of the Code of Criminal
        Procedure, 1973.            The appellants/accused, before they
        were enlarged on bail, had undergone a minimum of nine
        to ten years of actual sentence. They have been on bail for
        about twelve years.
24. Considering the discussion made above, it is not
        possible to come to a conclusion that the guilt of the
        appellants/accused is proved beyond a reasonable doubt.
        As stated earlier, the versions of the eyewitnesses differ.
25. We are, therefore, of the considered opinion that guilt
        of the accused has not been proved beyond a reasonable
        doubt.
26. Hence, the impugned judgment and order dated 10th
        September 2010 passed by the High Court of Chhattisgarh
Criminal Appeal No.1157 of 2011, etc.                        Page 21 of 22
at Bilaspur is, hereby, quashed and set aside and the
        appellants/accused are acquitted of the offences alleged
        against them. As the appellants/accused are on bail, their
        bail bonds stand cancelled. The appeals are, accordingly,
        allowed.
.…………………………….J.
                                        (Abhay S Oka)


                                        .…………………………….J.
                                        (Pankaj Mithal)


                                        …………………………….J.
                                        (Ahsanuddin Amanullah)
        New Delhi;
May 14, 2025.
Criminal Appeal No.1157 of 2011, etc.                   Page 22 of 22