[Cites
5
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Office For Alternative Architecture vs Ircon Infrastructure And Services Ltd on 13 May, 2025
Author:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
2025 INSC 665
                                                                                                 REPORTABLE


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL No……….. OF 2024
                                   (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 28104/2023)


                     OFFICE FOR ALTERNATIVE ARCHITECTURE
                                                    …APPELLANT

                                                               VERSUS

                     IRCON INFRASTRUCTURE AND SERVICES LTD.
                                                 …RESPONDENT


                                                        JUDGMENT
MANOJ MISRA, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. This appeal impugns the judgment and order of the High Court of Delhi at

                     New Delhi1 dated 06.09.2023 whereby, while appointing an arbitral tribunal

                     in exercise of power under Section 112 of the Arbitration and Conciliation
1
The High Court
2
11. Appointment of arbitrators.
(1) A person of any nationality may be an arbitrator, unless otherwise agreed by the parties.
     (2) Subject to sub-section (6), the parties are free to agree on a procedure for appointing the arbitrator or arbitrators.
     (3) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (2), in an arbitration with three arbitrators, each party shall appoint
     one arbitrator, and the two appointed arbitrators shall appoint the third arbitrator who shall act as the presiding arbitrator.
Signature Not Verified
(3A) [The Supreme Court and the High Court shall have the power to designate, arbitral institutions, from time to time,
Digitally signed by
which
Deepak    Guglanihave been graded by the Council under section 43-I, for the purposes of this Act:
Date: 2025.05.13
   16:15:42 IST
   Reason:
Civil Appeal No……. of 2024 @SLP (C) No. 28104/2023
Page 1 of 6
Provided that in respect of those High Court jurisdictions, where no graded arbitral institution are available, then, the
Chief Justice of the concerned High Court may maintain a panel of arbitrators for discharging the functions and duties of
arbitral institution and any reference to the arbitrator shall be deemed to be an arbitral institution for the purposes of this
section and the arbitrator appointed by a party shall be entitled to such fee at the rate as specified in the Fourth Schedule.
Provided further that the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court may, from time to time, review the panel of
arbitrators.]
(4) If the appointment procedure in sub-section (3) applies and (a) a party fails to appoint an arbitrator within thirty days
from the receipt of a request to do so from the other party; or (b) the two appointed arbitrators fail to agree on the third
arbitrator within thirty days from the date of their appointment, [the appointment shall be made, on an application of the
party, by the arbitral institution designated by the Supreme Court, in case of international commercial arbitration, or by
the High Court, in case of arbitrations other than international commercial arbitration, as the case may be].
(5) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (2), in an arbitration with a sole arbitrator, if the parties fail to agree
on the arbitrator within thirty days from receipt of a request by one party from the other party to so agree [the appointment
shall be made on an application of the party in accordance with the provisions contained in sub-section (4).]
(6) Where, under an appointment procedure agreed upon by the parties,- (a) a party fails to act as required under that
procedure; or (b) the parties, or the two appointed arbitrators, fail to reach an agreement expected of them under that
procedure; or (c) a person, including an institution, fails to perform any function entrusted to him or it under that
procedure, [the appointment shall be made, on an application of the party, by the arbitral institution designated by the
Supreme Court, in case of international commercial arbitration, or by the High Court, in case of arbitrations other than
international commercial arbitration, as the case may be] to take the necessary measure, unless the agreement on the
appointment procedure provides other means for securing the appointment.
(6A) The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court, while considering any application under sub-section (4)
or sub-section (5) or sub-section (6), shall, notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any Court, confine to the
examination of the existence of an arbitration agreement.
(6B) The designation of any person or institution by the Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court, for the
purposes of this section shall not be regarded as a delegation of judicial power by the Supreme Court or the High Court.
(7) Decision on a matter entrusted by sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) to the Supreme Court or, as the
case may be, the High Court or the person or institution designated by such Court is final and no appeal including Letters
Patent Appeal shall lie against such decision.
(8) [The arbitral institution referred to in sub-sections (4), (5) and (6), before appointing an arbitrator, shall seek a
disclosure in writing from the prospective arbitrator in terms of sub-section (1) of section 12, and have due regard to-(a)
any qualifications required for the arbitrator by the agreement of the parties; and (b) the contents of the disclosure and
other considerations as are likely to secure the appointment of an independent and impartial arbitrator.]
(9) In the case of appointment of sole or third arbitrator in an international commercial arbitration, [the arbitral institution
designated by the Supreme Court] [Substituted 'the Supreme Court or the person or institution designated by that Court'
by Act No. 33 of 2019, dated 9.8.2019.] may appoint an arbitrator of a nationality other than the nationalities of the parties
where the parties belong to different nationalities.
(10) [The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court, may make such scheme as the said Court may deem
appropriate for dealing with matters entrusted by sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) or sub-section (6), to it.]
(11) [Where more than one request has been made under sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) to different
arbitral institutions, the arbitral institution to which the request has been first made under the relevant sub-section shall
be competent to appoint.]
(12) Where the matter referred to in sub-sections (4), (5), (6) and (8) arise in an international commercial arbitration or
any other arbitration, the reference to the arbitral institution in those sub-sections shall be construed as a reference to the
arbitral institution designated under sub-section (3A).
(13) An application made under this section for appointment of an arbitrator or arbitrators shall be disposed of by the
arbitral institution within a period of thirty days from the date of service of notice on the opposite party.
(14) The arbitral institution shall determine the fees of the arbitral tribunal and the manner of its payment to the arbitral
tribunal subject to the rates specified in the Fourth Schedule.
Explanation. - For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that this sub-section shall not apply to international
commercial arbitration and in arbitration's (other than international commercial arbitration) where parties have agreed for
determination of fees as per the rules of an arbitral institution.]

 Civil Appeal No……. of 2024 @SLP (C) No. 28104/2023
Page 2 of 6
Act, 19963, the High Court excluded certain claims, as stated in paras 48 (ii),
(iii) and (iv) of the claim petition, by holding them to be non-arbitrable

              /excepted matters in view of clause 50 and 50.2 of the agreement.
3. In a nutshell, the case of the appellant, inter alia, is that while exercising

              power under Section 11 of the 1996 Act, the Court has to only examine

              whether the arbitration agreement exists or not and if it exists, an Arbitrator

              is to be appointed who, thereafter, would decide whether the claims fall

              within the excepted category or not. It is thus prayed that the impugned order

              to the extent it excludes certain claims be set aside by leaving it open to the

              parties to raise all pleas before the arbitral tribunal.
4. Per contra, the learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the High

              Court is empowered to exclude non-arbitrable claims in light of the decision

              of this Court in
“Emaar India Limited vs. Tarun Aggarwal Projects LLP

              and Anr.4”
.
5. We have considered the rival submissions and have perused the materials on

              record.
6. The short question that falls for our consideration is whether while exercising

              power under Section 11 of the 1996 Act, the Court has to confine its

              consideration as to the existence of an arbitration agreement between the
3
The 1996 Act
4
(2023) 13 SCC 661

    Civil Appeal No……. of 2024 @SLP (C) No. 28104/2023
Page 3 of 6
parties. If so, whether it would be permissible, while exercising jurisdiction

         under Section 11, to hold that some of the claims raised are non-arbitrable or

         fall within excepted category.
7. Sub-section (6A) of Section 11, which was inserted by Act 3 of 2016, with

         effect from 23.10.2015, makes it clear that while considering an application

         under sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) or sub-section (6), the Supreme Court

         or the High Court, as the case may be, shall, notwithstanding any judgment,

         decree or order of any Court, confine to the examination of the existence of

         an arbitration agreement.
8. Act 33 of 2019 omitted sub-section (6A) but the amending Act has not been

         notified thus far. In consequence, sub-section (6A) of Section 11 of the 1996

         Act remains in the statute book.
9. The statement of objects and reasons of the 2015 amendment with reference

         to insertion of sub-section (6A) in Section 11 of the 1996 Act, reads thus:
“(iii) an application for appointment of an Arbitrator shall be disposed of by the
            High Court or the Supreme Court, as the case may be, as expeditiously as
            possible and an endeavour should be made to dispose of the matter within a
            period of 60 days.
(iv) to provide that while considering any application for appointment of
            Arbitrator, the High Court or the Supreme Court shall examine the existence of
            a prima facie arbitration agreement and not other issues.”
10. The significance of the use of the expression “not other issues” in the

         statement of objects and reasons of the 2015 amendment was noticed by a

         seven-Judge bench of this Court in In Re: Interplay Between Arbitration
Civil Appeal No……. of 2024 @SLP (C) No. 28104/2023
Page 4 of 6
Agreements under the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
and the

             Indian Stamp Act, 18995, and it was observed:
“209. The above extract indicates that the Supreme Court or High Court at the
                stage of the appointment of an Arbitrator shall ‘examine the existence of prima
                facie arbitration agreement and not other issues’. These other issues not only
                pertain to the validity of the arbitration agreement, but also include any other
                issues which are a consequence of unnecessary judicial interference in the
                arbitration proceedings.”
11. Relying on the above observations made by this Court in In Re: Interplay

             (supra), a three-judge bench of this Court in “SBI General Insurance Co.

             Ltd. vs. Krish Spinning6” observed:
“114. …. that the scope of enquiry at the stage of appointment of Arbitrator is
                limited to the scrutiny of prima facie existence of the arbitration agreement,
                and nothing else. For this reason, we find it difficult to hold that the
                observations made in
‘Vidya Drolia vs. Durga Trading Corporation
7 (supra)
                and adopted in
‘NTPC vs. SPML Infra Limited
8 (supra) that the jurisdiction
                of the referral court when dealing with the issue of “accord and satisfaction”
                under
section 11
extends to weeding out ex-facie non-arbitrable and frivolous
                disputes would continue to apply despite the subsequent decision in In Re:
Interplay (supra)”.
Emphasis Supplied
12. As the above decision has been rendered by a three-Judge bench of this

             Court after considering the seven-Judge bench decision of this Court in In

             Re: Interplay (supra), we are of the view that the respondent cannot profit

             from certain observations made by a two-Judge bench of this Court in
Emaar
(supra). In our view, therefore, the High Court fell in error in bisecting the

             claim of the appellant into two parts, one arbitrable and the other not
5
2023 INSC 1066
6
2024 INSC 532
7
(2021) 2 SCC 1
8
(2023) 9 SCC 385

    Civil Appeal No……. of 2024 @SLP (C) No. 28104/2023
Page 5 of 6
arbitrable, when it found arbitration agreement to be there for settlement of

         disputes between the parties. The correct course for the High Court was to

         leave it open to the party to raise the issue of non-arbitrability of certain

         claims before the arbitral tribunal, which, if raised, could be considered and

         decided by it.
13. The appeal is, therefore, allowed. The order of the High Court to the extent

         it excludes claims mentioned in para 48 (ii), (iii) and (iv), as referred to in

         paragraph 8 of the impugned order, is set aside. The parties are, however, at

         liberty to take the plea of non-arbitrability of certain claims before the arbitral

         tribunal, which shall decide the same without being prejudice by any

         observations made in the order of the High Court. There is no order as to

         costs.
….............................................J.
                                          (Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha)



                                          ................................................J.
                                                                       (Manoj Misra)



         New Delhi;
May 13, 2025




Civil Appeal No……. of 2024 @SLP (C) No. 28104/2023
Page 6 of 6