[Cites
16
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
K. Mangayarkarasi vs N.J. Sundaresan on 9 May, 2025
2025 INSC 687




                                                                           REPORTABLE


                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                              EXTRAORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                          SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 13012 OF 2025



                         K. MANGAYARKARASI & ANR.                           PETITIONERS


                                                      VERSUS


                         N.J. SUNDARESAN & ANR.                             RESPONDENTS


                                                    O R D E R
J.B. Pardiwala, J.
1.      This petition arises from the judgment and order passed by

                         the High Court of Judicature at Madras dated 09.01.2025 in C.R.P.

                         No. 1272 of 2024 by which the Civil Revision Petition filed by the

                         petitioners herein (original plaintiffs) came to be rejected thereby

                         affirming the order passed by the Commercial Court (District
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
POOJA SHARMA
Date: 2025.05.14
Judge Cadre), Coimbatore allowing application filed by the
18:45:01 IST
Reason:
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                               Page 1 of 28
respondents herein (original defendants) under
Section 8
of the

Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short, ‘the Act of

1996’) and referring the parties to arbitration.
2.      It appears from the materials on record that the petitioners

herein instituted a suit being C.O.S. No. 147 of 2023 in the

Commercial Court seeking following reliefs:-
“(i) Permanent injunction restraining Defendant No. 1, by
     himself, partners, business successors, servants, agents,
     representatives and every other person claiming through
     Defendant No. 1 to offer, sell, open any other shop with the
     same name or for any other purpose using the plaintiff No.
     1 mark in Application No. 3440505 of “SRI ANGANNAN
     BIRIYANI HOTEL” or “ABM SRI ANGANNAN HOTEL”
     or any other name format signifying the term ANGANNAN.
(ii) Permanent injunction restraining the Defendant No. 1
     by himself, partners, successors in business, servants,
     agents, representatives and every other person claiming
     through the Defendant No. 1 from using or associating
     himself with the mark in Application No. 3440505 of “SRI
     ANGANNAN BIRIYANI HOTEL” OR “ABH SRI
     ANGANNAN HOTEL” or any other term ANGANAN in any
     kind of social media platform or any other media platform
     until the court passes further orders.
(iii) to pay for damages of Rs. 20,00,000 /- (Rupees Twenty
     Lakhs only) for the loss that the Plaintiffs had incurred due
     to the use of the Trademark in Application No. 6440505 of
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                                 Page 2 of 28
“SRI ANGANNAN BIRIYANI HOTEL” and pass any other
     order that this Hon'ble Court may deem fit and thus render
     justice.
(iv) For costs of the suit.
(v) and pass such further or other orders as this Hon'ble
     Court may deem fit and proper in the circumstances of the
     case and thus render Justice.”
3.      The defendants appeared before the Commercial Court and

preferred application under
Section 8
of the Arbitration and

Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2019 stating as under:-
“APPLICATION FILED UNDER SECTION 8 OF THE
     ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION AMENDMENT
     ACT, 2019
     I. Petitioner/1st Defendant

     N. J. Sundaresan S/o Jagadeeswaran, Hindu, aged about
     45 years, residing at Flat No. 69, Sai Gangotri Apts.,
     N.S.R. Road, Sai Baba Colony, Coimbatore 641 025.
The address for service of the Petitioner is same as above
     and in care of his counsel Mr. P.R. Ramakrishnan
     /Advocate, “Ram Prasad , No. 2, Ramar Koil Street, Ram
     Nagar, Coimbatore - 641 009.
II. Respondents/ Plaintiffs
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                               Page 3 of 28
1. Mrs. K. Mangayarkarasi, W/o. Late Mr. N.
    Kadiravadivei, Hindu, aged about 77 years, residing at
    A2/1, Sree Annapporna Apartments, Bharathi Park, 1st
    cross, Saibaba Colony, Coimbatore- 641011 Presently
    residing at No. 153, Lakshmi Mills Colony, Coimbatore
    South, Pappanaickenpalayam, Coimbatore - 541037.
2. Mrs. K. M. Shredevi, D/o Late N. Kathiravadivel, Hindu,
    aged about 48 Years, residing at Flat #503,
    Kanakadhara's Landmark Apts., Virat Nagar Colony,
    Saket Road, Kapra, Hyderabad - 500 062,
    Both Rep. by their Power Agent Mrs. Jaishree S, W /o. Mr.
    Sandeep, Residing at 153, Lakshmi Mills Colony,
    Pappanaickenpalayam, Coimbatore - 641 037.
    III. Respondent/2nd Defendant
3. Mrs. Manonmani Angannan D/o Late N.
    Kathlravadivel, Hindu, aged about 50 years, residing at 4
    704 Antebeilum lane, Mansfield, 75063, Texas, USA.
    The address for service of the Respondent is same as
    above. FOR THE REASONS stated in the accompanying
    affidavit, the petitioner prays that this Honorable Court
    may be pleased to refer the parties to Arbitration and thus
    render justice.
LIST OF DOCUMENTS
1. 20.09.2017          Deed of Assignment of Trade Marks
                           (Original)
2. 14.10.2019          Deed of Assignment of Trade Marks
                           (Original)”
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                              Page 4 of 28
4.      The Commercial Court vide order dated 06.02.2024 allowed

the
Section 8
application filed by the respondents herein holding

as under:-
“15. Right in rem or Right in personam:- Applying the
      said principle of law, this court has to consider the facts
      of the case on hand. The petitioner has referred Ex.P1
      and Ex.P2 Deed of Assignment of Trade Marks dated
      14.10.2019 and dated 20.09.2017 respectively, which
      contain Arbitration Clauses. The petitioner claims right
      through the said Assignment deeds. The respondents
      contended in the counter that they signed in a blank stamp
      paper, which was fabricated as Assignment deeds and in
      Ex. R8 Legal Notice, they claimed that the petitioner
      fraudulently included his name in the Assignment deeds
      and obtained signature of the 1st respondent in the
      Assignment deeds. Further, the respondents stated in the
      plaint cause of action that the signature of the 1st
      respondent was forged by the petitioner. The respondents
      1 and 2 filed the suit for permanent injunction in respect
      of trade mark and not suit for declaration of any trade
      mark. The said suit is filed for the reliefs against
      infringement and passing off, which by their very nature
      would fall within the jurisdiction of the arbitrator. The
      right that is asserted by the petitioner is not a right that
      emanates from the Trademark Act, but a right that
      emanates from Ex.P1 and Ex.P2 Assignment deeds. The
      assignment of a trademark is by a contract and not by a
      statutory act. It does not involve any exercise of sovereign
      functions of the State. It cannot be said that the disputes
      are not arbitrable. Further, no relief has been prayed for
      declaration to set aside the said Assignment deeds.
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                                 Page 5 of 28
16. The counsel for respondents contended that the
      dispute pertained to the scope of trade mark registration
      and thus, any decision on the same would operate in rem
      as it would confer an absolute right on the winning party.
However, this court feels that that firstly, the dispute was
      addressed, more or less exclusively, around two
      contractual arrangements, namely. Assignment deeds.
      Secondly, the remedy is sought not on the ground that the
      petitioner is using deceptively similar trade marks, but
      rather that the right to use the trade mark was deliberated
      on a different family group. Thirdly, even if there was any
      reliance on provisions of the
Trade Marks Act, 1999
, the
      “essential infraction” as alleged was not of provisions of
      the
Trade Marks Act, 1999
, but of the provisions of the
      agreements. Thus, this court is of the view that any
      effective adjudication of the disputes would be dreadful
      without reference to the two assignment deeds. On the
      question of arbitrability of IPR disputes, the court finds
      that the dispute in the present case does not be in
      connection with the grant or registration of trade marks,
      and was therefore not affected by the concern identified
      in Vidya Drolia or Ayyasamy cases. Further, there was
      no connection of sovereign functions, and as it did not fall
      under any of the categories of disputes excepted by the
      Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in Vidya Drolia.
17. Non Signatory can be party to Arbitration:-
Admittedly, the petitioner and respondents 1 and 2 are
      parties to the said documents, but the 3 rd respondent is
      not party to the said documents. The respondents also
      produced the copies of the same documents as Ex.R2 and
      Ex.R3. Further, the 1st respondent also executed Ex.R4
      Copy Gift Deed dated 13.10.2020 and Ex.R5 Copy of Gift
      Deed dated 31.01.2023 in favour of the respondents 2 and
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                                 Page 6 of 28
3. Ex.R6 Letter of Registrar. Ex.R5 and Ex.R5 reveal that
      the applications were filed on 02.03.2023 and 15.05.2023
      for transfer of changes in the Trade mark. Ex.R8 to
      Ex.R15 are documents to show the legal action taken
      against the petitioner. Ex.R16 is the Power of Attorney
      deed. Ex.A17 State of Account. Thus, the right, title and
      interest of the 1st interest has been transferred in favour
      of the respondents 2 and 3 and they are successors or
      legal representatives of the said 1st respondent through
      Gift deeds. When the 1st and 2nd respondents are parties
      to the disputed Assignment deeds, the 3rd respondent also
      become party to the said Assignment deeds, who derived
      50% right of the 1st respondent. She cannot claim that
      she is non signatory of Ex.P1 and Ex.P2 = Ex.R2 and
      Ex.R3. Admittedly, no pleading in the counter of the
      respondents in respect of non signatory of the 3rd
      respondent. Further, Sec.8 of Arbitration and
      Conciliation Act says that “…if a party to the arbitration
      agreement or any person claiming through or under
      him....” Thus, this court feels that even though, the 3rd
      respondent is not a party to the Assignment deeds, in the
      absence of any pleadings, in view of the Gift deed and
      sailing with the other respondents and successor/legal
      representative of the 1st respondent, she can also be
      subjected to arbitration proceedings.
18. Thus, it is clear that the disputed assignment deeds
      have to be analyzed in the present suit and the present
      suit is filed based on the said assignment deeds and
      subsequent events between the parties. Considering all
      aspects this Court is of the view that when the disputed
      assignment deeds have to be analyzed in view of the
      clause No. 15 regarding Arbitration Clause, this Court
      has no jurisdiction and such, the parties have to be
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                                Page 7 of 28
directed to resolve their dispute before the Arbitral
      Tribunal.
19. In the result, this application is allowed. No costs.”
5.      The petitioners being dissatisfied with the order passed by

the Commercial Court referred to above challenged the same

before the High Court by way of a civil revision application. The

High Court rejected the revision application vide the impugned

judgment holding as under:-
“18. It is not in dispute that the 1st Petitioner/Plaintiff is
      the Proprietrix of the Trademark, after her father Late
      Angannan, who died in 1986. The 1st Petitioner’s
      husband, Kathirvadivel took over the business in 1984,
      after the death of Angannanm and till he died in 1990, he
      was assisted by his brother, Jagadeeswaran in the
      business till he died in 2019. The 1st Respondent,
      Sundaresan, is the son of Jagadeeswaran.
Mangayarkarasi had a son, Muralidharan. He died
      leaving behind two daughters namely, Jaishree and
      Sreemathi. Jaishree represents the Petitioners, as power
      agent in this proceeding. The two daughters of
      Mangayarkarasi are Manonmani, who is the 2nd
      Respondent and Sreedevi, who is the 2nd Petitioner.
19. On perusal of the records it is seen that the Petitioners
      / Plaintiffs filed a Suit in C.O.S. No. l47 of 2023 before
      the Commercial Court (District Judge Cadre),
      Coimbatore, for permanent injunction, restraining the
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                                   Page 8 of 28
defendants from interfering or using the Plaintiff’s
      Trademark of “Sri Angannan Briyani Hotel” and to pay
      damages of Rs.20,00,000/- for the loss that the plaintiffs
      incurred due to the use of the Trademark. Pending Suit,
      the 1st Respondent / 1st Defendant filed an Application in
      I.A.No.9 of 2023, praying to refer the parties to
      Arbitration, which was allowed by the Commercial
      Court, District Judge, Coimbatore. Aggrieved over the
      same, the Petitioners are before this Court with the
      present Civil Revision Petition.
20. On perusal of Clause 15 of “Deed of Assignment of
      Trade Marks”, dated 20.09.2017 and 14.10.2019, it is
      seen that in the event of any dispute between the parties,
      parties agreed to get such issues resolved. through
      Arbitration and in the event of not finding a resolution
      through Arbitration, the Court having jurisdiction in
      Coimbatore to the exclusion of all other Courts. The
      Clause 15 of “Deed of Assignment of Trade Marks”,
      dated 14.10.2019, contains Arbitration Clause, which
      reads as follows:-
Arbitration Clause, which reads as follows:-
15. “Dispute Resolution”

            “In the event of any dispute, difference or claim
            arising between the Parties under or in
            connection with this Agreement, parties agree to
            get such issues and disputes resolved first
            through CONCILIATION failing which by
            ARBITRATION and in the event of not finding a
            resolution through arbitration, the Court having
            jurisdiction in Coimbatore to the exclusion of all
            other Courts.”
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                                 Page 9 of 28
21.
Section 8
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
      reads as under:-
“8. Power to refer parties to arbitration where
            there is an arbitration agreement.-
(1) A judicial authority, before which an action
            is brought in a matter which is the subject of an
            arbitration agreement shall, if a party to the
            arbitration agreement or any person claiming
            through or under him, so applies not later than
            the date of submitting his first statement on the
            substance of the dispute, then, notwithstanding
            any judgment, decree or order of the Supreme
            Court or any Court, refer the parties to
            arbitration unless it finds that prima facie no
            valid arbitration agreement exists.
(2) The application referred to in sub-section (1)
            shall not be entertained unless it is accompanied
            by the original arbitration agreement or a duly
            certified copy thereof;
Provided that where the original arbitration
            agreement or a certified copy thereof is not
            available with the party applying for reference
            to arbitration under sub-section (1), and the said
            agreement or certified copy is retained by the
            other party to that agreement, then, the party so
            applying shall file such application along with a
            copy of the arbitration agreement and a petition
            praying the Court to call upon the other party to
            produce the original arbitration agreement or
            its duly certified copy before that Court.
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                                 Page 10 of 28
(3) Notwithstanding that an application has
            been made under sub-section (1) and that the
            issue is pending before the judicial authority, an
            arbitration may be commenced or continued and
            an arbitral award made.”
22. The suit has been filed by the Petitioners / Plaintiffs
      by suppressing the Arbitration Clause. The right of the
      Respondents emanates out of the agreement between the
      parties. When there is a valid contract between the
      parties providing for Arbitration, all claims including
      enforceability can only be adjudicated before an
      Arbitrator. Though the Petitioners disputed the execution
      of the agreement, the existence of the agreement is not
      disputed. An Arbitration Clause which forms a part of the
      Agreement shall be treated as an agreement independent
      of the other terms of the Contract. Further, the Arbitral
      Tribunal has power to decide on any objections with
      respect to the existence of validity of the agreement when
      there is an Arbitration Clause. The petitioners and
      Respondents having signed in the ‘Assignment Deed of
      Trademark’, which contains the Clause regarding
      settlement of dispute through arbitration, the Court
      below is right in referring the matter to the Arbitral
      Tribunal.
23. As regards the contention of the petitioners that the
      Assignment Deed is brought fraudulently and therefore,
      when fraud is pleaded, the matter cannot be referred to
      Arbitration is concerned, no doubt, mere plea of fraud is
      insufficient to avoid an arbitration proceedings. The
      contention of the petitioners that the 1st Petitioner was
      misled to signing blank papers and the 1st Respondent
      filled up the same by including his name and the 1 st
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                                 Page 11 of 28
Respondent has forged a fabricated deed as an
      irrevocable deed, cannot be countenanced for the simple
      reason that the 1st Petitioner wanted to assign the
      fabricated deed as an irrevocable deed, cannot be
      countenanced for the simple reason that the 1st Petitioner
      wanted to assign the Trademark is not in dispute and the
      signatures not disputed. Once 1st Petitioner admitted her
      signatures and the document ex facie shows that it has
      been properly executed and the 1st Petitioner is also a
      party to the document and the Assignment Deed is duly
      executed and attested by a Notary Public, prima facie the
      contention of the Petitioners cannot be accepted. Further,
      the 1st Petitioner/K. Mangayarkarasi and the 2nd
      Petitioner Sreedevi and her Husband Ajith received
      several payments from, the 1st Respondent periodically,
      which is evident from the statement of extract of the
      payments made by the 1st Respondent from 19.03.2021 to
      23.02.2023.
24. The allegation of fraud must have some implication
      in public domain to oust jurisdiction of arbitration. If an
      allegation of fraud exists directly between the parties
      concerned, the same will not be termed to be of serious
      nature of fraud and hence would not be barred for
      arbitration. At this juncture, it is worthwhile to refer the
      decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in Sushma Shivkumar
      Daga case (cited supra). Further, relying on a earlier
      Judgment of the Apex Court in Rashid Raza's case (cited
      supra) the Supreme Court holds that two parties in an
      Agreement. The first is that the plea perneats the entire
      contract option of the arbitration agreement rendering it
      void or secondly whether the allegation of fraud touches
      upon the internal affairs of the parties inter se having no
      implication in the public domain. The allegation must
      have some implication in public domain to oust
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                                 Page 12 of 28
jurisdiction of arbitration. If an allegation of fraud exists
      directly between the parties concerned, the same will not
      be termed to be of serious nature of fraud and hence
      would not be barred for arbitration. Further, the Apex
      Court in the Judgment in Deccan Paper Mills's case
      (cited supra) held that where the suit is inter parties with
      no public domain, fraud as laid down in the case of
      Avitech Past Studioz Ltd (cited supra)) is not applicable.
      Where rectification of instrument under
Section 31
of the
      Specific Relief Act is strictly action inter parties or by
      person who obtained derivative title from parties, such
      action is in personam and the dispute is arbitrable.
25. The Law laid down by the Apex Court in the aforesaid
      Judgments squarely apply to the case on hand.
      Admittedly, the dispute between the parties arise out of a
      contract of assignment. There is no public cause involved
      in this dispute. The question involved is one between the
      parties arise out of a contract of assignment. There is no
      public cause involved in this dispute. The question
      involved is one arising under the contract of assignment
      and its validity and binding nature and what is the effect
      of several payment received by the assignor from the 1st
      Respondent, as assignee/on various dates, which are
      matters to be considered by the Arbitral Tribunal and this
      is undoubtedly covered by the arbitration clause. The
      right claimed by the 1st Respondent is contractual as
      assignee of a Trademark. Disputes raised by the
      Petitioners is that there was no intention to assign the
      trademark and that too irrevocably to the 1st Respondent,
      but at the same time, the assignment in favour of the 2 nd
      Petitioner is accepted. This renders the position of the
      Petitioners very week insofar as the merits of the claim
      are concerned. This despite is arbitrable and factual
      issues as also validity of the assignment and rights
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                                  Page 13 of 28
flowing from it can be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal.
Further, the Suit is filed for the reliefs against the
      infringement and passing off, which by their very nature
      would fall within the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator. The
      right that is asserted by the 1st Respondent is not a right
      that emanates from the Trademark Act, but a right that
      emanates from the Assignment Deeds. The Assignment of
      a trademark is by a contract and not by a statutory act.
26. As regards the contention of the Petitioners that
      disputes involved in use of trademark is not arbitrable is
      concerned, the Petitioners rely on a passing reference in
      Ayyasamy's case (cited supra), where the Apex Court
      held that where there are allegations of fraud and such
      allegations are merely alleged, it may not be necessary to
      nullify the effect of arbitration agreement between the
      parties and such issues can be determined by the Arbitral
      Tribunal. This judgment supports the plea of the 1 st
      Respondent, who wants the dispute to be referred to
      Arbitration. Though fraud was pleaded in that
      proceeding, the Supreme Court concluded that mere
      allegation of fraud was not sufficient to detract from the
      obligations of the parties to submit their disputes to
      arbitration. Moreover, non-arbitrable disputes dealt with
      in Booz Allen's case and Vidya Doha's case. In Booz
      Allen’s case, the Apex Court dealt with the disputes,
      which are arbitrable and which non-arbitrable. This is
      clarified by a Three Judge Bench Decision of the Apex
      Court in Vidya Doha's case. In view of the foregoing
      reasons, this Court is not inclined to interfere with the
      findings of the Court below.
27. In the result, the Civil Revision Petition stands
      dismissed. Consequently, the connected miscellaneous
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                                Page 14 of 28
petitions are also dismissed. However, there shall he no
      order as to costs.”
6.      In such circumstances referred to above, the petitioners are

before this Court with the present petition.
7.      Heard Mr. V. Prakash, the learned senior counsel appearing

for the petitioners.
8.      The law on the subject is no longer res integra. When the

arbitral tribunal is constituted at the instance of one of the parties

and other party takes up the position that such proceedings are not

valid in law then what is the court expected to do in law has been

explained very succinctly by this Court in
Kvaerner Cementation

India Ltd. v. Bajranglal Agarwal and Anr.
reported in (2012) 5

SCC 214, as under:-
“3. There cannot be any dispute that in the absence of
      any arbitration clause in the agreement, no dispute could
      be referred for arbitration to an Arbitral Tribunal. But,
      bearing in mind the very object with which the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
has been enacted
      and the provisions thereof contained in
Section 16
conferring the power on the Arbitral Tribunal to rule on
      its own jurisdiction, including ruling on any objection
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                                 Page 15 of 28
with respect to existence or validity of the arbitration
      agreement, we have no doubt in our mind that the civil
      court cannot have jurisdiction to go into that question.
4. A bare reading of
Section 16
makes it explicitly clear
      that the Arbitral Tribunal has the power to rule on its own
      jurisdiction even when any objection with respect to
      existence or validity of the arbitration agreement is
      raised, and a conjoint reading of sub-sections (2), (4) and
      (6) of
Section 16
would make it clear that such a decision
      would be amenable to be assailed within the ambit of
Section 34
of the Act.
5. In this view of the matter, we see no infirmity in the
      impugned order so as to be interfered with by this Court.
The petitioner, who is a party to the arbitral proceedings
      may raise the question of jurisdiction of the arbitrator as
      well as the objection on the ground of non-existence of
      any arbitration agreement in the so-called dispute in
      question, and on such an objection being raised, the
      arbitrator would do well in disposing of the same as a
      preliminary issue so that it may not be necessary to go
      into the entire gamut of arbitration proceedings.”

                                            (Emphasis supplied)
9.      What would be the position in case a suit is filed by the

plaintiff and in the said suit, the defendant files an application

under
Section 8
of the Act of 1996 questioning the maintainability

of the suit on the ground that party had agreed to settle the disputes
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                                 Page 16 of 28
through the means of arbitration having regarding to the existence

of an arbitration agreement between them? This has been very

elaborately explained by this Court in
A. Ayyasamy v. A.

Paramasivam & Ors.
reported in (2016) 10 SCC 386. The Court

held as under:-
“13. …Obviously, in such a case, the court is to
      pronounce upon arbitrability or non-arbitrability of the
      disputes.
14. In the instant case, there is no dispute about the
      arbitration agreement inasmuch as there is a specific
      arbitration clause in the partnership deed. However, the
      question is as to whether the dispute raised by the
      respondent in the suit is incapable of settlement through
      arbitration. As pointed out above, the Act does not make
      any provision excluding any category of disputes treating
      them as non-arbitrable. Notwithstanding the above, the
      courts have held that certain kinds of disputes may not be
      capable of adjudication through the means of arbitration.
The courts have held that certain disputes like criminal
      offences of a public nature, disputes arising out of illegal
      agreements and disputes relating to status, such as
      divorce, cannot be referred to arbitration. The following
      categories of disputes are generally treated as non-
      arbitrable [See O.P. Malhotra on ‘The Law and Practice
      of Arbitration and Conciliation’, 3rd Edn., authored by
      Indu Malhotra. See also note 10 ibid.]:
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                                 Page 17 of 28
(i) patent, trade marks and copyright;
(ii) anti-trust/competition laws;
(iii) insolvency/winding up;
(iv) bribery/corruption;
(v) fraud;
(vi) criminal matters.
Fraud is one such category spelled out by the decisions
      of this Court where disputes would be considered as non-
      arbitrable.
15. “Fraud” is a knowing misrepresentation of the truth
      or concealment of a material fact to induce another to act
      to his detriment. Fraud can be of different forms and
      hues. Its ingredients are an intention to deceive, use of
      unfair means, deliberate concealment of material facts,
      or abuse of position of confidence. The Black's Law
      Dictionary defines “fraud” as a concealment or false
      representation through a statement or conduct that
      injures another who relies on it [See
Ramesh
      Kumar v. Furu Ram
, (2011) 8 SCC 613 : (2011) 4 SCC
      (Civ) 303 (a decision rendered under the
Arbitration Act,
      1940
).] However, the moot question here which has to be
      addressed would be as to whether mere allegation of
      fraud by one party against the other would be sufficient
      to exclude the subject-matter of dispute from arbitration
      and decision thereof necessary by the civil court.”

                                            (Emphasis supplied)
10.
In
Booz Allen and Hamilton Inc. v. SBI Home Finance

Limited & Ors.
, (2011) 5 SCC 532, this Court in the context of
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                                    Page 18 of 28
Section 8
of the Act of 1996 considered the question as to whether

the subject matter was ‘arbitrable’ i.e. arbitrable by private forum

(arbitral tribunal). In this context, the Court discussed the term

‘arbitrability’ by pointing out three facets thereof namely:-
(1) whether the disputes are capable of adjudication and

   settlement by arbitration?
(2) whether the disputes are covered by the arbitration

   agreement?
(3) whether the parties have referred the disputes to arbitration?
11.     The Court held as under:-
“35. The Arbitral Tribunals are private fora chosen
      voluntarily by the parties to the dispute, to adjudicate
      their disputes in place of courts and tribunals which are
      public fora constituted under the laws of the country.
      Every civil or commercial dispute, either contractual or
      non-contractual, which can be decided by a court, is in
      principle capable of being adjudicated and resolved by
      arbitration unless the jurisdiction of the Arbitral
      Tribunals is excluded either expressly or by necessary
      implication. Adjudication of certain categories of
      proceedings are reserved by the legislature exclusively
      for public fora as a matter of public policy. Certain other
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                                Page 19 of 28
categories of cases, though not expressly reserved for
      adjudication by public fora (courts and tribunals), may
      by necessary implication stand excluded from the
      purview of private fora. Consequently, where the
      cause/dispute is in arbitrable, the court where a suit is
      pending, will refuse to refer the parties to arbitration,
      under
Section 8
of the Act, even if the parties might have
      agreed upon arbitration as the forum for settlement of
      such disputes.
36. The well-recognised examples of non-arbitrable
      disputes are : (i) disputes relating to rights and liabilities
      which give rise to or arise out of criminal offences; (ii)
      matrimonial disputes relating to divorce, judicial
      separation, restitution of conjugal rights, child custody;
(iii) guardianship matters; (iv) insolvency and winding-
      up matters; (v) testamentary matters (grant of probate,
      letters of administration and succession certificate); and
(vi) eviction or tenancy matters governed by special
      statutes where the tenant enjoys statutory protection
      against eviction and only the specified courts are
      conferred jurisdiction to grant eviction or decide the
      disputes.
37. It may be noticed that the cases
referred to above
relate to actions in rem. A right in rem is a right
      exercisable against the world at large, as contrasted from
      a right in personam which is an interest protected solely
      against specific individuals. Actions in personam refer to
      actions determining the rights and interests of the parties
      themselves in the subject-matter of the case, whereas
      actions in rem refer to actions determining the title to
      property and the rights of the parties, not merely among
      themselves but also against all persons at any time
      claiming an interest in that property. Correspondingly, a
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                                   Page 20 of 28
judgment in personam refers to a judgment against a
      person as distinguished from a judgment against a thing,
      right or status and a judgment in rem refers to a judgment
      that determines the status or condition of property which
      operates directly on the property itself. (Vide Black's Law
      Dictionary.)
38. Generally and traditionally all disputes relating to
      rights in personam are considered to be amenable to
      arbitration; and all disputes relating to rights in rem are
      required to be adjudicated by courts and public tribunals,
      being unsuited for private arbitration. This is not
      however a rigid or inflexible rule. Disputes relating to
      subordinate rights in personam arising from rights in rem
      have always been considered to be arbitrable.”
                                            (Emphasis supplied)
12.
In
Vidya Drolia v. Durga Trading Corporation
reported in

(2021) 2 SCC 1, this Court held that the grant and issue of patents

and registration of trademarks are matters that fall within the

sovereign or government functions and have erga omnes effect.
Prima facie, the nature of disputes sought to be raised by the

petitioners cannot be considered as actions in rem. The assumption

that all matters relating to trademarks are outside the scope of

arbitration is plainly erroneous. There may be disputes that may

arise from subordinate rights such as licences granted by the
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                                Page 21 of 28
proprietor of a registered trademark. Undisputedly, these disputes,

although, involving the right to use trademarks, are arbitrable as

they relate to rights and obligations inter se the parties to a licence

agreement.
13.     At this juncture, we would like to refer to the recent decision

of this Court in SBI General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Krish

Spinning reported in 2024 SCC OnLine SC 1754, wherein one of

us, J.B. Pardiwala, J., was a part of the Bench, which considered,

inter alia, the issue as to whether a party could seek referral of a

matter to arbitration, having previously executed a discharge

voucher as the full and final settlement of all pending dues.
Referring to the position of law elucidated in the case of
National

Insurance Company Limited v. Boghara Polyfab Private Limited
reported in (2009) 1 SCC 267, the Court observed that the aspect

of full and final settlement having been obtained by fraud or

coercion itself gives rise to an arbitrable issue and thus does not
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                                  Page 22 of 28
act as a bar to arbitration. The relevant paragraphs are reproduced

hereinbelow:-
“57. The position that emerges from the aforesaid
      discussion is that there is no rule of an absolute kind which
      precludes arbitration in cases where a full and final
      settlement has been arrived at. In
Boghara Polyfab
(supra), discussing in the context of a case similar to the
      one at hand, wherein the discharge voucher was alleged to
      have been obtained on ground of coercion, it was observed
      that the discharge of a contract by full and final settlement
      by issuance of a discharge voucher or a no-dues certificate
      extends only to those vouchers or certificates which are
      validly and voluntarily executed. Thus, if the party said to
      have executed the discharge voucher or the no dues
      certificate alleges that the execution was on account of
      fraud, coercion or undue influence exercised by the other
      party and is able to establish such an allegation, then the
      discharge of the contract by virtue of issuance of such a
      discharge voucher or no dues certificate is rendered void
      and cannot be acted upon.
58. It was further held in
Boghara Polyfab
(supra) that the
      mere execution of a full and final settlement receipt or a
      discharge voucher would not by itself operate as a bar to
      arbitration when the validity of such a receipt or voucher
      is challenged by the claimant on the ground of fraud,
      coercion or undue influence. In other words, where the
      parties are not ad idem over accepting the execution of the
      no-claim certificate or the discharge voucher, such
      disputed discharge voucher may itself give rise to an
      arbitrable dispute.”                  (Emphasis supplied)
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                                 Page 23 of 28
14.     Further, referring to the time-sensitive nature of arbitration

proceedings and the broad jurisdiction of arbitral tribunals under
Section 16
of the Act of 1996, the Court observed that the aspects

like full and final settlement, frivolity or dishonesty in litigation,

etc. were well within the domain of the arbitral tribunal to consider

and the courts, acting under
Section 11
of the Act of 1996 must

limit their scope of examination merely to ascertaining the

existence of the arbitration agreement. The approach taken by this

Court in Krish Spinning (supra) not only furthers the

interpretation adopted by this Court in its previous decisions in
Mayavati Trading Private Limited v. Pradyut Deb Burman
reported in (2019) 8 SCC 714 and In Re : Interplay Between

Arbitration Agreements under the
Arbitration and Conciliation

Act, 1966
and the
Indian Stamp Act, 1899
reported in 2023 INSC

1066, but also gives meaningful effect to the change brought about

by the 2015 amendment to the Act of 1996. The relevant

paragraphs are reproduced hereinbelow:-
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                                 Page 24 of 28
“123. The power available to the referral courts has to be
      construed in the light of the fact that no right to appeal is
      available against any order passed by the referral court
      under
Section 11
for either appointing or refusing to
      appoint an arbitrator. Thus, by delving into the domain of
      the arbitral tribunal at the nascent stage of
Section 11
, the
      referral courts also run the risk of leaving the claimant in
      a situation wherein it does not have any forum to approach
      for the adjudication of its claims, if it
Section 11
application is rejected.
124.
Section 11
also envisages a time-bound and
      expeditious disposal of the application for appointment of
      arbitrator. One of the reasons for this is also the fact that
      unlike
Section 8
, once an application under
Section 11
is
      filed, arbitration cannot commence until the arbitral
      tribunal is constituted by the referral court. This Court, on
      various occasions, has given directions to the High Courts
      for expeditious disposal of pending
Section 11
applications. It has also directed the litigating parties to
      refrain from filing bulky pleadings in matters pertaining to
Section 11
. Seen thus, if the referral courts go into the
      details of issues pertaining to “accord and satisfaction”
      and the like, then it would become rather difficult to
      achieve the objective of expediency and simplification of
      pleadings.
125. We are also of the view that ex-facie frivolity and
      dishonesty in litigation is an aspect which the arbitral
      tribunal is equally, if not more, capable to decide upon the
      appreciation of the evidence adduced by the parties. We
      say so because the arbitral tribunal has the benefit of going
      through all the relevant evidence and pleadings in much
      more detail than the referral court. If the referral court is
      able to see the frivolity in the litigation on the basis of bare
      minimum pleadings, then it would be incorrect to doubt
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                                   Page 25 of 28
that the arbitral tribunal would not be able to arrive at the
      same inference, most likely in the first few hearings itself,
      with the benefit of extensive pleadings and evidentiary
      material.”                             (Emphasis supplied)
15.     The law is well settled that allegations of fraud or criminal

wrongdoing or of statutory violation would not detract from the

jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal to resolve a dispute arising out

of a civil or contractual relationship on the basis of the jurisdiction

conferred by the arbitration agreement.
16.     Once an application in due compliance with
Section 8
of the

Act of 1996 is filed, the approach of the civil court should be not

to see whether the court has jurisdiction. It should be to see

whether its jurisdiction has been ousted. There is a lot of difference

between the two approaches. Once it is brought to the notice of the

court that its jurisdiction has been taken away in terms of the

procedure prescribed under a special statute, the civil court should

first see whether there is ouster of jurisdiction in terms or

compliance with the procedure under the special statute. The
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                                  Page 26 of 28
general law should yield to the special law — generalia

specialibus non derogant. In such a situation, the approach shall

not be to see whether there is still jurisdiction in the civil court

under the general law. Such approaches would only delay the

resolution of disputes and complicate the redressal of grievance

and of course unnecessarily increase the pendency in the court.
[See:-
A. Ayyasamy
(supra)]
17.     Once there is an arbitration agreement between the parties,

a judicial authority before whom an action is brought covering the

subject-matter of the arbitration agreement is under a positive

obligation to refer parties to arbitration by enforcing the terms of

the contract. There is no element of discretion left in the court or

judicial authority to obviate the legislative mandate of compelling

parties to seek recourse to arbitration.
18.     In view of the foregoing, we are of the view that no error,

not to speak of any error of law, could be said to have been
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                               Page 27 of 28
committed by the High Court in passing the impugned judgment

and order.
19.     The Special Leave Petition stands, accordingly, dismissed.
20.     Pending application(s), if any, stands disposed of.
…...............................J.
                                     (J.B. PARDIWALA)



                                     …................................J.
                                     (R. MAHADEVAN)
NEW DELHI;
MAY 9, 2025
SLP(C) No. 13012/2025                                       Page 28 of 28