[Cites
23
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Noble Resources And Trading India ... vs Union Of India on 14 May, 2025
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
2025 INSC 684

                                                                       REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2572 OF 2025


                         NOBLE RESOURCES AND                          APPELLANT(S)
                         TRADING INDIA PRIVATE LIMITED
                         (EARLIER KNOWN AS ANDAGRO
                         SERVICES PVT. LTD.)


                                                   VERSUS


                         UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                   RESPONDENT(S)

                                               JUDGMENT
UJJAL BHUYAN, J.
This appeal by special leave has been preferred

                         against the judgment and order dated 05.08.2019 passed by

                         the High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad (briefly ‘the High

                         Court’ hereinafter) in R/Special Civil Application No.8596 of
Signature Not Verified
2007.
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2025.05.14
18:40:18 IST
Reason:
2.         On 06.12.2019, this Court had condoned the delay

in filing the special leave petition and issued notice. An interim

order was passed to the effect that the ad interim protection

which was granted by the High Court shall continue to operate.

By order dated 12.02.2025, leave has been granted.
3.         Relevant facts may be briefly noted.
4.         Appellant is a government recognized two star

export house and a trading company engaged in the export of

rice, sesame seeds, soyabean meal extracts, etc. Earlier name

of the appellant was M/s Andagro Services Private Limited but

has since been renamed as Noble Resources and Trading India

Private Limited.
5.         Under the Export-Import (EXIM) policy of 2002-

2007, which provided for exempting goods when imported into

India under a duty free credit entitlement (DFCE) certificate,

appellant was granted such a certificate for import of goods

having a nexus with the products exported by it under the

category ‘67/food products’. Under this duty free credit

entitlement certificate (briefly ‘the certificate’ hereinafter),
2
appellant imported crude degummed soyabean oil vide two

Bills of Entry dated 26.07.2006 and 27.07.2006 claiming duty

exemption on the basis of such certificate. The exemption

claimed was in terms of para 3.7.2.1(vi) of the EXIM policy.
6.        A show-cause notice dated 30.08.2006 was issued

to the appellant by the Office of the Commissioner of Customs,

Kachchh Commissionerate stating that under the duty free

credit entitlement scheme (briefly ‘the scheme’ hereinafter) vide

notification No.53/2003-Cus. dated 01.04.2003, appellant was

not eligible for benefits on the import of crude degummed

soyabean oil as it was an agricultural product. Since goods in

the nature of agricultural and dairy products were excluded

under the said notification, appellant was liable to discharge

the duties as applicable. Revenue was of the further view that

the import made by the appellant should have a nexus with

the product group exported. One of the goods exported by the

appellant was soyabean meal extract while the product

imported was crude degummed soyabean oil; there was no
3
nexus between the two. The notice therefore called upon the

appellant to pay all the duties chargeable with interest.
7.        Appellant responded to the show-cause notice by

filing a reply dated 14.09.2006. Appellant contended that the

product imported by it i.e. crude degummed soyabean oil, was

not an agricultural and dairy product so as to be excluded

from the notification No.53/2003. It was further contended

that both the products imported and exported i.e. crude

degummed      soyabean    oil   and   soyabean    meal      extract

respectively are classified as food products. Therefore, the

product imported clearly has a nexus with the product

exported by the appellant. Appellant relied upon amended

notifications dated 28.01.2004 and 21.04.2004 as well as para

3.2.5 of the Handbook of Procedures. Appellant explained that

through a process of manufacture, the agricultural product

soyabean loses its identity and becomes another product

called crude degummed soyabean oil which is a distinctly

marketable commodity. That apart, appellant contended that it

was imported through the Metals and Minerals Trading
4
Corporation (MMTC). Therefore, it was entitled to exemption

from duty under the scheme on this score as well.
8.        Appellant was granted a personal hearing on

08.12.2006.
9.        Thereafter, order-in-original dated 09.01.2007 was

passed by the Assistant Commissioner (Gr.-VII), Customs

House, Kandla (briefly ‘Assistant Commissioner’ hereinafter)

whereby the demand of duty to the tune of Rs.1,00,38,321.00

raised in the show-cause notice was confirmed. In the process

appellant has been denied the benefit of duty free credit

entitlement.
10.       This came to be assailed by the appellant before the

High Court by filing a petition under
Article 226
of the

Constitution of India which was registered as R/Special Civil

Application No.8596 of 2007.
11.       A Division Bench of the High Court vide judgment

and order dated 05.08.2019 (impugned judgment) dismissed

the writ petition by upholding the levy of demand. After

pronouncement of the judgment, on the prayer made on behalf
5
of the appellant, the Division Bench of the High Court

extended the interim relief which was granted earlier in the

writ proceeding for a period of four weeks.
12.       As noted above, this Court while issuing notice had

granted interim relief extending the interim protection granted

by the High Court.
13.       Learned senior counsel for the appellant at the

outset submits that the benefit given by the statutory

notification bearing No. 53/2003-Cus. dated 01.04.2003 could

not have been whittled down by the departmental circular No.

10/2004-Cus. dated 30.01.2004. He submits that in terms of

the notification, the goods imported into India by importers

covered by the duty free credit entitlement certificate were

exempted from payment of whole of the customs duty and

additional duty. As per definition of the word ‘goods’ in the

said notification, only agricultural and dairy products were

excluded. Crude degummed soyabean oil imported by the

appellant is not an agricultural product. However, the

department relied upon the circular to contend that any
6
product derived from agriculture or having dairy origin would

not be permitted to avail the benefit under the duty free

entitlement scheme. High Court committed a manifest error in

placing reliance on the circular. The circular could not have

narrowed down the scope of the exemption by enlarging the

exclusionary clause.
13.1.      Learned senior counsel submits that since the

expression ‘agricultural product’ has not been defined in the

notification No. 53/2003, its meaning has to be ascribed in

terms of commercial parlance. In the said notification,

agriculture and dairy products were excluded from the

exemption to payment of customs duty and additional duty.

However, the circular expanded the exclusion by adding the

words ‘any product derived from agricultural origin’. Thus, the

circular   had   gone   beyond   the     scope   of   the   statutory

notification which is not permissible.
13.2.      Learned senior counsel has pointed out that

Director General of Foreign Trade (DGFT) subsequently issued

public notice No. 42/2004-2009 dated 06.01.2025 permitting
7
importers to import all types of edible oil classifiable under

Chapter Heading No. 15 through the State Trading Corporations

(STC) and MMTC.
13.3.      Assailing the impugned judgment, learned senior

counsel submits that High Court fell in error in holding that

crude degummed soyabean oil imported by the appellant is an

agricultural product since it is derived from soyabean which is

admittedly an agricultural product. He has painstakingly

explained the process of manufacture of crude degummed

soyabean oil from soyabean and submits that by no stretch of

imagination, the same can be said to be an agricultural

product.   Through   a   manufacturing   process,   a   distinct

commodity or product is manufactured i.e. crude degummed

soyabean oil which is clearly a distinct commodity. This aspect

was overlooked by the High Court. He also adverted to the

expression ‘agricultural product’ and submits that since it has

not been defined in the EXIM policy, the common parlance test

should be applied and the dictionary definition should be

referred to. He submits that agriculture has been defined to
8
mean the science and art of cultivating the soil, harvesting

crop and raising livestock. While soyabean is certainly an

agricultural product, crude degummed soyabean oil, even if

not refined and not fit for human consumption, cannot be

termed as an agricultural product.
13.4.     Learned senior counsel asserts that the process of

extraction of crude degummed soyabean oil from soyabean

amounts to manufacture. In this connection, he has placed

reliance on the
Central Excise Act, 1944
.
13.5.     Even otherwise, it is submitted that the Handbook

of Procedures (Vol. I) was amended by the DGFT through

public notice No. 40/2002-07 dated 28.01.2004 in terms of

the powers conferred on him under the EXIM policy of 2002-

2007. By the said notice, para 3.2.5 was inserted which clearly

stated that agricultural products under Chapters 1-24 of ITC

(HS) were not allowed to be taken into consideration for

computation of entitlement under the duty free credit

entitlement scheme. Thereafter, DGFT further amended para

3.2.5 by way of public notice No. 42/2004-2009 dated
9
06.01.2005 whereby DGFT allowed import of items to be

covered under the scheme except the items specifically

excluded. By way of the said public notice, DGFT allowed the

import of all types of edible oil classifiable under Chapter

Heading 15 of ITC (HS) classification of export and import

items but only through STC and MMTC. In the instant case,

appellant had imported the crude degummed soyabean oil on

26.07.2006 through the MMTC. Therefore, on this ground also

appellant is entitled to the benefit of the scheme.

13.6.      Learned senior counsel also submits that the

imported good i.e. crude degummed soyabean oil has clear

nexus with the product group exported by the appellant.
As

per the license under the scheme, the import should have

nexus with the product exported. Appellant exported food

products like non-basmati rice, sesame seeds, white sugar and

soyabean milk extract which are clearly food products having

been allotted respective numbers under the Standard Input

Output Norms (SION). The good imported is crude degummed

soyabean oil which is also a food product and clearly has a
10
nexus with the exported product. This aspect has been dealt

          with by the Bombay High Court in
Essel Mining and Industries

          Limited Vs. Union of India
1. However, learned senior counsel

          pointed out that this decision is subject matter of a pending

          special leave petition before this Court.
In fact, this Court vide

          order dated 08.01.2025 declined the request for tagging of the

          present appeal with the special leave petition assailing the

          Bombay High Court judgment in
Essel Mining and Industries

          Limited
(supra) as the High Court has held that the same

          would have no application.
13.7.          In any view of the matter, learned senior counsel

          submits that the order of the Assistant Commissioner dated

          09.01.2007        and   the   impugned   judgment    are   wholly

          unsustainable in law. Those are liable to be appropriately

          interfered with by this Court.
14.            Per contra, learned Additional Solicitor General

          appearing for the respondents submits that the precise

          question involved in the present appeal is whether appellant
1
(2011) 270 ELT 306
11
was entitled to exemption from customs duty, additional duty

and special additional duty in terms of the notification No.

53/2003-Cus. dated 01.04.2003. He submits that while

dealing with this issue, the condition mentioned in the

notification would have to be read in terms of the EXIM policy

2002-2007, as amended from time to time. He has referred to

a subsequent notification bearing No. 38 dated 21.04.2004

whereby the EXIM policy was amended by insertion of Note 7

which clearly stated that agricultural products falling under

item 1-24 of ITC (HS) will not be allowed for import under the

scheme.
14.1.       It is submitted that import of crude degummed

soyabean oil is in the nature of an agricultural product or a

product of agricultural origin. It is not eligible for benefits

under the scheme in terms of notification No. 53/2003. He

asserts that permitting import of such a product which is

otherwise an agriculture product would amount to subverting

the tariff barrier.
12
14.2.      Controverting the contention of the appellant that

the product imported is not agricultural in nature, learned

Additional Solicitor General has referred to the impugned

judgment of the High Court which held that extraction of oil

from soyabean does not strip it of its agricultural identity.

14.3.      Referring   to   the   two   Bills   of   Entry,   learned

Additional Solicitor General submits that appellant itself

classified the imported product under Custom Tariff Heading

(CTH) 15071000 which falls under Chapter 15 of the Indian

Trade Classification (Harmonized System) (already referred to

as ITC (HS)). This chapter specially covers animal or vegetable

fats and oils, prepared edible fats and animal or vegetable

waxes. This clearly shows that the product imported falls

under Chapter 15 of ITC (HS) and, therefore, not allowed for

import under the scheme.
14.4.      Learned Additional Solicitor General submitted that

appellant was exporting non-basmati rice (E/38), sesame

seeds (E/93), white sugar (E/52/79) and soyabean meal

extract (E/42) as food products. Such goods exported by the
13
appellant did not have any broad nexus with the imported

product i.e. crude degummed soyabean oil. Therefore, the

benefit under notification No.53/2003 was rightly denied to

the appellant.
14.5.      He has also referred to the impugned judgment

where the High Court has held that the test report clearly

demonstrated that crude degummed soyabean oil was not fit

for direct human consumption unless refined. Hence, benefit

of public notice No. 42/2004-2009 dated 06.01.2005 through

which import of edible oil was expressly permitted would not

be available to the appellant.
14.6.      Referring to the submissions of the appellant that

the circular No. 10/2004-Cus. dated 30.01.2004 could not

have exceeded the statutory notification, he submits that

notification No. 53/2003 excluded agricultural products. The

specific exclusion of all agricultural and dairy products was

explained by the circular No. 10/2004-Cus. dated 30.01.2004.

The circular did not add anything new but merely clarified and

articulated what was implicit in the notification.
14
14.7.     He, therefore, submits that there is no merit in the

appeal which is liable to be dismissed.
15.       Submissions made by learned counsel for the

parties have received the due consideration of the Court.
16.       Since the genesis of the present lis is the show-

cause notice dated 30.08.2006 issued by the Assistant

Commissioner, Kandla, it would be appropriate to initiate the

analysis therefrom. The show-cause notice referred to the

factum of importation of crude degummed soyabean oil falling

under CTH 15071000 chargeable to appropriate tariff duty by

the appellant. However, the appellant filed two Bills of Entry

dated 26.07.2006 and 27.07.2006 claiming benefit of the

notification bearing No.53/2003-Cus. dated 01.04.2003 i.e.

exemption from payment of various customs duties on the

basis of the license issued by the DGFT for duty free import of

goods specified in the license. After referring to the said

notification and the amendments carried out thereto, the

Assistant Commissioner observed that in view of exclusion of

agricultural and dairy products from the ambit of ‘goods’
15
covered by the said notification, the import did not appear to

be eligible for the benefits under the scheme since the

imported good i.e. crude degummed soyabean oil was in the

nature of agricultural product. The Assistant Commissioner

further observed that as per the pre-condition sheet attached

to the license issued by the DGFT, the imported product must

have a nexus with the product group exported. The export

group name indicates 67/food products. Included in the said

group of export was soyabean meal extract, whereas the

product imported was crude degummed soyabean oil which

did not appear to have a nexus with the exported product.

Therefore, appellant was called upon to show-cause as to why

the duties chargeable/leviable for imported goods should not

be charged under
Section 28
of the Customs Act, 1962 (‘the
Customs Act
’ hereinafter) on the goods imported duty free and

hit by the exclusion clause of the notification bearing

No.53/2003. Appellant was also called upon to show cause as

to why interest at appropriate rate on the aforesaid duties

should not be charged under
Section 28AB
of the Customs Act.
16
17.         Appellant responded to the aforesaid show-cause

notice by way of reply dated 14.09.2006. Appellant submitted

that the product imported by it clearly did not fall within the

scope of the term ‘agricultural and dairy product’ and cannot

be excluded from the benefits of the notification bearing No.

53/2003. The exclusion was only with respect to agricultural

products falling under Chapter Heading 1 to 24 of ITC (HS).

Crude degummed soyabean oil imported by the appellant can

by no means be said to be an agricultural product. Thereafter,

appellant explained the various stages in the process of

manufacturing of crude degummed soyabean oil. It was

submitted    that   crude   degummed   soyabean    oil   was   a

completely different marketable commodity having an identity

distinct from soyabean. While soyabean is an agricultural

product,    crude   degummed     soyabean   oil   manufactured

therefrom cannot be called an agricultural product. Therefore,

the exclusion of agricultural product vide the notification

bearing No.53/2003 would not apply to crude degummed

soyabean oil. The process of extraction of crude degummed
17
soyabean oil from soyabean amounts to manufacture. Crude

degummed soyabean oil is clearly a commodity distinct from

soyabean. Hence, crude degummed soyabean oil cannot be

classified as an agricultural product and therefore the

exclusion of agricultural product would not apply to crude

degummed soyabean oil. Appellant also asserted that the

imported product i.e. crude degummed soyabean oil is

classified as a food product under SION; so also one of the

exported products i.e. soyabean meal extract. In view of

clarifications issued by the DGFT from time to time, the

product imported clearly has a nexus with the product

exported by the appellant. In the circumstances, appellant

contended that there was no basis whatsoever for demanding

any duty from it. Appellant had rightly claimed the benefit of

notification bearing No.53/2003. Therefore, the Assistant

Commissioner was requested to drop the show-cause notice.
18.       After considering the reply of the appellant to the

show-cause notice and upon hearing the appellant, order-in-

original dated 09.01.2007 was passed by the Assistant
18
Commissioner. After analyzing the notification No.53/2003,

Assistant Commissioner held that in view of exclusion of

agricultural and dairy products from the scope of ‘goods’

covered by the said notification, appellant was not eligible for

the benefits under the scheme on the import of crude

degummed soyabean oil which is in the nature of agricultural

product arising out of a product of agricultural origin. The

importer has therefore to discharge the duties as applicable.

The Assistant Commissioner referred to para 3.7.5 of the EXIM

policy and also observed that goods allowed to be imported

under the scheme should have a broad nexus with the product

group exported. For the purpose of import entitlement under

the scheme ‘broad nexus’ would mean goods imported with

reference to any of the products in the product group exported

within the overall value of the entitlement certificate. The

name of the export group indicates 67/food products. Goods

exported by the appellant included non-basmati rice (E/38),

sesame seeds (E/93), white sugar (E/52/79) and soyabean

meal extract (E/42) while the product imported was crude
19
degummed soyabean oil. Hence the imported good did not

appear to have any broad nexus with the product group

exported. Therefore, the Assistant Commissioner concluded

that appellant did not appear to be eligible for the benefits

under the scheme on the import of crude degummed soyabean

oil. The said good is excluded from the purview of the

notification bearing No.53/2003. Therefore, it was declared

that appellant would have to discharge the duties as

applicable on merit. Consequently, a demand of duty to the

tune of Rs.1,00,38,321.00 was raised against the appellant

further ordering that interest at the appropriate rates on the

aforesaid demand of duty would also be recoverable under
Section 28AB
of the Customs Act.
19.       Though the order-in-original dated 09.01.2007 was

an appealable order under
Section 128
of the Customs Act,

appellant assailed the same before the High Court by filing a

petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India. The

challenge made in the writ proceedings was to the order-in-

original dated 09.01.2007 as well as to the circular bearing
20
No.10/2004-Cus. dated 30.01.2004 whereby the exclusionary

clause in the notification bearing No.53/2003 was expanded to

include all types of products derived from agriculture/dairy

origin within the term ‘agriculture and dairy products’.

19.1.      High Court did not non-suit the appellant on the

ground of alternative remedy but proceeded to hear the

challenge on merit. By the impugned judgment and order

dated 05.08.2019, High Court held that the basic ingredient of

crude degummed soyabean oil is soyabean which is admittedly

an agricultural product. According to the High Court, the

process which is undertaken to convert soyabean into crude

degummed soyabean oil though may be termed as a

manufacturing process but what is to be seen is that soyabean

as an agricultural product is a primary product which

undergoes a simple operation so as to make it more usable or

saleable. It can in no way be said to acquire a distinct identity.

Soyabean on extraction of oil does not lose its identity.

According to the test report, unless the crude degummed

soyabean oil is refined, it cannot be used for human
21
consumption.     Therefore,    the   High   Court   rejected   the

contention that in view of the process undertaken soyabean

acquires a distinct marketable identity is without any merit.

Finding of the Assistant Commissioner that crude degummed

soyabean oil is an agricultural product cannot be faulted.

19.2.       Insofar the challenge to circular No.10/2004-Cus.

dated 30.01.2004 is concerned, High Court observed that the

EXIM policy stated that agricultural products would not be

allowed for imports. When a clarification was sought for by the

DGFT, the said circular was issued clarifying that all products

derived from agriculture/dairy origin are not permitted to be

imported.
19.3.       High Court also did not find fault with the view

taken by the primary authority that the imported goods i.e.

crude degummed soyabean oil had no nexus with the product

group exported. What was exported was not soyabean refined

oil after undergoing chemical modification but was only

soyabean meal extract which had no nexus with the imported

product i.e. crude degummed soyabean oil which is again not
22
a refined oil fit for human consumption. Therefore, even

though crude degummed soyabean oil might have been

imported through the MMTC, that would not be of any help to

the appellant. Therefore, High Court affirmed the order of the

Assistant Commissioner dated 09.01.2007 denying the benefit

of the scheme to the appellant under notification No. 53/2003-

Cus. dated 01.04.2003 in respect of the subject Bills of Entry.
20.          Before we examine the correctness or otherwise of

the view taken by the High Court, it would be apposite to have

an overview of the relevant legal provisions, statutory or

otherwise.
21.          To provide for the development and regulation of

foreign trade by facilitating imports into and augmenting

exports from India and for matters connected therewith or

incidental thereto, the
Foreign Trade (Development and

Regulation) Act, 1992
(briefly ‘the 1992 Act’ hereinafter) came

to be enacted.
Section 5
provides for framing of foreign trade

policy. It says that the central government may, from time to

time, formulate and announce by notification in the official
23
gazette the foreign trade policy and may also, in like manner

amend such policy. Under
Section 6(1)
of the 1992 Act, the

central government may appoint any person to be the Director

General of Foreign Trade (DGFT) for the purposes of the 1992

Act. It shall be the duty of the DGFT to advise the central

government in the formulation of the foreign trade policy and

shall be responsible for carrying out that policy.
22.         In exercise of the powers conferred by
Section 5
of

the 1992 Act, the central government notified the export and

import (EXIM) policy for the period 2002-2007 coming into

force w.e.f. 01.04.2002. Paragraph 1.1 clarified that the

central government reserved the right in public interest to

carry out any amendment in the EXIM policy, 2002-2007.

Such amendment would be made by means of a notification

published in the Gazette of India.
22.1.       Under paragraph 2.4, DGFT may, in any case or

class of cases, specify the procedure to be followed by an

exporter or importer or by any licensing or any other

competent    authority   for    the   purposes   of   implementing
24
amongst others the EXIM policy, 2002-2007. Such procedures

shall be included in the Handbook of Procedures (Vol.-1) etc.

and published by means of a public notice. The Handbook of

Procedures (Vol.-1) is a supplement to the EXIM policy and

contains relevant procedures and other details including the

procedure for availing benefits under various schemes of the

EXIM policy.
22.2.          In exercise of the powers conferred under paragraph

2.4     of     the   EXIM     policy      2002-2007,       DGFT     notified

the Handbook of Procedures (Vol.–1) vide the public notice

No. 1/2002-2007 dated 31.03.2002 which came into force

from 01.04.2002. Paragraph 3.2 provides for duty free credit

entitlement for status holders. Paragraph 3.2.5 reads as

under:
3.2.5 The status holders having an annual incremental
                  growth of more than 25% in the FOB value of exports
                  (in free foreign exchange) shall be entitled to the
                  facility of duty free credit entitlement subject to
                  achieving a minimum annual export turnover of Rs.
                  25 crore (in free foreign exchange). Such status
                  holders   shall    be   entitled   to   duty   free   credit
25
entitlement certificate to the extent of 10% of the
             incremental growth in exports.
Accordingly, status holders who will achieve more
             than 25% growth in exports in the year 2003-04 (in
             free foreign exchange) as compared to the exports
             made in 2002-03 (in free foreign exchange) subject to
             a minimum export of Rs. 25 crore (in free foreign
             exchange) shall be entitled for duty free credit
             entitlement certificate @ 10% of the incremental
             growth in exports.
The duty free credit entitlement can be used for
             import of capital goods, office equipment and inputs
             provided the same is freely importable under ITC(HS).
             Such   goods   shall   be   non-transferable.   Goods
             imported against such entitlement certificate shall be
             used   by    status    holder    or   his   supporting
             manufacturer/job worker provided the name and
             address of the supporting manufacturer/job worker
             is endorsed on the certificate issued by RLA.

22.3.     Chapter 3 of the EXIM policy 2002-2007 deals with

promotional measures. Paragraph 3.7.2.1 provides for special

strategic package for status holders. In paragraph 3.7.1, it is

stated that merchant as well as manufacturer exporters,

service providers, export oriented units or units located in

special economic zones or agri export zones or electronic
26
hardware technology parks or software technology parks shall

be eligible for such status certificate. Paragraph 3.7.2.1 says

that the status holders shall be eligible for the new/special

facilities mentioned therein. In this case, we are concerned

with clause (vi) which reads thus:
vi) Duty free import entitlement for status holders having
       incremental growth of more than 25% in FOB value of exports
       (in free foreign exchange) subject to a minimum export
       turnover of Rs. 25 crore (in free foreign exchange). The duty
       free entitlement shall be 10% of the incremental growth in
       exports. Such entitlement can be used for import of capital
       goods, office equipment and inputs for their own factory or
       the factory of the associate/supporting manufacturer/job
       worker. The entitlement/goods shall not be transferable.
23.      Let us now come to the
Customs Act, 1962
(already

 referred to as ‘the
Customs Act
’ hereinabove). Sub-section (1)

 of
Section 25
is relevant and reads thus:
25. Power to grant exemption from duty.-(1) If the
       Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary in the
       public interest so to do, it may, by notification in the
       Official Gazette, exempt generally either absolutely or
       subject to such conditions (to be fulfilled before or after
       clearance) as may be specified in the notification goods of
27
any specified description from the whole or any part of duty
        of customs leviable thereon.
23.1.      Thus what the above provision provides for is that if

the central government is satisfied that it is necessary in the

public interest it may by notification in the official gazette

exempt generally either absolutely or subject to such

conditions as may be specified in the notification, goods of

any specified description from the whole or any part of the

duty of customs leviable thereon.
24.        In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section

(1) of
Section 25
of the Customs Act, the central government

being satisfied that it is necessary in the public interest so to

do issued notification No. 53/2003-Cus. dated 01.04.2003,

exempting goods when imported into India against a duty free

entitlement     credit   certificate   issued   under   paragraph

3.7.2.1(vi) of the EXIM policy from the whole of the duty,

additional duty and special additional duty of customs

subject to the conditions that the certificate was issued by

the licensing authority to a status holder specified in
28
paragraph 3.7.2 of the EXIM policy and that the said

certificate and goods imported against it were not transferred

or sold. Paragraph 3 deals with capital goods with which we

are not concerned in this appeal. However, the said certificate

shall be produced before the proper officer of customs at the

time of clearance for debit of the duties leviable on the goods

but for the exemption. Further, the imports against the said

certificate should be undertaken through the seaports

mentioned in paragraph 5 of the said notification. Paragraph

5(ii) is relevant and is extracted hereunder:
(5)         ***         ***              ***              ***
      (i)         *       *           *       *          *        *
      (ii) goods means –
            (a)   capital goods;
(b)   office equipment (including computer systems,
            software, fax/machine, telephone); and
(c)   raw   materials,        components,        intermediates,
            consumables and parts other than agricultural
            and dairy products;
25.         Thereafter,   the       Central   Board     of    Excise   and

Customs issued circular No. 10/2004-Cus. dated 30.01.2004
29
stating     that   DGFT        had        sought       clarification   from    the

Department of Revenue whether the restriction regarding

agricultural and dairy products would apply to all products

derived from agriculture/diary origin. Central Board of Excise

and Customs (Board) clarified that restriction regarding

agriculture and dairy products as specified under the scheme

shall mean that import of all types of products derived from

agriculture/diary origin including crude edible oil shall not be

permitted. Relevant portion of the circular dated 30.01.2004

reads as under:
4. It is, therefore, reiterated that the restriction regarding
          agriculture and dairy products as specified in DFCEC
          scheme for status holders and service providers shall mean
          that   import   of   all        types   of   products    derived    from
          agriculture/diary origin including crude edible oil shall not
          be permitted.
26.          Government of India in the Ministry of Commerce

and Industry, Department of Commerce, issued public notice

No.40      (RE-2003)/2002-2007                dated      28.01.2004 inserting

amongst others the following below paragraph 3.2.5 of the

Handbook of Procedures (Volume 1):
30
3. In terms of para 3.2.5 of Handbook of Procedures
      (Volume 1) the following items would not be allowed for
      imports under duty free credit entitlement certificate for
      status holders:
a. Agricultural products which fall under Chapters 1-24
            of ITC(HS) classification of export and import items.
27.      Thereafter, the Department of Commerce issued

notification No. 38/(RE-2003)/2002-2007 dated 21.04.2004

inserting Note 7 in paragraph 3.7.2.1 of the EXIM policy

2002-2007 which reads thus:
Note 7 – The following items would not be allowed for
      imports under duty free credit entitlement certificate for
      status holders:
Agricultural products, which fall under Chapters 1-24 of
      ITC(HS) classification of export and import items.
28.      Finally, DGFT issued public notice No.42/2004-

2009 dated 06.01.2005 making the following amendments in

the Handbook of Procedures (Vol. I):
Sub para-3 of public notice No. 40(RE-2003)/2002-2007 dt.
      28.01.2004 shall be amended to read as under:
In terms of para 3.2.5 of the Handbook of Procedures (Vol.
      I), import of agricultural products listed in Chapter 1 to 24
      of ITC (HS) classification of export and import items except
      the following shall be allowed:
31
(i)     Garlic, peas and all other vegetables with a duty
                  of more than 30% under Chapter 7 of ITC (HS)
                  classification of export and import items.
(ii)    Coconut, areca nut, oranges, lemon, fresh grapes,
                  apple and pears and all other fruits with a duty of
                  more than 30% under Chapter 8 of ITC (HS)
                  classification of export and import items.
(iii)   All spices with a duty of more than 30% under
                  Chapter 9 of ITC (HS) classification of export and
                  import items (except cloves).
(iv)    Tea, coffee and pepper as per Chapter 9 of ITC
                  (HS) classification of export and import items.
(v)     All oil seeds under Chapter 12 of ITC (HS)
                  classification of export and import items.
Further, natural rubber as per Chapter 40 of ITC (HS)
      classification of export and import items shall also not be
      allowed for import under the scheme.
Import of all edible oils classified under Chapter 15 of ITC
      (HS) classification of export and import items, shall be
      allowed under the scheme only through STC and MMTC.
29.      As we have noted, notification No. 53/2003-Cus.

dated 01.04.2003 is a statutory notification issued under

sub-section (1) of
Section 25
of the Customs Act. By way of

the said notification, exemption is granted when certain

goods are imported into India against a duty free entitlement
32
credit certificate issued under paragraph 3.7.2.1(vi) of the

EXIM policy. The goods which are exempted from payment of

customs duty etc. means capital goods, office equipments

(including   computer    system,    software,   fax/machine,

telephone) and raw materials, components, intermediates,

consumables and parts other than agricultural and dairy

products. From a plain reading of the said notification, it

would mean that agricultural and dairy products are

excluded from exempted goods. In other words, agricultural

and dairy products would not be covered by the notification

No.53/2003-Cus. dated 01.04.2003 and would be liable to

pay customs duty, etc. on merit. On the other hand, circular

No.10/2004-Cus. dated 30.01.2004 was issued by the Board

following a clarification sought by DGFT from the Department

of Revenue as to whether the restriction regarding agriculture

and dairy products would apply to all products derived from

agriculture/dairy origin. Board clarified that the restriction

regarding agriculture and dairy products as specified in the

scheme for status holders and service providers shall mean
33
that       import   of   all   types   of   products   derived   from

            agriculture/dairy origin including crude edible oil shall not be

            permitted.
30.          In contra-distinction to the exclusion of agricultural

            and dairy products from the goods exempted from paying

            customs duty etc. on import as stated in the statutory

            notification No.53/2003, the circular has expanded the

            meaning of the expression ‘other than agricultural and

            dairy products’ to mean ‘all types of products derived from

            agriculture/dairy origin including crude edible oil’. What

            is therefore evident is that by way of the subsequent

            administrative circular dated 30.01.2004, the excluded goods

            of agricultural and dairy products as per the statutory

            notification dated 01.04.2003 has been enlarged to include all

            types of products derived from agriculture/dairy origin

            including crude edible oil.
31.
In
Tata Teleservices Ltd. Vs. Commissioner of

            Customs
2 this Court observed that the concerned circular
2
(2006) 1 SCC 746
34
sought to impose a limitation on the exemption notification

           which the exemption notification itself did not provide. This

           Court held that it was not open to the Board to whittle down

           the exemption notification in such a manner.
32.          Therefore, the first question which arises for

           consideration is, whether by way of the circular dated

           30.01.2004       the   benefits      granted   under   the     statutory

           notification dated 01.04.2003 could have been curtailed by

           expanding the exclusionary clause.
33.          A two-Judge Bench of this Court in
Union of India

           Vs. Inter Continental
3 was considering the question as to

           whether the end-use verification of the products is necessary

           for availing the benefit of concessional rate of duty. In that

           case, the statutory notification bearing No.17/2001-Cus.

           dated 01.03.2001 provided for concessional rate of duty on

           crude      palmolin    oil.   However,    as   per   Board’s    circular

           No.40/2001-Cus. dated 13.07.2001, end-use certificate was

           required to be produced for allowing such benefit. This came
3
2008 SCC OnLine SC 22
35
to be challenged by the assessee by filing a writ petition in the

High Court questioning the direction to produce the end-use

certificate which was stated to be a new condition to the

statutory notification by way of a circular. Contention of the

petitioner was that the circular sought to impose a limitation

on the exemption notification or tried to whittle it down by

adding a new condition beyond the notification. High Court

accepted the writ petition by holding that the Board by

issuing a circular subsequent to the notification could not

have added a new condition thereby restricting the scope of

the exemption notification. Imposing such a condition would

tantamount to re-writing the notification or in other words

legislating by circular, which is not permissible in law. High

Court held that the circular being contrary to the notification

could not be sustained as it could not override the

notification. This Court agreed with the view of the High

Court and held thus:
6.     We entirely agree with the view taken by the
        High Court that the department could not, by
        issuing a circular subsequent to the notification,
36
add a new condition to the notification thereby
                        either restricting the scope of the exemption
                        notification or whittle it down.
34.          This view was reiterated in
Sandur Micro Circuits

            Limited Vs. Commissioner of Central Excise, Belgaum4
.
Though

            the controversy was of a different nature in
Sandur Micro

            Circuits Limited
(supra), nonetheless it is relevant to note the

            principle
laid down in
the said decision
. This Court held that

            the principle that a circular cannot take away the effect of a

            notification statutorily issued would be applicable to the facts

            of that case as well. This Court held thus:
6. The issue relating to effectiveness of a circular
                        contrary to a notification statutorily issued has
                        been examined by this Court in several cases. A
                        circular cannot take away the effect of notifications
                        statutorily issued. In fact in certain cases it has
                        been held that the circular cannot whittle down
                        the exemption notification and restrict the scope of
                        the exemption notification or hit (sic) it down. In
                        other words, it was held that by issuing a circular
                        a new condition thereby restricting the scope of the
                        exemption or restricting or whittling it down
                        cannot be imposed. The principle is applicable to
4
(2008) 14 SCC 336
37
the instant cases also, though the controversy is of
        different nature.
35.      Following the clear principle of law enunciated by

this Court, it is evident that the Board could not have

expanded      the   scope   of    the   expression   ‘other    than

agricultural and dairy products’ as stipulated in the

statutory notification dated 01.04.2003 to mean and include

all types of products derived from agriculture/dairy origin

including crude edible oil by way of the administrative

circular dated 30.01.2004. If this is accepted, it would

amount to rewriting the conditions of exclusion from

exempted goods statutorily provided in the notification dated

01.04.2003. This is impermissible. To that extent, circular

No.10/2004-Cus. dated 30.01.2004 would be of no legal

consequence.
36.      Therefore, our answer to the question framed above

would be that by way of the circular dated 30.01.2004, Board

could not have curtailed the benefits granted to the appellant

under   the    statutory    notification   dated   01.04.2003    by
38
expanding the scope of the exclusionary clause ‘other than

agricultural and dairy products’.
37.        This brings us to the crucial question as to whether

crude degummed soyabean oil imported by the appellant is

an agricultural product. The related question is, what is an

agricultural product or what do we mean by an agricultural

product?
38.        Before we analyze the above issue, let us examine

the reasonings given by the High Court in this regard. The

reasonings are at paragraphs 9 and 9.1 of the impugned

judgment. On an analysis of the diagram describing the

manufacturing process of the appellant, High Court observed

that the basic ingredient/root of the product is soyabean. It is

not disputed even by the appellant that soyabean is an

agricultural product. After referring to the contention of the

appellant that after undergoing the process of manufacture,

the crude degummed soyabean oil becomes a distinct

commodity, High Court observed that though the process

undertaken     by   the   appellant   may   be   termed   as   a
39
manufacturing process but what is to be seen is that

soyabean as an agricultural product is a primary product

which undergoes a simple operation so as to make it more

usable or saleable; it can in no way be said to acquire a

distinct   identity.   Unlike     eucalyptus   oil,   soyabean   on

extraction of oil does not lose its identity. High Court relied

on the test report placed on record to hold that unless the

crude degummed soyabean oil is refined, it cannot be used

for human consumption. High Court, therefore, rejected the

contention of the appellant that after going through the

process    as   explained,      soyabean   acquires     a   distinct

marketable identity is without any merit and upheld the

finding of the assessing authority that crude degummed

soyabean oil is an agricultural product.
39.        We will advert to the concept of agriculture and

agricultural product a little later. First, let us deal with the

contention of the appellant vis-à-vis the process of conversion

of soyabean into crude degummed soyabean oil; whether it

amounts to manufacture? Appellant has mentioned the four
40
steps taken for undergoing the aforesaid process. At this stage

we need to make a note that while the High Court admitted

that the process undertaken by the appellant may be a

manufacturing process but the end product does not acquire a

distinct identity. View of the High Court is that on extraction of

oil soyabean does not lose its identity. Unless crude degummed

soyabean oil is refined, it cannot be used for human

consumption. Therefore, crude degummed soyabean oil is an

agricultural product.
40.       The steps mentioned by the appellant for carrying

out the manufacturing process to convert soyabean into

crude degummed soyabean oil are as follows:
Step 1 - Soyabean procured from mandis (markets) are

      stored in cylos where proper storage, free from moisture

      and heat is ensured;
Step 2 - From cylos, these beans are taken to cleaning

      machine through conveyor where all dust, stones and

      foreign material are removed. After screening, it goes to

      the cooker. After cooking, the mass goes to flaker where
41
flaking is done and these flakes are then fed to the

extractor.
Step 3 - The flakes are fed from one side and fresh

solvent - hexane is fed from the other side, both move

continuously in opposite direction. The speed of belt of

extractor and feeding rate of flakes and hexane is so

adjusted that complete oil gets extracted from flakes by

the time flakes exit the extractor.
Step 4 - Solvent containing oil called miscella is then

taken to distillation unit where solvent is recovered back

by distillation and condensation. Thereafter, the oil is

sent to separate tank. Cake exiting from second end of

extractor is cooled and then taken to toaster to remove

traces of solvent. Toasted DOC (soymeal) is sent to DOC

godown for storing, packing and dispatching. This

extracted oil is sent to storage tank and subsequently

dispatched for taken to refinery to manufacture refined

oil.
42
41.         This then is the process of conversion of soyabean

into crude degummed soyabean oil. On the basis of the

aforesaid    process,   appellant   contends   that    a   distinct

commodity is manufactured. The above process has been

explained by way of a diagram which we extract hereunder:
SOYABEAN




                CLEANING, GRADING, DRYING,
                TEMPERING, CRACKING, FLAKING

      FOOD GRADE
      HEXANE
                        SOLVENT EXTRACTION



  CRUDE OIL              DEFATTED FLAKES              HULLSX
                         48-50% PROTEIN               PROTEINS
42.         On the above basis it is the contention of the

appellant that crude degummed soyabean oil is a commodity

clearly distinct from soyabean. Through a series of process,

the original agricultural product soyabean completely loses its

identity. The natural identity of soyabean is completely lost and

a new product is manufactured which is distinct from soyabean.
43
Therefore, crude degummed soyabean oil cannot by any stretch

           of imagination be treated as an agricultural product.
43.        Having examined the process undertaken by the

           appellant and even though the High Court acknowledges

           such process to be a process of manufacture, it will be

           useful to make a reference to the judicial precedents qua

           manufacture or manufacturing process.
44.
In
Union of India Vs. Delhi Cloth and General Mills

           Co. Ltd.
5, a Constitution Bench of this Court held that the

           verb ‘manufacture’ used as a word is generally understood to

           mean as ‘bringing into existence a new substance’, howsoever

           minor in consequence the change may be. ‘Manufacture’

           implies a change but every change is not manufacture. Every

           change of an article is the result of treatment, labour and

           manipulation. But something more is necessary to make it

           ‘manufacture’. There must be transformation; a new and

           different article must emerge having a distinctive name,

           character or use.
5
AIR 1963 SC 791
44
45.            The meaning of the expression ‘manufacture’ was

           considered by this Court in Deputy CST Vs. Pio Food Packers6.

           In the said decision, a three-Judge Bench held that the test

           evolved for determining whether manufacture can be said to

           have taken place is whether the commodity which is

           subjected to the process of manufacture can no longer be

           regarded as the original commodity but is recognized in the

           trade as a new and distinct commodity. This Court laid down

           the following test to determine as to whether manufacture

           has taken place:
5. xxx                xxx                xxx           xxx
                         Commonly manufacture is the end result of one or
                         more     processes    through     which     the     original
                         commodity is made to pass. The nature and extent
                         of processing may vary from one case to another,
                         and    indeed    there     may   be   several     stages   of
                         processing      and   perhaps    a    different    kind    of
                         processing at each stage. With each process
                         suffered, the original commodity experiences a
                         change. But it is only when the change, or a series
                         of changes, take the commodity to the point where
                         commercially it can no longer be regarded as the
6
1980 Supp. SCC 174
45
original commodity but instead is recognized as a
                       new and distinct article that a manufacture can be
                       said to take place.
46.              This    view     was     endorsed   by   this    Court   in

           Commissioner of Income Tax, Orissa Vs. M/s N.C. Budharaja

           And Company7. In that case this Court was considering the

           limited question as to whether the construction of a dam to

           store water (reservoir) can be characterized as amounting to

           manufacturing or producing an article or articles, as the case

           may be. The aforesaid question arose in the context of the

           claim of the assessee to deduction under
Section 80-HH
of

           the Income Tax Act, 1961. This Court explained that the word

           ‘production’            has   a   wider    connotation    than    the   word

           ‘manufacture’; while every manufacture can be characterized

           as     production, every           production    need     not    amount   to

           manufacture and thereafter endorsed the meaning ascribed

           by this Court to the expression ‘manufacture’ in Pio Food

           Packers (supra).
7
1994 Supp (1) SCC 280
46
47.
In
Commissioner   of   Income   Tax   Vs.   Stanes

            Amalgamated Estates Ltd.
8 , Madras High Court was

            examining the question on a reference made to it under
Section 256(2)
of the Income Tax Act, 1961: whether the

            Income Tax Appellate Tribunal was right in holding that the

            sale proceeds of eucalyptus oil extracted by the assessee from

            the leaves of eucalyptus trees grown by it was in the nature of

            agricultural income and hence not assessable to income tax?

            The reference was at the instance of the revenue. Finding of

            the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (for short ‘the Tribunal’)

            was that eucalyptus oil was agricultural produce. It was in

            that backdrop the High Court considered the question as to

            whether eucalyptus oil extracted from eucalyptus leaves

            could be considered as an agricultural produce. Division

            Bench of the High Court held that the oil extracted from the

            eucalyptus leaves is a distinct product. In the process

            undertaken, eucalyptus leaves loses their original identity.

            Therefore, the High Court held that view taken by the
8
(1998) 232 ITR 443
47
Tribunal that eucalyptus oil extracted from eucalyptus leaves

            is also an agricultural produce is not correct.
48.        This Court in
Commissioner of Income Tax Vs.

            Cynamid India Limited9
considered an interesting question as

            to whether rice husk was a product of agriculture or not.

            Assessee claimed deduction under
Section 35-C
of the

            Income Tax Act, 1961 contending that it manufactures an

            animal feed wherein rice husk was mainly used as raw

            material. Tribunal disallowed the deduction on the ground

            that rice husk was not a product of agriculture because it

            was not a direct outcome of agricultural endeavor. What was

            produced by the cultivator was paddy which alone could be

            considered as an agricultural product. The husk was the

            result of a process of dehusking which was not agriculture.

            High Court answered the question in favour of the assessee

            holding that operation of dehusking paddy is not an

            industrial   or   manufacturing     operation     as   commonly

            understood. It is essentially an agricultural operation. Both
9
(1999) 3 SCC 727
48
rice and husk remain in their natural form as a result of

            dehusking and are covered by the term ‘agricultural product’.

            It was in that context this Court observed that the term

            ‘agricultural product’ or ‘product of agriculture’ is required to

            be construed liberally so as to include not merely the primary

            product as it actually grows but also a product which

            undergoes a simple operation so as to make it more saleable

            or more usable. The rice and the husk though separated

            remain as they were produced and hence continue to be

            ‘agricultural product’ or ‘product of agriculture’.
49.
In
Jai Bhagwan Oil and Flour Mills Vs. Union of

            India10
, this Court held that the true test to ascertain whether

            a process is a manufacturing process producing a new and

            distinct article is, whether the article produced is regarded in

            the trade, by those who deal in it, as a marketable product

            distinct in identity from the commodity/raw material involved

            in the manufacture.
10
(2009) 14 SCC 63
49
50.         Again, in the case of
Collector of Central Excise,

            Kanpur Vs. Mineral Oil Corporation11
, a three-Judge Bench of

            this Court endorsed the view taken in
Delhi Cloth and General

            Mills Co. Ltd.
(supra) and held that to amount to manufacture,

            a new commodity having distinct name, character or use

            should emerge as a result of the process of manufacture. The

            true test for determining whether manufacture can be said to

            have taken place is whether the commodity which is

            subjected to the process of manufacture can no longer be

            regarded as the original commodity but is recognized in trade

            as a new and distinct commodity.
50.1.       In the facts of that case, this Court observed that

            appellants used to bring transformer oil and by removing

            impurities, it was again made useable as transformer oil.

            Before      and   after   the   process,   the   product   was   only

            transformer oil. That being so, this Court held that it could

            not be said that a new and distinct commodity had come into
11
(2015) 14 SCC 64
50
existence consequent to the process undertaken by the

appellant.
51.          Thus, to constitute manufacture, the following are

the essential features:
i.     There must be a process or series of process.

      ii.    The original commodity or raw material undergoes a

      transformation through the process or series of process.

      iii.   At the end of the process or series of process, a new

      commodity emerges.
iv.    The new commodity should have a distinct name,

      character or use and can no longer be regarded as the

      original commodity.
v.     It should be regarded as distinct from the original

      commodity and recognized as so in the trade.
52.          The test is not whether the end product is a

consumable product or not. Therefore, the High Court clearly

missed the point by holding that because crude degummed

soyabean oil was not further refined and therefore was not a

consumable item; it did not have a distinct identity. This is
51
not the test of manufacture. While there is no dispute that

soyabean is an agricultural product, the High Court while

endorsing the view of the Assistant Commissioner held that

crude degummed soyabean oil is also an agricultural product.

Certainly, crude degummed soyabean oil is distinct from

soyabean; it is not the same thing as soyabean.
53.       The expression ‘agricultural product’ is not defined

in the EXIM policy. Therefore, to understand the expression

‘agricultural product’, reference would have to be made to the

dictionary meaning and also what is understood as an

‘agricultural product’ by applying the common parlance test.
54.       In Black’s Law Dictionary, Ninth Edition, ‘agriculture’

has been defined as the science or art of cultivating soil,

harvesting crops and raising livestock.
54.1.     Supreme Court Words and Phrases, Fourth Edition,

defines ‘agriculture’ to mean in its root sense ager, a field,

and cultura, cultivation; which means cultivation of field.
55.       In P. Ramanatha Aiyar’s Advanced Law Lexicon,

Seventh Edition, the expression ‘agricultural purpose’ has
52
been ascribed the meaning of use of land for the purpose of

            growing crops. It is the science and art of cultivating the soil,

            harvesting crops and raising livestock and also as the science

            or art of the production of plants and animals useful to man

            and in varying degrees the preparation of such products for

            man’s use and their disposal.
55.1         The expression ‘agricultural purposes’ refer to tilling

            and cultivation for the purposes of raising crops. In their

            widest sense, the words may include grazing as well.
56.          Kerala High Court in
P. Narayanan Nair Vs. Dr.

            Lokeshan Nair
12 referred to the dictionary meaning of the

            expression ‘agricultural product’ as under:
14. Agricultural product. Things which have a
                        situs of their production upon the farm and which
                        are brought into condition for uses of society by
                        labour of those engaged in agricultural pursuits as
                        contra-distinguished from manufacturing or other
                        industrial pursuits. That which is the direct result
                        of husbandry and the cultivation of the soil. The
                        product is in its natural unmanufactured condition.
12
AIR 2014 Ker 141
53
57.          Therefore, applying the above test, we are unable to

concur with the view expressed by the High Court that crude

degummed soyabean oil is an agricultural product.
58.          Thus, having regard to the discussions made above,

we record our conclusions as under:
i.     The circular bearing No.10/2004 dated 30.01.2004

      insofar it expands the exclusionary clause in the statutory

      notification No.53/2003 dated 01.04.2003 would have no

      legal consequence.
ii.    Crude degummed soyabean oil is a product different

      and distinct in character and identity from soyabean.

      iii.   The process carried out by the appellant using

      soyabean as raw material and ending in the product

      crude degummed soyabean oil is manufacturing.
iv.    Crude   degummed      soyabean    oil   is   not   an

      agricultural product.

      v.     Therefore, appellant would be entitled to the
benefits under notification No.53/2003 dated 01.04.2003.
54
59.      In view of the aforesaid discussions and conclusions

reached, this Court is of the considered opinion that further

deliberation on the remaining issues is not warranted.
60.      Consequently, the appeal is allowed. Impugned

judgment and order of the High Court dated 05.08.2019 and

the order passed by the Assistant Commissioner dated

09.01.2007 are hereby set aside.
61.      However, there shall be no order as to costs.
…………………………J.
                                          [ABHAY S. OKA]


                                      ……………………………J.
                                         [UJJAL BHUYAN]


NEW DELHI;
MAY 14, 2025.
55