[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Vishal Tiwari vs Union Of India on 5 May, 2025
Author:
Sanjay Kumar
Bench:
Sanjay Kumar
NON-REPORTABLE

2025 INSC 647
                                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                              CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                              WRIT PETITION NO. 466/2025


        VISHAL TIWARI                                                     .....     PETITIONER(S)

                                                         VERSUS

        UNION OF INDIA & ORS                                              .....     RESPONDENT(S)


                                                        O R D E R
This petition under
Article 32
read with
Article 129
of the

        Constitution                 of   India     seeks    initiation    of     suo   motu    criminal

        contempt proceedings against respondent No. 4, Nishikant Dubey, for

        having made deliberate and scandalizing remarks against the Supreme

        Court of India and the Chief Justice of India; for a direction to

        the Union of India, Ministry of Home Affairs, to lodge a First

        Information Report under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; and for

        a direction to the Union of India, Ministry of Home Affairs, to

        issue                an   advisory    to   all    Chief   Secretaries     to    curb    hate   and

        provocative                 speeches       by    political   parties      and   their    leaders

        relating to the Waqf (Amendment) Act, 2025, and its hearing before

        this Court.
2.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Normally, this Bench would not have heard this matter but as
   babita pandey
   Date: 2025.05.08
   14:34:47 IST
        we are not inclined to issue notice and the Waqf matter 1 was heard
   Reason:
1 W.P. (C) Nos. 276/2025, 314/2025, 284/2025, 331/2025 & 269/2025.
1
by the two of us, we would dispose of the writ petition with some

observations and, accordingly, we have proceeded to consider the

issue.
3.     Judicial pronouncements result in an order or a decision which

may aggrieve a party or sometimes a section of the public. Critical

analysis and objective criticism of an order’s reasoning or even

its outcome is protected under the fundamental right to free speech

and    expression           under   clause     (a)        of
Article      19(1)
of     the

Constitution of India. The power of criminal contempt, however, is

exercised by courts when publication by words, spoken or written,

by signs, or by visible representation or otherwise, in terms of

clause (c) of
Section 2
of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971, 2 is

with the intent to scandalize or lower the authority of the courts;

or    tends    to     scandalize     or   lower         such   authority;     prejudices     or

interferes or tends to interfere with the due course of judicial

proceedings; or interferes or tends to interfere with or obstructs

or tends to obstruct the administration of justice in any manner.

Exercise of the power of contempt, nevertheless, is discretionary.
4.     We     have    examined      the   contents        of   the   assertions      made   by

respondent no. 4, which no doubt tend to scandalize and lower the

authority of the Supreme Court of India, if not interfere or tend

to    interfere       with    the   judicial       proceedings       pending    before    this

Court,      and      have    the    tendency       to    interfere     and     obstruct     the

administration of justice. The statements made reflect the clear

intent to impute motives to the Bench itself by naming the Chief

Justice of India as “responsible for all the civil wars happening

2 For short, “the Act”.
2
in India” and “in order to incite religious wars in this country,

it    is    only   and     only   the     Supreme      Court      that   is   responsible”.
Sections 3
and
4
of the Act carve out exceptions which, prima

facie, are not attracted. There is no ‘civil war’ in India.
5.     In our opinion, the comments were highly irresponsible and

reflect a penchant to attract attention by casting aspersions on

the Supreme Court of India and the Judges of the Supreme Court.

This apart, the statements show ignorance about the role of the

constitutional courts and the duties and obligations bestowed on

them under the Constitution. At the same time, we are of the firm

opinion that courts are not as fragile as flowers to wither and

wilt under such ludicrous statements. We do not believe that the

confidence in and credibility of the courts in the eyes of the

public can be shaken by such absurd statements, though it can be

said   without       the   shadow    of    doubt       that      there   is   a    desire     and

deliberate attempt to do so.
6.     We, therefore, refrain from taking any action. This Court in,

In Re S. Mulgaokar,3 observed that the judiciary is not immune from

criticism, but when criticism is an obvious distortion or a gross

misstatement, which is made in a manner designed to lower the

respect of the judiciary and destroy public confidence, it should

not    be    ignored.      However,       the       power   to     initiate       contempt     is

discretionary        in    its    unsheathed         exercise.      Every     commission       of

contempt      need   not    erupt    in    an       indignant     committal       or   levy    of

punishment, however deserving it may actually be. It is so because

judges are judicious, their valour non-violent and their wisdom


3 (1978) 3 SCC 339.
3
springs into action when played upon by a volley of values, the

least of which is personal protection. Courts believe in values

like free press, fair trial, judicial fearlessness and community

confidence.       Thus,    courts       need     not       protect         their    verdicts      and

decisions by taking recourse to the power of contempt. Surely,

courts and judges have shoulders broad enough and an implicit trust

that the people would perceive and recognize when criticism or

critique is biased, scandalous and ill-intentioned.
7.   Each     branch       of    the      State       in     a       democracy,      be    it     the

legislature,       executive         or     the       judiciary,            especially       in     a

constitutional       democracy,           acts       within          the    framework      of     the

Constitution. It is the Constitution that is higher than all of us.

It is the Constitution which imposes limits and restrictions on the

powers vested in the three organs. The power of judicial review is

conferred    by     the    Constitution          on    the       judiciary.         Statutes      are

subject to judicial review to test their constitutionality as well

as for judicial interpretation. Therefore, when the constitutional

courts exercise their power of judicial review, they act within the

framework of the Constitution.
8.   In     the    course       of   dispensation               of     justice,     courts      draw

inspiration       from    consecrated           principles.           The    judiciary,      as    an

institution,       is     accountable           to     the       people       through      various

mechanisms.       Arguments      take     place       in     open      court.      Decisions      and

judgments are reasoned. Judicial procedure ensures transparency and

accountability.          Judgments        are    put       to        scrutiny      and    critique.

Decisions are debated and if required, corrected by exercise of
4
right of appeal, review, in curative jurisdiction and by reference

to a larger bench. The judiciary’s legitimacy and credibility are

rooted in public trust and are maintained through fair, impartial

and transparent decision-making.
9.     To deny the power of judicial review to the courts would be to

rewrite    and    negate    the    Constitution,        as    the   power    of    judicial

review is one of the cornerstones of democracy. This power is

conferred in express terms by
Articles 32
and
226
by the framers of

the Constitution and hinges on the system of checks and balances.

We    believe    that   the   general     public       does   know    the   relationship

amongst    the    three    wings    of   the       Government   and    their      different

roles.    They    are     aware    of    the       function   and    the    role   of   the

judiciary, which is to judicially review the actions of the other

branches and to evaluate whether the other branches are acting

lawfully under the Constitution. Judicial decisions are made in

accordance with legal principles and not in keeping with political,

religious or community considerations. When citizens approach the

court praying for exercise of the power of judicial review, they do

so in furtherance of their fundamental and/or legal rights. The

court’s consideration of such a prayer is the fulfilment of its

constitutional duty.
10.    While we are not entertaining the present writ petition, we

make it clear that any attempt to spread communal hatred or indulge

in hate speech must be dealt with an iron hand. Hate speech cannot

be tolerated as it leads to loss of dignity and self-worth of the

targeted group members, contributes to disharmony amongst groups,
5
and erodes tolerance and open-mindedness, which is a must for a

multi-cultural   society   committed   to   the   idea   of   equality.   Any

attempt to cause alienation or humiliation of the targeted group is

a criminal offence and must be dealt with accordingly.
11.   Recording the aforesaid, we dismiss the present writ petition.
12.   Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
................CJI.
(SANJIV KHANNA)




                                                     ..................J.
                                                           (SANJAY KUMAR)
NEW DELHI;
MAY 05, 2025.
6