[Cites
13
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Mohit Kumar vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 15 May, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
2025 INSC 704                                                                REPORTABLE
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5233 OF 2025

          MOHIT KUMAR                                                       …APPELLANT

                                                   VERSUS

          STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH AND ORS.                                   …RESPONDENTS

                                                    WITH

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5234 OF 2025

          STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH AND ANR.                                   …APPELLANTS

                                                   VERSUS

          KIRAN PRAJAPATI                                                   …RESPONDENTS

                                               JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA J.
1.             These appeals, arising out of orders passed by the High Court of

                         Judicature at Allahabad1 on separate writ petitions2 with differing

                         outcomes but concerning the same recruitment process, raise a

                         common question of law.
FACTS IN CIVIL APPEAL 5233 OF 2025
2.             Respondent no.3/Uttar Pradesh Police Recruitment and Promotion
Signature Not Verified
Board3 issued a notification on 24th February 2021 for direct
Digitally signed by
JATINDER KAUR
Date: 2025.05.15
17:30:29 IST
Reason:
1
High Court
2
WRIT - A No. - 11413 of 2022 and WRIT - A No. – 18987 of 2022
3
UPPRPB
1
recruitment on the post of Sub-Inspector, Civil Police and Platoon

      Commander, PAC and Fire Officer, for the year 2020-20214. The

      appellant-Mohit Kumar5, on 20th April 2021, applied for the post of

      Sub-Inspector, Civil Police as well as for Platoon Commander and was

      thereafter called for examination, which was held on 17th May 2022.
3.    Pursuant to the examinations conducted by UPPRPB, Mohit scored

      313.84 marks. A list of non-selected candidates came to be published,

      which featured Mohit’s registration number at serial number 11108.

      Aggrieved thereby, Mohit made a representation to UPPRPB on 21st

      July 2022. Receiving no response, Mohit moved a writ petition6 before

      the High Court, praying that his representation be considered. The

      High Court, on 4th August 2022, directed the Superintendent of Police,

      UPPRPB, to consider the representation and pass a reasoned order

      thereon within 4 weeks.
4.    Respondent no. 47, by its speaking order dated 15th September 2022,

      rejected Mohit’s representation on the ground that he did not submit

      OBC8 certificate in the format prescribed at the time of initial

      recruitment release and, thus, he was considered in the general

      category instead of the OBC category. The cut-off marks for the

      general category were 316.11, whereas for the OBC category it was
4
Recruitment Notification
5
Mohit
6
WRIT - A No. - 11413 of 2022
7
Additional Secretary, UPPRPB
8
Other Backward Class
2
305.542. The order also stated that as per Mohit’s own case, at the

         time of application, he had mentioned the certificate issued by the

         Central Government instead of the State Government.
5.       Mohit yet again approached the High Court by way of a writ petition9,

         challenging the order rejecting his representation. The High Court, by

         its judgment and order dated 22nd March 2023, dismissed the writ

         petition while holding that the order impugned in the petition did not

         call for interference. The order of the High Court rejecting Mohit’s writ

         petition has been impugned in the lead appeal.


FACTS IN CIVIL APPEAL 5234 OF 2025
6.       UPPRPB, by the same notification as referred to in the lead appeal,

         notified the recruitment for posts of sub-inspector (SI) Civil Police,

         Platoon Commander and PAC and Fire Fighting Second Officer for the

         year 2020-2021. The sole respondent-Kiran Prajapati10 applied for the

         post of sub-inspector (SI) Civil Police on 8th April 2021, in the OBC

         category. Similar     to   the   lead   appeal,   Kiran   appeared for   the

         examination and cleared the same by scoring 287 marks. Pertinently,

         the cut-off marks for the general category and the OBC category were

         296.597 and 285.92. However, after verification of documents and

         noticing that the OBC certificate was not submitted in the prescribed
9
WRIT - A No. – 18987 of 2022
10
Kiran
3
format by Kiran, UPPRPB did not place her in the select list. Against

         this rejection, Kiran addressed a representation to UPPRPB.
7.       Receiving no response, Kiran filed a writ petition11 before the High

         Court seeking a direction for acceptance of the OBC Certificate

         submitted by her. A single judge of the High Court allowed the writ

         petition vide order dated 27th March 2023 and directed UPPRPB to

         accept the OBC certificate submitted by Kiran and to process her

         application further. Against the order of the single judge, UPPRPB

         preferred an appeal12 before the Division Bench of the High Court. By

         an order dated 25th August 2023, the High Court dismissed the appeal

         and confirmed the order of the single judge.
8.       The appellants in the connected appeal impugn this order of the High

         Court rejecting their appeal.
SUBMISSIONS FOR THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH
9.       Ms. Ruchira Goel, learned counsel appearing for the State and the

         UPPRPB contended that the requirement prescribed by UPPRPB under

         the recruitment notification/ release and the consequent rejection of

         the candidature of Mohit and Kiran by UPPRPB was valid. She further

         urged that:
11
Writ Petition A No. 5245 of 2023
12
Special Appeal Defective No. 562 of 2023
4
i.     The recruitment conducted by UPPRPB was under the Uttar

             Pradesh Sub-inspector and Inspector (Civic Police) Service

             (Amended) Rules, 201513. Further, the Uttar Pradesh Public

             Services (Reservation for Schedule Castes, Schedule Tribes and

             Other Backward Classes) Act, 199414 provides for reservation for

             OBCs in the state of Uttar Pradesh. A Government Order dated

             17th December, 201415 issued under the 1994 Act proscribed

             OBC reservation for persons having gross annual income of Rs. 8

             lakh or above or possessing wealth above the exempted limit

             under the
Wealth Tax Act, 1957
.
ii.    The advertisement stated that 2437 posts were reserved for OBC

             candidates and laid down the eligibility norm in clause 5.4(4) of

             the advertisement, which reads as under:
5.4(4) If the candidates belonging to other backward class
                     category do not submit the certificate in the prescribed
                     format-I/ within prescribed period or if they submit the
                     certificate of Other Backward Class category valid for the
                     services of Government of India, they will be treated as
                     candidates of unreserved category.
(emphasis supplied)

      iii.   Both Mohit and Kiran submitted their OBC (NCL) caste certificate

             in the format prescribed for appointments to the Central
13
2015 Rules
14
1994 Act
15
G.O. No.13/22/16/92/TC-iii-Ka-2/2014
5
Government,       and    not   the   one   prescribed    for   the   State

               Government, as mandated by clause 5.4(4).
iv.   Since Mohit and Kiran were considered in the unreserved

               category and secured marks less than the required cut-off

               marks, they were not selected.
v.    Judgment rendered by the Full Bench of the High Court in
Gaurav Sharma v. State of U.P.16
was relied upon which held

               that there is no repugnancy between the financial criteria fixed

               by the Union and the State Governments for the purpose of

               identification of creamy layer.
vi.   The object and rationale of the criteria in clause 5.4(4) is to

               ensure compliance of or ascertainment of creamy layer, which is

               redefined by the State Government and the Central Government

               from time to time. While the creamy layer criteria may be

               congruent at a given point of time, it is always subject to

               change. In view of the subjective nature, it is essential that all

               the candidates submit proof that they do not fall within the

               exclusionary zone set out by the State Government. In the

               absence thereof, the State machinery would be burdened with

               the   inquiry    of   individual   candidates   who     submit   a   caste

               certificate for Central Government and would have to ascertain
16
2013 SCC OnLine All 1286
6
whether they also qualify as OBC-NCL under the rules of the

       State Government.
vii.   The   format   prescribed       in   ‘Format-I’   of   the   recruitment

       notification categorically requires that the gross annual income

       of the candidate’s parents for a continuous period of three years

       is not above Rupees eight lakh and that he/she does not possess

       wealth above the exemption limit, as prescribed in the
Wealth

       Tax Act
1957. This prescription finds no place in the caste

       certificate prescribed for jobs under the Central Government.

viii. The Central Government refers to ‘Department of Personnel and

       Training’s O.M. No.36012/22/93 Estt (SCT) dated 8th September,

       1993 or the latest notification of Government of India modified

       vide O.M. No.36033/3/2004 Estt(Res.) dated 9th March, 2004

       and further modified vide O.M. No. 36033/3/2004-Estt.(Res)

       dated 14th February, 2008 or the latest notification of the

       Government of India, whereas, the format prescribed by the

       State Government is as per the Government Order dated 17 th

       December, 2014.
ix.    The decisions relied upon by Mohit and Kiran are distinguishable

       on facts since the candidates in those cases were already

       appointed under the OBC category as Constables and sought

       appointment in the same category for the posts under the
7
present recruitment notification. Thus, in those cases, the caste

                category already stood verified by UPPRPB.
x.     The decision in
Bedanga Talukdar v. Saifudaullah Khan17
was cited for the proposition that if the rules do not provide,

                relaxation is not permitted.
xi.    The impugned judgment dismissing Mohit’s writ petition rightly

                considered the ratio of this Court’s decision in
State of T.N. v.

                G. Hemalathaa18
.
xii.   Under the said notification, there remained no vacancies after

                publication of the final selection result. However, after the final

                result, 122 posts eventually remained unfilled either due to

                cancellation of candidature or death or absence/disqualification

                in medical examination or expulsion. Under the 2015 Rules, the

                vacant posts were required to be carried forward to the next

                selection. Consequently, under the recruitment notification, the

                122 OBC posts that remained unfilled were carried forward for

                the selection year of 2023-24 and the process of publishing the

                notification is in progress.
17
(2011) 12 SCC 85
18
(2020) 19 SCC 430
8
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF MOHIT AND KIRAN
10.      Mr. Rahul Kaushik, learned senior counsel appearing for Mohit,

         submitted that the OBC certificate submitted by Mohit ought to have

         been accepted for/on the following reasons/grounds:
i.     OBC certificate for participating in recruitment processes initiated

                by both the Central Government and the State Government, is

                issued by the Tehsildar.
ii.    Mohit comes from a poor family and his entire hard work would

                be drained for want of a certificate in a particular format.

         iii.   Mohit having secured 313.684 marks which is in excess of the

                cut-off that was prescribed for OBC candidates, i.e., 305.542

                marks, merit has been overlooked much to his detriment and

                prejudice.
iv.    Mohit belongs to Ahir community, which is recognized as

                backward class in the State of Uttar Pradesh and this is

                categorically reflected from the certificate submitted by him.

         v.     The decision of this court in
Dolly Chhanda v. Chairman, Jee

                & Ors.19
was cited for highlighting that every infraction of rule

                may not necessarily result in rejection of candidature.
vi.
Dheerender      Singh      Paliwal   v.   Union   Public       Service

                Commission20
was cited for the proposition that in case of any
19
(2005) 9 SCC 779
9
doubt as to qualification of any candidate, the candidate could

             have been called upon to produce the required certificate.
vii.   This Court’s decisions in
Ram Kumar Gijroya v. Delhi

             Subordinate Services Selections Board and Anr.21
and
Karn

             Singh Yadav v. Government of NCT of Delhi & Ors.
22 were

             cited for reminding us that the object of providing reservations

             to   members     of   the    Scheduled   Caste/Scheduled     Tribe

             communities is to remove inequalities in employment and

             provide a level playing field for those belonging to educationally

             and socially backward classes of society; hence, it would be

             unreasonable to be too technical in one’s approach and throw

             asunder the object sought to be achieved by reservations.
11.   Mr. Kumar Gaurav, learned counsel for Kiran, adopted the submissions

      of Mr. Kaushik.
THE ISSUE
12.   The issue that arises for consideration is, whether UPPRPB was bound

      to accept the OBC certificates submitted by Mohit and Kiran which,

      admittedly, were not in the format prescribed in the Recruitment

      Notification.
20
(2017) 11 SCC 276
21
(2016) 4 SCC 754
22
(2024) 2 SCC 588
10
13.      We may initiate our discussion by first referring to this Court’s decision

         in Registrar General, Calcutta High Court v. Shrinivas Prasad

         Shah and Ors23. The question that was raised is whether, the West

         Bengal Public Service Commission was justified in considering the 1st

         respondent as a general candidate for recruitment in connection with a

         judicial service examination, instead of his claim of being a member of

         the Scheduled Tribe community. The advertisement stipulated that in

         order to obtain the benefit of reservation, the requisite certificate had

         to be issued by the competent authority as specified in the stated

         enactment       and   SCs/STs   Welfare   Department   Order   No.   261-

         TW/EC/MR-103/94 dated 6th April, 1995. Instead of producing a

         certificate issued by the competent authority, the 1st respondent

         produced a certificate issued by the Director of the Backward Classes

         Welfare Department certifying him as a member of the Scheduled

         Tribe community; hence, such certificate was ignored and he was

         considered to be a general candidate. The 1st respondent was

         fortunate enough to succeed in the two tiers before the High Court at

         Calcutta, which directed the PSC to consider him as a ST candidate,

         fortune deserted him before this Court. It was held thus:
“15. We find no error in the decision taken by the Commission in not
               entertaining the respondent’s application as a ST candidate since no
               certificate was produced from the competent authority, as provided
               under the
West Bengal Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
               (Identification) Act, 1994
. The information to the candidates
23
(2013) 12 SCC 364
11
specifically stated that the candidates claiming to be SC/ST/BC must
            have a certificate from a competent authority specified in the
West
            Bengal Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Identification) Act,
            1994
. No such certificate was produced from that competent authority
            by the respondent. Consequently, in the absence of the requisite
            certificate, the Commission was justified in treating him as a general
            category candidate. The first time the respondent produced the
            certificate from the competent authority was only when he appeared in
            the examination held on 30-7-2010, by that time he had obtained a
            certificate from the competent authority on 22-9-2009. Admittedly, at
            the time when the 2007 examination was held no such certificate was
            produced from the competent authority along with the application.
Consequently, the respondent was treated as a general category
            candidate and hence he could not get appointment as judicial officer in
            the examination held in the year 2007.
16. We are of the considered opinion that in view of the specific
            legislation passed by the West Bengal State Legislative Assembly i.e.
            the
West Bengal Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
            (Identification) Act, 1994
, and the specific stipulation in the
            notification issued to the candidates, Guideline 10 of para 13 of
Madhuri Patil v. Commissioner, Tribal Development
[(1994) 6 SCC
            241] is inapplicable, particularly to the facts of this case.
The Act
does
            not recognise the Director, Backward Class Welfare, West Bengal as a
            competent authority to issue the certificate. Therefore, the
            Commission was justified in not placing reliance on the certificate
            issued by the Director, Backward Class Welfare, West Bengal. ... ”.
(italics in original)
14.   What follows from
the above decision
is that irrespective of whether an

      aspirant for public employment belongs to a particular community like

      SC/ST/OBC, the status claimed by him for being accorded the benefit

      of reservation is per se not decisive. Such status has to be certified by

      the competent authority upon following due process and identification

      that the aspirant is what he claims to be. In Shrinivas Prasad Shah

      (supra), the requirement of production of a certificate from the

      competent authority was held to be mandatory in view of a statutory

      mandate. Although there is no such statutory mandate in the facts of
12
the present case, the requirement in question is no less mandatory

      and must be scrupulously followed. Once a process of recruitment is

      set in motion, all aspirants are entitled in law to equal treatment.

      There cannot be different yardsticks for different sets of aspirants.

      Non-compliance with the terms of the advertisement/notification is

      bound to trigger adverse consequences of rejection of the aspirant’s

      claimed status by the selecting body/appointing authority, should he

      choose not to adhere to the same. Having regard thereto, the selecting

      body/appointing authority would be justified in not entertaining the

      application of an aspirant as a member of the community for whom

      reservations are permissible.
15.   The proposition of law as settled by the above decision does not

      appear to have been doubted in any subsequent decision and we do

      hereby endorse the same.
16.   Let us now examine whether in the light of the settled law in this

      behalf, Mohit and Kiran deserve any relief.
17.   Clause 5.4(4) of the recruitment notification has been noticed above.
It clearly warns what the consequence would be should an aspirant fail

      to submit the requisite certificate in Format–I. Admittedly, the

      certificates submitted by Mohit and Kiran do not align with Format-I.

      Viewed thus, we need not even carry the discussion forward to

      ascertain whether Mohit and Kiran have been unfairly treated.
13
However, since it has been assiduously argued by Mr. Kaushik that

      Mohit after all belongs to the OBC category, and Mr. Kumar Gaurav

      appearing for Kiran has supported him, we consider it proper to deal

      with such argument too.
18.   Here, the Government of Uttar Pradesh is the appointing authority.
The appointments would follow, once UPPRPB makes the necessary

      recommendations. The entire process of recruitment is regulated by

      statutory rules. Is it open to an aspirant or group of aspirants, who do

      not comply with the terms of the recruitment notification, to raise

      questions once the result(s) of selection is/are not palatable to

      him/them?
19.   It is no longer res integra that terms of an advertisement issued in

      connection with a selection process are normally not open to challenge

      unless the challenge is founded on the ground of breach of
Article 16
of   the   Constitution   or,   for    that   matter,
Article   14.
Once   an

      advertisement is issued inviting applications for public employment, it

      is the responsibility, nay duty, of an aspirant to read and note the

      terms and understand what its requirements are. If any aspirant finds

      any of the terms ambiguous and there is scope for an inquiry inbuilt in

      the advertisement or is provided by any rule/regulation, an effort

      ought to be first made to obtain clarity for understanding the

      requirements accurately. If no such scope is available, nothing
14
prevents the aspirant from seeking clarity by making a representation.
Should such clarity be not provided, the aspirant may participate in

         the process without prejudice to his rights and may question the term

         even after he is not selected. However, if the aspirant does not make

         any such effort and takes a calculated chance of selection based on his

         own understanding of the disputed term in the advertisement and

         later, he emerges unsuccessful, ordinarily, it would not be open to him

         to challenge the selection on the ground that the disputed term is

         capable of being understood differently. In such cases, the courts

         should be loath to entertain such plea of ambiguity while preferring to

         accept the recruiting authority’s understanding of the said term. This is

         for the simple reason that the recruiting authority is the best judge of

         what its requirements are and it is such understanding of the

         recruiting authority that would matter most in cases brought up before

         the courts; hence, after commencement of the process wherein

         aspirants have participated without raising any demur as to what a

         particular terms means, even if any of the terms be ambiguous, the

         courts should lean in favour of the recruiting authority.
20.      We are conscious of what this Court observed in paragraphs 15 to 19

         of its decision in
Meeta Sahai v. State of Bihar24
under the heading

         ‘Preliminary Issues’. If the procedure followed by the selecting
24
(2019) 20 SCC 17
15
body/appointing authority is such that the same is in breach of

      constitutional safeguards, an aspirant’s challenge to the procedure

      may not be nipped in the bud only on the ground that he has

      participated in the process. We also read the decision as recognizing

      that it may not always be possible for an aspirant to foresee any

      illegality in the procedure followed, till such time the select list is

      published. In all such cases where the illegality could not have been

      foreseen, a challenge to the procedure cannot be spurned on the

      specious ground that the aspirant having participated in the process,

      he has forfeited his right.
21.   Be that as it may, clause 5.4(4) with which we are concerned is far

      from ambiguous. It is absolutely clear what UPPRPB required and what

      would be the consequence of non-adherence. In the wake of such

      requirement, no aspirant could possibly have any iota of doubt as to

      the format in which the certificate was to be issued. Even if Mohit and

      Kiran had doubts as to whether the certificates that they had would

      suffice, nothing prevented them from seeking such clarification and, at

      the same time, approach the concerned tehsildars to issue certificates

      in the requisite format. It has not been shown that obtaining a second

      certificate in the format required by the State Government was barred

      by any law. Having regard thereto, both Mohit and Kiran cannot take

      shelter under the plea that insistence on the part of UPPRPB of
16
certificates issued in the requisite format is a mere formality which

      could have been dispensed with since they had certificates issued in

      the other format.
22.   Finally, the reason why UPPRPB has insisted for the certificate in the

      requisite format as explained by Ms. Goel [recorded in paragraph 9
(vi) to (viii) above] commends our acceptance.
23.   We are conscious that aspirants similarly placed like Mohit and Kiran

      have been granted relief by the High Court earlier and coordinate

      Benches of this Court have not interfered with such decisions.

      However, in all such cases, the special leave petitions were dismissed

      at the admission stage and, therefore, do not operate as binding

      precedents.
24.   For the reasons aforesaid, Mohit and Kiran are not entitled to any

      relief.
25.   Consequently, the lead appeal is dismissed while the connected appeal

      is allowed.
………..…………………J.
                                                        (DIPANKAR DATTA)




                                                       ….……..………………J.
                                                           (MANMOHAN)
  NEW DELHI;
MAY 15 , 2025.
17
18