[Cites
16
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Old Jalukai Village Council vs Kakiho Village on 23 May, 2025
REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.          OF 2025
                                   (Arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No. 9897 of 2016)



                         OLD JALUKAI VILLAGE COUNCIL                      …APPELLANT(S)



                                                     VERSUS



                         KAKIHO VILLAGE & ORS.                          …RESPONDENT(S)




                                                 JUDGMENT
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2025.05.23
17:18:17 IST
Reason:
J.B. PARDIWALA, J. :-
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the following

      parts:
INDEX

A.         FACTUAL MATRIX ............................................................................ 2

B.         SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES .................................................... 18

     i.       Submissions on behalf of the appellant ......................................... 18

     ii.      Submissions on behalf of the respondent nos. 1 and 2 .................. 23

     iii. Submissions on behalf of the State ................................................ 29

C.         ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION ...................................................... 32

D.         ANALYSIS ......................................................................................... 33

     i.     Whether all the necessary conditions/criteria for the issuance of formal
            order(s) of recognition as per the O.M.’s dated 22.03.1996 and
            01.10.2005 respectively were fulfilled?.................................................. 33
     ii. Whether the existence of an “inter-district boundary dispute” was a

            valid reason to keep the recognition of the respondent no. 1 village in
            abeyance?... .............................................................................................. 42

E.         CONCLUSION ................................................................................... 60
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                                                  Page 1 of 61
1. Leave granted.
2. This appeal arises from the Judgment and Order passed by the High Court of

     Gauhati, Kohima Bench in Writ Appeal No. 6(K) of 2015 dated 07.10.2015

     (hereinafter, the “impugned decision”), by which the High Court affirmed the

     Judgment and Order passed by the Single Judge in Writ Petition (C) No. 65(K)

     of 2014 directing the State authorities to take steps for the issuance of formal

     order(s) for the recognition of the respondent no. 1 village within a period of three

     months. The said period was however, extended by another four months

     subsequently.
A.      FACTUAL MATRIX
3. Land is one of the priceless assets for the people of Nagaland and forms an

     inalienable part of their identity and life.1 The landholding system in Nagaland

     differs slightly from the rest of the States and is especially characterized by its

     non-cadastral nature. Each district, more or less, is occupied by a predominant
1
A. NSHOGA, TRADITIONAL NAGA VILLAGE SYSTEM AND ITS TRANSFORMATION 87 (Anshah Publishing House
2009)
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                          Page 2 of 61
concentration of one major tribe and other sub-tribes with distinct socio-cultural

    and linguistic characteristics, and therefore, the different districts of the State are

    demarcated primarily on the basis of the inhabitation patterns of a specific tribe

    or tribes.2 Land is either owned communally by a clan or village or, by individuals

    and a new village is formed only within the community land which is owned by

    its inhabitants. The formation of villages and its recognition is also extensively

    rooted in customary traditions and practices. It is the case of the appellant that

    since the establishment and recognition of a new village on the ancestral land of

    another village results in the transfer of ownership of the said land to the newly

    created village, the prevailing custom requires the village ancestrally owning

    such land to accord their consent by way of a ‘No Objection Certificate’ to the

    new village which is sought to be established on their land.
4. The aforesaid custom is said to have been recognized in the O.M. dated

    22.03.1996 issued by the State of Nagaland which lays down several criteria for

    the recognition of villages. The relevant portions of the same read as follows:
“                 Government of Nagaland
                                 Home Department
                           (General Administration Branch)

                              OFFICE MEMORANDUM
2
LANUSASHI LONGKUMER ET. AL., STATUS OF ADIVASIS/INDIGENOUS PEOPLES LAND SERIES – 6: NAGALAND 20
(Aakar Books 2012).
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                           Page 3 of 61
Dated, Kohima the 22nd March, 1996

          No. GAB-12/13/74 : The existing criteria/conditions for
          recognition of villages in Nagaland having found
          inconsistent in the present context of administration, the
          Cabinet in their sitting on 30-06-1995 decided to modify the
          existing criteria/conditions. Therefore, superseding the
          Department’s Memorandum No. GAB-13/17/1983 dated 20-
          7-1987, the existing criteria/conditions for the recognition of
          villages in Nagaland have been modified as follows with
          immediate effect:-
(i)   A new village should have a minimum of 50(fifty) houses with
         a population of not less than 250 (two hundred and fifty)
         people.
(ii) A new village should have sufficient land expansion of the
         village and also for agriculture purposes.
(iii) A new village should be constituted by indigenous inhabitants
         only.
(iv) A new village constituted by members of more than one
         village should obtain from the Village Council Chairman a
         ‘No Objection Certificate’ of the parent village indicating
         that the boundaries of the new village.
(v) A new village constituted by members of more than one
         village in a different location but within the ancestral land of
         the parent village, should obtain from the Village Council
         Chairman of the parent village a ‘No Objection Certificate’
         indicating the boundaries of the new village. In cases where
         exact boundary demarcations cannot be defined due to
         scatter of pockets of land, the Village Council Chairman and
         all the GBs of the parent village should determine the nature
         of boundaries with the new village on any permanent basis
         acceptable to both the villages.
(vi) In cases where GBs are appointed and allowed to function as
         the constitutional head of the village in matters of
         administration of the village land, the GBs concerned should
         attest their signatures in the ‘No Objection Certificate’
         jointly with the Village Council Chairman.
(vii) The entire area of the newly established village should be
         surveyed jointly by competent staff of Land Records & Survey
         and civil administration to clearly demarcate and map the
         village territory and also record the area in hectares.
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                Page 4 of 61
(viii) A new village on completion of the process of boundary
          demarcations with the neighbouring villages/parent village
          and also on completion of survey as required under (vii)
          given below, should erect pillars at its own expenses in the
          presence of competent staff as requisitioned under the same
          point.
(ix) The following certificates/documents are required to
          accompany the proposal:
(a) Clearance from Forest Department issued by an officer
          not below the rank of DFO.
(b) Judicial clearance from a Class-I Magistrate.
(c) ‘No Objection Certificate’ from neighbouring village(s)
          duly countersigned by an Administrative Officer.
(x) Administrative approval should be from an officer not below
          the rank of SDO(C).
(xi) No approval is required from extra-constitutional body like
          students’ union, tribal hoho(s).
Sd/- L. COLNEY
                      Addl. Chief Secretary to the Govt. of Nagaland”


                                                   (Emphasis supplied)

         Condition (v) of the aforesaid O.M. clearly lays down that if a new village

   is constituted by the members of more than one village, in a different location

   which is within the ancestral land of another parent village, then the new village

   must obtain a ‘No Objection Certificate’ from the Village Council Chairman of

   the said parent village while also indicating the boundaries of the new village.
5. In the meantime, there arose a boundary dispute between the districts of Kohima

   (where the appellant village is located) and Dimapur (where the respondent

   village is allegedly located). On 26.09.2000, a Committee (hereinafter, called the

   “Ezong Committee”) was constituted by the Government of Nagaland to work
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                               Page 5 of 61
out and submit their recommendations as regards the demarcation of the inter-

   district boundary between the aforesaid two districts, with particular reference to

   the boundary between the Dhansiripar sub-division of the Dimapur District and

   the Jalukai sub-division of the Kohima District. A new district called Peren

   District has since been carved out of Kohima District and the Jalukai sub-division

   now falls under the Peren District. On 28.05.2002, the Ezong Committee

   submitted its report to the Additional Chief Secretary & Commissioner of

   Nagaland. The Committee decided to give due consideration in placing the

   villages associated with the ‘Sumi’ tribe under the Dimapur District and those

   associated with the ‘Zeliangrong’ tribe under the Kohima district as far as

   conveniently practicable and wherever the same was not possible, the boundary

   was to be demarcated strictly in accordance with administrative convenience. The

   Committee also suggested that it would be desirable for the State Government to

   consider the issue of recognition of new villages existing in the disputed areas

   only after the boundary demarcation between the two districts was finalized.
6. The Government of Nagaland issued one another Office Memorandum dated

   01.10.2005 which introduced an additional criteria/condition in the process of

   village recognition i.e., the requirement of a public notice providing a 30 day

   period to the public to register their objections, if any, regarding the specific

   village which is sought to be recognised. This notice which would also indicate

   the area of land/boundary of the new village was to be issued by the Deputy
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                Page 6 of 61
Commissioner of the concerned district. The authorities were specifically

   implored to strictly abide by and adhere to the cumulative conditions mentioned

   in the O.M. dated 22.03.1996 and the O.M. dated 01.10.2005, the failure of which

   would result in the rejection of the application of village recognition. The

   aforesaid O.M. dated 01.10.2005 is reproduced hereinbelow:
“                  Government of Nagaland
                                Home Department
                          General Administration Branch-I

          No. GAB-1/COM/108/2005

                                   Dated Kohima, the 1st October, 2005

                            OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Criteria/ conditions for recognition of new villages
          in Nagaland

          In addition to the instructions contained in this Department's
          O.M. No.GA-12-13/74 dtd. 22/03/96 on the above mentioned
          subject, all cases relating to recognition of new villages in
          Nagaland, shall henceforth, with immediate effect, require a
          public notice to be issued by the Deputy Commissioner of the
          District concerned. The notice shall indicate the area of
          land/boundary of the village proposed for recognition, giving
          30(thirty) days’ time for objection, if any, to be filed.
2. All other conditions/ criteria laid down in the O.M. under
          reference shall remain unchanged.
3. It is hereby impressed on all concerned that any proposal
          for recognition of village in Nagaland which does not comply
          with the prescribed conditions shall be rejected. District
          Administration shall therefore ensure strict adherence to
          these conditions/criteria while recommending cases to the
          Government.
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                               Page 7 of 61
Sd/-
Banuo Z. Jamir
                  Principal Secretary to the Government of Nagaland”

                                               (Emphasis supplied)
7. On 01.09.2007, the respondent no. 2, who is the Head Gaobura-cum-Council

   Chairman of the respondent no. 1 village, had allegedly established the

   respondent no.1 village which is affiliated to the ‘Sumi’ tribe. While it is the case

   of the appellant that the said village falls within the bounds of their ancestral land,

   the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively instead contend that their village falls

   within another district altogether i.e., the Dhansiripar sub-division of the

   Dimapur District. With a view to initiate the process of recognition, on

   24.03.2009, the respondent no. 2 submitted an application requesting the Deputy

   Commissioner, Dimapur to depute a Survey Team and conduct a spot verification

   of the respondent no. 1 village. On 10.09.2009, the spot verification report was

   submitted which revealed that the respondent no. 1 village, admeasuring 1012

   Acres, with a population of 300 people and 57 households, falls under the

   Dhansiripar sub-division of the Dimapur district. It was said to be bounded by

   Ghowoto Village in the North, K. Xekiye Village in the South, the Pathor

   river/Ballu Nallah in the East and K. Xekiye Village in the West. The report also

   observed that the respondent no. 1 village has no inter-boundary dispute at least

   in so far as the neighbouring villages were concerned.
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                   Page 8 of 61
8. In order to expedite the recognition of the respondent no. 1 village, on

   21.09.2009, the respondent no. 2 submitted yet another representation to the

   Deputy Commissioner, Dimapur inter-alia stating that the respondent no. 1

   village has been established with his own privately purchased land and that ‘No

   Objection Certificates’ were obtained from their parental village i.e. Khumishi

   ‘A’ Village under the Zunheboto District and from all the villages currently

   neighbouring the respondent no. 1 village i.e. Ghowoto Village and K. Xekiye

   Village. Having complied with the conditions laid down in the O.M. dated

   22.02.1996, it was requested that their application be forwarded to the

   appropriate higher authorities with a recommendation that the respondent no. 1

   village be recognised. Soon thereafter, on 30.09.2009, the local authorities had

   also submitted other relevant documents to the Deputy Commissioner, Dimapur

   which included the ‘No Objection Certificates’ from the Judicial Magistrate and

   the Forest Department.
9. On 13.10.2009, whilst kickstarting the last leg of the village recognition process

   and in accordance with the O.M. dated 01.10.2005, the Deputy Commissioner,

   Dimapur published a public notice inviting claims/objections, if any, as regards

   the recognition of the respondent no. 1 village within a period of 30 days. The

   notice was also published in a local daily, “The Nagaland Post”, on the very next

   day. On 16.10.2009, i.e., within two days of the public notice, the appellant raised

   an objection to the proposal for granting recognition to the respondent no. 1
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                 Page 9 of 61
village with the Deputy Commissioner, Dimapur, predominantly for the reason

   that it is sought to be established on the land ancestrally belonging to them. The

   objection is also said to have been published in a local daily i.e., “The Morung

   Express” on 19.10.2009. Vide communication dated 08.11.2009, the Deputy

   Commissioner, Dimapur, directed the appellant to provide additional and

   complete information as to how the respondent no. 1 village falls within their

   land and the same was to be furnished within a period of 7 days, failing which

   their objection would be nullified. Immediately on the ensuing day, i.e., on

   09.11.2009, the appellant addressed a letter providing several pertinent

   information along with some historical context as to how the respondent no. 1

   village indeed fell within their ancestral land.
10. Despite the objections raised by the appellant herein, on 18.11.2009, the Deputy

   Commissioner, Dimapur, submitted its recommendation for the recognition of

   the respondent no. 1 village under the Dhansiripar sub-division of the Dimapur

   District to the Commissioner, Nagaland. Pursuant to the above, a Cabinet

   meeting was held on 14.12.2011 to deliberate on the issue of recognition of

   villages. The State Cabinet had approved the proposal of the Home Department

   for the recognition of a total of 34 villages listed therein. However, in so far as

   the recognition of those villages listed between Sl. Nos. 19 to 24 were concerned,

   the order of recognition was to be issued only after a joint verification was

   conducted by the Deputy Commissioners of Peren and Dimapur respectively. It
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                               Page 10 of 61
is pertinent to note that the respondent no. 1 village featured at Sl. No. 23 in the

   said list.
11. In compliance with the Cabinet decision aforementioned, a joint verification is

   said to have been conducted on 08.03.2012. Thereafter, on 26.07.2012, the

   Deputy Commissioner, Dimapur forwarded the joint verification report to the

   Commissioner, Nagaland specifically indicating that both the joint verification

   report and the map of the Dimapur District reveals that the respondent no. 1

   village is situated within the Dhansiripar sub-division of the Dimapur District.

   However, on the contrary, vide communication dated 23.08.2012, the Deputy

   Commissioner, Peren, had refrained from offering any conclusive opinion as

   regards the recognition of the respondent no. 1 stating that “the office of the D.C.

   Peren has no further comments for recognition of the above two villages until the

   boundary dispute between the two districts is settled”. Alluding to the opinion of

   the Deputy Commissioner, Peren, the Office of the Commissioner, Nagaland also

   addressed a letter dated 05.11.2012 to the Home Commissioner suggesting that

   the recognition of two villages, i.e. the A.K. Industrial Village and the respondent

   no. 1 village, be kept in abeyance until the inter-district boundary dispute is

   resolved since the grant of recognition would motivate other villages in the

   disputed areas to also seek recognition and cause serious unrest at the ground

   level.
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                Page 11 of 61
12. To address this issue effectively, a consultation meeting was held on 10.06.2013

   under the auspices of the Home Ministry which included the Commissioner,

   Nagaland, the Deputy Commissioner, Peren and the Deputy Commissioner,

   Dimapur, amongst others, regarding the inter-district boundary dispute between

   the Peren and Dimapur districts. It was decided that the boundary demarcation

   which was recommended by the Ezong Committee in the year 2002 would be

   notified for the purpose of inviting claims/objections from the public after due

   approval from the Cabinet. It was further reiterated that, notwithstanding the

   Cabinet decision to order recognition subject to joint verification having been

   completed, the recognition of the respondent no. 1 village would stand deferred.

   Consequently, the Cabinet accorded its approval for the publication of the Ezong

   Committee report vide O.M. dated 05.09.2013 and the same was published in all

   the local dailies on 20.09.2013. It is averred by the State of Nagaland that several

   objections were received from different Hohos, Village Councils, Gaobura’s etc.

   in response to the publication of the Ezong Committee report and that the issue

   had further been referred to the district administration of Dimapur for an update

   on the ground reality.
13. Notwithstanding the above Cabinet decision, on 05.03.2014, the Sub-Divisional

   Officer (SDO) (Civil) of the Dhansiripar sub-division is said to have issued a

   certificate of administrative approval for the recognition of the respondent no. 1
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                Page 12 of 61
village while also recording that there were no objections against the recognition

   of the said village from any quarter.
14. However, still having witnessed abysmal progress as regards its recognition, on

   21.04.2014, the respondent no. 1 village along with the respondent no. 2 filed a

   Writ Petition being W.P.(C) No. 65(K) of 2014 before the High Court of Gauhati,

   Kohima Bench inter-alia seeking a writ of mandamus directing the State

   government to take necessary steps for its recognition. Vide judgment and order

   dated 21.04.2015, the Single Judge of the High Court directed the State to take

   appropriate steps for the purpose of issuing formal order(s) for the recognition of

   the respondent no. 1 within a period of 3 months. The High Court’s reasoning

   was three-fold: –
(i) First, that all the criteria/conditions mentioned in the O.M.’s dated

       22.03.1996 and 01.10.2005 respectively, for the recognition of the respondent

       no. 1 village, were complied with. ‘No objection certificates’ were also issued

       by the neighbouring villages i.e., Ghowoto Village on 16.08.2007 and K.

       Xekiye Village on 30.11.2007 respectively. The public notice published in

       the newspaper also yielded no objection from any quarter. The Cabinet had

       then given its approval for recognition subject to a joint verification being

       conducted by the Deputy Commissioners of the Peren and Dimapur districts.

       Such a joint verification had also been completed. Therefore, all the steps for

       the recognition of the respondent no. 1 as a village were duly undertaken.
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                               Page 13 of 61
(ii) Secondly, the main objection which was canvassed by the State was the

       existence of an inter-district boundary dispute between the districts of Peren

       and Dimapur and that until the same was resolved, recognition of the

       respondent no. 1 village must be stalled. The High Court was at a loss to

       understand how the inter-district boundary dispute was related to the issue at

       hand and stated that it would have no bearing insofar as the issue of

       recognition was concerned.
(iii) Thirdly, the High Court interpreted the communication of the Deputy

       Commissioner, Peren, dated 23.08.2012 which was issued after the joint

       verification was completed, to mean that she had no further comments

       whatsoever to offer on the issue of recognition of the respondent no. 1

       village. Therefore, it was held that the communication dated 05.11.2012 sent

       from the office of the Commissioner, Nagaland to the Home Commissioner

       which reflected upon the comments of the Deputy Commissioner, Peren was

       done without any application of mind and was considered devoid of the other

       circumstances which favoured the case of the respondent no. 1. The High

       Court adopted such a view especially since the Cabinet had accorded its

       approval subject only to a joint verification by the concerned authorities and

       the said joint verification was completed.
15. The relevant observations made by the Single Judge of the High Court are

   reproduced hereinbelow:
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                              Page 14 of 61
“6. As required by the O.M's dated 22.03.1996 and
          01.10.2005, the respondents had carried out all formalities
          for recognition of the petitioner village and no objection
          certificates were also issued by the Ghowoto Village Council
          on 16.08.2007 and K. Xekiye Village Council on 30.11.2007.
as there was no objection from any quarter, survey was
          conducted and such report was also submitted on
          10.09.2009. The Deputy Commissioner, Dimapur had also
          issued a public notice on 13.10.2009. Such public notice was
          also published in the local newspaper and as there was no
          further objection, the Deputy Commissioner, Dimapur by
          letter dated 18.11.2009 had written to the Commissioner,
          Nagaland, Kohima stating that all formalities has been
          completed and as such, the matter regarding recognition of
          the petitioner village was recommended. On such
          recommendation, the matter was put up before the cabinet
          and the cabinet on 14.12.2011 had given its approval for
          recognition of the petitioner's village along with 33 others. A
          condition was also laid down by the Cabinet that for the
          villages appearing at Serial No.19 to 24, a joint verification
          has to be done by the Deputy Commissioners of Dimapur and
          Peren under the supervision of Commissioner, Nagaland.
The name of the petitioner village appears at Serial No.23
          and as required by the cabinet, joint verification was also
          conducted by the two Deputy commissioners of Dimapur and
          Peren.
7. The main taken by the State respondents is that there is a
          boundary dispute between the districts of Dimapur and Peren
          and therefore until and unless such boundary dispute is
          settled recognition cannot be given to the petitioner village.
          This Court is not in a position to understand the ground taken
          by the State respondents inasmuch as, the inter-district
          boundary dispute would have no bearing insofar as
          recognition of the petitioner's village is concerned. Important
          point of note is that all steps have been taken insofar as the
          recognition of the petitioner's village is concerned.
8. A reading of the communication dated 23.08.2012 written
          by the Deputy Commissioner, Peren would indicate that the
          Deputy Commissioner, Peren has no further comments for
          recognition of the two villages i.e. A.K. Industrial Village and
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                Page 15 of 61
Kakiho Village (petitioner villages). The letter dated
          23.08.2012 is reproduced herein below […]
9. Further, the letter of the Office of the Commissioner,
          Nagaland dated 05.11.2012 would clearly indicate that it has
          reflected only the comments of the Deputy Commissioner,
          Peren without application of mind. When the cabinet has
          given its approval subject to verification by two Deputy
          Commissioners of Dimapur and Peren districts and such
          verification having been already completed this Court is not
          in position to understand as to why the recognition of the
          petitioner's village has not been given till date.
10. This being the position, this Court has no hesitation to
          direct the State respondents to take steps for issuance of
          formal order(s) for recognition of the petitioner's village. Let
          such exercise be completed within a period of three months
          from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
11. Writ petition is allowed.
12. No costs.”
                                                    (Emphasis supplied)
16. Aggrieved by the aforesaid, the State preferred Writ Appeal No. 6(K) of 2015

   against the judgment and order rendered by the Single Judge of the High Court.

   Vide judgement and order dated 07.10.2015, the Division Bench of the High

   Court acknowledged that the respondent no. 1 village is situated on the boundary

   between the Peren and Dimapur districts, which is predominantly inhabited by

   different tribes and that this was the foremost reason as to why the issue of

   boundary demarcation has become a sensitive one. However, since it was pleaded

   that the government was taking necessary steps for effecting the demarcation
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                Page 16 of 61
which would in turn enable the issuance of a formal order of recognition of the

   respondent no. 1 village, the Court extended the time granted by the Single Judge

   by another four months from the date of the impugned decision. The relevant

   observations are reproduced hereinbelow:
“From the submissions of the learned Addl. A.G, it is quite
          clear that State is not contesting the judgment on merit. It
          appears from the submissions made that the village of the
          respondents/writ petitioners is situated on the boundary
          between Dimapur and Peren districts, both districts being
          pre-dominantly inhabited by members of different tribes.
          Therefore, demarcation of the boundary of the village has
          become a sensitive issue. However, the Government is taking
          necessary steps for making the demarcation to enable
          issuance of formal order of recognition of the respondents
          village as directed by learned Single Judge. But considering
          the sensitiveness of the matter, some more time may be
          required to complete the exercise, he submits.
Learned counsel for the respondents fairly submits that he
          would have no objection for grant of time to the State for
          issuance of the consequential order of recognition of the
          village.
The being the position, we extend the time of 3 months
          granted by the learned Single Judge by another period of 4
          months effective from today. Appellant State shall issue the
          formal order of recognition of respondents village within this
          extended period of 4 months.
This disposes of the writ appeal.”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
17. It is the case of the appellant that despite being a necessary and proper party to

   the writ petition filed before the High Court by the respondent no. 1 village, they
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                               Page 17 of 61
were not impleaded in the said proceedings. Having come across the impugned

     decision subsequently and also having learnt that effective steps to issue orders

     for the recognition of the respondent no. 1 village were being undertaken by the

     State, the appellant is before us with the present appeal.
B.      SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES


i.      Submissions on behalf of the Appellant
18. Mr. Parthiv K. Goswami, the learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of

     the appellant, submitted that the appellant was a necessary and proper party in

     the adjudication of the dispute before the High Court on account of the fact

     that the respondent no. 1 village falls within their ancestral land and that they

     had also filed objections to the Public Notice dated 13.10.2009. Hence, the

     impugned decision, having been passed in the absence of the appellant would

     be bad in law, in violation of principles of natural justice and therefore,

     deserves to be set aside on this ground alone.
19. He submitted that the issue of granting recognition to a village falls within

     the domain of the executive decision making. It is well settled that in exercise

     of the power of judicial review, a writ court can only examine the decision-

     making process, and not substitute the decision under consideration with its
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                  Page 18 of 61
own decision. Therefore, once the state government/cabinet had taken a

   decision to keep recognition of the respondent no. 1 village in abeyance upon

   a consideration of several relevant factors, the High Court had committed a

   serious error by issuing a mandamus and directing the grant of a formal

   recognition order, more so, when the question as to whether the respondent

   no. 1 village falls within the ancestral land of the appellant is a disputed

   question of fact which needs proper examination at the ground level. The

   impugned decision, which was passed in the absence of the appellant was

   neither alive to the existence of such a dispute nor did it have the assistance of

   the material now being placed on record by the appellant.
20. It was further submitted that a new village is generally only established within

   the community land which is owned by its inhabitants. The establishment and

   recognition of a new village on ancestral land of another village results in

   transfer of ownership of the land to the newly created village. It is for this

   reason that upon the establishment of         a new village on a land which

   ancestrally belongs to another village, the prevailing custom requires a ‘No

   Objection Certificate’ of the parent/ancestral village. The said custom is

   recognized in the O.M. dated 22.03.1996 and also finds codification in the
Nagaland Village and Area Councils Act, 1978
(for short, the “1978 Act”),

   more specifically
Sections 3
and
4
thereof.
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                 Page 19 of 61
21. He vehemently submitted that a bare perusal of the British Survey Map of

   1921-1923, shows that the area admeasuring approx. 1000 acres which is said

   to be owned by the respondent no. 1 village falls within the larger area

   ancestrally owned by the appellant. Furthermore, he submitted that there also

   exists an agreement between the appellant and the Dhansiripar sub-division

   (within which the respondent no. 1 village is allegedly situated) where the

   Dhansiripar Village Council has also explicitly stated that their land falls

   within the absolute jurisdiction of the appellant. According to customary law

   governing land ownership and transfer in Nagaland, the inhabitants of a newly

   established village falling within the land ancestrally owned by another village

   are required to seek the consent of the parent village and also pay a nominal

   annual token of acknowledgment called ‘rampwa lunget’. Such prior consent

   of the parent/ ancestral village is a condition precedent even under the O.M.

   dated 22.03.1996. It was submitted that the said policy was backed by a sound

   rationale and the non-adherence thereof would result in frustrating the very

   purpose behind it i.e., the peaceful co-existence of the neighbouring villages

   and/or the predominant tribes inhabiting them, especially considering that

   inter-tribal conflicts continue to remain a very sensitive issue in the State.

   Hence, no formal order(s) of recognition of the respondent no. 1 village can

   be issued in the absence of a ‘No Objection Certificate’ from the appellant.
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                               Page 20 of 61
22. With a view to emphasize the importance of the customary practices in the

   State of Nagaland governing social practices and ownership and transfer of

   land, the counsel placed great emphasis on
Article 371A
of the Constitution,

   which was introduced immediately prior to the creation of the State of

   Nagaland in 1963 by the 13th Constitutional Amendment Act of 1962. He

   submitted that
Article 371A
of the Constitution inter alia recognizes the

   importance of safeguarding the social practices of the Nagas along with the

   customary laws and traditions existing in the region by specifically excluding

   any law made by the Parliament in respect of certain matters from application

   in the State of Nagaland, unless a resolution to that effect is passed by the

   Legislative Assembly. Customary practices that govern land ownership and

   transfer would subsume under themselves the issues relating to village

   establishment and recognition as well and therefore, would fall within the

   protection afforded under
Article 371A.
23. The counsel reiterated that the present matter is a clear case of encroachment

   which has been committed by the respondent no. 1 and its villagers. The

   respondent no. 1 villagers are from the ‘Sumi’ tribe whose ancestral home is

   in the district of Zunheboto, Nagaland. The ancestral home of the Respondent

   Village is ‘Khumishi A’ Village in sub-division Asuto, falling within the

   Zunheboto district. The Counsel also brought our attention to a complaint for

   eviction which was filed by the appellant with the Deputy Commissioner,
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                              Page 21 of 61
Peren, much prior to the inauguration of the respondent no. 1 village i.e., on

   22.01.2005, alleging that the respondent no. 1 village has been illegally

   established on their land. Addressing the same, on 07.04.2005, the Office of

   the Sub-Divisional Officer (Civil), Jalukie is said to have communicated the

   decision of the Deputy Commissioner, Peren and issued an eviction order

   directing the villagers belonging to the respondent no. 1 village to vacate the

   ‘encroached land’ within a period of 15 days, upon failure of which

   appropriate legal action would be initiated. In light of the same, the counsel

   submitted that it is a well settled principle of law that “to seek equity, one must

   do equity”. The respondent no.1, having encroached upon the ancestral land

   of the appellant without following the conditions precedent for the

   establishment of a new village, has no right to seek equity, more so having

   approached the court with unclean hands by suppressing the fact that the

   appellant had filed objections to the public notice issued on 13.10.2009.
24. In the last, the counsel brought our attention to the fact that since the

   respondent no. 1 village is unrecognized, its villagers have the right to obtain

   all facilities which are due to them from their parent village, namely, the

   ‘Khumishi A’ Village of sub-division Asuto falling under the Zunheboto

   District till such time the formal order(s) for their recognition is granted.

   Therefore, it may not be correct to suggest that the villagers of the respondent

   no. 1 would be denied all the benefits that they otherwise may be entitled to,
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                 Page 22 of 61
thereby, causing an infringement of their fundamental right to life under
Article 21
of the Constitution.
25. In light of the aforesaid, the counsel prayed that the impugned decision be set

      aside and the State authorities be directed to take a final call on the issue of

      recognition of the respondent no. 1 village, in a time-bound manner, after

      taking into consideration the objections of the appellant. Furthermore, it was

      also prayed that in the event that the State authorities arrive at a decision which

      goes against the appellants, their right to take recourse to available legal

      remedies before the appropriate forum, be protected.
ii.      Submissions on behalf of the respondent nos. 1 and 2
26. Ms. Renuka Sahu, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent nos.
1 and 2 respectively submitted that the appellant was not a necessary party

      both in the Writ Petition and the Writ Appeal before the High Court.
27. It was submitted what while an objection was raised by the appellant to the

      public notice dated 13.10.2009 vide its letter dated 16.10.2009, the Office of

      the Deputy Commissioner, Dimapur had replied to the same vide its

      communication dated 08.11.2009 and directed the appellant to provide

      additional and sufficient details to back their claim that the respondent no. 1
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                    Page 23 of 61
village would fall within the boundary of their ancestral land. However, it was

   the appellant who has failed to produce any such document. Therefore,

   naturally, the objections raised by the appellant were nullified.
28. The counsel further submitted that there exist around 16 recognised and

   unrecognised villages along with the 18th Assam Rifles Head Quarter between

   the boundary of the respondent no. 1 village and the appellant. The respondent

   no. 1 village is bound by Ghowoto village in the north, K. Xekiye Village in

   the South, the Pathor River/Ballu Nallah in the East and the K. Xekiye Village

   in the West. The same is also evident in the map which reveals the boundaries

   of the respondent no. 1 village. Therefore, the counsel submitted that the issue

   of the inter-district boundary, if any, has nothing to do with the recognition of

   the respondent no. 1 and that she was at a loss to understand how the appellant

   would be affected in any manner if the respondent no. 1 village is granted

   recognition. This was more so because the respondent no. 2 has established

   the respondent no. 1 village in a self-acquired land i.e., the Zhuthovi Village,

   which is a recognized village under the Dhansiripar Sub-Division, Dimapur

   District, had donated land to Ghowoto Village, which in turn had donated land

   to the respondent no. 1 village.
29. The counsel submitted that the respondent no. 1 village has duly complied

   with all the formalities for the recognition of a new village as required by the

   O.M.’s dated 22.03.1996 and 1.10.2005. i.e., - (a) ‘No Objection Certificates’
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                Page 24 of 61
were obtained from the neighbouring villages on 16.08.2007 and 30.11.2007

   respectively, (b) a Survey report dated 10.09.2009 was submitted by the local

   authorities, (c) A public notice dated 13.10.2009 was issued by the Deputy

   Commissioner, Dimapur, (d) The Deputy Commissioner, Dimapur vide its

   letter dated 18.11.2009 addressed to the Commissioner of Nagaland, Kohima,

   confirmed that all formalities for the recognition of the respondent no. 1

   village were completed, (e) On 14.12.2011, the Cabinet given its approval for

   the recognition of the respondent no. 1 village subject to a joint verification,
(f) On 23.08.2012, the joint verification was conducted by the Deputy

   Commissioners of Dimapur and Peren in compliance with the Cabinet’s

   condition and the Deputy Commissioner, Peren stated that he had no further

   objections. In light of the aforesaid, it was submitted that, having complied

   with all the requirements, recognition must be granted to the respondent no. 1

   village.
30. The counsel acknowledged that
Article 371A
pertains to special provisions

   vis-à-vis the State of Nagaland whereby the State is granted immunity in

   respect of Parliament made law with respect to certain matters. However, it

   was her case that while individual ‘Acts of Parliament’ may not apply, certain

   overarching principles under the Constitution, including the Fundamental

   Rights guaranteed under Part III would still find application in the State of

   Nagaland. The very object and purpose of the enactment of
Article 371A
was
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                               Page 25 of 61
to keep the interest and welfare of people of Nagaland at the forefront.

   Therefore, such a provision cannot be utilised to the detriment of its people.

   Hence, under the garb of customary and religious practices which are

   protected by
Article 371A
, the fundamental rights, more particularly
Articles

   14
, 19
and
21
respectively, cannot be sought to be abridged. To fortify her

   submissions, the counsel placed reliance on the decision of this Court in PUCL

   & Anr. Vs. State of Nagaland and Ors., (Civil Appeal No. 3607 of 2016) and

   the decision of the Gauhati High Court in Mangyang Lima v. State of

   Nagaland and Ors, reported in 2019 SCC OnLine Gau 3494.
31. The counsel submitted that the rights guaranteed under
Articles 14
, 19
and
21
respectively, of the villagers belonging to the respondent no. 1 village were

   being infringed owing to that fact that their ‘unrecognised’ status deprives

   them access to several facilities and schemes provided by the Central and State

   governments. This denial of Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) and State

   Sponsored Schemes (SSS) hampers their fundamental developmental rights

   which are critical to social and economic progress. These would include:
i. Village Development Board (V.D.B.) : The absence of a V.D.B. in the

       respondent no. 1 village has stripped them off the power to independently

       plan, implement, and oversee infrastructure along with providing services

       and amenities using funds from the Rural Development Department. The

       essential schemes to which access has been denied as a consequence
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                              Page 26 of 61
include the
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
(MGNREGA), Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana-Gramin (PMAY-G),

       Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY), Deen Dayal Upadhyaya

       Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY), National Rural Livelihoods

       Mission (NRLM) etc.

   ii. Public Works Department (PWD): No roads are constructed, nor is

       maintenance work undertaken in the absence of official recognition of the

       respondent no. 1 village.
iii. Health Department: The village is denied access to critical health care

       infrastructure such as Primary Health Centres or dispensaries.
iv. Education Department: There is no establishment of government

       schools for primary or secondary education, depriving children of their

       fundamental right to education.
v. Food and Civil Supplies Department: Essential food security schemes

       under the
National Food Security Act
(NFSA) remain inaccessible. These

       include (a) Antyodaya Anna Yojana scheme where a household receives

       35 kg of food grains per month and (b) Priority House Hold scheme where

       up to 5 kg of subsidized food grains per family member, per month, is

       granted.
vi. Forest Department: Recognized villages benefit from the grant of free

       tree saplings, annually, for environmental protection and improvement.
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                            Page 27 of 61
vii. Horticulture and Agriculture Department: Free fruit saplings, free

        vegetable saplings, farming machinery, tools, and equipment critical to

        agricultural development are all denied to the respondent no. 1 village.

  viii. Land Resources Department: Free saplings of cash crops like Arecanut,

        Coffee, and local spices such as broom grass, naganeem, lali, kadam etc.

        which foster sustainable livelihoods are also denied.
ix.   Transport Department: Public transport facilities essential for

        connectivity and mobility are also not extended to unrecognized villages,

        perpetuating isolation and backwardness.
32. In the last, it was submitted that the fundamental rights and Directive

   Principles of State Policy under Parts III and IV of the Constitution

   respectively, form the bedrock of our Constitution and cannot be over-

   shadowed by
Article 371A
or any other customary law of the State, since the

   rule of law and constitutional supremacy must remain paramount. Having

   already complied with the procedural requirements for its recognition, the

   objections raised by appellant, cloaked under the guise of special provisions

   and customary practices, are clearly legally untenable and morally unjust.

   Such opposition seeks to perpetuate inequality and injustice, denying the

   residents of the respondent no. 1 village their rightful access to essential

   services.
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                              Page 28 of 61
33. In light of the aforesaid, it was submitted that the impugned decision not be

       interfered with and that the State Government be directed to take immediate

       steps for the recognition of the respondent no. 1 village, without any further

       delay.
iii.      Submissions on behalf of the State
34. Ms. Enatoli Sema, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State of

       Nagaland submitted that the Ezong Committee which was tasked to demarcate

       the inter-district boundary between the Dhansiripar Sub-Division of Dimapur

       District and Jalukie Sub-Division of Peren, Kohima District had

       recommended in its Report dated 28.05.2002 that the Government recognise

       villages in the disputed areas only after the boundary demarcation is finalised.

       She submitted that the while the appellant belongs to the Jalukie sub-division,

       the respondent no. 1 belonged to the Dhansiripar sub-division. The Report had

       also recorded that several rounds of meetings were held with the

       representatives of both the communities belonging to the disputing villages

       but no mutually agreeable decision could be arrived at. Therefore, the attempt

       of the Government to amicably settle the issue way back in 2002 was rendered

       futile. Subsequently, the Ezong Committee Report of 2002 was placed before

       the Cabinet wherein, the recognition of the respondent No.1 village was

       recommended to be kept in abeyance. The Report was then published and
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                   Page 29 of 61
several objections and counter-claims were filed before the Government

   which are being reviewed.
35. It was submitted that after the Single Judge of the High Court had directed

   the grant of recognition of the respondent no. 1 village, the State had preferred

   an appeal before the High Court since the inter-district boundary demarcation

   was pending and on-going. The State, while keeping in mind the past instances

   of violence in the disputed areas wished to amicably settle the dispute between

   the parties herein, in order to avoid any untoward situation relating to the two

   communities in the area.
36. The counsel submitted that pursuant to the order of this Court dated

   13.01.2017, a meeting dated 16.03.2017 was held between both the parties in

   the presence of the Deputy Commissioners of the concerned districts. In the

   aforesaid meeting, while both the parties could not arrive at a logical

   conclusion, they agreed to (a) maintain peace and tranquillity between the

   villages located in the inter-district boundaries i.e., Peren and Dimapur

   Districts; and (b) form a Committee amongst themselves comprising of a

   convenor and three representatives each from both sides. However, the

   counsel submitted that no report from the aforesaid committee has been

   received by the concerned authorities till date.
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                Page 30 of 61
37. It was submitted that since the dispute between the two villages pertain to and

   touch upon Inter-District Boundary dispute between the Peren and Dimapur

   Districts respectively, the State constituted a Cabinet Sub-Committee vide

   Notification No. GAB-1/333/2014 (VOL-I) 309 dated 7.8.2019. The mandate

   of the said Sub-Committee was to look into the setting up of new settlement

   ‘Lamhai Namdi’ and finalise the boundary demarcation between the two

   Districts of Peren and Dimapur in order to arrive at a solution to solve the

   present impasse. The Sub-Committee physically visited the spot on 14.9.2019

   and on 23.10.2019, a consultative meeting with both the Hoho’s/ Tribal

   Organisations, in the presence of both the respective Deputy Commissioners

   was held whereby the Hoho’s/Tribal organisations were directed to submit

   additional documents. Finally, the Report of the Sub-Committee was placed

   before the cabinet on 13.7.2021. Pursuant to the Report of the Sub-Committee,

   a new District called Chumoukedima was carved out in 2021 and therefore,

   the inter-district dispute between the two villages presently falls between the

   Peren and Chumoukedima districts.
38. Furthermore, it was submitted that pursuant to the intervention of this Court

   vide order dated 3.12.2024 and in the interest of maintaining peace between

   the two communities, the State convened two meetings on 21.12.2024 and

   3.1.2025 respectively with the disputing villages. The discussions during the

   meeting revealed that the outstanding issues between the two villages have
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                               Page 31 of 61
narrowed down. There is every chance of a positive negotiation between the

     parties which may lead to a final settlement. Therefore, the counsel submitted

     that in order to facilitate such a settlement, a final chance be given to the State

     so that the two villages can meet under the aegis of the tribal councils,

     consisting of tribal elders, as provided under
Section 26
of the Nagaland

     Village and Tribal Councils Act, 1978. This section enjoins the tribal council

     to inter-alia, “assist settlement of disputes and cases involving breaches of

     customary laws and usages.”.
C.         ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION
39. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone

     through the materials on record, the following questions fall for our

     consideration:
I.      Whether it could be said that the respondent no. 1 village had fulfilled

             all the necessary conditions/criteria for the issuance of formal order(s)

             of recognition as per the O.M.’s dated 22.03.1996 and 01.10.2005

             respectively, especially in light of the fact that the appellant had raised

             objections to the Public Notice dated 13.10.2009?
II.     Whether the existence of an “inter-district boundary dispute” was a

             valid reason to keep the recognition of the respondent no. 1 village in

             abeyance?
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                    Page 32 of 61
D.    ANALYSIS


i.      Whether all the necessary conditions/criteria for the issuance of formal
order(s) of recognition as per the O.M.’s dated 22.03.1996 and
        01.10.2005 respectively were fulfilled?
40.
Article 371A
of the Constitution which was inserted by the
Constitution

     (Thirteenth Amendment) Act, 1962
and which came into effect on 01.12.1963

     carves out a special provision as regards the State of Nagaland. It specifically

     provides that no Act of Parliament in respect of the religious or social practices

     of the Nagas, Naga customary law and procedure, and ownership and transfer

     of land and its resources, amongst others, shall apply to the State of Nagaland

     unless the Legislative Assembly of the State decides to adopt them through a

     specific resolution to that effect. The relevant portion of
Article 371A
reads

     thus:
“371A. Special provision with respect to the State of
             Nagaland.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in this
             Constitution,—
(a) no Act of Parliament in respect of—
(i) religious or social practices of the Nagas;
(ii) Naga customary law and procedure;
(iii) administration of civil and criminal justice involving
                decisions according to Naga customary law;
(iv) ownership and transfer of land and its resources,
             shall apply to the State of Nagaland unless the Legislative
             Assembly of Nagaland by a resolution so decides;”

                                                       (Emphasis supplied)
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                   Page 33 of 61
41. The insertion of
Article 371A
was the outcome of a political settlement which

      culminated after a decade-long struggle and is also a reflection of the grant of

      the right to ‘self-rule’ and political autonomy to the people of Nagaland.3 The

      decision of the Gauhati High Court in
Sabeituo Mechulho and Ors v. State

      of Nagaland and Ors.
reported in 2011 SCC OnLine Gau 592 which held

      that
Article 371A
has no role to play in the matter of provision of reservation

      to a woman representative belonging to a society/NGO in the Village Council

      or local body, had the occasion to deal with the reason behind the insertion of

      a special provision in the nature of
Article 371A.
The High Court emphasized

      the lofty purpose for which such a provision had been included in the

      Constitution i.e., the preservation of the distinct identity of the Naga people

      by allowing them to live with their distinct religious and social practices,

      customs, traditions etc. The relevant observations are thus:
“10. This provision has been made to preserve the identity of
               Naga People by allowing them to live with their distinct
               religious, social practice, customs, tradition, etc. They have
               been given opportunity to administer civil and criminal
               justice as per their customary law.
Article 371A
is silent
               about the share of participation of Naga men and women in
               the local administration. There is no mention about
               reservation for Naga Woman representative in the local
               administration. In my considered view
article 371A
has no
               role to pay or application in the matter of providing
               reservation for woman representative in the Village Council
               or local body. This provision is for a mighty and lofty
               purpose/aim to preserve the distinct identity of Naga people
               for which it has been made incumbent upon the parliament to
3
RAJYA SABHA DEB., (Sep. 3, 1962) 4660.
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                   Page 34 of 61
have the approval of the Nagaland State Legislature before
                any Act is implemented or enforced in the State of Nagaland.
                The parliament would not have any say in the matter of
                providing reservation for woman in the local body like
                Village Council. It is the State Government which is required
                to enact law or rules for such purpose.”

                                                           (Emphasis supplied)
42. In the debates which ensued in the Rajya Sabha as regards the passing of the

       Constitution (Thirteenth Amendment) Bill, 1962 and the State of Nagaland

       Bill, 1962, the then Prime Minister of India, Mr. Jawaharlal Nehru, remarked

       that “Anyhow, it is for the people of Nagaland to make their rules about their

       land”4. It is the case of the appellant that the issue of village establishment and

       recognition falls within the larger umbrella of “ownership and transfer of land

       and its resources” and is rooted in certain unique social and customary

       practices and procedures. In this context, it is relevant for us to refer to the

       provisions of the 1978 Act, especially
Section 3
thereof which reads thus:
“
Section 3
- Constitution: Every recognised Village shall
                have a Village Council.
Explanation: Village means and includes an area recognised
                as a Village as such by the Government of Nagaland. An area
                in order to be a Village under this act shall fulfil the following
                conditions namely:
(a) The land in the area belong to the population of that
                   area or given to them by the Government of Nagaland, if
                   the land in question is a Government land or is land given
                   to them by the lawful owner of the land; and
4
Ibid at 4716.
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                        Page 35 of 61
(b) The Village is established according to the usage and
            customary practice of the population of the area.”

                                                    (Emphasis supplied)
43. The Explanation to
Section 3
, elaborates on the meaning of a ‘Village’. It

   states that a village would mean and include “an area which is recognised as

   a village by the Government of Nagaland”. Furthermore, an area in order to

   be recognised as a village must fulfil certain conditions i.e. – The land/area in

   which the village exists must either belong to the population in that area or be

   given to such a village/population by the Government of Nagaland/lawful

   owner AND, the village must be established according to the usages and

   customary practices of the population belonging to that area. The land in

   question would be given to the village population by the government if it is a

   government land and if otherwise, by the lawful owner of the land.
44. Therefore, a great amount of emphasis is placed primarily on two things –

   One, ownership of the land, either communally by the village as a whole or

   individually by the members of the village; and two, the adherence to the

   existing customary practices in the process of ‘recognition’ of the village. The

   State Government is empowered to recognise a particular area as a ‘village’

   in accordance with
Section 3
of the 1978 Act, upon the fulfilment of the

   conditions mentioned therein and only when an application is made to them

   in that behalf by a section of people inhabiting the particular area which is
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                Page 36 of 61
sought to be given a recognised status. In such an application, the people

   residing in such an area must be able to show in a bona fide and sufficient

   manner that they are the lawful owners of the said area/land and that they have

   established their village as per the existing customary practices.
45. The two O.M.’s dated 22.03.1996 and 01.10.2005 respectively, elaborates on

   the process which is to accompany such a claim for recognition. These O.M.’s

   are said to also mirror and codify the existing customs pertaining to village

   recognition in the State. A bare reading of the two O.M.’s reveals that the idea

   of consent and communication between all the relevant stakeholders is

   cardinal and fundamental to the process of village recognition. We say so

   because, in the O.M. dated 22.03.1996, apart from the conditions stipulating

   that a village must have a minimum of 30 houses with a population of not less

   than 150 people, have sufficient land for its expansion and agricultural

   purposes and be constituted by indigenous inhabitants, it is also required that

   ‘No Objection Certificates’ be obtained from several stakeholders. Condition
(v) stands testament to this and states that when a new village is constituted

   by members of more than one village, but in a different location and within

   the ancestral land of a parent village, the Village Council Chairman of such a

   parent village must give a ‘No Objection Certificate’ while indicating the

   boundaries of the new village which is sought to be established and later,

   recognised. When the exact boundaries of the village cannot be determined, it
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                 Page 37 of 61
is required that the Village Council Chairman of the parent village along with

   all the Gaobura’s of the parent village decide upon the nature of the boundaries

   with the new village, on any permanent basis, which is acceptable to both

   parties. Additionally, if the parent village has appointed Gaobura’s who are

   allowed to function as the constitutional head of the village in matters of

   administration of the village land, then the concerned Gaobura’s must also

   attest their signatures to the ‘No Objection Certificate’ along with the Village

   Council Chairman.
46. A joint survey of the newly established village is also conducted by competent

   personnel and authorities belonging to the Land Records & Survey

   Department and other appropriate civil authorities to demarcate, map and

   record the area of the village. Apart from the same, clearance in the form of a

   ‘No Objection Certificate’ is also required from the appropriate officials of the

   Forest Department, a Class-I Magistrate and the neighbouring villages.

   Finally, after all the clearances and procedures are complied with, an

   administrative approval would be given by the Sub-Divisional Officer (SDO)

   and the matter of recognition of the said village would be referred to the higher

   authorities of the District administration who would place their proposal(s) for

   recognition before the government.
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                Page 38 of 61
47. The O.M. dated 01.10.2005, which brought in the requirement of issuance of

   a public notice by the Deputy Commissioner of the concerned district also

   places the idea of mutual consent from all concerned parties at the forefront.

   This notice must mandatorily contain details as regards the area of the land

   and the boundary of the village whose recognition is being proposed. A period

   of 30 days is provided to the public to file objections, if any. This additional

   criterion, again, fortifies the assertion that all the relevant parties/villages must

   be apprised of and also be on board with the recognition of the new village.
48. The raison d’être behind the issuance of a public notice is that one last

   opportunity be given to those interested parties/villages who might be

   adversely affected by the recognition of the new village but who were

   otherwise left out from the process preceding the publication of notice and to

   also ensure that a transparent platform is provided for them to put forth their

   case with reasons so that they can be heard before any further progress is made

   in the matter. This would further obviate any possibility of a subsequent

   conflict occurring in the area between two or more villages laying claim over

   a particular land. On this aspect, the appellant is right in submitting that there

   is a sound rationale behind the existence of such a procedure i.e., the peaceful

   co-existence of the neighbouring village and/or the predominant tribes

   inhabiting the areas, especially considering that inter-tribal conflicts remain a

   very sensitive issue in the State.
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                   Page 39 of 61
49. However, what we would like to further point out is that it is the bounden duty

   of the State and its relevant authorities to adequately and appropriately

   consider any and all such objections which may be raised by the interested

   parties in response to the public notice issued by them, provided that they are

   lodged within the stipulated time-period. Otherwise, the very object of issuing

   a public notice would be vitiated. In the present case, the said public notice

   was issued on 13.10.2009 and vide communication dated 16.10.2009, the

   appellant had raised its objections to the recognition of the respondent no. 1

   village by contending that that the respondent no. 1 village is in fact sought to

   be established on their land. The objection is said to have also been published

   in a local daily on 18.10.2009. The Office of the Deputy Commissioner,

   Dimapur vide its letter dated 08.11.2009 had directed the appellant to furnish

   more comprehensive details along with the relevant boundaries and records to

   incidate as to how the respondent no. 1 village would fall within their land.

   The authorities further stipulated that, if the same is not provided within a

   period of 7 days, their objection dated 16.10.2009 would stand nullified. On

   the ensuing day i.e., on 09.11.2009, the appellant sent a reply providing details

   supporting their claim to the Deputy Commissioner, Dimapur. It is unclear as

   to what extent the aforesaid communication made by the appellant was

   considered by the Deputy Commissioner, Dimapur before additional steps

   were taken to forward the proposal for recognition of the respondent no. 1

   village to the government. The State of Nagaland has not made a single
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                Page 40 of 61
averment regarding the merits of the claim made by the appellant over the land

   in which the respondent no. 1 village is situated. It is not the case of the State

   of Nagaland that the claims made by the appellant are absolutely baseless and

   devoid of merit as well. Therefore, we are at a loss to understand how it can

   be contended, both by the State of Nagaland and by the respondent nos. 1 and

   2 respectively, that the conditions/criteria
laid down in
the two O.M.’s,

   especially the latter O.M. dated 01.10.2005, were fulfilled in the present case.
50. With the existing procedure that is prescribed for the recognition of a village

   in the State of Nagaland, we are of the view that it would not be open for the

   respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively to blanketly assail the right of the

   appellant to raise its objections as regards the recognition of the respondent

   no. 1 village. However, what we would like to highlight is that it is the

   responsibility of the State to weed out frivolous objections and those devoid

   of merit from the process, in such a manner that the rights of the village

   seeking recognition are not prejudiced. What would be appropriate at this

   juncture is for the State to consider the objections of the appellant on their own

   merits and decide whether their ‘No objection’ is a pre-requisite for the grant

   of recognition of the respondent no. 1 village or not. If answered in the

   negative, the appellant would have no locus to challenge the recognition of the

   respondent no. 1 village and the matter would be put to bed at least insofar as

   these two parties are concerned. Only in the instance that the said question is
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                 Page 41 of 61
answered in the affirmative, would the respondent no. 1 village be required to

      initiate conversation with representatives of the appellant, to arrive at a

      mutually beneficial settlement and prevent the risk of any adverse measures

      being taken against them.
ii.    Whether the existence of an “inter-district boundary dispute” was a
       valid reason to keep the recognition of the respondent no. 1 village in
       abeyance?
51. The demarcation of the inter-district boundary between the districts of

      Kohima and Dimapur and its nexus with the recognition of village(s) was first

      brought to the fore by the Ezong Committee Report. While undertaking the

      task of boundary demarcation and receiving information from all corners, it

      was observed that groups belonging to both districts had claims and

      counterclaims over pieces of land irrespective of whether they had effective

      physical possession of the said land. The broad consensus amongst the

      concerned parties was to place all the villages affiliated with the ‘Sumi’ tribe

      in the Dimapur District and those affiliated to the ‘Zeliangrong’ tribe under

      the Kohima district. This aspect is relevant for us since the appellant belongs

      to the ‘Zeliangrong’ tribe, while the respondent no. 1 village is affiliated to the

      ‘Sumi’ tribe.
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                    Page 42 of 61
52. In the course of examining the issue of boundary demarcation, the Committee

   was apprised of certain newly established villages which were seeking

   recognition. It was in this context that the Committee was of the opinion that

   it would be desirable if the government considers the question of recognition

   of these newly established villages in the disputed areas after the boundary

   demarcation between the two districts was finalised. It is, however,

   noteworthy that while suggesting the final boundary which is to run between

   the two districts, more particularly the Jalukie sub-division of Peren in the

   Kohima District and the Dhansiripar sub-division in the Dimapur District, the

   Committee noted that there were some practical difficulties in placing all the

   ‘Sumi’ villages in Dimapur and all the ‘Zeliangrong’ village in Kohima

   respectively. Therefore, from a purely administrative standpoint, it was

   decided that ‘Kiyevi A’ which is a ‘Sumi’ village would be placed under the

   Kohima District and ‘Mhaikam’ which is a ‘Zeliangrong’ village would be

   placed under the Dimapur District. Therefore, in the eventuality that the

   respondent no. 1 village, a ‘Sumi’ village, is given recognition but the

   boundary demarcation is decided in such a manner that they would be placed

   under the Kohima (now Peren) District instead of the Dimapur District, the

   same would not be an outlier considering that there exists another ‘Sumi’

   village which was also suggested to be placed under the Kohima (now Peren)

   District by the aforesaid Committee for administrative reasons.
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                              Page 43 of 61
53. In the meantime, the respondent no. 1 had applied for recognition in the year

   2009 and their proposal was elevated for a final decision to the Cabinet after

   allegedly complying with the requirements under the O.M.’s dated 22.03.1996

   and 01.10.2005 respectively. The Cabinet in its meeting dated 14.12.2011 had

   directed that out of the 34 villages whose proposal for recognition was being

   considered, a set of 6 villages, which included the respondent no. 1 village

   herein, would be required to undergo a joint verification conducted by the

   Deputy Commissioners of Peren and Dimapur districts respectively. Now,

   once the joint verification was complete, the Deputy Commissioner, Dimapur

   vide communication dated 26.07.2012 reiterated that the respondent no. 1

   village would fall within the Dhansiripar sub-division of the Dimapur District.

   However, the Deputy Commissioner, Peren vide communication dated

   23.08.2012 seems to have again referred to the issue of the “inter-distrct

   boundary dispute” by stating that “the office of the D.C. peren has no further

   comments for recognition…until the boundary dispute between the two

   districts is settled”. Due to the aforesaid observation made by the Deputy

   Commissioner, Peren, the Office of the Commissioner, Nagaland vide

   communication dated 05.11.2012 addressed to the Home Commissioner had

   suggested that the recognition of the respondent no. 1 village and another

   village by the name ‘A.K. Industrial village’, be kept in abeyance till such time

   the boundary issue is resolve since this would invite more villages in the

   disputed area to seek recognition and cause an environment of serious unrest.
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                Page 44 of 61
Additionally, the Commissioner also invited attention to the Ezong Committee

   Report which had recorded its detailed recommendations on the issue of the

   boundary dispute between the two districts and sought necessary action on the

   matter.
54. Despite granting a formal approval to the Ezong Committee Report on

   24.10.2003, it was only after the aforesaid development that a decision was

   made to notify the Ezong Committee Report for inviting claims and objections

   from the public. Such a decision was taken by the Cabinet in its consultation

   meeting as late as 10.06.2013 i.e., more than 10 years after the Ezong

   Committee Report was submitted for necessary action. The Cabinet had,

   again, emphasized that the recognition of the respondent no. 1 village would

   be kept in abeyance until such time the recommendations of the Ezong

   Committee is finally notified.
55. In the writ proceedings which was initiated by the respondent no. 1 before the

   Single Judge of the High Court, the stance taken by the State was that they

   could not decide on the recognition of the respondent no. 1 due to the

   subsisting inter-district boundary dispute. It was averred that they were in the

   midst     of   examining   the   multiple   objections   received     after   the

   recommendations of the Ezong Committee Report was notified for inviting

   views from the public. Furthermore, it was also submitted that they were
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                Page 45 of 61
awaiting a ground reality report on the issue. This stance, however, did not

   seem to find favour with the Single Judge of the High Court who went on to

   observe that “the inter-district boundary dispute would have no bearing

   insofar as the recognition of the petitioner’s village is concerned”. However,

   the State preferred a Writ Appeal and the Division Bench in its impugned

   decision had extended the time-limit for the issuance of formal order(s) of

   recognition of the respondent no. 1 village by observing as follows:
“[…] It appears from the submissions made that the village
          of the respondents/writ petitioners is situated on the
          boundary between Dimapur and Peren districts, both
          districts being pre-dominantly inhabited by members of
          different tribes. Therefore, demarcation of the boundary of
          the village has become a sensitive issue. However, the
          Government is taking necessary steps for making the
          demarcation to enable issuance of formal order of
          recognition of the respondents village as directed by learned
          Single Judge. But considering the sensitiveness of the matter,
          some more time may be required to complete the exercise, he
          submits.”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)


      Therefore, the impugned decision while agreeing with the Single Judge

   that the inter-district boundary dispute had nothing to do with the recognition

   of the respondent no. 1 village appears to have nevertheless been convinced

   with the argument canvassed by the State at least for the purpose of allowing

   some additional time to the State authorities.
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                              Page 46 of 61
56. Under circumstances such as these, i.e., when the State has taken a policy

   decision or through its Cabinet has arrived at a certain conclusion, in their

   wisdom, after exhaustively considering all the relevant factors and

   recommendations, it would not be appropriate for courts to interfere or

   supplant the finding arrived at by the government. In the absence of any patent

   arbitrariness, capriciousness, mala fides or illegality, courts have always

   subscribed to the rule that executive decision-making must not be dissected

   and prodded unnecessarily. This is specially true for a State like Nagaland

   wherein the system of administration and governance is slightly different from

   the other States and where the government might be more familiar and

   informed of the ground realities that exist. In such scenarios, yielding to the

   executive expertise might be the right call. This judicial policy of non-

   interference with the Cabinet decisions made by the government or vis-á-vis

   policy matters is no more res integra.
57. This Court in
Sachidanand Pandey and Another v. State of West Bengal and

   Others
reported in (1987) 2 SCC 295 was faced with a question on whether

   the court could judicially review the Cabinet decision of the State government

   to lease out a part of the zoo land which was used for fodder cultivation, as a

   burial ground, hospital etc. for animals for the construction of a five-star hotel.

   While answering in the negative, it was held that the decision to lease out the

   land was taken openly and after due application of mind to relevant
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                 Page 47 of 61
considerations including the ecology and the provision of alternative facilities

   to the zoo. Furthermore, it was stated that in a scenario where the decision-

   making of the government was alive to the various relevant considerations and

   a conscious decision was arrived at after investing sufficient thought and

   deliberation, it would not be appropriate for the court to interfere in the

   absence of mala fides plaguing the process. However, if the relevant

   considerations are proven to have been cast aside without due deliberation and

   irrelevant considerations seem to bear significance, there would be every

   reason for courts to interfere in public interest. Still, it was cautioned that it

   would not be proper for the court to intervene to the extent that it attempts at

   a laborious balancing of the relevant considerations. Instead of indulging in

   that exercise, it was suggested that courts must rather resign themselves to

   accepting the decision of the government/appropriate authority in that regard.

   The relevant observations are reproduced thus:
“4. […] The question raised in the present case is whether
          the Government of West Bengal has shown such lack of
          awareness of the problem of environment in making an
          allotment of land for the construction of a five star hotel at
          the expense of the zoological garden that it warrants
          interference by this Court? Obviously, if the government is
          alive to the various considerations requiring thought and
          deliberation and has arrived at a conscious decision after
          taking them into account, it may not be for this Court to
          interfere in the absence of mala fides. On the other hand, if
          relevant considerations are not borne in mind and irrelevant
          considerations influence the decision, the court may interfere
          in order to prevent a likelihood of prejudice to the public.
          Whenever a problem of ecology is brought before the court,
          the court is bound to bear in mind
Article 48-A
of the
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                 Page 48 of 61
Constitution, the Directive Principle which enjoins that “the
           State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment
           and to safeguard the forests and wild life of the country”, and
Article 51-A(g)
which proclaims it to be the fundamental duty
           of every citizen of India “to protect and improve the natural
           environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wild life, and
           to have compassion for living creatures”. When the court is
           called upon to give effect to the Directive Principle and the
           fundamental duty, the court is not to shrug its shoulders and
           say that priorities are a matter of policy and so it is a matter
           for the policy-making authority. The least that the court may
           do is to examine whether appropriate considerations are
           borne in mind and irrelevancies excluded. In appropriate
           cases, the court may go further, but how much further must
           depend on the circumstances of the case. The court may
           always give necessary directions. However the court will not
           attempt to nicely balance relevant considerations. When the
           question involves the nice balancing of relevant
           considerations, the court may feel justified in resigning itself
           to acceptance of the decision of the concerned authority. We
           may now proceed to examine the facts of the present case.”

                                                     (Emphasis supplied)
58. In yet another decision of this Court in Indian Charge Chrome Ltd. and

   Another reported in (2006) 12 SCC 331, it was held that in the absence of the

   Cabinet decision being tainted or, vitiated for any palpable reason, the role of

   the court in scrutinising the said policy decision, was limited. It was observed

   thus:
“[…]There is nothing to show that the noting of the Minister
           was tainted in any manner or that the subsequent Cabinet
           decision was vitiated for any reason that could be gone into
           by the Court. In a sense, counsel for OMC and the State of
           Orissa are right in submitting that it was really a policy
           decision and the role of this Court in respect of such a policy
           decision and its scrutiny was limited and within the scope of
           that limited scrutiny, there was no justification in interfering
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                 Page 49 of 61
with the decision of the Government. Of course, as we have
          indicated earlier, it is for the Central Government to give its
          approval or not to give its approval to the proposal of the
          State Government. The Central Government is yet to take a
          decision. Since, we have not reached that stage, we are also
          not called upon to pronounce on it at this stage.”

                                                    (Emphasis supplied)
59. Subsequently, in
State of Uttar Pradesh and Others v. Chaudhari Ran Beer

   Singh and Another
reported in (2008) 5 SCC 550, this Court was concerned

   with an issue wherein the State Government decided on the creation of a new

   district by the name of ‘Baghpat’ and published a notification in that regard

   The same was challenged by way of a writ petition. This Court had reiterated

   that the scope of interference is very limited when policy decisions are

   concerned since the government is better equipped to weigh and measure all

   the relevant aspects that must be taken into consideration. So long as the

   infringement of fundamental rights is not shown or evident, courts must

   refrain from substituting its own judgment while assessing the propriety of the

   government’s decisions which is made in exercise of its discretion or as a

   matter of policy. The relevant observations are reproduced hereinbelow:
“13. Cabinet's decision was taken nearly eight years back
          and appears to be operative. That being so there is no scope
          for directing reconsideration as was done in Ram Milan case,
          though learned counsel for the respondents prayed that such
          a direction should be given. As rightly contended by learned
          counsel for the State, in matters of policy decisions, the scope
          of interference is extremely limited. The policy decision must
          be left to the Government as it alone can decide which policy
          should be adopted after considering all relevant aspects from
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                Page 50 of 61
different angles. In matter of policy decisions or exercise of
          discretion by the Government so long as the infringement of
          fundamental right is not shown, courts will have no occasion
          to interfere and the court will not and should not substitute
          its own judgment for the judgment of the executive in such
          matters. In assessing the propriety of a decision of the
          Government the court cannot interfere even if a second view
          is possible from that of the Government.”

                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
60. A conspectus of the aforementioned decisions would indicate that when an

   executive Cabinet decision is the outcome of sound reasoning, an inclusive

   consideration of all the relevant factors and based on recommendations, it

   cannot be sought to be faulted with, especially through judicial intervention.

   Assailing it in the absence of arbitrariness and merely because a ‘better’

   alternate view could have been taken or was possible, would not suffice in

   order to strike down such a decision or render it inoperative. The Ezong

   Committee, while working on its recommendations for a boundary

   demarcation between the two districts and while assessing the ground level

   realities existing in the disputed areas, witnessed first-hand potential for

   conflict if recognition is given to those villages which were situated in the

   disputed area and therefore, suggested that recognition of those select villages

   be kept in abeyance. The Deputy Commissioner, Peren also refrained from

   commenting on the recognition of the respondent no. 1 village in view of the

   subsisting boundary dispute. Therefore, on the advice of the Commissioner

   and Home Commissioner, the Cabinet sought to keep the recognition of the
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                               Page 51 of 61
respondent no. 1 village in abeyance until the inter-district boundary dispute

   was solved. The same cannot be faulted for being unreasonable or arbitrary

   and based on no materials.
61. However, we have been apprised of the report of yet another Cabinet Sub-

   Committee which was submitted before the Cabinet on 13.07.2021, which re-

   examined the inter-district boundary dispute between the Peren and Dimapur

   districts. The new committee had the occasion to consider or rather, re-

   consider the recommendations made by the Ezong Committee back in 2002.

   This Report of the Cabinet Sub-Committee came much after the impugned

   decision dated 07.10.2015. Therefore, it cannot be said that the authorities

   designated by the Cabinet sub-committee would have been unaware of the

   unrecognised status of the respondent no. 1 village or their claim for

   recognition while undertaking the site visits, assessing the ground realities and

   performing their due diligence on the matter. However, what must be noted

   with emphasis is that the Report of the Cabinet sub-committee while

   mentioning the tussle which had ensued between the ‘Lamhai’ Village and

   ‘Kiyevi’ village due to their claims in the disputed area, is conspicuously silent

   about the respondent no. 1 village and its conflict, if any, with another village

   on account of it falling within the disputed boundary area of the two districts.

   Therefore, while there may exist a dispute between the appellant and the

   respondent no. 1 village regarding the ownership of land, what is evident is
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                 Page 52 of 61
that it does not seem to have anything to do with the boundary dispute which

   is prevailing in the region.
62. Moreover, the Report of the Cabinet Sub-committee arrived at a conclusion

   that the recommendations of the Ezong Committee were largely feasible and

   practical albeit with a few exceptions and partial modifications. Under this

   Report too, a ‘Sumi’ village was suggested to be placed under the Peren

   District and a ‘Zeliangrong’ village was recommended to be kept in the

   Dimapur District, purely for administrative convenience. The second

   noteworthy aspect of the present Report was that the establishment and

   recognition of new villages within a demarcated “buffer-zone/area” between

   the Jalukie sub-division of the Peren District and Dhansiripar sub-division of

   the Dimapur District was recommended to be considered only after the

   boundary dispute was put to rest. The Report provided an Annexure under

   which the list of villages, both recognised and unrecognised, falling within

   such a “buffer-zone/area”, was detailed. A careful perusal of the same reveals

   that the respondent no. 1 village does not fall within the said buffer-zone/area.
63. On a consideration of the recent report of the Cabinet sub-committee, which

   comes as a relatively recent development, it can be seen that the stance of the

   State blaming the inter-district boundary dispute for the non-recognition of the

   respondent no. 1 deserves to be viewed strictly. When the Ezong Committee
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                Page 53 of 61
Report was published in the year 2002, the respondent no. 1 village was not

   inaugurated or established yet. Hence, there is every possibility that the State

   authorities attributed the persisting inter-district dispute as a bona fide reason

   for keeping the recognition of the respondent no. 1 village in abeyance, largely

   due to the absence of clarity on the bounds of the respondent no. 1 village and

   whether it fell within the disputed area or not. However, post the year 2021,

   i.e., it was obvious and plain as day that the boundary dispute had nothing

   whatsoever to do with the case of the respondent no. 1 village, especially since

   it’s the case of the State themselves that the respondent no. 1 village is situated

   approx. 3.7 kms from the buffer-zone/area.
64. The only reasonable ground or basis to further delay the recognition of the

   respondent no. 1 was the objection raised by the appellant to the public notice

   dated 13.10.2009. Still, this was also more than 15 years ago. We are equally

   baffled and frustrated with the enormous reluctance that the State has

   exhibited in considering the merits of the objections of the appellants and

   putting an end to this issue.
65. Furthermore, the nature of the objections raised by the appellant are such that

   they render it impossible for this court, which owing to its systemic

   limitations, would not be well-equipped to understand the nuances of the rich

   history of the land and the inter-tribal land related interactions which
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                 Page 54 of 61
transpired over the years, to authoritatively decide such claims. The State

   authorities would be better suited to delve into the accuracy and correctness

   of the claims put forth by the appellant and effectively decide the issue once

   and for all. The courts face, for the lack of a better word, a real impediment in

   deciding such complex disputed questions of fact which are involved in the

   present litigation, especially at this stage. It would also be apposite to mention

   that courts must also not bear the burden of what is a responsibility cast upon

   the State and entrusted to executive decision-making.
66. The learned counsel for the State has also submitted in her counter-affidavit

   that there might be objections by other parties, apart from those raised by the

   appellants, which are germane to the issue of the respondent no. 1 village’s

   recognition. It is clarified that any and all such objections may also be looked

   into and decided upon expeditiously.
67. We appreciate that the State has refrained from adopting a completely

   adversarial stand on the present issue but it must not be forgotten that the State

   is still duty bound to carry out its role as an administrator and ensure that the

   proper governance of its districts and villages do not suffer as a result of it

   embracing such a non-confrontational role instead. In the face of conflict, the

   State must delicately balance its function as a mediator but also as an authority

   while seamlessly morphing into either role as per the demands of the situation
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                 Page 55 of 61
before itself. Ever since this Court has taken seisin of this matter, the State has

   attempted to bring both parties together, at the same table, on multiple

   occasions, in the hopes of an amicable settlement being reached. However,

   every one of those attempts has remained unsuccessful in view of both parties

   refusing to concede or arrive at a middle-ground. In such a scenario, the only

   option that remains with the State is to consider the stand taken by both parties,

   on merits, from an objective point of view and implement its decision without

   hesitation. We say so, because the alternative – protracting the present impasse

   and maintaining this limbo - is equally, if not more undesirable.
68. We have been informed by the State that certain basic facilities have been

   made available to the respondent no. 1 and the same is tabulated below:
SL. NO NAME OF DEPT.            SCHEME/FACILITIES          REMARKS
   1.   Rural                    77 job card holders The job holders are
        Development              are there in Kakiho registered under K.
                                 village             Xikeye village since
                                                     2012-13.
    2.     Education             NIL                 There are at present no
                                                     schools in the village.
                                                     The nearest schools are:
                                                     1. GPS Ghowoto which
                                                        is approx.. 2km
                                                        away.
                                                     2. GHS Lhotavi village
                                                        which is approx..
                                                        3km away.
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                 Page 56 of 61
3. GMS at Amaluma
                                                        which is approx.. 3-4
                                                        km away.
                                                     4. GMS at Doyapur
                                                        which is approx.. 5
                                                        km away.
    3.     Social Welfare Anganwadi        centre
                          with       Anganwadi
                          worker/helper
                          available.
                          PMMVY/IGNPS are
                          availed.
    4.     PHED           The      village      is
                          connected with water
                          supply under Jal
                          Jeevan Mission since
                          2022-2023. All 35
                          households        have
                          functional          tap
                          connection.
                          Under             SBM
                          (Grameen) one plastic
                          waste management
                          unit      has     been
                          provided         during
                          2022-2023.
    5.     Electrical     Electricity connected      Single Point metering
    6.     Food and Civil There are 16 priority
           Supplies       house hold ration card
                          holders.
    7.     Agriculture    NIL                        NIL
    8.     Horticulture   NIL                        NIL
    9.     Medical        NIL                        No PHC/CHC/SC In
                                                     Kakiho (U/R). Nearest
                                                     Sub Centre is at Pimla
                                                     which is about 6-7 KM
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                          Page 57 of 61
from Kakiho       (U/R)
                                                         village.
    10.    Water Resource   Balu   Nallah     MI
                            Project – Surface
                            Minor      Irrigation
                            (SMI) project under
                            PMKSY “Har Khet
                            Ko Pani”.
    11.    Forest           NIL                          NIL
    12.    Fishery          NIL                          NIL
    13.    Land Resources   NIL                          NIL
    14.    Industries   and NIL                          NIL
           Commerce
69. In the aforesaid context, the counsel for the appellant also submitted that the

   respondent no. 1 currently being unrecognised, would still be entitled to avail

   certain benefits which are due to them from their parent village, namely the

   ‘Khumishi A’ Village belonging to the Asuto sub-division of the Zunheboto

   District. The aforesaid may be true in terms of availing benefits like obtaining

   free tree saplings under the schemes of the Forest Department; free fruit

   saplings from the Horticulture Department; free vegetable saplings, farming

   machinery, tools etc. from the Agricultural Department; free saplings of cash

   crops and local spices from the Land Resources Department and; access to

   several food security schemes under the Food and Civil Supplies Department.

   These benefits, not requiring the existence of permanent structures and being

   easily transportable, can be availed by sharing in the proceeds of what is made

   available to the parent village/neighbouring village(s) on a mutual consent
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                               Page 58 of 61
basis for the interim period. However, other essentials facilities like the

   construction of roads, health infrastructure, school and other benefits that

   would be made available upon the creation of a Village Development Board,

   still remain denied to the respondent no. 1 village since they require a separate

   and considerable amount of fund allocation on part of the State along with the

   erection of permanent structures. It is keeping this in mind that we urge the

   State authorities to take a final call on the issue of recognition of the

   respondent no. 1 village with the utmost urgency and with strict adherence to

   the procedure which has been contemplated for the said purpose. In the likely

   event that a decision is arrived at to deny recognition to the respondent no. 1

   village, it must be for reasons falling within the umbrella of the procedure laid

   out therein and the State must be ready to clearly indicate what their next plan

   of action would be, in that scenario.
70. Another set of arguments were canvassed by the respondent nos. 1 and 2 as

   regards the relationship between the fundamental rights, more particularly
Articles 14
, 19
and
21
guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution and the

   special status assigned to customary practices under
Article 371A
of the

   Constitution. It was argued that customary practices protected under
Article

   371A
cannot be utilised as a tool, rather a weapon, to abridge the fundamental

   rights of the people of Nagaland and the villagers of the respondent no. 1

   village. However, in the absence of the relevant provisions of the 1978 Act
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                Page 59 of 61
and O.M.’s dated 22.03.1996 and 1.10.2005 respectively, themselves being

   challenged as being violative of the fundamental rights guaranteed to the

   respondent no. 1 village and its inhabitants, there arises no occasion for us

   delve into the said question of law. The grievance of the respondent, as we

   understand, is primarily due to the delayed action, nay inaction, of the State

   authorities in conclusively deciding their application for recognition and the

   assignment of irrelevant reasons that perpetually kept their recognition in

   abeyance. We believe the said grievance has been addressed by us,

   appropriately and in great detail, in the preceding paragraphs.



E. CONCLUSION
71. In light of the aforesaid discussion, it cannot be said that the procedure

   envisaged in the two O.M.’s dated 22.03.1996 and 01.10.2005 respectively,

   was complied with in the present case. Furthermore, we are of the view that

   the inter-district boundary dispute had no nexus whatsoever with the issue of

   recognition of the respondent no. 1 village.
72. The decision of the High Court insofar as the observations made regarding the

   compliance with the aforesaid two O.M.’s are concerned, is set aside solely

   because the High Court while passing the impugned decision, was not alive to

   the case of the appellant herein.
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                              Page 60 of 61
73. The State authorities are directed to re-issue a public notice regarding the

   recognition of the respondent no. 1 village and exhaustively consider all the

   objections which may be raised from every quarter, including that of the

   appellant herein. A period of six months is provided to the State to complete

   the said process and take a call on whether recognition must be granted to the

   respondent no. 1 village or not. Non-adherence to this timeline would be

   viewed strictly.
74. We treat this matter as part heard. The Registry shall notify this matter after a

   period of six months before this very Bench (J.B. Pardiwala and R.

   Mahadevan, JJ.) after obtaining appropriate orders from Honourable the Chief

   Justice of India.
…………………………………J.
                                                    (J.B. Pardiwala)




                                                  …………………………………J.
                                                    (R. Mahadevan)
New Delhi.
23rd May, 2025.
SLP(C) No. 9897 of 2016                                                 Page 61 of 61