[Cites
45
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
In Re : T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad vs Union Of India on 22 May, 2025
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
B.R. Gavai
2025 INSC 754                                                          REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                            IN RE: ZUDPI JUNGLE LANDS

                                             I.A. NO.12465 OF 2019
                                                     WITH
                                             I.A. NO. 98194 OF 2019
                            [Application for permission to file Additional Documents
                                            in I.A. No.12465 of 2019]

                                            I.A. NO. 127871 OF 2020
                             [Application for Intervention in I.A. No.12465 of 2019]

                                                     WITH
                                            I.A. NO. 127874 OF 2020
                              [Application for Directions in I.A. No.12465 of 2019]

                                                     WITH
                                         I.A. NO. 44062 OF 2025
                              [CEC REPORT NO. 08 OF 2025 IN I.A. NO.12465 OF
                                                   2019]
                                                     WITH
                                       I.A. NOS. 66986 AND 74569 OF 2025
                            [Applications for permission to file Additional Documents
                                             in I.A. No.127871 of 2020]

                                                     IN
                                      WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 202 OF 1995


                            IN RE: T.N. GODAVARMAN THIRUMULPAD
                                                              …PETITIONERS
   Signature Not Verified



                                                    VERSUS
   Digitally signed by
   DEEPAK SINGH
   Date: 2025.05.22
   11:51:16 IST
   Reason:



                            UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS              …RESPONDENTS


                                                        1
IN THE MATTER OF:
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                                                       …APPLICANT
PRASAD KHALE                                         …INTERVENOR/APPLICANT


                                             INDEX

I.        INTRODUCTION ...................................................................... 3
II. SUBMISSIONS ......................................................................... 5
III.        FACTUAL POSITION ............................................................. 7
     a.     Meaning of the term Zudpi ................................................... 7
     b.
Forest Conservation Act, 1980
........................................... 12
     c.     Steps taken by the State Government ................................ 13
          (i) Government Order dated 6th November 1987 ................... 13
          (ii)    Mahajan Committee and Joshi Committee ................... 16
          (iii)   Expert Committee ........................................................ 18
     d.     HPC constituted by the Central Government ...................... 20
     e.     Remedial measures by Central and State Government ........ 26
     f.     IAs concerning Zudpi Jungle .............................................. 30
          (i) IA No.176 of 1997 ........................................................... 30
          (ii)    IA No.12465 of 2019 .................................................... 31
     g.     Recommendations in the 2025 CEC Report ........................ 35
IV.         ISSUE FOR CONSIDERATION.............................................. 39
V. DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS.................................................. 39
     a.     Locus of the intervenor in IA No.127871 of 2020 ............... 39
     b.     Efforts taken by CEC .......................................................... 46
     c.     Consequences of not accepting recommendations of CEC .. 47
     d.     Social and Economic Justice .............................................. 48
     e.     Inter-relationship between DPSP and Fundamental Rights . 55
     f.     Case Laws on clauses (b) and (c) of
Article 39...................... 62
g.     Right to Shelter ................................................................. 68
     h. Right to Livelihood ............................................................ 74
     i.     Sustainable Development ................................................... 77
     j.     Effect of CEC’s recommendations ...................................... 81
VI.         CONCLUSION ..................................................................... 90



                                                 2
                       JUDGMENT

B.R. GAVAI, CJI

I.   INTRODUCTION

1.   This batch of applications involves a peculiar issue

concerning the situation prevailing in the six districts of

Eastern Vidarbha Region namely Nagpur, Wardha, Bhandara,

Gondia, Chandrapur and Gadchiroli. The issue pertains to the

status of the parcels of lands known as Zudpi Jungle or Zudpi

Forest in the aforesaid districts of State of Maharashtra.

2.   The State of Maharashtra has approached this Court

stating that though these lands have been recorded in the

revenue records as Zudpi Forest lands, however, taking into

consideration the historical perspective, it is clear that these

lands are not forest lands and that for the past several decades

these lands have been put to various non-forestry purpose like

residential, agricultural, government offices, public schools,

primary health centres etc. The Divisional Commissioner,

Nagpur Division, State of Maharashtra accordingly has filed

certain IAs being IA No.12465 of 2019 and IA No.98194 of

2019. The prayers in the first of the two IAs are thus:



                               3
     “(a) Issue the directions that the 86409 ha. Zudpi
     land, unfit for Forestry Management does not come
     under the purview of
Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980
and also does not attract the provisions of orders of
     12.12.1996 issued by this Hon’ble Court in the
     present Writ Petition AND in light of the submissions
     made above, this Hon'ble Court may also be pleased
     to issue directions that the directions in order dated
     13.11.2000 in Writ Petition No. 337/1995 are also
     not applicable in respect of 86409 ha. Zudpi land,
     unfit for Forestry Management in the State of
     Maharashtra;
     (b) Pass such other or further orders as may be
     deemed fit and proper.”

3.   One Mr. Prasad Khale has filed IA No.127871 of 2020

seeking intervention. Further, IA No.127874 of 2020 has been

filed by the said intervenor seeking the following reliefs:

     “a. Direct the State of Maharashtra to initiate
     departmental enquiry against the errant officers of
     the Forest Department and Revenue Department
     who have violated the provisions of the
Forest
     Conservation) Act, 1980
by permitting Zudpi lands to
     be diverted for non-forest use and for allowing
     encroachments in the said areas.
     b. Direct the State of Maharashtra to undertake
     necessary measures to restore the zudpi lands to its
     original condition, in cases where such lands have
     been illegally diverted without following the
     procedure laid down as per law.”


4.   This Court, by its earlier orders, had directed the Central

Empowered Committee (hereinafter, “CEC”) constituted under

the orders of this Court, to submit its report.



                                4
5.    Pursuant to the directions passed by this Court, two

reports have been submitted by the CEC being CEC Report

No.29 of 2019 dated 22nd October 2019 (hereinafter referred to

as “2019 CEC Report”) and CEC Report No.8 of 2025 dated

17th February 2025 (hereinafter referred to as “2025 CEC

Report”). We will refer to the orders passed by this Court and

the aforesaid reports submitted by the CEC in the subsequent

paragraphs of this judgment.

6.    We have heard Shri K. Parameshwar, learned amicus

curiae, Shri Siddharth Dharmadhikari, learned counsel

appearing on behalf of the State and Smt. Madhavi Divan,

learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the intervenor.

II.   SUBMISSIONS

7.    Shri Parameshwar, learned amicus curiae has placed

before us the entire factual scenario and the recommendations

of the CEC as contained in both the reports. He submits that

this Court after taking into consideration the entire factual

scenario and the historical background should pass an

appropriate order that balances the concerns with regard to

protection of forests and also the interests of lakhs of citizens




                               5
who would be affected by the orders passed by this Court in

the present proceedings.

8.   Shri Dharmadhikari, learned counsel appearing on

behalf of the State submits that the said Zudpi lands were

never forest lands. However, on account of reorganization of

States and inaction of certain bureaucrats, the revenue

records were not corrected and as such, the lands continued

to be recorded as Zudpi Forest lands erroneously. He submits

that, inter alia, government offices, public schools, colleges,

hospitals are constructed on these lands. He submits that if

the prayers sought by the State are not granted, it will cause

grave and irreparable damage to lakhs of citizens residing in

these six districts of the Eastern Vidarbha Region in the State

of Maharashtra.

9.   Smt. Divan, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf

of the intervenor submits that the 2025 CEC Report has failed

to address various ecological concerns specifically with regard

to wildlife and flora and fauna. She submits that the said

Report of the CEC does not state that in the said Zudpi lands

there is no wildlife. She submits that Zudpi lands are a

representation of the transitional stage in ecological evolution.


                               6
She further submits that the “Scrub Forests” have an

individual status and therefore they cannot be permitted to be

used for non-forestry activities. She further submits if

denotification of Zudpi Forest lands will be allowed, it will lead

to healthy forests being degraded so that they can also be

de-notified in the future. She further submits that there are

various discrepancies in the 2025 CEC Report when compared

with the 2019 CEC Report.

III.   FACTUAL POSITION

   a. Meaning of the term Zudpi

10. For considering the rival submissions, it will be

appropriate to refer to the meaning of Zudpi Jungle, its history

and usage.

11. As can be seen from the Report of the Committee for

suggesting changes required in simplified procedure for

diversion of Zudpi Jungle Land under
Forest Conservation Act,

1980
titled as “Resolving Zudpi Jungle Land Issue : A

Development     Perspective”    chaired    by   the    Divisional

Commissioner, Nagpur, “Zudpi” is a Marathi word which

literally means Bushes/Shrubs. Zudpi lands means inferior

type of unoccupied lands with bushy growth. The term Zudpi


                                7
Jungle has been in vogue over several decades and was used

for all such wastelands which were not occupied by individual

farmers for cultivation and other purposes. These lands

consist of very low Murmadi soil (arid soil with gravel and soft

stones) where tree growth was not possible. These lands had

very poor potential of vegetative growth since the soil strata

did not support root systems of trees. Such Murmadi soil

supported mostly bushes and shrubs only. According to the

said Report, in a nutshell, Zudpi was what forest was not.

These lands were traditionally grazing lands and called as

Gairan/Gurcharan/E-Class land as per Maharashtra Land

Revenue Code 1966 (hereinafter referred to as “MLR Code,

1966”) in other parts of Maharashtra.

12. As has been stated in the said Report, the Zudpi Jungle

land issue is an issue very peculiar to the six districts of

Eastern Vidarbha viz., the Nagpur Division which were

erstwhile part of Central Provinces i.e., Nagpur, Wardha,

Bhandara, Gondia, Chandrapur and Gadchiroli. The Central

Provinces was a province of British India which covered

present day Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Vidarbha

Region of Maharashtra with Nagpur as its capital.



                               8
13. It will further be relevant to note that the word Zudpi

Jungle was first used under the Central Province Settlement

Code, 1889 (hereinafter referred to as “1889 Code”). The said

term was used in the revenue records (Settlement Khasra)

during the last round of the revision settlements which took

place in the Ex Central Province Districts during 1912-1917.

The said term of Settlement was for a period of 30 years. As

such, the next round of Settlement was to be undertaken

between 1942-1947. However, the said round of Settlement

could not take place due to the Second World War and was

also    not   undertaken    post       1947   when   India   became

independent.

14. The Central Province Grazing and Nistar Act, 1948

(hereinafter referred to as “Nistar Act, 1948”) defined the term

“Scrub Jungle”. The said Act was enacted to regulate the rights

of grazing and Nistar within the area of any estates in the

Central Provinces. The relevant provisions of the said Act are

thus:

        “2. Definitions.-
        (m) “right of nistar” means right to cut, gather or
        otherwise appropriate any jungle produce for
        domestic purposes and not for sale.




                                   9
     (n) “Scrub Jungle” means forest growth of four years
     or less


     3. Right of grazing and nistar – (1) The right of a
     resident of a village in respect of grazing of cattle and
     collection of jungle produce shall be regulated in
     accordance with the provisions made by or under
     this Act.
     (2) Nothing contained in this Act shall affect any
     custom or any entry in the village administration
     paper relating to grazing or collection of jungle
     produce, which is not inconsistent with any express
     provision of this Act.”

15. It can thus be seen that clause (m) of Section 2 of the

Nistar Act, 1948 defines “right of nistar” to mean right to cut,

gather or otherwise appropriate any jungle produce for

domestic purposes and not for sale. Clause (n) of
Section 2
of

the said Act defines “Scrub Jungle” to mean forest growth of

four years or less. Sub-section (1) of
Section 3
of the said Act

provides that the right of a resident of a village in respect of

grazing of cattle and collection of jungle produce shall be

regulated in accordance with the provisions made by or under

the said Act. However, sub-section (2) thereof provides that

nothing contained in the said Act shall affect any custom or

any entry in the village administration paper relating to

grazing or collection of jungle produce, which is not

inconsistent with any express provision of the said Act.

                               10
16. It will also be relevant to note that the term Zudpi Jungle

or Scrub Jungle was also used in Vidarbha after Nistar rights

were settled and incorporated in the Madhya Pradesh Land

Revenue Code, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as “MPLR Code,

1954”).

17. After abolition of Malguzari System in 1951, the State of

Madhya Pradesh appointed Nistar Officers for all the Talukas.

It was decided that the suitable areas out of the waste land

belonging    to   former    Malguzari/Zamindari       would    be

transferred to the Forest Department for the purpose of fodder

and fuel. The abovementioned Nistar Officers after inspection

of their respective Talukas, classified the lands in 2 categories:

(1) Zudpi Jungle meaning land with bushes and shrubs and

(2) Mothe Zadancha Jungle meaning forest containing big

trees.

18. It will be pertinent to note that for years the Zudpi lands

vested with the Revenue Department were used by the State

Government for development of basic amenities for villages like

schools, primary health centres, laying of water supply

pipeline or electrical poles, burial grounds, etc. These lands

were also allowed to be used by the State Government for



                                11
Central Government’s various projects like construction of

railway stations, post offices, telegraph offices etc. The said

lands were also used for various irrigation projects.

19. The area of these six districts after the reorganization of

States which took place on 1st November 1956 became part of

the State of Maharashtra. However, the scheme of preparation

of record of rights was taken up for this area only in 1974.

  b.
Forest Conservation Act, 1980
20.
The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980
(hereinafter referred

to as “
FC Act, 1980
”) came into force on 25th October 1980. It

will be relevant to refer to
Section 2
of the said Act, as it stood

then, which reads thus:

     “2. Restriction on the dereservation of forests or
     use of forest land for non-forest purpose -
     Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
     for the time being in force in a State, no State
     Government or other authority shall make, except
     with the prior approval of the Central Government,
     any order directing-
          (i) that any reserved forest (within the
          meaning of the expression "reserved
          forest" in any law for the time being in
          force in that State) or any portion thereof,
          shall cease to be reserved;
          (ii) that any forest land or any portion
          thereof may be used for any non-forest
          purpose;
          (iii) that any forest land or any portion
          thereof may be assigned by way of lease or
          otherwise to any private person or to any

                                12
              authority, corporation, agency or any
              other organisation not owned, managed or
              controlled by Government;
              (iv) that any forest land or any portion
              thereof may be cleared of trees which have
              grown naturally in that land or portion, for
              the purpose of using it for reafforestation.
        Explanation - For the purpose of this section, "non-
        forest purpose" means the breaking up or clearing of
        any forest land or portion thereof for -
              (a) the cultivation of tea, coffee, spices,
              rubber,    palms,     oil-bearing    plants,
              horticultural crops or medicinal plants;
              (b) any purpose other than reafforestation,
        but does not include any work relating or ancillary to
        conservation, development and management of
        forests and wildlife, namely, the establishment of
        check-posts, fire lines, wireless communications and
        construction of fencing, bridges and culverts, dams,
        waterholes, trench marks, boundary marks,
        pipelines or other like purposes.”

21. It can thus be seen that after the
FC Act, 1980
came into

effect, no State Government or any other authority except with

the prior approval of the Central Government could have

de-reserved the reserved forest land or permitted use of any

forest land for non-forestry purpose. So also without the prior

approval of the Central Government, no trees could be cleared

from forest or any portion thereof.

  c. Steps taken by the State Government

  (i)     Government Order dated 6th November 1987

22. Faced with the peculiar problem arising out of the



                                 13
aforesaid situation, the State of Maharashtra took up the issue

with the Central Government. The issue was discussed with

the Union Minister for Forests.

23. As    an   outcome     of   the   discussion,   the   State   of

Maharashtra issued a Government Order dated 6th November

1987. It will be relevant to refer to the following part of the said

Government Order:

     “…In this connection, the Union Minister for Forests
     had studied this question during his discussions
     with the Hon. Chief Minister and the concerned
     senior officials of the State and Central Governments.
     It was suggested at this meeting called by the Central
     Government that the aforesaid lands in the 5
     districts of Vidarbha classified as “Scrub forests” will
     not attract the provisions of the
Forest (Conservation)
     Act
1980, provided that these lands out of the private
     forest lands under possession of the Revenue
     Department in 1950, were classified as “Scrub
     Forests” and the Dy. Commissioner/Dist. Collector
     had, after consultations with the Zonal Forests
     Officers in regard to the legal status of these lands,
     decided to hand over these lands to the Revenue
     Department for afforestation, grazing, etc, and the
     lands had remained in possession of the Revenue
     Department at the time of settlement operation…”

24. Perusal of the aforesaid Government Order would reveal

that the Chief Minister of Maharashtra, Union Minister for

Forests and the concerned Senior Officers of the Central and

the State Government had discussed the issue pertaining to

Zudpi lands. In the said meeting, it was suggested that the


                                 14
aforesaid lands which were “Scrub Forests” would not attract

the provisions of the
FC Act, 1980
. However, for this, it was

necessary that the said lands were classified as “Scrub

Forests” and the Deputy Commissioner/District Collector had,

after consultations with the Zonal Forests Officers in regard to

the legal status of these lands, decided to hand over these

lands to the Revenue Department for afforestation, grazing,

etc., and that the lands had remained in possession of the

Revenue Department at the time of settlement operation.

25. The said Government Order dated 6th November 1987

came to be challenged by Bombay Environmental Action

Group and one other before the High Court of Judicature at

Bombay, Nagpur Bench by filing a Writ Petition being WP No.

2840 of 1988.

26. When the said Writ Petition was pending, it appears that

the Government of India changed its earlier stand and issued

a notification dated 12th February 1992 clarifying therein that

the Zudpi Jungle in revenue records would continue to be

treated as “Forest Lands” under the
FC Act, 1980
. However,

by the said notification, the Central Government also provided

that the land which was a part of the Zudpi Jungle and which



                               15
was also used for certain non-forestry purpose (for example

land used for Gaothan, land falling in Nagpur City used for

urban buildings etc.) but for which the corresponding

mutation entries had not been made in the revenue records,

specific proposals would be sent by the State Government for

approval of the Central Government under the
FC Act, 1980
.

27. It appears that in view of the stand taken by the Union of

India in its notification dated 12th February 1992, the

Government of Maharashtra vide Resolution dated 17th March

1994 withdrew its earlier Government Order dated 6th

November 1987.

  (ii)   Mahajan Committee and Joshi Committee

28. To address the challenges arising out of the said

situation, the Government of Maharashtra appointed a

Committee known as the “Mahajan Committee”. The said

Committee after studying the village records found that out of

the 9,23,913 hectares of Zudpi Jungle lands, an extent of

6,55,619 hectares had already been notified as “Forest” during

the period 1955-56 to 1959 as protected/reserved forest under

the provisions of the
Indian Forest Act
1927. It, therefore,

found that only 2,68,293 hectares of land remained as Zudpi


                              16
Jungle land. Another committee known as “Joshi Committee”

was also appointed to provide a possible solution to the

problem of Zudpi Jungle.

29. In the meanwhile, this Court, in the present proceedings,

vide an order dated 12th December 19961 defined the term

“Forest” as under:

      “4. ….The word “forest must be understood
      according to its dictionary meaning. This
      description covers all statutorily recognised
      forests,   whether    designated   as   reserved,
      protected or otherwise for the purpose of Sec 2(i)
      of the
Forest Conservation Act
. The term “forest
      land”, occurring in the
Section 2
, will not only
      include “forest” as understood in the dictionary
      sense, but also any area recorded as forest in the
      Government record irrespective of the ownership.
      This is how it has to be understood for the
      purpose of the
Section 2
of the Act. The
      provisions enacted in the
Forest Conservation
      Act
1980 for the conservation of forests and the
      matters connected therewith must apply clearly
      to all forests so understood irrespective of the
      ownership or classification thereof…
      5. We further direct as under:
             1. In view of the meaning of the word
             “forest” in the Act, it is obvious that
             prior    approval    of   the    Central
             Government is required for any non
             forest activity within the area of any
             “forest”. In accordance with
Section 2
of the Act, all on-going activity within
             any forest in any State throughout the
             country, without the prior approval of
             the Central Government, must cease
1 (1997) 2 SCC 267 : 1996 INSC 1477




                                      17
            forthwith. It is, therefore, clear that the
            running of saw mills of any kind including
            veneer or plywood mills, and mining of any
            mineral are non-forest purposes and are,
            therefore, not permissible without prior
            approval of the Central Government….”
                                        [Emphasis supplied]
  (iii)   Expert Committee

30. In compliance with the directions issued by this Court,

the State of Maharashtra constituted an Expert Committee

comprising of the following:

   1.     Principal Chief Conservator of Forests,     Chairman
          Maharashtra State
   2.     Chief     Conservator      of    Forests    Member
          (Conservator), Maharashtra State
   3.     Director, Social Forestry, Maharashtra      Member
          State
   4.     Settlement Commissioner and Director        Member
          of Land Records, Pune
   5.     Deputy Secretary (Revenue), Revenue         Member
          and Forests Department
   6.     Representative of Private Company           Member
          indulging in raising of plantation of
          tree species
   7.     Representative of the NGO, Fr.              Member
          Krispino     Lobo    of    Indo-German
          Watershed Development Programme,
          Ahmednagar
   8.     Nodal Officer in the o/o of the Principal   Member –
          Chief Conservator of Forests                Secretary


31. The Expert Committee submitted its report and on the

basis of the said report, an affidavit came to be filed by the



                                18
State of Maharashtra before this Court on 20th August 1997.

In the said affidavit, three categories were made i.e., (i) forest;

(ii) areas which were earlier forest which degraded, denuded or

cleared; (iii) areas covered by plantation of trees belonging to

government and those belonging to private persons. Further,

the details of the areas identified in all the three categories

including areas which could be construed as forests were

stated. It will be apposite to refer to the relevant part of the

said affidavit which reads thus:

     “Even as we are seeking to include areas covered by
     the dictionary meaning of the word ‘forest’, in the
     areas already notified as forests 2680 sq.km of Zudpi
     lands are also included. In these, there are vast
     stretches which have no attributes of forest. The
     Government of Maharashtra has been persistently
     requesting the Union Government to exclude such
     areas from the application of the
Forest
     (Conservation) Act
1980. It is prayed that this
     Hon’ble Court may issue suitable directions to the
     Union Government for exclusion of such Zudpi areas
     from the purview of the
Forest (Conservation) Act
1980.”


32. It can thus be seen that the said affidavit shows that in

the areas already notified as forests, 2680 sq. km of Zudpi

lands were also included. The affidavit stated that there were

vast stretches which had no attributes of forest. Further, the

Government of Maharashtra had been persistently requesting


                                19
the Union Government to exclude such areas from the

application of the
FC Act, 1980
. The Government of

Maharashtra thus prayed that this Court issues suitable

directions to the Union of India for exclusion of such Zudpi

areas from the purview of the
FC Act, 1980
.

  d. HPC constituted by the Central Government

33. To address these problems, the Government of India vide

notification dated 21st September 1998 constituted a High

Powered Committee (hereinafter, “HPC”). It will be relevant to

refer to the following observations of the said HPC:

          “Though the term “Zudpi” has not been defined
     specifically in the Maharashtra Land Revenue Code,
     it is in use in Vidarbha area of the ex-Madhya
     Pradesh State since 1954-55 indicating the
     classification of land owned by and normally covered
     by scrub (bush growth) and not by big trees. The
     meaning is obvious since ‘Zudpi’, a Marathi word,
     means bushy growth in inferior type of lands on
     unoccupied lands in a village.

          In fact the term “Zudpi Jungle” in common
     parlance over the years has come to be used for all
     such wastelands, as were not occupied by the
     individuals for cultivation and other purposes.
     Actually these lands are of very low murmadi soil
     where tree is not possible or the tree growth is very
     low like scrub jungle and hence these land were
     knows as scrub jungle and grazing lands in English
     terminology.”




                              20
34. It will also be apposite to refer to the analysis and the

recommendations made by the HPC which read thus:

     “Analysis by the HPC
           High Powered Committee (hereinafter referred as
     HPC) constituted by Government of India vide its
     notification No.4B-87/FC (pt.) dated 21/9/98 held 4
     meetings: Nagpur (11/12/1998), Delhi (8/1/1999,
     19/2/1999, and)
         HPC examined the reports of the two Committees
     mentioned in paragraph in details and the survey work
     of Zudpi Jungle area undertaken by Government of
     Maharashtra during 1993-94.
           Its observations are as follows:
     (i)   Application of the provisions of the
Forest
           (Conservation) Act
1980 to Zudpi Jungle has given
           a severe jolt to the cultivators and villagers in
           Vidarbha in meeting their communal and day to day
           needs.
                 It was felt by the HPC that Zudpi Jungle lands
           cater to the communal and day to day needs of
           villagers and were complimentary to agriculture,
           dairy, cottage & small-scale industries in the
           villages. This was in consonance with the
           developmental policies of the Government which
           emphasized that the villagers should not be
           required to go outside their villages for their needs
           of fodder, firewood, minor minerals, clay, murrum,
           boulders, wood etc.
                 However the sodden interpretation covering
           these communal village lands under the
Forest
           (Conservation) Act
1980 adversely affected the
           cultivators and the villagers in the 5 districts of
           Vidarbha Area where Forest Department started
           refusing permission for non forest uses of these
           lands which were guaranteed by the Government
           since 1954-55 under the Nistar Patraks framed
           under the Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code,
           1955 and Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966.

                               21
             Unfortunately, the legal provisions already in
        force guaranteeing rights of grazing, firewood,
        minor minerals, etc. to cultivators and landless
        labours from “Zudpi Jungle” lands in the vicinity of
        the villages has been unceremoniously withdrawn
        without amending the provisions under the
        Maharashtra land revenue code.
             Major problems faced by the villagers and
        various Central/State government departments in
        implementing the developmental schemes/works in
        the Villages are primarily due to the above
        impediments created in respect of “Zudpi Jungle”.
        In fact the entire issue has been made so sensitive
        that the implementing agencies are being
        prosecuted if they remove minor minerals like
        murrum, small stones, etc. and MSEB or Telephone
        Department fix a pole even.
(ii)    The procedure envisaged under the
Forest
        (Conservation) Act
has led to slowing down of
        development projects including even those
        requiring minimal Zudpi Jungle land like school
        buildings, laying of electrical poles, pipe lines etc.
(iii)   Since Zudpi Jungle lands have traditionally been
        used for communal and day to day needs by the
        villagers, they should have been kept out of the
        purview of the
Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980
. The
        application of the
Forest (Conservation) Act
intends
        to negate the benefits, which were flowing and were
        intended to flow in future also to the community
        and the villagers.
(iv)    It was felt that these lands though referred to as
        ‘Jungle’ should not have been treated as forest
        under the
Forest Conservation Act
, since the term
        was used very loosely since early 1900 when there
        was no idea of the
Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980
.
        In fact such lands are not known as Jungle in other
        parts of Maharashtra at all. Instead they are known
        as gairon, parampok etc. Therefore it would be
        desirable that the
Forest (Conservation) Act
is not
        made applicable to such lands though known as
        Zudpi Jungle.

                            22
(v)    It may not be possible to take Zudpi Jungle out of
       purview of the
Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980
in
       view of the Supreme Court Judgment of 1996.
(vi)   The problem of Zudpi Jungle is primarily confined
       to Vidarbha area alone.
(vii) The Committee analysed the results of the survey
      and demarcation done by the Government of
      Maharashtra during 1993 to 1998 and observed
      that:
       (a) 92115 Ha. Of Zudpi Jungle (out of 178525 Ha.
           With Revenue Department) is suitable for forestry
           management, development and conservation.
       (b) 86409 Ha. Of land is unsuitable for forest
           management due to encroachment, fragmented
           holding, and existing non-forestry use.
       (c) Government of India should give permission for
           86409 ha. Land, unsuitable for forest
           management under the
Forest (Conservation) Act
1980 in bulk without insisting on individual
           proposals. Government of India should also
           waive    the    conditions    of   compensatory
           afforestation and equivalent non-forest land.
(viii) Slowing down of the development projects coupled
       with restrictions of Nistar rights has led to
       discontent and unrest amongst the villagers in
       Vidarbha region. This has the potential of taking
       serious turn if not attended to urgently.
(ix)   It is pertinent to point out here about the area of
       89768.39 ha of Zudpi Jungle as point out in para
       11(ii) above. This area needs to be located, surveyed
       and proposals for regularization under FCA 1980 be
       submitted to the Government of India, if these areas
       cannot be put to forestry use as per principles of
       discussions and recommendations.


Recommendations
       1. 92,115 Ha. of Zudpi Jungle, which is found to be
          suitable for forestry management, development


                           23
             and conservation should be notified as
             protected/reserved forest under
Forest Act,
             1927
.
          2. 86,409 Ha. Zudpi Jungle land, which is not
             suitable for forest management, as mentioned
             below, should be denotified and be allowed for
             any purpose including non-forestry as decided by
             the Revenue Department.
             A) Land under encroachment        27507 Ha.
             B) Land already       under   non-forestry    use
                    26672 Ha.
             C) Fragmented land etc.           32229 Ha.
          3. Government of India should give permission
             under
Forest (Conservation) Act
to the above land
             86,409 Ha. Through a consolidated proposal
             without insisting on individual proposals.
          4. Government of India should not insist on
             compensatory afforestation because during
             1955-59, 6,55,619 ha and in this report as per
             recommendation No.1 above, an area of 92,115
             ha totalling to 7,47,734 ha of all Zudpi Jungle
             has been taken to be forests out of a total of
             9,23,913 ha of land which had the status of
             Zudpi Jungle.
          5. The area of 89,768.39 ha which has already been
             diverted to non-forestry purpose (upto 1992)
             needs to be located, surveyed ad proposals for its
             regularization under FCA 1980 be sent to
             Government of India provided these areas cannot
             be put to forestry use as per principles of
             discussions and recommendations.”


35. It can be seen from the Report of the HPC that on account

of the inaction of certain bureaucrats a huge problem has

arisen. It was emphasized that Zudpi Jungle lands cater to the

community and day-to-day needs of villagers and were

                              24
complimentary to agriculture, dairy, cottage and small-scale

industries in the villages. It was further emphasized that the

villagers should not be required to go outside their villages for

their needs of fodder, firewood, minor minerals, clay, murrum,

boulders, wood etc. It was further emphasized that the major

problems faced by the villagers and various Central/State

Government Departments in implementing the developmental

schemes/works in the villages are primarily due to the above

impediments created in respect of Zudpi Jungle. It was also

emphasized that in the other parts of the State, similar lands

instead of being referred to as “Jungle”, were known as gairon,

parampok etc. The said Committee, therefore, recommended

that 92,115 hectares of Zudpi Jungle, taking all these factors

into consideration which was found to be suitable for forestry

management, development and conservation should be

notified as protected/reserved forest under the
Indian Forest

Act, 1927
. It also recommended that 86,409 hectares of Zudpi

Jungle land, which was not suitable for forest management,

should be denotified and be allowed for any purpose including

non-forestry as decided by the Revenue Department. The said




                               25
Committee also recommended that the Government of India

should not insist on compensatory afforestation.

36. The Report of the HPC along with the proposal of the

State Government for denotification of 35,010.89 hectares

Zudpi Jungle land was considered by the Forest Advisory

Committee (hereinafter referred to as, “FAC”) of the Ministry of

Environment and Forest & Climate Change (hereinafter

referred to as, “MoEF&CC”) in its meeting dated 24th April

2001. The FAC recommended a site visit. After the site visit

and the recommendation of FAC, the MoEF&CC granted

Stage-I approval on 20th November 2001 for the diversion of

31,192.34 hectares subject to compliance of certain prescribed

conditions.

  e. Remedial      measures         by   Central   and    State
     Government

37. Subsequently, a meeting was chaired by the Chief

Minister of Maharashtra and through a letter dated 18th July

2011, the following suggestions were made to the MoEF&CC:

    i.    “To drop the condition of notifying 92,115 ha
          Zudpi Jungle land which is suitable for forestry
          management as Reserved Forest/Protected
          Forest under the
Indian Forest Act, 1927
26
   ii.      An extent of 92,116 ha Zudpi Jungle land as
            recommended by the HPC, may be kept as land
            bank for compensatory afforestation
  iii.      To de-notify 86,409 ha of Zudpi Jungle lands,
            recommended by the Committee as unsuitable
            for forestry management, break up being
            27,507 ha under encroachment and 26,672 ha
            under various non forestry use and 32,229 ha
            of fragmented land available in patches of less
            than 3.00 ha
  iv.       Simplification of procedure under the
Forest
            (Conservation) Act
for submission of proposals
            as at present it entails an enormous amount of
            paperwork.”


38. Thereafter, a Joint Meeting of Secretary of MoEF&CC and

representative of State of Maharashtra was held on 18th April

2013. In the said meeting, the following decisions were taken:

     i)     In accordance with the Hon'ble Supreme Court
            Judgment, Zudpi Jungle will have to be treated
            as a forest.
     ii)    Out of 92,115 ha. of Zudpi Jungle land an
            extent of 16,309.99 ha has already been notified
            as forest. The balance 75,806.78 ha will be
            notified by the State Government at the earliest.
            The proposal of the State Government to use
            these lands as land bank for compensatory
            afforestation will be favourably considered.
            However, double the area will have to be taken
            up and this will be admissible only for proposal
            of the State Government and for other projects
            it will be as provided in the guidelines.
     iii)   The proposals for the diversion of forest land as
            at (a) (b), and (c) below will be examined by the
            MoEF&CC and considered favorably within the
            framework of prevailing laws and the directions
            of the Hon'ble Supreme Court.

                                27
           (a) Proposals for diversion of 32,229 ha.
               Fragmented Zudpi Jungle Lands for public
               purpose/infrastructure will be submitted by
               the    State    Government      Departments/
               Undertakings in a consolidated form giving
               details of the area of each of the fragmented
               lands.
           (b) Proposals for Zudpi Jungle Lands under
               encroachment (27,507 ha.) and land under
               non-forest use (26,672 ha) will be submitted
               in the following manner:
             (i)     State Government will identify the area
                     under encroachment/non-forestry use
                     prior   to  12.12.1996     and     post
                     12.12.1996.
             (ii)    The Slate Government will identify the
                     area under non-forestry use for
                     commercial purposes.
             (iii)   Proposals for pre-12.12.1996 non-
                     forestry uses/encroachment and post-
                     12.12.1996                   non-forest
                     uses/encroachments will be submitted
                     separately in accordance with the
                     prevailing law and the Hon'ble Supreme
                     Court's directions.
           (c) The special dispensation for submission and
               consideration of diversion proposals will not
               be considered for the diversion of forest land
               under commercial use.
     iv)   The Government of India will prescribe
           simplified procedures for the submission of
           proposals of Zudpi Jungle lands under FCA.”


39. It will also be pertinent to note that the request of the

State Government for exemption from payment of Net Present

Value (hereinafter referred to as “NPV”) was considered by the


                                28
FAC in its meeting dated 26th October 2017. The FAC

recommended that since the concept of NPV was introduced

by this Court in its order dated 29th October 2002 in the

present proceedings, it recommended that NPV shall not be

collected from the State Government for diversion proposals

submitted under the
FC Act, 1980
where Zudpi Jungle Land

has been put to non-forestry use before 12th December 1996.

It   will    also   be   relevant    to     refer   to   the   following

recommendations made by the FAC:

      “15. The proposal was considered by the FAC on
      26.10.2017 and following recommendations were
      made:
      1. The recommendation of the state government that
         the 86,409 Ha. Zudpi Jungle land with following
         present land use should be de-notified for any
         purpose including non-forestry as decided by the
         Revenue Department is not according to the legal
         provisions.
            (a) Land under encroachment                  27507 Ha.
            (b) Land   already      under      non-forestry     use
                    26,672 Ha.
            (c) Fragmented land etc.                     32,229 Ha.
      2. The judpi jungle under encroachment (27507 ha)
         and under non-forestry use (26672 ha) which has
         been put to non-forestry use without FC clearance
         before judgement dated 12.12.1996 by Hon’ble
         Supreme Court in T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad
         be considered for post facto approval under
section 2(ii)
of FC Act subject to mitigation
         measures.



                                    29
        3. District wise comprehensive proposal, where zudpi
           jungle is recorded in the land record and the same
           has been put to non-forestry use before
           12.12.1996 will be submitted providing the details
           of each piece of judpi jungle land with names of
           owner of the land and its present land use duly
           certified by District collector and the respective
           Divisional Forest Officer of the concerned district
           along with the maps. If the present land use of the
           judpi jungle is still a forest having jungle jhar and
           tree growth, as certified by the DFO and revenue
           authority, the same piece of landwill be retained
           and maintained as forest and developed as village
           or urban forest as the case may be.
        4. 33229 ha of fragmented piece of judpi jungle
           which are being treated as small patches of forest
           should be maintained as forest land and developed
           and maintained as village or urban forest by the
           state government. If any of these land is required
           for non-forestry purpose by the state government
           then the approval under
section 2(ii)
of FC Act will
           be mandatorily required on payment of NPV and
           Compensatory afforestation and other mitigation
           measures.
        5. Since the concept of NPV was introduced by
           Supreme Court judgment on 29th October 2002 for
           future diversion proposals, NPV shall not be
           collected from the state Government for the
           diversion proposal submitted under
section 2(ii)
of
           FC Act as referred above in para 15(3) of the
           recommendation.”


  f. IAs concerning Zudpi Jungle

  (i)     IA No.176 of 1997

40. It will also be relevant to note one other development.

After the order dated 12th December 1996 was passed by this



                                  30
Court in the present proceedings, an IA being IA No.176 of

1997 came to be filed by one Nagpur Quarry Owners Welfare

Association seeking permission to continue quarrying in the

Zudpi Jungle in Nagpur District as they had been refused

permission for stone quarrying on the ground that the area

falls within a Zudpi Jungle which attracted the provisions of
FC Act, 1980
. This Court called upon the CEC for its

recommendations in this regard. The CEC recommended that

the said area would be a forest area in view of the order passed

by      this   Court   dated   12th        December   1996.   The   said

recommendation of the CEC was accepted by this Court vide

order dated 6th May 2003 and the applicant therein was

relegated to take appropriate recourse by making an

application through the State Government for obtaining prior

approval from the Central Government.

     (ii)   IA No.12465 of 2019

41. In this background, IA No.12465 of 2019 came to be filed

by the Divisional Commissioner, Nagpur with the prayers

which we have already reproduced hereinbefore.

42. This Court, vide order dated 8th March 2019, sought the

opinion of the CEC. Pursuant to the order dated 8th March


                                      31
2019, the CEC filed its Report being 2019 CEC Report. The

conclusions recorded by CEC in the said Report are as under:

    i.    “Zudpi Jungle lands are recorded forests and
          not notified forests;
   ii.    Out of 9,23,913 ha. of originally recorded Zudpi
          Jungle lands, 6,55,619 ha. of land with tall tree
          growth has already been notified as Reserved
          Forest/Protected Forest between 1955 and
          1959;
  iii.    Another 93,293.18 ha. of land has been notified
          under
Section 4
of the Indian Forest Act, 1927
          and it is proposed to declare the same as
          Reserve Forest;
  iv.     Change in land use in respect of 45056.14 ha.
          (33,739.40 ha. before 25.10.1980 and
          11,316.74 ha. between 25.10.1980 and
          12.12.1996) out of 170212.37 ha. has taken
          place prior to the order dated 12.12.1996 of this
          Hon’ble Court but corresponding changes in
          land records are yet to be made;
   v.     Secretary, MoEFF&CC in its meeting dated
          18.04.2013 has requested the State of
          Maharashtra to submit separate proposals
          under
FC Act
1980 for pre 12.12.1996 and post
          12.12.1996 non-forestry use;
  vi.     The FAC in its meeting held on 26.10.2017
          recommended that since the concept of NPV
          was introduced by this Hon’ble Court in its
          judgment dated 29.10.2002 NPV shall not be
          collected from the State Government for
          diversion of Zudpi Jungle lands which have
          been put to non-forestry use before 12.12.1996;
  vii.    Revenue Department does not have any other
          land at its disposal to meet the residential needs
          of the poor sections of the society in Nagpur
          Revenue Division;




                              32
 viii.    Most of the Zudpi Jungle lands which are not
          notified as Reserved forest/Protected forest or
          under
Section 4
of the Indian Forest Act 1927
          are spread over 6919 villages and are highly
          fragmented and are not suitable for
          management as forests; and
  ix.     The Government of India on 12.02.1992
          conveyed to the State of Maharashtra that lands
          shown as “Zudpi Jungle” in revenue records will
          continue to be treated as forest land under the
Forest (Conservation) Act
1980.”


43. The CEC also recommended thus:
     “A.     Permitting    the    Applicant,     Divisional
     Commissioner, Nagpur to make suitable changes in
     the revenue records with a view to change the
     classification/ nomenclature of the "Zudpi Jungle"
     lands to actual land use class/nomenclature in
     respect of "Zudpi Jungle" lands which have been put
     to non-forest use prior to 12.02.1992. However, the
     Zudpi Jungle lands which have not been put to non-
     forest use prior to 12.02.1992 will attract the
     provisions of the
Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980
and
     the State of Maharashtra therefore will be required to
     take forest clearance from MoEF&CC and make
     payment of NPV and undertake compensatory
     afforestation; and
     i. transfer all the
Section 4
notified forest lands to the
     Forest Department latest by 31.03.2020; and
     ii. complete the forest settlement proceedings in
     respect of all the
Section 4
notified Zudpi Jungle
     Lands latest by December 2021.

     B. The balance extent of Zudpi Jungle land out of
     86,409 ha identified as unfit for forestry management
     be considered for approval under
FC Act, 1980
by
     MoEF&CC only after ensuring that the possession of
     entire 15,485.74 ha of reserve forest land in
     Ahmednagar District and 51,032.59 ha of reserve


                                33
     forest land in Sholapur District (total 66,518.33 ha)
     referred to in para 34 of above is transferred from the
     Revenue Department to the Forest Department in
     compliance of this Hon’ble Court order dated
     22.09.2006 in IA No.1483 of 2006.”


44. The State of Maharashtra filed its reply to the 2019 CEC

Report. The matter was thereafter heard by this Court from

time to time.

45. When the matter was heard by this Court on 14th

February 2024, it was noted that there were some issues that

could be resolved by the CEC and the representatives of the

State Government and the MoEF&CC. This Court, therefore,

directed the CEC to have a joint meeting with representatives

of the State Government & MoEF&CC and file a fresh report.

46. Pursuant to the aforesaid directions issued by this Court,

the CEC carried out a fresh exercise for data collection. The

CEC had several rounds of meetings with the officials of the

MoEF&CC as well as State Government. It also made various

site visits even to the remotest parts of the districts. Huge data

was collected by the CEC and the said data was also verified

by the respective District Collectors. It is pertinent to note that

the total data collected by the CEC amounts to 141 GB



                                34
comprising of 76,907 files distributed across 8,826 folders. It

is further to be noted that the District Collectors of Nagpur,

Wardha, Bhandara, Chandrapur, Gondia and Gadchiroli

Districts have issued certificates authenticating the Zudpi

Jungle data of their respective districts.

  g. Recommendations in the 2025 CEC Report

47. After considering all the aspects of the matter, the CEC

has made the following recommendations vide its Report being

2025 CEC Report:

     “46. In view of the available facts and analysis of
     various documents as highlighted in the preceding
     paragraphs, the CEC recommends that:
       i.    the Zudpi Jungle lands shall be considered
             as Forest Lands for all purposes, whatsoever
             and the
Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980
is
             applicable on Zudpi Jungle lands;
      ii.    given the peculiar circumstances and
             significance of Zudpi Jungle lands, as an
             exception and without treating it as a
             precedent by whatsoever for any matter, for
             the Zudpi Jungle lands allotted by competent
             Authority upto 12.12.1996 and for which
             land classification has not been changed, the
             State of Maharashtra shall seek approval
             under
section    2(i)
of   the   Forest
             (Conservation) Act, 1980 for their deletion
             from the "list of the forest areas". A
             consolidated proposal shall be submitted by
             the State Government of Maharashtra for
             each district and the Central Government
             may take a decision on that as per the extant
             norms/rules. All activities for which lands


                               35
       have been allotted by the competent
       Authority will be deemed to be site-specific
       and    no    condition    for  compensatory
       afforestation or depositing NPV levies may be
       imposed by the Central Government while
       processing such proposals. Moreover, the
       State Government shall necessarily ensure
       that the land use is not changed in the future
       under any circumstances and transfer is
       made only by inheritance;
iii.   the Central Government and the State
       Government shall with mutual consultation,
       and with prior approval of the CEC, devise a
       simpler format and process for processing
       the proposals of diversion of Zudpi Jungle
       land for non-forestry activities under the
Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980
. This task
       shall be completed within the next three
       months. Liberty may please be granted to the
       CEC to decide the issue in case any
       conflicting stand is taken by both the
       Governments;
iv.    it has been observed that certain allotments
       of Zudpi Jungle lands have been done post
       12.12.1996 also. The State Government shall
       give reasons as to why such allotments were
       done along with the list of officers who made
       such allotments in violation of the orders of
       this Hon'ble Court. The Central Government
       shall process such proposals under the
       provisions of
section 2(ii)
of the Forest
       {
Conservation) Act, 1980
only after ensuring
       that suitable punitive action has been taken
       against the concerned officials under
sections 3(a)
and
3(b)
of the Forest
       (Conservation) Act, 1980;
 v.    all the unallotted 'fragmented land parcels'
       (each plot having an area of less than 3 ha
       and not adjoining any forest area), shall be
       declared as 'Protected Forests’ under
section
       29
of the Indian Forest Act 1927 by the State


                        36
        Government. The concerned Sub-Divisional
        Magistrate shall be responsible for ensuring
        that no such land parcel is encroached upon.
        As and when these lands are required for
        non-forestry    purposes     by   the  State
        Government, the proposal may be submitted
        under the provisions of the
Forest
        (Conservation) Act, 1980
and the same shall
        require prior approval of the Central
        Government for diversion of such land.
        However, in no case any such land shall be
        diverted to any nongovernment entity for any
        purpose, whatsoever;
 vi.    the detailed data of Zudpi jungle land
        admeasuring 13,158.026 ha as mentioned in
        para 44 above shall be collected by the
        revenue authorities within the next six
        months. All such land parcels with an area
        less than 3 ha and not adjoining any forest
        area shall be treated as 'fragmented land
        parcels’ and the remaining shall be
        transferred to the Forest Department under
        intimation to the CEC;
vii.    in Zudpi jungle land, for settlement of rights
        under the provisions of the Forest Rights Act
        2006, apart from other required documents,
        the historical satellite imagery shall also be
        used as a tool in the decision-making
        process;
viii.   any government order issued by the State
        Government of Maharashtra regarding the
        regularisation of encroachments on any land
        shall not be applicable to Zudpi Jungle lands.
        All encroachments prior to 25.10. 1980 shall
        be removed except in the cases where ex-post
        facto approval of the Central Government
        under the
Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980
is
        permissible and granted;
 ix.    all allotments for commercial purpose post
        25.10.1980 must be treated at par with
        encroachments. An exercise of removal of all

                         37
       allotments for commercial purpose post
       25.10.1980 and all encroachments post
       25.10.1980 shall be started immediately. A
       special task force comprising of a Sub-
       Divisional         Magistrate,         Deputy
       Superintendent of Police, an Assistant
       Conservator of Forests and a Taluka
       Inspector of Land Records should be
       constituted in each district to remove
       encroachments. These officials will be posted
       only for this purpose and will not be assigned
       any other duty. This entire exercise shall be
       completed within a period of two years;
 x.    all the proceedings regarding notification
u/s
       20
of the Indian Forest Act 1927 concerning
       Zudpi Jungle lands notified under
Section 4
of the Indian Forest Act, shall be completed
       within the next six months. Any further delay
       shall call for fixing of responsibility and
       punitive action against the concerned
       officers;
xi.    in the five districts of Vidarbha, viz.
       Chandrapur, Gadchiroli, Nagpur, Wardha,
       and Bhandara, the Central Government shall
       consider     Zudpi     jungle    lands     for
       compensatory afforestation instead of non-
       forest land, without insisting on the Chief
       Secretary's Certificate regarding the non-
       availability of non-forest land. However, in
       such cases, compensatory afforestation must
       be carried out on double the area of Zudpi
       Jungle land, as per the existing guidelines of
       the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
       Climate Change; and
xii.   the State Government shall fix a timeline to
       transfer all the Reserve Forest Lands in the
       custody of the Revenue Department to the
       Forest Department within the next three
       months. Liberty may please be granted to the
       CEC to monitor the progress of the aforesaid
       transfer of the Reserve Forest Lands and


                        38
                 submit periodic reports to this Hon’ble
                 Court.”


IV.    ISSUE FOR CONSIDERATION

48. We are, therefore, called upon in the present lis to

consider as to whether the recommendations made by the CEC

in its 2025 Report should be accepted or not?

V.     DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS

     a. Locus of the intervenor in IA No.127871 of 2020

49. The intervenor, who is a resident of Dombivli East,

Maharashtra which is around 800 kms away from the area of

the six districts in respect of which the issue arises, has

opposed the recommendations of the CEC.

50. At the outset, we clarify that we do not propose to go into

the question regarding the locus of the intervenor inasmuch as

the    present    matter   involves   concern   with   regard   to

environmental protection. However, at the same time, it is also

required to be noticed that though the present lis is pending

before this Court for a number of years, there is not a single

application of intervention from any of the residents or

organizations working for protection of environment from the

aforesaid area opposing the recommendations of the CEC.


                                39
51. Having said that, we are of the opinion that the present

batch of applications are required to be considered by us from

a historical perspective.

52. As discussed hereinabove, the term Zudpi Jungle was

used under the erstwhile 1889 Code. The said term was used

in the revenue records (Settlement Khasra) during the last

round of the revision settlements which took place in the

erstwhile Central Province Districts during the years 1912-

1917. The said term of Settlement was for a period of 30 years.

Therefore, ideally, the next round of settlement ought to have

been undertaken between 1942-1947. However, during the

said period, the Settlement could not be undertaken on

account of Second World War. It further appears that after

India became independent in the year 1947, the Settlement

could not be undertaken on account of apathy on the part of

bureaucrats.

53.   It is further to be noted that the Nistar Act, 1948

conferred certain rights on the residents of villages in certain

matters including grazing of cattle and collection of jungle

produce from the “Scrub Jungle”. It also protects the




                               40
customary rights relating to grazing of cattle and collection of

jungle produce.

54. The term Zudpi Jungle or Scrub Jungle was thereafter

used in Vidarbha after Nistar rights were settled and

incorporated in the MPLR Code, 1954. It is to be noted that in

order to take forward the avowed principle of social and

economic equality as enshrined in the Constitution of India,

the erstwhile Malguzari system was abolished in 1951. Under

the said Malguzari system, the ownership of land was vested

with the Malguzars. It is clear that in order to give effect to the

Directive Principles under clauses (b) and (c) of
Article 39
of

the Constitution, the Malguzari system was abolished in the

year 1951 when the country was undergoing the process of

agrarian reforms and as a part of it Zamindari system and the

likewise systems were abolished. After the abolition of

Malguzari system, it was decided that the suitable areas out of

the waste land belonging to former Malguzari/Zamindari

would be transferred to the Forest Department for the purpose

of fodder and fuel. The Nistar Officers, who were appointed for

identifying the lands, classified the lands into 2 categories: (1)

Zudpi Jungle and (2) Mothe Zadancha Jungle. These Zudpi


                                41
Jungle would mean the Shrub Jungle i.e., the land with

bushes and shrubs whereas Mothe Zadancha Jungle would

mean the forest containing big trees.

55. It is further to be noted that though in the other parts of

the State of Maharashtra, after reorganization of States, the

similar lands were known as Gairan/Gurcharan/E-Class

land, however, on account of certain bureaucrats not taking

steps at the right time, the lands continued to be recorded in

the revenue record as Zudpi Jungle.

56. It is further to be noted that the effect of the
FC Act, 1980
and the order of this Court dated 12th December 1996 was that

the rights in the lands which were granted to the citizens as

early as in 1954-55 under the Nistar Act, 1948 issued under

the MPLR Code, 1954 and MLR Code, 1966 came to be

withdrawn. Till 1996, the lands in question were already put

in use for various purposes. Various government projects

including the irrigation dams, schools, hospitals, primary

health centres and the government buildings were already

existing thereon. The lands were allotted to landless people for

agricultural purposes.




                               42
57. Faced with this difficulty, the State of Maharashtra took

up the issue with the Central Government. The Central

Government, as is evident from the communication dated 6th

November 1987, discussed the issue with the Chief Minister of

Maharashtra and the concerned Senior Officials of the Central

and State Governments. In the said meeting, it was decided

that the lands classified as “Scrub Forests” in the erstwhile

Districts of Vidarbha would not attract the provisions of the
FC Act, 1980
. The Government of Maharashtra therefore

issued the Government Order dated 6th November 1987

directing therein that the “Scrub Forests” would not attract the

provisions of
FC Act, 1980
. It was clarified that the said

Government Order was applicable only to “Scrub Forests” of

the Districts of Vidarbha and would not affect any other lands.

58. Further, it appears that the said Government Order came

to be challenged before the High Court of Bombay by filing of

a Writ Petition. During the pendency of the said writ petition,

the Government of India issued a notification dated 12th

February 1992 stating therein that the Zudpi Jungle would be

continued to be treated as “Forest Land” under the
FC Act,

1980
. The Government of Maharashtra consequently withdrew


                               43
its earlier Government Order dated 6th November 1987 vide

Resolution dated 17th March 1994. Thereafter, the position

came to be clarified by this Court vide its order dated 12th

December 1996 in the present proceedings.

59. It can thus be seen that between the period from 1980 to

1996, there was a situation of uncertainty as to whether the

said land would be covered by the
FC Act, 1980
. It is for the

first time on 12th December 1996 the position became clear

that the said lands i.e. Zudpi Lands would also be treated as

“Forest Lands” for the purpose of
FC Act, 1980
. Thereafter,

various Committees were constituted by the State Government

to find out the solution. Finally, the HPC consisting of various

Senior Officers of the Central Government and the State

Government was constituted to submit its report. The HPC,

accordingly, submitted its Report.

60. Thereafter, the matter was pending between the State

Government and the Central Government for a long time.

61. Thereafter, though on the basis of the recommendations

of the FAC given in its meeting dated 24th April 2001, the

MoEF&CC granted Stage-I approval on 20th November 2001

for the diversion of 31,192.34 hectares subject to compliance


                               44
of   certain   prescribed   conditions,   the   Government   of

Maharashtra through a letter dated 18th July 2011 made

various requests to MoEF&CC. Again, a Joint Meeting of

officials of MoEF&CC and the State of Maharashtra was held

on 18th April 2013. Certain decisions were taken in the said

meeting to which we have already referred to hereinabove.

62. Thereafter, the request of the State Government for

exemption from payment of NPV was considered by the FAC in

its meeting dated 26th October 2017. The FAC recommended

that since the concept of NPV was introduced by this Court in

its order dated 29th October 2002 in the present proceedings,

the NPV shall not be collected from the State of Maharashtra

for diversion, where Zudpi Jungle land has been put to non-

forestry use before 12th December 1996.

63. Faced with this grave situation, the State of Maharashtra

preferred I.A. No.12465 of 2019 for clarification that the

directions of this Court dated 12th December 1996 issued in

the present proceedings were not applicable in respect of

86409 hectare of Zudpi lands being unfit for Forestry

Management.




                               45
64. This Court sought the Report of the CEC and the CEC

filed its Report being 2019 CEC Report.

65. The matter thereafter was heard from time to time and

this Court vide order dated 14th February 2024 noted that

there were some issues that could be resolved by joint

deliberation between the CEC and the representatives of the

State Government so also that of the MoEF&CC.

  b. Efforts taken by CEC

66. In pursuance of the aforesaid direction, the CEC

conducted site visits and several rounds of meetings with the

officials of MoEF&CC as well as the State Government and also

collected a huge amount of data which was verified by the

respective District Collectors.

67. It can thus be seen that the aforesaid recommendations

are an outcome of a huge exercise undertaken by the CEC. The

CEC consists of various experts having vast experience in the

field of forest management and protection. As already stated

hereinabove, the said recommendations contained in the 2025

CEC Report will have to be considered in the background of

the historical perspective as stated hereinabove.



                                  46
  c. Consequences of not accepting recommendations of
     CEC

68. It can also be seen that if the recommendations made by

the CEC are not accepted, it will have a devastating effect and

lakhs of people who are residing on the said lands for a

number of decades will be dishoused. The slum dwellers, who

have constructed the slums on the said lands and after

protection under the
Maharashtra Slum Areas (Improvement,

Clearance and Redevelopment) Act, 1971
have continued to

reside on the said lands decades prior to the period from 1980-

1996 will have to be dishoused. Huge government buildings

which are existing on the said lands for decades including

government offices, schools, hospitals etc. will also have to be

demolished.

69. The effect of non-acceptance of the recommendations as

made by the CEC would lead to demolition of the facilities in

use by the Defence Ministry, the Air Force, the buildings,

offices of the Central Government and the State Government.

It would also affect the establishments of the Agricultural

Universities constructed in the said area.




                               47
70. We are annexing along with this judgment as an

illustration, Annexure-1 to the Report of the Committee for

suggesting changes required in simplified procedure for

diversion of Zudpi Jungle Land under
Forest Conservation Act,

1980
chaired by Divisional Commissioner, Nagpur, which

would show the number of establishments only in the city of

Nagpur which would be affected if the Report of the CEC is not

accepted.

71. We are annexing the said list only to show as to how

many institutions/buildings/residences etc. would be affected

on non-acceptance of the 2025 CEC Report. This is only

pertaining to the area in Nagpur Municipal Corporation. One

can imagine as to what would be the effect in the entire 6

districts including various cities, towns and villages!

  d. Social and Economic Justice

72. There is another aspect to be considered in the present

matter.

73. The Constitution of India promises social and economic

justice along with political justice. It will be relevant to refer to
Articles 38
and
39
of the Constitution of India which are



                                 48
included in the Constitution as an instrument for bringing out

social and economic equality, and which read thus:

     “38. State to secure a social order for the
     promotion of welfare of the people.- (1)The State
     shall strive to promote the welfare of the people by
     securing and protecting as effectively as it may a
     social order in which justice, social, economic and
     political, shall inform all the institutions of the
     national life.
     (2) The State shall, in particular, strive to minimize
     the inequalities in income, and endeavor to eliminate
     inequalities in status, facilities and opportunities,
     not only amongst individuals but also amongst
     groups of people residing in different areas or
     engaged in different vocations.
     39. Certain principles of policy to be followed by
     the State. - The State shall, in particular, direct its
     policy towards securing-
       (a)   that the citizens, men and women equally,
             have the right to an adequate means of
             livelihood;
       (b)   that the ownership and control of the
             material resources of the community are so
             distributed as best to subserve the common
             good;
       (c)   that the operation of the economic system
             does not result in the concentration of wealth
             and means of production to the common
             detriment;
       (d)   that there is equal pay for equal work for both
             men and women;
       (e)   that the health and strength of workers, men
             and women, and the tender age of children
             are not abused and that citizens are not
             forced by economic necessity to enter
             avocations unsuited to their age or strength;
       (f)   that children are given opportunities and
             facilities to develop in a healthy manner and
             in conditions of freedom and dignity and that

                              49
                childhood and youth are protected against
                exploitation and against moral and material
                abandonment.”

74. It will also be relevant to note that there was a debate

even with regard to use of the word “strive” used in clause (1)

of
Article 38
of the Constitution.

75. It will be apt to refer to the words of Dr. B.R. Ambedkar,

in his speech in the Constituent Assembly on 19th November

1948. While explaining as to what was the fundamental

position taken in the Constitution, Dr. Ambedkar observed

thus:

             “The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Mr.
        Vice-President, I see that there is a great deal of
        misunderstanding as to the real provisions in the
        Constitution in the minds of those members of the
        House who are interested in this kind of directive
        principles.    It   is  quite     possible   that the
        misunderstanding         or      rather     inadequate
        understanding is due to the fact that I myself in my
        opening speech in support of the motion that I made,
        did not refer to this aspect of the question. That was
        because, not that I did not wish to place this matter
        before the House in a clear-cut fashion, but my
        speech had already become so large that I did not
        venture to make it more tiresome than I had already
        done; but I think it is desirable that I should take a
        few minutes of the House in order to explain what I
        regard as the fundamental position taken in the
        Constitution. As I stated, our Constitution as a piece
        of mechanism lays down what is called parliamentary
        democracy. By parliamentary democracy we mean
        ‘one man, one vote’. We also mean that every
        Government shall be on the anvil, both in its daily

                                 50
affairs and also at the end of a certain period when
the voters and the electorate will be given an
opportunity to assess the work done by the
Government. The reason why we have established in
this Constitution a political democracy is because we
do not want to install by any means whatsoever a
perpetual dictatorship of any particular body of
people. While we have established political
democracy, it is also the desire that we should lay
down as our ideal economic democracy. We do not
want merely to lay down a mechanism to enable
people to come and capture power. The Constitution
also wishes to lay down an ideal before those who
would be forming the Government. That idea is
economic democracy, whereby, so far as I am
concerned, I understand to mean, ‘one man, one
vote’. The question is : Have we got any fixed idea as
to how we should bring about economic democracy?
There are various ways in which people believe that
economic democracy can be brought about; there are
those who believe in individualism as the best form
of economic democracy; there are those who believe
in having a socialistic state as the best form of
economic democracy; there are those who believe in
the communistic idea as the most perfect form of
economic democracy.
     Now, having regard to the fact that there are
various ways by which economic democracy may be
brought about, we have deliberately introduced in
the language that we have used, in the directive
principles, something which is not fixed or rigid. We
have left enough room for people of different ways of
thinking, with regard to the reaching of the ideal of
economic democracy, to strive in their own way, to
persuade the electorate that it is the best way of
reaching     economic    democracy,     the    fullest
opportunity to act in the way in which they want to
act.
      Sir, that is the reason why the language of the
articles in Part IV is left in the manner in which this
Drafting Committee thought it best to leave it. It is no


                          51
use giving a fixed, rigid form to something which is
not rigid, which is fundamentally changing and
must, having regard to the circumstances and the
times, keep on changing. It is, therefore, no use
saying that the directive principles have no value. In
my judgment, the directive principles have a great
value, for they lay down that our ideal is economic
democracy. Because we did not want merely a
parliamentary form of Government to be instituted
through the various mechanisms provided in the
Constitution, without any direction as to what our
economic ideal, as to what our social order ought to
be, we deliberately included the Directive Principles
in our Constitution. I think, if the friends who are
agitated over this question bear in mind what I have
said just now that our object in framing this
Constitution is really two fold : (i) to lay down the
form of political democracy, and (ii) to lay down that
our ideal is economic democracy and also to
prescribe that every Government whatever, it is in
power, shall strive to bring about economic
democracy, much of the misunderstanding under
which most members are labouring will disappear.
      My friend Mr. Tyagi made an appeal to me to
remove the word ‘strive’, and phrases like that I think
he has misunderstood why we have used the ‘strive’.
The word ‘strive’ which occurs in the Draft
Constitution, in my judgment, is very important.
We have used it because our intention is even
when there are circumstances which prevent the
Government, or which stand in the way of the
Government giving effect to these Directive
Principles, they shall, even under hard and
unpropitious circumstances, always strive in the
fulfillment of these Directives. That is why we
have used the word ‘strive’. Otherwise, it would
be open for any Government to say that the
circumstances are so bad, that the finances are so
inadequate that we cannot even make an effort in
the direction in which the Constitution asks us to
go. I think my friend Mr. Tyagi will see that the
word ‘strive’ in this context is of great

                         52
     importance and it would be very wrong to delete
     it.”
                                         [Emphasis supplied]


76. Dr. Ambedkar stated that our Constitution as a piece of

mechanism     lays   down    what   is    called   parliamentary

democracy. According to him, we established parliamentary

democracy by employing the principle of ‘one man, one vote’.

He further stated that by parliamentary democracy, it is meant

that every Government should be on the anvil, both in its daily

affairs and also at the end of a certain period when the voters

and the electorate would be given an opportunity to assess the

work done by the Government. According to him, the purpose

of the political democracy was not to install by any means

whatsoever a perpetual dictatorship of any particular body of

people. According to him, when we establish political

democracy, it was also the desire that we should lay down as

our ideal economic democracy.

77. According to Dr. Ambedkar, the Constitution does not lay

down a mechanism to enable people to come and capture

power. It also wishes to lay down an ideal before those who

would be forming the Government and that ideal is economic

democracy. After referring to various ideologies, he stated that

                               53
the Drafting Committee has not deliberately used any principle

which is fixed or rigid. He stated that the Drafting Committee

has left enough room for people of different ways of thinking,

with regard to the reaching of the ideal of economic democracy,

to strive in their own way. They will persuade the electorate

that it is the best way of reaching economic democracy.

78. Criticizing the argument that the Directive Principles

have no value, Dr. Ambedkar stated that the Directive

Principles have a great value, for they lay down that our ideal

is economic democracy. In his view, no fixed or rigid formula

would be laid down in the Constitution as to what our

economic ideal or as to what our social order ought to be. He

stated that one of the objects in framing the Constitution was

also to prescribe that every Government, whoever is in power,

shall strive to bring about economic democracy. Justifying the

use of term “strive”, he stated that the intention of the Drafting

Committee was that even when there are circumstances which

prevent the Government, or stand in the way of the

Government giving effect to the Directive Principles, they shall,

even under hard and unpropitious circumstances, always

strive in the implementation of the Directive Principles. He


                               54
stated that if this was not done, it would be open for any

Government to say that the circumstances are so bad and that

the finances are so inadequate that we cannot make an effort

in the direction in which the Constitution asks us to go.

   e. Inter-relationship between DPSP and Fundamental
      Rights

79. It is to be noted that after the Constitution came into

effect on 26th January 1950, on several occasions, an issue

arose for consideration before this Court with regard to the

conflict between Directive Principles and Fundamental Rights.

80. Initially, this Court in a catena of judgments including

State of West Bengal v. Subodh Gopal Bose and Others2,

Dwarkadas Shrinivas v. Sholapur Spinning and Weaving

Company Limited and Others3 and State of West Bengal

v. Bela Banerjee4 took the view that whenever there was a

conflict between the Directive Principles and the Fundamental

Rights, the Fundamental Rights would prevail over the

Directive Principles.




2 (1953) 2 SCC 688 : 1953 INSC 89
3 (1953) 2 SCC 791 : 1953 INSC 92
4 (1953) 2 SCC 648 : 1953 INSC 85




                                    55
81. An 11-Judges Bench of this Court in the case of I.C.

Golak Nath and Others v. State of Punjab and Another5,

by a majority of 6:5, went to the extent of holding that the

importance attached to the fundamental freedoms was so

transcendental that a bill enacted by a unanimous vote of all

the members of both the Houses was ineffective to derogate

from its guaranteed exercise. The view with regard to

untouchability of the Fundamental Rights was again reiterated

by the Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in the case

of Rustom Cavasjee Cooper v. Union of India6 commonly

known as the Bank Nationalization Case and another

Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in the case of H.H.

Maharajadhiraja           Madhav         Rao   Jivaji   Rao   Scindia

Bahadur of Gwalior v. Union of India and Another7

commonly known as Privy Purse Case.

82. However, this conflict came to be resolved by a 13-Judges

Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in the case of His

Holiness Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalvaru v. State

of Kerala and Another8.


5 [1967] 2 SCR 762 : 1967 INSC 45
6 (1970) 1 SCC 248 : 1970 INSC 18
7 (1971) 1 SCC 85 : 1970 INSC 250
8 (1973) 4 SCC 225 : 1973 INSC 91




                                    56
83. Though the Constitution Bench judgment of this Court

Kesavananda Bharati (supra) is widely known for laying

down the Basic Structure Doctrine which view is taken by the

thin majority; insofar as the equal treatment of the Directive

Principles and the Fundamental Rights is concerned, there is

almost a uniformity.

84. The said judgment recognises that both the Fundamental

Rights and the Directive Principles of the State Policy are

equally important and that there is no conflict amongst them.

It recognises that they are complementary to each other, and

that they together are the conscience of the Constitution. It will

be appropriate to refer to some of the observations made by

this Court in the said case. J.M. Shelat and A.N. Grover, JJ.,

observed as under:

     486. ....Parts-III and IV which embody the
     Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of State
     Policy have been described as the conscience of the
     Constitution...
                        X     X        X   X
     489. …..The Directive Principles of State Policy set
     forth the humanitarian socialist precepts that were
     the aims of the Indian social revolution…… The
     Fundamental Rights and the Directive Principles
     were designed by the members of the Assembly to be
     the chief instruments in bringing about the great
     reforms of the social revolution……. They have
     helped to bring the Indian society closer to the


                                  57
        Constitution’s goal of social, economic and political
        justice for all in the affirmative….”.


85. K. S. Hegde and A. K. Mukherjea, JJ., observed thus:

        “634. ….The Directive Principles embodied in Part-IV
        of the Constitution or at any rate most of them are as
        important as the rights of individuals….
                          X    X        X   X
        712. ….The fundamental rights and the Directive
        Principles constitute the ‘conscience’ of our
        Constitution. The purpose of the Fundamental
        Rights is to create an egalitarian society, to free all
        citizens from coercion or restriction by society and to
        make liberty available for all. The purpose of the
        Directive Principles is to fix certain social and
        economic goals for immediate attainment by bringing
        about a non-violent social revolution….”


86. A. N. Ray, J. (as His Lordship then was), observed

thus:

        “1015. …The directive principles are also
        fundamental. They can be effective if they are to
        prevail over Fundamental Rights of a few in order to
        subserve the common good and not to allow
        economic system to result to the common
        detriment….
        1044. …Part III and IV of the Constitution touch
        each other and modify. They are not parallel to each
        other...”


87. P. Jaganmohan Reddy, J., observed thus:
        “1161. …What is implicit in the Constitution is that
        there is a duty on the Courts to interpret the
        Constitution and the laws, to further the Directive
        Principles which under
Article 37
, are fundamental


                                   58
    in the governance of the country….”


88. H. R. Khanna, J., observed thus:
    “1480. …The Directive Principles embody a
    commitment which was imposed by the Constitution-
    makers on the State to bring about economic and
    social regeneration of the teeming millions who are
    steeped     in  poverty,   ignorance    and   social
    backwardness. They incorporate a pledge to the
    coming generations of what the State would strive to
    usher in....
    1482. …There should be no reluctance to abridge or
    regulate the fundamental right to property if it was
    felt necessary to do so for changing the economic
    structure and attain the objectives contained in the
    Directive Principles.”


89. K.K. Mathew, J., observed thus:
    “1714. ……..Therefore, the moral rights embodied in
    Part-IV of the Constitution are equally an essential
    feature of it, the only difference being that the moral
    rights embodied in Part-IV are not specifically
    enforceable as against the State by a citizen in a
    Court of law in case the State fails to implement its
    duty but, nevertheless, they are fundamental in the
    governance of the country and all the organs of the
    State, including the judiciary, are bound to enforce
    those directives...”


90. Y. V. Chandrachud, J. (as His Lordship then was),

observed thus:

    “2002. …Our decision of this vexed question must
    depend upon the postulate of our Constitution which
    aims at bringing about a synthesis between
    “Fundamental Rights” and the “Directive Principles
    of State Policy”, by giving to the former a pride of


                             59
      place and to the latter a place of permanence.
      Together, not individually, they form the core of the
      Constitution. Together, not individually, they
      constitute its true conscience.”


91. Speaking         for    the      majority,   Chief   Justice   Y.V.

Chandrachud, in the case of Minerva Mills Limited and

Others v. Union of India and Others9, observed thus:

      “56. ….Parts-III and IV are like two wheels of a
      chariot, one no less important than the other. You
      snap one and the other will lose its efficacy. They are
      like a twin formula for achieving the social revolution,
      which is the ideal which the visionary founders of the
      Constitution set before themselves. In other words,
      the Indian Constitution is founded on the bedrock of
      the balance between Parts-III and IV. To give absolute
      primacy to one over the other is to disturb the
      harmony of the Constitution. This harmony and
      balance between fundamental rights and directive
      principles is an essential feature of the basic
      structure of the Constitution.”


92. It will also be relevant to refer to the observations made

by Justice P.N. Bhagwati (as His Lordship then was) in the

case of Minerva Mills Limited (supra), who partly disagreed

and held that though the amendment to
Article 368
of the

Constitution taking away the power of judicial review was

invalid, the amendment to
Article 31C
of the Constitution

expanding the scope was valid. Justice Bhagwati (as His

9 (1980) 3 SCC 625 : 1980 INSC 142




                                      60
Lordship then was) observed thus:

      “107. ……The Directive principles therefore, impose
      an obligation on the State to take positive action for
      creating socio-economic conditions in which there
      will be an egalitarian social order with social and
      economic justice to all, so that individual liberty will
      become a cherished value and the dignity of the
      individual a living reality, not only for a few privileged
      persons but for the entire people of the country. It
      will thus be seen that the Directive Principles enjoy a
      very high place in the constitutional scheme and it is
      only in the framework of the socio-economic
      structure envisaged in the Directive Principles that
      the Fundamental Rights are intended to operate, for
      it is only then they can become meaningful and
      significant for the millions of our poor and deprived
      people who do not have even the bare necessities of
      life and who are living below the poverty level.”


93. The importance given to the Directive Principles by the

Higher Judiciary of the country could also be seen in the case

of Waman Rao and Others v. Union of India and Others10

wherein the validity of
Maharashtra Agricultural Lands

(Ceiling of Holdings) Act, 1975
was challenged. Rejecting the

challenge, Y.V. Chandrachud, C.J. stated thus:

      “54. ...In fact far from damaging the basic structure
      of the Constitution, laws passed truly and bona fide
      for giving effect to directive principles contained in
      clauses (b) and (c) of
Article 39
will fortify that
      structure. We do hope that the Parliament will utilise
      to the maximum its potential to pass laws, genuinely
      and truly related to the principles contained in

10 (1981) 2 SCC 362 : 1980 INSC 216




                                      61
      clauses (b) and (c) of Article 39…”



   f. Case Laws on clauses (b) and (c) of
Article 39

94.
The cases to which we are referring to hereinbelow would

reveal as to how a widest possible interpretation has been

given by this Court with regard to importance of Directive

Principles while upholding various enactments and steps

taken by the Legislature or the Executive for bringing social

and economic justice.

95. In the case of Maharao Sahib Shri Bhim Singhji v.

Union of India and Others11, the validity of the
Urban Land

(Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976
, which provided for

compulsory acquisition of the land beyond a particular ceiling

limit, came up for consideration before a 5-Judges Bench of

this Court, wherein, the majority of 3:2 upheld the enactment.

Again V.R. Krishna Iyer, J., speaking for the majority, stated

as under:

      “10. …It needs no argument to conclude that the
      objective of the legislation as set out in the long title
      and in the statutory scheme is implementation of
      Part-IV of the Constitution. The directive principles
      of State Policy being paramount in character and
      fundamental       in   the    country's     governance,

11 (1981) 1 SCC 166 : 1980 INSC 219




                                      62
      distributive    justice  envisaged    in
Article
      39(b)
and (c) has a key role in the developmental
      process of the socialist republic that India has
      adopted...”

96. However, in the said case of Maharao Sahib Shri Bhim

Singhji (supra), a note of caution was put by Y.V.

Chandrachud, C.J., as under:

      “3. …..It shows that the Act was passed with the
      object of preventing concentration of urban land in
      the hands of a few persons and with a view to
      bringing about an equitable distribution of land in
      urban agglomerations to subserve the common good.
      “Common good” being the writing on the wall, any
      disposal which does not serve that purpose will be
      outside the scope of the Act and therefore lacking in
      competence in diverse senses. Private property
      cannot under our Constitution be acquired or
      allotted for private purposes though an enabling
      power like that contained in sub-section (1) of
      Section 23 may be exercised in cases where the
      common good dictates the distribution of excess
      vacant land to an industry, as defined in clause (b) of
      the Explanation to Section 23.”


97. Again, before a 5-Judges Bench of this Court in the case

of State of Tamil Nadu and Others v. L. Abu Kavur Bai

and Others12, the nationalisation of transportation in the

State of Karnataka was challenged on the ground that the

compensation so provided was inadequate and there was no




12 (1984) 1 SCC 515 : 1983 INSC 168




                                      63
distribution of resources as provided under
Article 39 (b)
and

(c) of the Constitution. S.M. Fazal Ali, J., speaking for the

Bench, stated as under:

     “11. …although the directive principles are not
     enforceable yet the court should make a real attempt
     at harmonising and reconciling the directive
     principles and the fundamental rights and any
     collision between the two should be avoided as far as
     possible. ”


98. Insofar as the term “distribution” is concerned, this Court

gave a wider meaning. It held that distribution cannot be given

a   narrower    meaning   of   collecting     from    someone    and

distributing to others. This Court held that insofar as private

transporters are concerned, their main aim would be to earn

profit and, therefore, they would only provide transport

services   on   the   profit   earning      routes.   However,    on

nationalization, the vehicles would go to remote villages even

if the State did not earn any profit there from. It therefore held

that providing facilities to the citizens residing in the remotest

part of the country, would also amount to “distribution” within

the meaning of
Article 31(b)
and (c) of the Constitution.

99. Then in the case of State of Maharashtra and Another




                                64
v. Basantibai Mohanlal Khetan and Others13, the provision

of
Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Act, 1976
which provided for compulsory acquisition of the land at a

meagre compensation and thereafter using that land for

construction of the houses for houseless persons came to be

challenged. An important factor is that in that enactment,

there was no declaration that the law is protected under
Article

31C
of the Constitution. In spite of that, this Court rejected

the challenge. It will be appropriate to refer to the words of E.S.

Venkataramiah, J. (as His Lordship then was), which read

thus:

        “13. …..The question whether an Act is intended to
        secure the objects contained in
Article 39 (b)
or not
        does not depend upon the declaration by the
        legislature but depends on its contents. We have
        already dealt with the objects of the Act with which
        we are concerned in this case. It inter alia, makes
        provision for acquisition of private lands for providing
        sites for building houses or housing accommodation
        to the community. The title to the lands of the private
        holders which are acquired first vests in the State
        Government. Later on, the land is developed and
        then distributed amongst the people as house sites.
        It also provides for reserving land for providing public
        amenities without which people cannot live there.
        Community centres, shopping complexes, parks,
        roads, drains, playgrounds, are all necessary for civic
        life and these amenities are enjoyed by all. That is
        also a kind of distribution…… ”

13 (1986) 2 SCC 516 : 1986 INSC 40




                                     65
100. It can thus be seen that in spite of there being no

declaration that the law was protected under
Article 31C
of the

Constitution, this Court itself examined, as to whether the

enactment was taking further the mandate of
Article 39(b)
and

(c) of the Constitution and upheld it on the ground that it is

protected under
Article 31C
of the Constitution.

101. Then in the case of Maharashtra State Electricity

Board v. Thana Electric Supply Company and Others14,

the constitutional validity of Indian Electricity (Maharashtra

Amendment) Act, 1976 was discussed. The issue under

consideration was whether compensation should be awarded

based solely on the depreciated value of the property and not

on the basis of the prevailing market value. Again, in this case

also, there was no declaration that the said Act was protected

under
Article 31C
of the Constitution. M.N. Venkatachaliah, J.
(as His Lordship then was) speaking for the Bench held thus:
“28. At the outset the misconception that an express
      legislative declaration in the legislation is condition
      precedent to the attraction of
Article 31-C
would,
      perhaps, require to be removed. The High Court, we
      say so with respect, was under a clear misconception
      on the point that an express incantation was
      necessary in the law itself. The nexus between the
      law and the objects of
Article 39(b)
could be shown

14 (1989) 3 SCC 616 : 1989 INSC 127
66
independently of any such declaration by the
      legislature……”

      “48. We accordingly hold that the provisions of
Amending Act
of 1976 have a direct and substantial
      relationship with the objects of
Article 39(b)
and,
      therefore, are entitled to the protection of
Article 39-
C. If the impugned law has such protection, as we
      indeed hold that it has, all challenges to it on the
      ground of violation of
Articles 14
, 19
and
31
must
      necessarily fail……”
102. Similarly, in the case of
Tinsukhia Electric Supply Co.

Ltd. v. State of Assam and Others15
, the challenge was to

the acquisition of land on the ground that the compensation

provided on the book value is totally illusory in nature. Again

M.N. Venkatachaliah, J. (as His Lordship then was), stated as

under:
“62. On an examination of the scheme of the
      impugned law the conclusion becomes inescapable
      that the legislative measure is one of nationalisation
      of the undertakings and the law is eligible for and
      entitled to the protection of Article 31C.”
103. In this background, the question that we will have to ask

and answer is as to whether the steps taken by the State prior

to 1980 or 1996 which are in furtherance of the avowed




15 (1989) 3 SCC 709 : 1989 INSC 128
67
objective of social and economic justice should be permitted to

be frustrated or not.
g. Right to Shelter
104. This Court, in the case of
Chameli Singh and Others

v. State of U.P. and Another16
, though was considering an

issue in the context of land acquisition, had elaborately

discussed on the right to shelter. It will be apt to refer to the

following observations of this Court:
“7.
In
State                                          of
      Karnataka v. Narasimhamurthy
[(1995) 5 SCC 524 :
JT (1995) 6 SC 375] (SCC p. 526, para 7 : JT at p.
      378, para 7), this Court held that right to shelter is a
      fundamental        right    under
Article 19(1)
of
      the Constitution. To make the right meaningful to
      the poor, the State has to provide facilities and
      opportunity to build houses. Acquisition of the land
      to provide house sites to the poor houseless is a
      public purpose as it is the constitutional duty of the
      State to provide house sites to the poor.
8. In any organised society, right to live as a human
      being is not ensured by meeting only the animal
      needs of man. It is secured only when he is assured
      of all facilities to develop himself and is freed from
      restrictions which inhibit his growth. All human
      rights are designed to achieve this object. Right to live
      guaranteed in any civilised society implies the right
      to food, water, decent environment, education,
      medical care and shelter. These are basic human
      rights known to any civilised society. All civil,
      political, social and cultural rights enshrined in the
      Universal Declaration of Human Rights and

16 (1996) 2 SCC 549 : 1995 INSC 906
68
Convention       or     under    the Constitution      of
India cannot be exercised without these basic human
rights. Shelter for a human being, therefore, is not
a mere protection of his life and limb. It is home
where he has opportunities to grow physically,
mentally, intellectually and spiritually. Right to
shelter, therefore, includes adequate living space,
safe and decent structure, clean and decent
surroundings, sufficient light, pure air and water,
electricity, sanitation and other civic amenities
like roads etc. so as to have easy access to his
daily avocation. The right to shelter, therefore,
does not mean a mere right to a roof over one's
head but right to all the infrastructure necessary
to enable them to live and develop as a human
being. Right to shelter when used as an essential
requisite to the right to live should be deemed to
have been guaranteed as a fundamental right. As
is enjoined in the Directive Principles, the State
should be deemed to be under an obligation to secure
it for its citizens, of course subject to its economic
budgeting. In a democratic society as a member of
the organised civic community one should have
permanent shelter so as to physically, mentally and
intellectually equip oneself to improve his excellence
as a useful citizen as enjoined in the Fundamental
Duties and to be a useful citizen and equal
participant in democracy. The ultimate object of
making a man equipped with a right to dignity of
person and equality of status is to enable him to
develop himself into a cultured being. Want of decent
residence, therefore, frustrates the very object of the
constitutional animation of right to equality,
economic justice, fundamental right to residence,
dignity of person and right to live itself. To bring the
Dalits and Tribes into the mainstream of national life,
providing these facilities and opportunities to them is
the duty of the State as fundamental to their basic
human and constitutional rights.”
                                  [Emphasis supplied]
69
105. A perusal of
the said judgment
in the case of
Chameli

Singh
(supra) would show that this Court has held that in any

organised society, right to live as a human being is not ensured

by meeting only the animal needs of a man. It is secured only

when he is assured of all the facilities to develop himself and

is freed from restrictions which inhibit his growth. It has been

held that right to live guaranteed in any civilized society

implies the right to food, water, decent environment,

education, medical care and shelter. It has been held that

these are basic human rights necessary in order to ensure that

a person lives life with dignity. It has been held that shelter for

a human being is not a mere protection of his life and limb,

but it is a home where he has opportunities to grow physically,

mentally, intellectually and spiritually. It has been held that

the State should be deemed to be under obligation to secure

right to shelter for its citizens. However, this has to be subject

to its economic budgeting. This Court has held that want of

decent residence, therefore, frustrates the very object of the

constitutional animation of right to equality, economic justice,

fundamental right to residence, dignity of person and right to

live itself. This Court emphasized that to bring the Dalits and
70
Tribes into the mainstream of national life, providing of such

amenities is the duty of the State.
106.
In     another      case     titled
Ahmedabad   Municipal

Corporation v. Nawab Khan Gulab Khan and Others17
, this

Court observed thus:
“13. Socio-economic justice, equality of status and of
      opportunity and dignity of person to foster the
      fraternity among all the sections of the society in an
      integrated Bharat is the arch of the Constitution set
      down in its Preamble.
Articles 39
and
38
enjoin the
      State to provide facilities and opportunities.
Articles
      38
and
46
of the Constitution enjoin the State to
      promote welfare of the people by securing social and
      economic justice to the weaker sections of the society
      to minimise inequalities in income and endeavour to
      eliminate inequalities in status. In that case, it was
      held that to bring the Dalits and the Tribes into the
      mainstream of national life, the State was to provide
      facilities and opportunities as it is the duty of the
      State to fulfil the basic human and constitutional
      rights to residents so as to make the right to life
      meaningful.
In
Shantistar     Builders v. Narayan
      Khimalal Totame
[(1990) 1 SCC 520] another Bench
      of three Judges had held that basic needs of man
      have traditionally been accepted to be three — food,
      clothing and shelter. The right to life is guaranteed in
      any civilised society. That would take within its
      sweep the right to food, the right to clothing, the right
      to    decent    environment      and     a   reasonable
      accommodation to live in. The difference between the
      need of an animal and a human being for shelter has
      to be kept in view. For an animal, it is the bare
      protection of the body; for a human being, it has to
      be a suitable accommodation which would allow him
      to grow in every aspect — physical, mental and
17 (1997) 11 SCC 121 : 1996 INSC 1189
71
intellectual. The surplus urban vacant land was
directed to be used to provide shelter to the poor.
In Olga Tellis case [(1985) 3 SCC 545] the
Constitution Bench had considered the right to dwell
on pavements or in slums by the indigent and the
same was accepted as a part of right to life enshrined
under
Article 21;
their ejectment from the place
nearer to their work would be deprivation of their
right to livelihood. They will be deprived of their
livelihood if they are evicted from their slum and
pavement-dwellings. Their eviction tantamounts to
deprivation of their life. The right to livelihood is a
traditional right to life, the easiest way of depriving a
person of his right to life would be to deprive him of
his means of livelihood to the point of abrogation.
Such deprivation would not only denude life of its
effective content and meaningfulness but it would
make life impossible to live. The deprivation of right
to life, therefore, must be consistent with the
procedure established by law.
In
P.G. Gupta v. State
of Gujarat
[1995 Supp (2) SCC 182 : 1995 SCC (L&S)
782 : (1995) 30 ATC 47] another Bench of three
Judges had considered the mandate of human right
to shelter and read it into
Article 19(1)(e)
and
Article
21
of the Constitution and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and the Convention of Civic,
Economic and Cultural Rights and had held that it is
the duty of the State to construct houses at
reasonable cost and make them easily accessible to
the poor. The aforesaid principles have been
expressly embodied and inbuilt in our Constitution
to secure socio-economic democracy so that everyone
has a right to life, liberty and security of the person.
Article 22
of the Declaration of Human Rights
envisages that everyone has a right to social security
and is entitled to its realisation as the economic,
social and cultural rights are indispensable for his
dignity and free development of his personality. It
would, therefore, be clear that though no person
has a right to encroach and erect structures or
otherwise on footpaths, pavements or public
streets or any other place reserved or earmarked
72
for a public purpose, the State has the
      constitutional duty to provide adequate facilities
      and opportunities by distributing its wealth and
      resources for settlement of life and erection of
      shelter over their heads to make the right to life
      meaningful, effective and fruitful. Right to
      livelihood is meaningful because no one can live
      without means of his living, that is the means of
      livelihood. The deprivation of the right to life in that
      context would not only denude life of effective content
      and meaningfulness but it would make life miserable
      and impossible to live. It would, therefore, be the
      duty of the State to provide right to shelter to the
      poor and indigent weaker sections of the society
      in fulfilment of the constitutional objectives.”
                                           [Emphasis supplied]
107. This Court in the aforesaid case of
Ahmedabad

Municipal Corporation
(supra), while relying on the case of
Olga Tellis and Others v. Bombay Municipal Corporation

and Others18
wherein the surplus urban vacant land was

directed to be used to provide shelter to the poor, reiterated

the constitutional duty of State to provide adequate facilities

and opportunities by distributing its wealth and resources for

settlement of life and erection of shelter over their heads to

make the right to life meaningful, effective and fruitful.




18 (1985) 3 SCC 545 : 1985 INSC 151
73
108. This Court had an occasion to consider the aforesaid two

judgments of this Court, recently in the case of In Re:
Directions in the matter of demolition of structures19 to

which one of us B.R. Gavai, J. (as he then was) was a Member,

wherein this Court in unequivocal terms reiterated that the

Right to Shelter is one of the facets of
Article 21
of the

Constitution.
109. The question therefore that we are called upon to

consider is as to whether the shelter from the heads of lakhs

of people who are living in the houses constructed for decades

together should be permitted to be removed or not.

   h. Right to Livelihood
110. This Court, in a catena of judgments including in the

cases of
Olga Tellis
(supra),
Consumer Education and

Research Centre and Others v. Union of India and

Others20
, Common Cause, A Registered Society v. Union of

India and Others21 and Amarnath Shrine, In Re (Court on




19 2024 SCC OnLine SC 3291 : 2024 INSC 866
20 (1995) 3 SCC 42 : 1995 INSC 76
21 (1999) 6 SCC 667 : 1999 INSC 299
74
its own Motion) v. Union of India and Others22 has held

the Right to Livelihood to be a Fundamental Right.
111. The question that we are also called upon to consider is

as to whether the citizens of this country who have been

allotted parcels of land and are undertaking agricultural

activities thereon for decades together should now be deprived

of their livelihood.
112. For a period ranging more than half a century, various

public amenities like schools, government offices, public

health centres, graveyards, cemeteries are existing on these

lands for providing services to the citizens of this country

residing in the Zudpi areas. The question that we will also have

to answer is as to whether the citizens should be deprived of

all these facilities on account of some bureaucratic mess

caused by the negligence of the officials of the State

Government at the time of reorganization of the States.
113. In our considered view, the answers to all these questions

will have to be in the negative.
114. Our conclusion in this regard would be fortified by the



22 (2013) 3 SCC 247 : 2012 INSC 593
75
following chart which will show the purposes in all the districts

for which the aforesaid land is being utilized:
Land use as per Govt. Record
   District     Total                                                  Area under
                       Residential Agricultural    Public    Public
               Gat No.                                                 occupation
                        (hectare)    (hectare)    Purpose    Utility
                                                                        (hectare)
                                                 (hectare) (hectare)
Nagpur           6308     55.89         2077.44   3762.09   5046.18      10941.6
Wardha           4687     16.06         1668.38   260.23    3116.36      5061.03
Bhandara         3778     34.61         627.01    337.34    1615.68      2614.64
Gondia           3099      3.87         595.87    105.57    1902.48      2607.79
Chandrapur       4098      24.0         1508.6    298.36    1712.64      3543.6
Gadchiroli      10939     16.72         7451.93   141.68    1012.44      8622.77
Total           32909    151.15      13929.23     4905.27   14405.78    33391.43
115.          It is thus clear that the vast chunks of land have been

utilized either for residential purposes or for agricultural

purposes by the landless persons to whom the lands were

allotted in order to earn their livelihood. Vast chunks of land

have been utilized for providing public utilities like open

ground, burial and burning ground, etc. Vast chunks of land

have been utilized for public utilities such as primary health

centres, schools, anganwadi centres, offices of the Central

Government as well as the State Government and the other

establishments belonging to the State Government and the
76
Central Government or the local government. Not only that but

vast chunks of land have also been utilized for the purposes of

defence services including the Army and the Air Force.
116. The citizens who are residing in the houses built on these

lands for decades together cannot be permitted to be

dishoused. The agriculturists who have been allotted lands for

their livelihood in order to give effect to the promise of social

and economic equality to the citizens of this country cannot be

deprived of their livelihood at this stage. The citizens cannot

be deprived of public amenities which are essential for living

in their day-to-day life in a dignified manner.
i. Sustainable Development
117. Another aspect that needs to be considered is the balance

between     environmental       protection    and   the   need   for

sustainable development. It will be apt to refer to paras 87-88

of the judgment of this Court in the case of
State of Uttar

Pradesh and Others v. Uday Education and Welfare Trust

and Others23
, which read thus:
“87. It cannot be disputed that
Section 20
of the NGT
      Act itself directs the learned Tribunal to apply the
      principles    of   sustainable   development,      the

23 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1469 : 2022 INSC 1129
77
precautionary principle and the polluter pays
      principle. Undisputedly, it is the duty of the State as
      well as its citizens to safeguard the forest of the
      country. The resources of the present are to be
      preserved for the future generations. However, one
      principle cannot be applied in isolation of the other.
88. It is necessary that, while protecting the
      environment, the need for sustainable development
      has also to be taken into consideration and a proper
      balance between the two has to be struck.”
118. Much prior to that, this Court, in the case of
Vellore

Citizens’ Welfare Forum v. Union of India and Others24
,

had an occasion to consider the conflict between the

development and ecology. This Court observed thus:
“10. The traditional concept that development and
      ecology are opposed to each other is no longer
      acceptable. “Sustainable Development” is the
      answer. In the international sphere, “Sustainable
      Development” as a concept came to be known for the
      first time in the Stockholm Declaration of 1972.
      Thereafter, in 1987 the concept was given a definite
      shape by the World Commission on Environment and
      Development in its report called “Our Common
      Future”. The Commission was chaired by the then
      Prime Minister of Norway, Ms G.H. Brundtland and
      as such the report is popularly known as
      “Brundtland     Report”.  In   1991    the   World
      Conservation Union, United Nations Environment
      Programme and Worldwide Fund for Nature, jointly
      came out with a document called “Caring for the
      Earth” which is a strategy for sustainable living.
      Finally, came the Earth Summit held in June 1992
      at Rio which saw the largest gathering of world

24 (1996) 5 SCC 647 : 1996 INSC 952
78
leaders ever in the history — deliberating and
      chalking out a blueprint for the survival of the planet.
Among the tangible achievements of the Rio
      Conference was the signing of two conventions, one
      on biological diversity and another on climate
      change. These conventions were signed by 153
      nations. The delegates also approved by consensus
      three non-binding documents namely, a Statement
      on Forestry Principles, a declaration of principles on
      environmental policy and development initiatives
      and Agenda 21, a programme of action into the next
      century in areas like poverty, population and
      pollution. During the two decades from Stockholm to
      Rio “Sustainable Development” has come to be
      accepted as a viable concept to eradicate poverty and
      improve the quality of human life while living within
      the carrying capacity of the supporting ecosystems.
      “Sustainable Development” as defined by the
      Brundtland Report means “Development that meets
      the needs of the present without compromising the
      ability of the future generations to meet their own
      needs”. We have no hesitation in holding that
      “Sustainable Development” as a balancing concept
      between ecology and development has been accepted
      as a part of the customary international law though
      its salient features have yet to be finalised by the
      international law jurists.”
119. The principle of Sustainable Development as a balancing

concept between ecology and development has been accepted

as a part of the Customary International Law by this Court in

various judgments including
S. Jagannath v. Union of India

and Others25
, Consumer Education & Research Society v.



25 (1997) 2 SCC 87 : 1996 INSC 1466
79
Union       of   India   and     Others26,        Intellectuals   Forum,

Tirupathi v. State of A.P. and Others27 and
Tata Housing

Development Company Limited v. Aalok Jagga and

Others28
.
120. As discussed hereinabove, on the land in question,

various      developmental           activities   have    already   been

undertaken viz. irrigation dams have been constructed, roads

have been laid down, schools, public health centres, other

public utilities, facilities have been provided for the citizens.

All these public utilities are necessary for the citizens living in

the areas. We have annexed herewith the list of various

institutions/buildings/residential areas/public utilities which

will be affected in the city of Nagpur. The said list would show

that even the buildings wherein the High Court, the High

Court Judges’ residences, the State Governments’ Secretariat,

the Central Government’s buildings, the Defence Buildings,

the Air Force buildings, the establishment of Agricultural

University, the graveyards etc. are situated, they all would be

affected.
26 (2000) 2 SCC 599 : 2000 INSC 81
27 (2006) 3 SCC 549 : 2006 INSC 101
28 (2020) 15 SCC 784 : 2019 INSC 1203
80
j. Effect of CEC’s recommendations
121. Another reason that persuades us to accept the

recommendations        of    the   CEC   is   that   the   CEC   has

recommended that all allotments for commercial purposes

post 25th October 1980 must be treated at par with

encroachments. It is recommended that a Special Task Force

comprising    of   a        Sub-Divisional    Magistrate,   Deputy

Superintendent of Police, an Assistant Conservator of Forests

and a Taluka Inspector of Land Records should be constituted

in each district so as to demolish encroachments. It has been

recommended that these officials be posted only for this

purpose and that they will not be assigned any other duty. It

has also been recommended that the said exercise should be

completed within a period of two years.
122. The CEC has further recommended that the State

Government shall ensure that the land use is not changed in

the future under any circumstances and that the transfer is

permitted only by inheritance. Insofar as allotment of land

post 12th December 1996 is concerned, the CEC has

recommended that the State Government shall give reasons as

to why such allotments were done along with the list of officers
81
who made such allotments in violation of the orders of this

Court.   It   has   further   recommended     that    the   Central

Government      shall   process    such   proposals    under   the

provisions of
Section 2(ii)
of the FC Act, 1980 only after

ensuring that the suitable punitive action has been taken

against the concerned officials under
Sections 3-A
and
3-B
of

the FC Act, 1980.
123. It can be seen from the letter dated 19th/22nd September

2003 addressed by the MoEF&CC to the Secretaries of all the

State Governments and Union Territories clarifying therein that

the NPV will be charged in all those cases which have been

granted in-principle approval after 30th October 2002. The said

letter stated that NPV will be realized before Stage-II (Final)

approval.
124. It is thus clear that even according to MoEF&CC, the NPV

has to be charged where in-principle approval has been granted

after 30th October 2002. A perusal of the record would reveal

that in the present case Stage-I approval has been granted

much prior to 30th October 2002. In this background, the FAC

in its meeting dated 26th October 2017 has favourably

considered the request of the Government of Maharashtra for
82
exemption from payment of NPV. In this background, the

contention that the NPV should be charged from the persons

who were in possession of the said lands, in our view, would not

be tenable. In any case, the ground realities would not permit

the same to be done. As already discussed hereinabove, the

land admeasuring 33391.43 hectares has been largely utilized

for residential purposes, for agricultural purposes by the

landless persons to whom it was allotted and for public utilities

as well as public purposes like cemeteries, cremation grounds,

government offices, schools, primary health centres, anganwadi

centres etc.
125. As we have already held hereinabove, the said land has

been utilized to take further the avowed object of the

Constitution of distributive justice. It could have been a

different matter had the said land been utilized in order to

promote the vested interest of a few individuals. In any case,

the CEC itself has recommended that insofar as allotment for

commercial purposes and encroachment is concerned, the said

recommendation would not be applicable.
126. It has been recommended by the FAC that the NPV shall

not be collected from the State Government for diversion
83
proposals submitted under the
FC Act, 1980
where Zudpi land

has been put to non-forestry use before 12th December 1996.

The CEC after considering the larger public interest in this

respect    has     given    its    recommendations.      The      said

recommendations depict a balanced approach.
127. The   CEC,     given    the    peculiar    circumstances     and

significance of Zudpi Jungle lands, discussed the issue in

detail and recommended that the State Government in respect

of Zudpi Jungle lands allotted by the competent authority

before 12th December 1996 shall seek approval under
Section

2(i)
of the FC Act, 1980 for their deletion from the “List of the

Forest Areas”. It has been recommended that a consolidated

proposal   shall    be     submitted    by     the   Government     of

Maharashtra for each district. It has been recommended that

the Central Government would take a decision on the said

proposal on its own merits. It has further been recommended

that all activities for which lands have been allotted by the

competent authority would be deemed to be site specific and

no condition for compensatory afforestation or depositing NPV

levies may be imposed by the Central Government while

processing such proposals.
84
128. It is further to be noted that there is not much change

between the recommendations as made in the 2019 CEC

Report and 2025 CEC Report except the payment of NPV. It is

further to be noted that the FAC itself in its meeting dated 26th

October 2017 had favourably accepted the request of the State

Government for exemption from payment of NPV.
129. As already discussed hereinabove, the Report of the CEC

has been prepared after undertaking a huge exercise of site

inspections, collection of huge data from all the districts and

verification   thereof    by     the   District    Collectors.   The

recommendations also balance the rights of the citizens

accrued for past several decades much prior to 1980 or 1996,

the developmental activities already undertaken and the need

to provide a larger green coverage.
130. Though we are largely in agreement with the other

recommendations of the CEC, we are not inclined to accept the

recommendation of the CEC that the Zudpi land can be used for

compensatory afforestation instead of non-forest land without

insisting on the Chief Secretary’s certificate regarding the non-

availability   of   non-forest    land.   Though     the   CEC    has

recommended that in such cases compensatory afforestation
85
must be carried out on double the area of Zudpi Jungle land as

per the existing guidelines of MoEF&CC, we are not inclined to

accept      the     said     recommendation.   Accepting   such   a

recommendation would amount to deviating from the order

passed by this Court dated 12th December 1996 and the specific

directions issued by this Court on 4th March 2025 in the case

of Ashok Kumar Sharma, Indian Forest Service (Retd.) and
Others v. Union of India and Another29
.
131. We therefore reject the said recommendation and hold that

the Zudpi Jungle land can be considered for the purposes of

compensatory afforestation only if there is a Chief Secretary’s

certificate regarding non-availability of non-forest land. Only in

such cases, the compensatory afforestation would be carried

out on double the area of Zudpi Jungle land as per the existing

guidelines of MoEF&CC.
132. We further find that the interest of providing a larger green

cover can be taken care of by issuing stringent directions to the

State of Maharashtra.
133. In this regard, we reproduce the following chart which is a


29 Writ Petition (C) No. 1164 of 2023
86
part of the Report of the CEC:
S.N.                Description                 Area in hectare
   i.    Already been handed over to the            6,55,619
         Forest Department
   ii.   Zudpi jungle land was reclassified        89,768.39
         by the Revenue Department into
other categories up to 12.02.1992
  iii.   Zudpi jungle land for which                 92,116
         notifications
u/s 4
of IFA, 1927 have
         been issued
  iv.    The total area allotted by the            33,391.43
         revenue department for various
         non-forestry activities
   v.    The total area of fragmented land         29,032.622
         parcels (each plot having an area
         less than 3 ha. and not adjoining
         any forest area)
  vi.    Total area under encroachment             10,827.532
                        Total                    9,10,754.974
134. The chart would show that out of an area of 9,23,913

hectares, an area of 6,55,619 hectares has already been handed

over to the Forest Department and an area of 89,768.39

hectares was reclassified by the Revenue Department into other

categories up to 12th February 1992. A notification under
Section 4
of the Indian Forest Act, 1927 has already been issued

in respect of the land admeasuring 92,116 hectares. The CEC
87
has also recommended that the total area of land admeasuring

29,032.622 hectares that is the plots having an area of less than

3 hectares and not adjoining any forest area to be transferred

to the Forest Department. The various non-forestry activities for

the lands admeasuring 33,391.43 hectares allotted by the

Revenue Department have already been discussed hereinabove.

We find that the interest of providing larger green coverage can

be achieved by directing the State Government to utilize the

aforesaid area of 7,76,767.622 hectares for the purposes of

afforestation within a specified period.
135. We find that the concern for providing larger green

coverage can be ensured by directing the Revenue Department

of the State of Maharashtra to hand over the remaining area out

of the aforesaid area of 7,76,767.622 hectares to the Forest

Department which would be utilized by the State Government

for afforestation. We further find that a direction to the State

Government to complete the process of handing over the

possession from the Revenue Department to the Forest

Department in respect of the aforesaid land would ensure the

use of the said land for afforestation in an expeditious manner.
88
136. Insofar as the concern expressed by Smt. Divan that if

the recommendations of CEC are accepted, it will lead to

denotifying forest areas where the forests have been degraded

is concerned, the said apprehension is not correct. The CEC

has itself recommended that Zudpi Jungle land shall be

considered as “Forest Lands” on account of peculiarity of the

circumstances.     It   has   also   recommended      that   the

recommendations shall not be permitted to be treated as

precedent. In any case after 12th December 1996, no forest

could be denotified or used for non-forestry purpose except

with the permission of the Central Government under the
FC

Act, 1980
.
137. Before we part with this judgment, we will also reiterate

the issue that we had covered in our recent judgment dated

15th May 2025 in the present proceedings in the case of In Re:
Construction of Multi Storeyed Buildings in Forest Land

Maharashtra30. In the said case, we had noticed that various

parcels of land which were notified as forest lands were still in

possession of the Revenue Department. We noticed that the

Revenue Department despite resistance from the Forest


30 2025 INSC 701
89
Department      had   allotted    the   lands   to   the    private

individuals/institutions for non-forestry purposes. We had

noticed that this had the effect of reducing vital green cover.
We therefore issued directions to all the States and the Union

Territories to hand over the possession of such lands to the

Forest Department. We had further directed that if on account

of such lands already being converted for non-forest activities,

it was found that taking back the possession of the land would

not be in larger public interest, then the States/Union

Territories should recover the cost of the land from such

individuals/institutions and use the said amount for the

purpose of afforestation, restoration and conservation of the

forest. At the cost of repetition, in order to emphasize the need

for protection and enhancement of green coverage, we will

reiterate the said directions in the present matter also.

VI.   CONCLUSION:
138. In the result, the present IAs are disposed of in the

following terms:
(i)   It is directed that the Zudpi Jungle lands shall be

            considered as Forest lands in line with the order of
90
this Court dated 12th December 1996 in the present

        proceedings;
(ii)    In the peculiar facts and circumstances of the

        present case, we direct that as an exception, and

        without the same being treated as a precedent

        whatsoever for any matter, the Zudpi Jungle lands

        allotted by the competent authority up to 12th

        December 1996 and for which land classification

        has not been changed, the State of Maharashtra

        shall seek approval under
Section 2
of the Forest

        (Conservation) Act, 1980 for their deletion from the

        “List of Forest Areas”;
(iii)   We direct that the State of Maharashtra shall

        submit a consolidated proposal for each district. We

        clarify that all activities for which lands have been

        allotted by the competent authority will be deemed

        to be site-specific. We further clarify that the State

        Government shall ensure that the land used is not

        changed in the future under any circumstances and

        transfer is made only by inheritance;
91
(iv)   We direct that on receipt of such proposals, the

       Union of India shall consider and approve the same

       without imposing any condition for compensatory

       afforestation or depositing NPV levies;
(v)    We direct that the Union Government and the State

       of Maharashtra shall with mutual consultation and

       with prior approval of the CEC, devise a format for

       processing the proposal of diversion of Zudpi Jungle

       land for non-forestry activities within a period of

       three months from the date of this judgment;
(vi)   For proposal regarding the allotments of Zudpi

       Jungle lands made post 12th December 1996, the

       State of Maharashtra shall give reasons in the

       proposal as to why such allotments were made

       along with the list of officers who had made such

       allotments in violation of the order of this Court. We

       clarify that the processing of proposal for such

       allotments shall be done by the Union Government

       only after ensuring that punitive action has been

       taken against the concerned officers under
Sections

       3A
and
3B
of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980;
92
(vii) We direct that the State of Maharashtra shall

       declare all the unallotted “fragmented land parcels”

       (each having an area of less than three hectare and

       not adjoining any forest area) as “Protected Forests”

       under
Section 29
of the Indian Forest Act, 1927;
(viii) We further direct the State of Maharashtra to issue

       directions to all the concerned Sub-Divisional

       Magistrates (SDMs) to ensure that no such land

       parcel is encroached upon hereinafter. It is further

       directed that if any such encroachment takes place

       after the date of this judgment, the concerned SDM

       shall be made responsible for the same;
(ix)   We clarify that, as and when these lands are

       required for non-forestry purposes by the State

       Government, the proposal shall be submitted as per

       the provisions of the
Forest (Conservation) Act,

       1980
. We further clarify that, in no case any such

       land shall be diverted to any non-governmental

       entity for any purpose whatsoever;
93
(x)    We further direct that a Special Task Force

       comprising of Sub-Divisional Magistrate, Deputy

       Superintendent of Police, an Assistant Conservator

       of Forests and a Taluka Inspector of Land Revenue

       of land records should be constituted in each

       district to remove encroachments within a period of

       two years from the date of this judgment. We clarify

       that these officials will be posted only for this

       purpose and will not be assigned any other duty.
We further clarify that all allotments for commercial

       purpose post 25th October 1980 must be treated at

       par with encroachments;
(xi)   We further direct that the Revenue Department of

       the State of Maharashtra shall hand over the

       possession of the remaining area, if any, from the

       aforesaid area of 7,76,767.622 hectares, which is

       still in possession of the Revenue Department to the

       Forest Department. The same shall be done within

       a period of one year from the date of this judgment.

       We clarify that the said land shall be utilized only

       for the purpose of compensatory afforestation;
94
(xii) We direct the CEC to monitor the progress of the

     aforesaid transfer of the forest land. We further

     direct that the Zudpi land will not be permitted to

     use for compensatory afforestation unless there is a

     certificate of the Chief Secretary regarding the non-

     availability of non-forest land for the purposes of

     afforestation.   However,      in    such     cases,

     compensatory afforestation must be carried out on

     double the area of Zudpi Jungle land, as per the

     existing guidelines of the MoEF&CC;
(xiii) As already directed in the recent case of In Re:
Construction of Multi Storeyed Buildings in

     Forest Land Maharashtra (supra) dated 15th May

     2025, we reiterate our direction to the Chief

     Secretaries of all the States and the Administrators

     of all the Union Territories to constitute Special

     Investigation Teams for the purpose of examining

     as to whether any of the Forest Land in the

     possession of the Revenue Department has been

     allotted to any private individuals/institutions for

     any purpose other than the forestry purpose; and
95
(xiv) We further reiterate our directions to the State

          Governments and the Union Territories to take

          steps to take the possession of the land from the

          persons/institutions in possession of such lands

          and hand over the same to the Forest Department.
In case, it is found that taking back the possession

          of the land would not be in the larger public

          interest, the State Governments/Union Territories

          should recover the cost of the said land from the

          persons/institutions in occupation thereof and use

          the said amount for the purpose of development of

          forests.
139. We place on record our appreciation for the valuable

assistance rendered by Shri K. Parameshwar, learned amicus

curiae ably assisted by Ms. Kanti, Mr. M.V. Mukunda, Ms. Raji

Gururaj and Mr. Shreenivas Patil, learned counsel, Smt.

Madhavi Divan, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the

intervenor and Shri Sidharth Dharmadhikari, learned counsel

appearing for the State. We direct the State of Maharashtra to

pay an amount of Rs.5,00,000/- to Shri K. Parameshwar,

learned amicus curiae and Rs.2,50,000/- each to Ms. Kanti,
96
Mr. M.V. Mukunda, Ms. Raji Gururaj and Mr. Shreenivas Patil,

learned counsel as a token for the valuable services rendered

by them.
140. We also place on record our deep appreciation for the

voluminous exercise undertaken by the CEC and in assisting

this Court to arrive at a solution that would balance the rights

of the citizens at large on one hand and the interest of the

environment on the other hand.
Encl: Annexure-1 to the Report of the Committee for
suggesting changes required in simplified procedure for
diversion of Zudpi Jungle Land under
Forest Conservation Act,
1980
titled as “Resolving Zudpi Jungle Land Issue : A
Development Perspective” chaired by Divisional Commissioner,
Nagpur.
..............................CJI
                                                        (B.R. GAVAI)




                              ............................................J
                              (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)




NEW DELHI;
MAY 22, 2025.
97
Annexure – I
     Tahsil - Nagpur
Sr.        Name of     Survey No.    Area           User Name         Type of Use
No.        Village                   of S.
                                      No.
                                    (in ha)
1         2            3          4                  5                     6
1            Ajni          8         0.40      Mhada                Mhada Quarter
                                                                    Since 1970
                           9         9.79      Mhada                House, Play
                                                                    Ground
2         Jat Tarodi      14         0.63      Nagpur Improvement   Residential Area
                                               Trust
                          16         0.35      Nagpur Improvement   Residential Area
                                               Trust
                          22         0.11      Nagpur Improvement   Residential Area
                                               Trust
3.         Dhantoli      305/5       0.05      Nagpur Improvement   Residential Area
                                               Trust
4.         Lendra        79/5       15.52      Dr. Punjabrao Agr.   Agri. Research
                                               University
                         83/4       12.64      Dr. Punjabrao Agr.   Agriculture
                                               University
                        83/4/1       0.47      MSRTC                Bust Stand
                         89/1        3.92      Govt. Building       Govt. Building
                         142/2       0.60      Dr. Punjabrao Agr.   Residential Area
                                               University
                          178        0.06      Dr. Punjabrao Agr.   RCF Building
                                               University
                         217/1      27.65      Dr. Punjabrao Agr.   Agriculture
                                               University
                         219/1       4.02      Dr. Punjabrao Agr.   Agriculture
                                               University
                          226        0.12      Dr. Punjabrao Agr.   Agriculture
                                               University           Market
                          303        1.83      Dr. Punjabrao Agr.   Open Space,
                                               University           Water Body
                         26 B        0.02      Govt. Land Nazul     Building
                         91/2        0.77      Hadas High School    Education
                                                                    Institute
98
228/2       0.45    Cotton Research      Residential Area
                      Centre
  229/1       0.95    Cotton Research      Residential Area
                      Centre
  232/2       1.81    Dr. Punjabrao Agr.   Girls Hostel
                      University
  233/1       2.15    ICAR                 Residential Area
  245/2       0.04    ICAR                 Residential Area
  246/1       0.70    ICAR                 Residential Area
  248/1       0.23    Nagpur Improvement   Residential Area
                      Trust


   256        0.65    Nagpur Improvement   Office
                      Trust
  257/1       2.13    Nagpur Improvement   Education
                      Trust                Institute
   279        0.05    Nagpur Improvement   Education
                      Trust                Institute
  78/2-3      0.38    Nagpur Improvement   Education
                      Trust                Institute
   80/1       0.01    Nagpur Improvement   Maharaj Bag
                      Trust
   80/2       0.12    Nagpur Improvement   Maharaj Bag
                      Trust
   89/8       7.69    Nagpur Improvement   Commercial
                      Trust                Building
   91/3       0.35    Nagpur Improvement   In possession of
                      Trust                NIT
217/4,219/2   2.71    Nagpur Improvement   Diksha Bhumi
                      Trust
221/1, 22/2   3.77    Nagpur Improvement   Diksha Bhumi
                      Trust
  220/1,      6.86    Nagpur Improvement   ITI Building
  224/1               Trust
  234/2       0.07    Nagpur Improvement   Residential Area
                      Trust
   244        0.80    Nagpur Improvement   Residential Area
                      Trust
  247/2       0.81    Nagpur Improvement   Residential Area
                      Trust
  302/2       0.92    Nagpur Improvement   Forensic Lab
                      Trust
99
242       0.07    Govt. Body           Garden
                 243/1      0.11    Govt. Body           Garden
                 243/2      0.10    Forest Deptt.        Garden
                  79/1      2.81    Govt. Nazul          Building
                   67       1.97    Somalwar High        Education
                                    School               Institute
5    Khamla       72/4      2.69    Private land         Pandey Layout
                  73/4      7.37    Private land         Pandey Layout
                  88/2      0.40    Nagpur Municipal     Grave Yard /
                                    Corp                 Cemetery
                75/12,13    0.76    Residential          Nagpur
                                                         Improvement
                78/8,9,10
                                                         Trust Layout
6.   Ambazari      29       1.66    Nagpur Municipal     Grave Yard /
                                    Corp                 Cemetery
                  8/3       0.04    Nagpur Improvement   Boundary of
                                    Trust                Water Body
                   24       1.94    VNagar Improvement   Education
                                    Trust Univ           Institute
                  37/2      2.37    Nagpur Improvement   Sweeming Pool
                                    Trust


                   40       0.96    Nagpur Improvement   Building of
                                    Trust                Nagpur
                                                         Improvement
                                                         Trust
                  42/1      2.19    Dharampeth High      Education
                                    School               Institute
                  44/2      0.15    Nagpur Improvement   Ambazari Garden
                                    Trust
                  53/2      1.05    Residential          Nagpur
                                                         Improvement
                                                         Trust
                  52/2      7.11    Residential          Nagpur
                                                         Improvement
                                                         Trust
7.    Binaki       16       0.21    Grave Yard /         For public use
                                    Cemetery
                   32       0.07    Grave Yard /         For public use
                                    Cemetery
                   44       0.65    Grave Yard /         For public use
                                    Cemetery
100
91     0.05     Grave Yard /         For public use
                                     Cemetery
                    103     0.44     Grave Yard /         For public use
                                     Cemetery
                     154    0.29     Grave Yard /         For public use
                                     Cemetery
                     77     0.33     Grave Yard /         For public use
                                     Cemetery
                     26     0.85     Nagpur Improvement   Residential Area
                                     Trust
8.   Shivangaon     134/2   0.29     MIHAN                Grave Yard For
                                                          public use
                    171     0.87     MIHAN                Grave Yard For
                                                          public use
                    172     0.14     MIHAN                Grave Yard For
                                                          public use
9    Chichbhuwan    236     1.65     Nagpur Municipal     Grave Yard For
                                     Corp                 public use
                    153     0.03     Nagpur Municipal     Residential
                                     Corp                 Purpose
                    154     0.04     Nagpur Municipal     Residential
                                     Corp                 Purpose
10     Jaitala      22/2    0.21     Nagpur Municipal     Grave Yard /
                                     Corp                 Cemetery
                    34/2    2.83     Nagpur Municipal     Grave Yard /
                                     Corp                 Cemetery
                    103     2.17     Nagpur Municipal     Grave Yard /
                                     Corp                 Cemetery
11     Bhamti       60/2    0.71     Railway Deptt.       Railway Line &
                                                          Ring Road
12     Dhabha       168     9.34     Police Deptt.        Govt. Building
                    175/1   23.86    Police Deptt.        Govt. Building
                    175/2   10.43    Defence Ministry     Air Force Building
                    177     0.77     Defence Ministry     In possession of
                                                          Air Force
                    178/1   13.94    Agriculture Deptt.   Agri. Research
                    178/2   2.09     Defence Ministry     Air Force Building
13   Hajari Pahad    54     0.17     Khadan               Khadan
                     83     0.25     Nagpur Municipal     Grave Yard /
                                     Corp                 Cemetery
101
87       0.05     Nagpur Municipal     Grave Yard /
                                        Corp                 Cemetery
                     91/2      0.93     Houses               Grave Yard /
                                                             Cemetery
                     91/3      3.16     Houses
                    109/1      25.30    Dr. Punjabrao Agr.   Agri. Research
                                        University
                    109/2      55.77    Dr. Punjabrao Agr.   Agri. Research
                                        University
                     111       0.05     Defence Ministry     In possession of
                                                             Air Force
                     113       30.40    Defence Ministry     In possession of
                                                             Air Force
14   Telangkhedi     10/1      28.42    Mah. Animal          Education
                                        Husbendry &          Institute
                                        Fishries Universiy
                     10/2      0.93     Defence Ministry     Air Force Building
                     12/1      6.77     Defence Ministry     In possession of
                                                             Air Force
                     12/2      1.22     Defence Ministry     In possession of
                                                             Air Force
                      13       23.20    Defence Ministry     In possession of
                                                             Air Force
                      53       0.09     Defence Ministry     In possession of
                                                             Air Force
                     54/2      1.55     Defence Ministry     In possession of
                                                             Air Force
                     64/1      0.48     Defence Ministry     In possession of
                                                             Air Force
                     64/3      0.01     Defence Ministry     In possession of
                                                             Air Force
                     67/6      29.71    Central Govt.        T.V. Office, Work
                                                             shop of IBM
                      69       1.12     Central Govt.
                     70/2      0.25     N M C Water Deptt.   Water pipeline &
                                                             Houses
                      71       0.57     N M C Water Deptt.   Water pipeline &
                                                             Borgaon Road
                      73       3.17     N M C Water Deptt.   Water pipeline &
                                                             Houses
                   77/2 part   0.27     N M C Water Deptt.   Water pipeline &
                                                             Houses
102
90      0.16     N M C Water Deptt.    Water pipeline &
                                                      Houses


               92      10.95    SSC Collage, Church   Education
                                                      Institute
               95      1.04     C.P. Club             Club
              98/1     0.50     Nazul Deptt.          Govt. Building
              98/2     8.85     Nazul Deptt.          Mother Diary
               107     0.61     Health Deptt.         Govt. Building
               110     0.09     PWD Deptt.            Govt. Building
              112/1     4.1     Govt. Deptt.          Govt. Building
              112/2    0.93     C.P. School           Education
                                                      Institute
              112/3    0.48     C.P. School           Education
                                                      Institute
              112/4    0.60     C.P. School           Education
                                                      Institute
              65/1     0.45     Govt. Deptt.          Residential Area
              65/3     0.02     Govt. Deptt.          Residential Area
              65/4     6.25     Central Govt.         MECL
15   Futala    2/1     79.11    Dr. Punjabrao Agr.    Agri. Research
                                University
               2/2     44.51    Dr. Punjabrao Agr.    Agri. Research
                                University
               2/3     20.00    Dr. Punjabrao Agr.    Agri. Research
                                University
              14/1     11.00    PWD Deptt             Govt. Building
              14/1 A   0.06     Rev. Deptt            Religious
                                                      Stracture
              14/4     0.01     Police Deptt.         Police Station
              15/1     1.66     PWD Deptt.            Govt. Building
              15/4     1.48     PWD Deptt.            Govt. Building
              17/3     0.64     PWD Deptt.            Govt. Building
              17/7     0.30     School                Education
                                                      Institute
              13/3     23.06    Dr. Punjabrao Agr.    Agri. Research
                                University
              13/1     13.19    Dr. Punjabrao Agr.    Agri. Research
                                University
103
14/2        0.01    Electricity Deptt    Transformer
                                        (MSEB)
                  14/3, 15/6    0.30    School               Education
                                                             Institute
16   Kachimate      6,7,8       2.15    Dr. Punjabrao Agr.   Agri. Research
                                        University
                     11         5.02    Dr. Punjabrao Agr.   Agri. Research
                                        University
                    13,14      11.91    Dr. Punjabrao Agr.   Agri. Research
                                        University
                    17,18       0.80    Dr. Punjabrao Agr.   Agri. Research
                                        University
                     40         3.37    Central Govt.        Staff Quarter
                                                             BSNL
                    44/1       26.88    Nagpur Municipal     Ambazari Lake
                                        Corp
                    44/2        4.86    Nagpur University    Education
                                                             Institute
                    44/3       100.00 Central Govt.          Cirtus Research
                                                             Centre
17    Takli Sim       2        14.00    Nagpur Municipal     Ambazari Lake
                                        Corp
18   Pandhabodi      29         1.98    Nagpur Improvement   Residential Area
                                        Trust
                    13/1        0.49    Nagpur Improvement   Residential Area
                                        Trust
                     14         0.02    Nagpur Improvement   Residential Area
                                        Trust
                     32         0.28    Nagpur Improvement   Residential Area
                                        Trust
19   Dharampeth      2/4        0.80    Central Govt.        Govt. Building
                     2/5        0.04    Central Govt.        Govt. Building
                    17/2        0.05    PWD Deptt.           High Judges
                                                             Bungalow
                    19/3        0.06    Central Govt.        Residential Area
                    20/2        0.19    Agriculture Deott.   Office
                     23         7.41    Nazul Deptt.         Tiger Camp
                                                             Ground
                    19/2        5.81    Agriculture Deptt.   Office
                     27         1.13    PWD Deptt.           Govt. Building
                     29         0.81    PWD Deptt.           Govt. Building
104
33/1-3-5   3.16     Forest Deptt.        Garden
               35/1-2     0.36     C.P. Club            Club
                35/3      2.52     Irrigation Deptt.    Rest House
                 50       0.78     PWD Deptt.           Office
                 67       0.08     PWD Deptt.           Judial Officer
                                                        Resedence
                 72       1.82     PWD Deptt.           Govt. Building
                73/1      1.44     PWD Deptt.           Govt. Building
                73/2      0.85     PWD Deptt.           Govt. Building
                75/2      0.79     PWD Deptt.           Govt. Building
                78/2      0.11     Z.P.                 Govt. Building
                78/4      0.19     PWD Deptt.           Road
                 80       0.11     PWD Deptt.           MLA Hostel
                82/4      1.00     PWD Deptt.           Residential Area
                77/1      0.97     PWD Deptt.           Residential Area
20   Gadga      27/11     0.11     Nagpur Improvement   Residential Area
                                   Trust
                 31       0.19     Nagpur Improvement   Residential Area
                                   Trust
                 32       0.38     Nagpur Improvement   Residential Area
                                   Trust
                 35       1.94     Nagpur Improvement   Residential Area
                                   Trust
21   Borgaon      4       0.53     Defence Ministry     Firing Range
                  5       0.08     Defence Ministry     Firing Range
                  6       0.53     Defence Ministry     Firing Range
                  7       0.24     Defence Ministry     Firing Range
                  8       7.58     Defence Ministry     Firing Range
                  9       4.66     Defence Ministry     Firing Range
                 10       2.60     Defence Ministry     Firing Range
                 11       3.69     Defence Ministry     Firing Range
                 12       2.79     Defence Ministry     Firing Range
                 13       1.57     Defence Ministry     Firing Range
                 14       5.42     Defence Ministry     Firing Range
                 15       13.77    Defence Ministry     Firing Range
                 16       0.72     Defence Ministry     Firing Range
               17/1-2     5.44     Defence Ministry     Firing Range
105
19/1      0.12    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                 63/1      1.67    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                  64       5.71    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                  65       3.14    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                 66/1      0.28    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                 67/2      0.96    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                  68       3.36    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                  69       0.45    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                  70       0.49    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                  71       5.09    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                 72/2      8.59    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                 73/2      3.64    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                 74/2      1.98    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                 77/2      0.70    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                 78/2      0.02    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                 110/2     1.98    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                 121/1     0.51    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                 140/2     1.98    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                 141/2     0.49    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                 142/2     0.17    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                 143/2     0.13    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                 144/1     0.51    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                  145      0.19    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                 148/2     3.30    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                  149      3.20    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                  150      2.26    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                  151      6.21    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                  152      2.91    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                  153      0.51    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                  154      3.28    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
22   Gorewada   58/1-2-3   2.30    Nagpur Municipal   Grave Yard /
                                   Corp               Cemetery
                 102/2,    6.32    Defence Ministry   Firing Range
                 103/1,
                103/2K,
                103/3K,
                103/4Kh
106
106   19.55    Nagpur Municipal      Water Work
                                  Corp
                   110   6.58     Forest Deptt.         Forest Use
                   112   8.47     Forest Deptt.         Forest Use
                   113   0.65     Nagpur Municipal      Gorewada Water
                                  Corp                  Tank
                   115   1.68     Nagpur Municipal      Gorewada Water
                                  Corp                  Tank
                   121   10.44    Forest Deptt.         Forest Use
23   Police Line   8     5.99     Home Deptt / Police   Police Head
        Takli                     Deptt                 Quarter
                   9     35.14    Home Deptt / Police   Police Head
                                  Deptt                 Quarter
                   17    7.41     Home Deptt / Police   Police Head
                                  Deptt                 Quarter
                   15    1.45     Home Deptt / Police   Police Head
                                  Deptt                 Quarter
                   19    3.05     Home Deptt / Police   Police Head
                                  Deptt                 Quarter
                   20    2.19     Home Deptt / Police   Police Head
                                  Deptt                 Quarter
                   21    0.03     Home Deptt / Police   Police Head
                                  Deptt                 Quarter
                   23    2.17     Home Deptt / Police   Police Head
                                  Deptt                 Quarter
                   26    0.85     Home Deptt / Police   Police Head
                                  Deptt                 Quarter
                   28    0.85     Home Deptt / Police   Police Head
                                  Deptt                 Quarter
                   32    1.18     Home Deptt / Police   Police Head
                                  Deptt                 Quarter
                   36    1.38     Home Deptt / Police   Police Head
                                  Deptt                 Quarter
                   39    0.31     Home Deptt / Police   Police Head
                                  Deptt                 Quarter
                   40    14.62    Home Deptt / Police   Police Head
                                  Deptt                 Quarter
                   43    0.39     Home Deptt / Police   Police Head
                                  Deptt                 Quarter
                   45    3.30     Home Deptt / Police   Police Head
                                  Deptt                 Quarter
107
46        0.25     Home Deptt / Police   Police Head
                                     Deptt                 Quarter
                  47        1.62     Home Deptt / Police   Police Head
                                     Deptt                 Quarter
                  49        1.93     Home Deptt / Police   Police Head
                                     Deptt                 Quarter
                  52        2.31     Home Deptt / Police   Police Head
                                     Deptt                 Quarter
                  54        0.93     Home Deptt / Police   Police Head
                                     Deptt                 Quarter
                 57/2       2.87     PWD Deptt             Govt. Building
                 60/1       0.85     PWD Deptt             Govt. Building
                 60/3       0.04     PWD Deptt             Govt. Building
                 61/2       1.15     PWD Deptt             Govt. Building
24    Nari       161        0.78     Govt. Zudpi Jungle    house
                 163        1.83     Power greed office    office
                 166        0.07     Power greed office    office
                 167        3.54     Power greed office    Office
                 66/1       8.16     Govt. Zudpi Jungle    house
                 66/2       2.75     Govt. Zudpi Jungle    house
25   Indora       6         0.79     J E Nazul Govt        Road & houses
              38/3, 40/1,   21.81    J E Nazul Govt        Houses
               46/2, 47,
               49/1, 50,
                51, 63
              53, 54, 55,   65.86    J E Nazul Govt        Houses
              56, 57, 58,
              59, 60, 61,
               62/1, 98,
                99, 100,
               101, 102,
               103, 104,
               105, 106,
107
65, 66/, 2    0.27     J E Nazul Govt        Houses
                68, 69      1.17     J E Nazul Govt        Houses
                84, 85      0.77     J E Nagpur            Houses
                                     Improvement Trust
                 97/2       0.37     J E Nazul Govt        Houses
                 97/3       0.01     J E Nazul Govt        Houses
108
112, 113,     26.24    J E Nazul Govt       Houses
                  114, 115,
                 116, 119/1,
                 120/1, 121,
                 122, 126/1,
127/1
26   Mankapur        51         0.10     Residential Nagpur   Nagpur
                                         Improvement Trust    Improvement
                                                              Trust
                     48         0.03     Residential Nagpur   Nagpur
                                         Improvement Trust    Improvement
                                                              Trust
                     53         0.18     Residential Nagpur   Nagpur
                                         Improvement Trust    Improvement
                                                              Trust
27   Jaripatka      26/1        0.79     Residential          Nagpur Municipal
                                                              Corp School
                    27/4        6.15     Nazul                Residential
                     35         0.94     Nazul                Residential
                    40/52       9.08     Nazul                Residential on
                                                              lease
                    41/1        1.80     Residential          Nagoba temple
                 27/1, 35/4     12.66    Residential          Houses
                    27/2        3.30     Nagpur Municipal     Buried ground
                                         Corp
                    27/3        0.24     Residential          Residential
                 29/2, 31/2,    0.78     Nazul                Residential
                    32/2                                      purpose
                     38         0.34     Road                 Road
                    40/1        1.54     Nagpur Municipal     Cementry Buried
                                         Corp                 gournd
                    41/2        0.97     Nazul                Residential
                                                              purpose
                 43, 44, 44/1   6.77     Nazul                Residential
                                                              purpose
                  48, 49, 50    2.39     Education Dept       Education
                                                              purpose
                    51/1        0.28     Central Govt         Railway line
                     59         0.38     Nagpur Municipal     Education
                                         Corp                 purpose
                     67         2.02     Central Govt         Railway
                                                              residential
                                                              quarters
109
94         0.46    Nagpur Improvement   Plantation
                                         Trust
                      98         0.28    Nazul                Religious
                                                              structure
                     102/2       0.03    Nazul                Plantation
                      117        0.28    Nazul                Plantation
                     29/1        0.11    Nazul                Residential
                                                              purpose
                     96/1        0.45    Nagpur Municipal     Road
                                         Corp
28    Wanjara        96/3        0.09    Nagpur Municipal     Road
                                         Corp
29     Wanari         42         0.24    Nagpur Improvement   Residential Area
                                         Trust
30   Bhandewadi        7         0.32    Nagpur Municipal     Edgah/Grave
                                         Corp                 Yard/Cemetery
                      13         1.31    Nagpur Municipal     Edgah/Grave
                                         Corp                 Yard/Cemetery
31    Punapur          7         0.06    Nagpur Municipal     Grave Yard/
                                         Corp                 Cemetery
32     Pardi         81/1        0.29    Nagpur Municipal     Bed of Nag River
                                         Corp
                     81/3        0.01    Nagpur Municipal     Bed of Nag River
                                         Corp
33     Hiwari        32/3        0.05    Nagpur Municipal     Bed of Nag River
                                         Corp
34   Babulkheda       18         0.46    Nagpur Municipal     Main Road
                                         Corp
                      36         0.53    Nagpur Municipal     School &
                                         Corp                 Dispensary
35   Manewada       20, 21       0.81    Nagpur Municipal     Grave Yard/
                                         Corp                 Cemetery
36   Sakkardara      82/2        7.94    Nazul                Residencial Area
37    Bidpeth        9.08        1.78    Nazul                Religious
                                                              Stracture
                  39, 40, 41/2   1.49    Nazul                Residential Area
38     Harpur         29         0.39    Nagpur Municipal     Road
                                         Corp
110