[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Kumari Rekha vs Shambhu Saran Paswan on 6 May, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
2025 INSC 631                                                         NON-REPORTABLE


                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3489 OF 2025
                            [ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 18812 OF 2022]



             KUMARI REKHA                                                 …. APPELLANT



                                                  VERSUS



             SHAMBHU SARAN PASWAN                                        ... RESPONDENT




                                              JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
1. This appeal registers a challenge to the judgment and decree dated 4th

                    June, 2020 of the High Court of Judicature at Patna1 in Miscellaneous

                    Appeal No. 501 of 2013. Under challenge before the High Court were (i)
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
JATINDER KAUR
Date: 2025.05.06
17:01:15 IST
Reason:
judgment and decree dated 4th June, 2013 of the Principal Judge, Family
1
High Court
1
Court, Munger, Bihar, dismissing a petition2 under
Section 13
of the Hindu

      Marriage Act, 1955 presented by the appellant-wife and (ii) the judgment

      and decree dated 11th June, 2013 allowing a petition under
section 9
of

      the said Act of the respondent-husband. The High Court dismissed the

      appeal and, thereby, upheld the impugned judgment and decree of the

      Family Court.
2. The marriage between the appellant-wife and the respondent-husband

      was solemnized on 24th April, 1999. They were blessed with a daughter

      on 7th June, 2001. It is not in dispute that the parties have been living

      separately for quite some time. According to the appellant-wife, they

      have been living separately since 2008 while the respondent-husband

      claims that the separation is since 2012. Be that as it may, admittedly,

      they have been living separately for at least a little in excess of 12

      (twelve) years.
3. Having perused the materials on record and considering the factual

      situation of separation in excess of 12 (twelve) years, we had put it

      across to learned senior counsel for the parties as to whether any reunion

      by way of reconciliation is possible.
4. Ms. Nivedita Nirvikar, learned senior counsel for the appellant-wife ruled

      out any scope for such reconciliation and insisted for a decree of divorce

      on the ground of irretrievable breakdown of marriage. According to her,

      because of the acrimony between the parties, there is nothing left of the

      marriage.
2
Title Suit (Matrimonial) No. 1 of 2009
2
5. Per contra, Mr. Ashok Kumar Choudhary, learned senior counsel for the

   respondent-husband submitted, on instructions, that the respondent-

   husband was more than willing to have resumption of marital relationship

   particularly having regard to the future of the child of the parties. He

   contended that the petitioner-wife started showing her true colours once

   she obtained public employment. The respondent-husband had huge

   contributions for what the appellant-wife is today (she happens to be a

   Child Development Project Officer). Not only was she encouraged by him

   to prepare for securing public employment, the entire expenses for her

   to live a dignified, fulfilling and meaningful life were borne by him.

   Conveniently, she repudiated the contribution of the respondent-husband

   and disowned him after such employment. According to Mr. Choudhary,

   in light of the socio-economic conditions of the rural area from where the

   respondent-husband hails, it would be extremely difficult, if not

   impossible, to find a suitable groom for his child. Having regard to the

   stigma that is attached with a divorce, no respectable family would agree

   to give in marriage their son with the child of a divorcee. Even otherwise,

   it has not been demonstrated how the Family Court or the High Court

   erred in not granting relief to the appellant-wife. Placing reliance on

   several decisions of this Court, Mr. Choudhary, thus, assiduously urged

   that this appeal be dismissed.
6. We heard submission of Ms. Nirvikar that the child of the parties has

   since grown up and she is an adult, pursuing her medical course in

   Puducherry. According to Ms. Nirvikar, the respondent-husband never
3
cared for his child and all expenses for her up-bringing as well as

   education have been borne by the appellant-wife. That apart, she was an

   aspirant for public employment even before her marriage. With great

   deal of personal effort and without anyone’s assistance she could secure

   public employment. Submissions to the contrary are entirely wrong.
7. We heard rival contentions of the parties with patience and considering

   that the respondent-husband was overly concerned about his child’s

   future, particularly about her married life, decided to interact with her on

   the virtual platform.
8. In course of interaction, we could ascertain that the child of the parties

   is in the 2nd year of her MBBS course in a medical college in Puducherry.

   She is approaching marriageable age. We found her sufficiently mature

   to make her own decisions. Although the parties were not visible on the

   screen, their respective senior counsel did join the proceedings. Even if

   the parties had not joined proceedings virtually, we have no doubt that

   they have been told of the interaction that we had with their child.
9. We need not burden this judgment with what the child of the parties

   answered while responding to the other questions posed to her by both

   of us. Suffice to record, we believe that it is a fit case for us to invoke

   powers conferred on us by
Article 142
of the Constitution of India and to

   dissolve the marriage between the parties on the ground of irretrievable

   breakdown of marriage. We are persuaded to do so, having considered

   the prolonged period of separation and the multiple failed attempts at
4
reconciliation, which clearly indicate that there is no possibility of

       reunion, as well as their age (both are quinquagenarian).
10. Mr. Choudhary for the respondent-husband once again urged us to not

       grant divorce as it would not be in the best interest of the child. We are

       not impressed by this submission, especially in light of the fact that the

       respondent-husband and his daughter have had no contact during the

       entire period of separation. To us, this appears to be a mere attempt to

       prolong the litigation and stall the inevitable.
11. Keeping in mind the totality of the facts and circumstances, we are of the

       clear view that it would be in the best interest of both the parties, and

       their daughter too, to put a quietus to this protracted litigation. It is our

       hope that this quietus allows all members of the family to move on in

       life.
12. Even though the respondent-husband has vehemently opposed the

       prayer for dissolution of marriage contending that none of the available

       grounds on which a Hindu marriage could be dissolved is present, the

       same is not a bar for us to exercise our powers under
Article 142
of the

       Constitution; more particularly when we are satisfied that it is a case of

       irretrievable breakdown of marriage.
In this regard, one may refer

       profitably to the decision of the Constitution Bench of this Court in
Shilpa

       Sailesh v. Varun Sreenivasan3
.
13. Accordingly, we dissolve the marriage between the parties by a decree

       of divorce. Decree be drawn up accordingly.
3
2023 SCC OnLine SC 544
5
14. Since the appellant-wife has no claim for alimony, no order is made in

    that behalf.
15. The appeal, accordingly, stands allowed.
…………………………….J.
                                                 [DIPANKAR DATTA]



                                                 …………………………....J.
                                                  [MANMOHAN]
     NEW DELHI;
May 06, 2025.
6