[Cites
22
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Gyan Prakash vs Union Of India on 21 May, 2025
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Abhay S Oka
2025 INSC 753


                                                                         Non-Reportable
                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                            CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                        WRIT PETITION (C) NO.1272 OF 2019


                            Gyan Prakash                                    … Petitioner


                                                        versus


                            Union of India & Ors.                        ... Respondents


                                                      ORDER
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
1.   A very important issue has been raised in this petition
                            filed under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India. In short,
                            the issue is about the safety of our National Highways. It is
                            pointed out in this petition, based on the report titled “Road
                            Accidents in India – 2017”, that 53,181 persons were killed
                            during the year 2017 on highways in India. Attention of the
                            Court was invited to the
Control of National Highways (Land
                            and Traffic) Act, 2002
(for short, ‘the 2002 Act’) and the
                            Highway Administration Rules, 2004 (for short, ‘the 2004
                            Rules’). The prayers made are very wide. Although there may
                            be some limitations on the writ Court in granting some of the
Signature Not Verified
prayers, nevertheless, the issues raised are very important in
                            the context of highway safety.
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2025.05.21
19:28:14 IST
Reason:
Writ Petition (C) No.1272 of 2019                                    Page 1 of 26
2.        We have heard the petitioner appearing in person, Ms.
          Swati Ghildiyal, the learned counsel appointed as amicus
          curiae, Shri K M Nataraj, the learned Additional Solicitor
          General and Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy, an intervenor, appearing
          in person, who is a Member of Parliament. Paragraph Nos. 1
          to 7 of the order dated 20 th February 2024, passed by this
          Court read thus:
“1. Heard the petitioner appearing in
                                    person and the learned counsel
                                    appearing for the respondents.
2. In our order dated 10th October,
                                    2023, we had flagged the issue of
                                    implementation of the provisions of
                                    the
Control of National Highways
                                    (Land and Traffic) Act, 2002
(for short
                                    "2002 Act"). The affidavits have been
                                    filed on record which only indicate
                                    that the various authorities, as
                                    contemplated by
Section 3
of the
                                    2002 Act have been constituted
                                    and/or appointed. There are very
                                    important functions entrusted to the
                                    Highway Administrations. One is of
                                    prevention of occupation of highway
                                    land    (
Section   24
),   removal     of
                                    unauthorised       occupation      from
                                    highway (
Section 26
), recovery of cost
                                    of     removal     of    unauthorized
                                    occupation and fine imposed (Section
27), to regulate right of access to
                                    highway (
Section 28
) and regulation
                                    of traffic on the highway when
                                    situation contemplated by sub-
section
                                    2
of
Section 31
arises.
3. Firstly, we find that there is no
                                    machinery created to carry out
Writ Petition (C) No.1272 of 2019                                          Page 2 of 26
survey of highways under the
                                    jurisdiction of the various Highway
                                    Administrations to ascertain whether
                                    there are unauthorized structures or
                                    unauthorized occupation of highway
                                    land.     Unless survey is regularly
                                    carried      out,     the     Highway
                                    Administrations will have no source of
                                    knowing whether there is any
                                    unauthorized occupation of highway
                                    land. Judicial notice will have to be
                                    taken of the fact that in different
                                    parts of India, there are unauthorized
                                    encroachments on highway land.
Under
Section 31(2)
of the 2002 Act,
                                    it is provided that the Highway
                                    Authority must step in when highway
                                    becomes congested or unsafe for
                                    vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
4. There is no machinery provided to
                                    the citizens to complain about
                                    unauthorized occupation of the
                                    highway land, congestion or other
                                    situation   contemplated    by sub-
section 2
of
Section 31
of the 2002
                                    Act. There is no grievance redressal
                                    mechanism created for the benefit of
                                    the citizens. Unless such grievance
                                    redressal mechanism is developed
                                    and wide publicity is given to the
                                    existence of mechanism, the citizens
                                    will not have any opportunity to lodge
                                    complaints     with    the    Highway
                                    Administrations. Moreover, by some
                                    method, periodical survey of the
                                    highways under the jurisdiction of
                                    Highway Administration has to be
                                    carried out with a view to ensure that
                                    the highways are kept free of
                                    encroachments.
Writ Petition (C) No.1272 of 2019                                        Page 3 of 26
5. After reading the affidavits of the
                                    Highway Administrations, one gets an
                                    impression that the machinery is
                                    available only on paper and there is
                                    no effective implementation of the
                                    provisions of the 2002 Act. We direct
                                    the Highways Administrations to
                                    come out with a scheme which will
                                    provide for regular inspection of the
                                    highways,    for   establishment    of
                                    grievance redressal mechanism and
                                    for taking prompt action on the basis
                                    of the complaints.
6. After carrying out survey, the
                                    Highway Administrations will have to
                                    exercise the powers under
Section 26
of     removal    of    unauthorized
                                    occupation so that the highways are
                                    clear of encroachments.
7. We grant time of two months to the
                                    various   Highway     Administrations
                                    appointed in terms of
Section 3
to
                                    report compliance. The role of the
                                    Government of India does not come to
                                    an end after appointing various
                                    Highways Administrations. It is the
                                    duty of the Government of India to
                                    ensure      that     the    Highway
                                    Administrations function effectively
                                    and discharge their duties under the
                                    2002 Act.”

               Paragraph nos. 1 to 7 of the further order dated 30 th April
               2024 read thus:
“1. We have perused the affidavit
                                    dated 22nd April, 2024 filed by the
                                    Ministry of Road Transport &
                                    Highways, Government of India,
Writ Petition (C) No.1272 of 2019                                        Page 4 of 26
reporting   compliance     with    the
                                    directions contained in the order
                                    dated 20th February, 2024. Shri
                                    Gyan Prakash, petitioner-in-person,
                                    has many grievances to make about
                                    the implementation of the directions.
2. Before we go into the grievances,
                                    after perusing the afore- stated
                                    compliance affidavit, we propose to
                                    issue additional directions.
3. The letter dated 18th March, 2024
                                    addressed by the Ministry of Road
                                    Transport & Highways, Government
                                    of India, records that the teams
                                    constituted as per the communication
                                    dated 18th March, 2020, will carry
                                    out frequent inspection of the
                                    National Highways for ascertaining
                                    existence of encroachments on the
                                    highways.      Certain    statistics   is
                                    incorporated in Annexure A-5 to the
                                    compliance affidavit. Prima facie, we
                                    are not satisfied with the action taken
                                    as reflected from the said statistics
                                    when it comes to removal of
                                    encroachments on the highways as
                                    provided in
Section 26
of the Control
                                    of National Highways (Land and
                                    Traffic) Act, 2002 (for short, “the 2002
                                    Act”).
4. To test the stand taken in the
                                    compliance affidavit, we direct that a
                                    specific affidavit shall be filed placing
                                    on record the details of the
                                    inspections carried out on the
                                    National Highways and actions of
                                    removal of encroachments taken on
                                    the highways in the States of Assam,
Writ Petition (C) No.1272 of 2019                                           Page 5 of 26
Gujarat, Karnataka, Maharashtra,
                                    Rajasthan,     Tamil    Nadu,    Uttar
                                    Pradesh and West Bengal. We direct
                                    the Ministry of Road Transport &
                                    Highways to collect the data of (a) the
                                    inspections carried out by the
                                    inspection squads; and (b) action of
                                    removal of encroachments taken in
                                    these States up to 30th June, 2024,
                                    so that we will be able to issue
                                    further directions. A compliance
                                    affidavit on these aspects shall be
                                    filed by the concerned respondents by
                                    26th July, 2024.
5. From the perusal of the chart at
                                    Annexure A-5 to the compliance
                                    affidavit, it appears that though
                                    notices have been issued right from
                                    April, 2023 as regards large number
                                    of encroachments on the highways,
                                    action of removal appears to have
                                    been taken in respect of few
                                    structures/occupancies. The Ministry
                                    of Road Transport & Highways will
                                    invite attention of the concerned
                                    States to this aspect. We also make it
                                    clear that wherever for taking action
                                    under
Section 26
of the 2002 Act,
                                    assistance of the local Administration
                                    and local Police is required, the same
                                    shall be rendered by the Authorities
                                    of the State. The Ministry of Road
                                    Transport & Highways will forward a
                                    copy of this order to all the concerned
                                    Revenue and Police Authorities of the
                                    States.
6. As regards the paragraph 8 dealing
                                    with the non-implementation of the
                                    provisions incorporated in the 2002
Writ Petition (C) No.1272 of 2019                                         Page 6 of 26
Act by 2019 amendment, the learned
                                    ASG states that there is an
                                    inadvertent mistake in paragraph 46
                                    of the affidavit. Shri Gyan Prakash,
                                    petitioner-in- person, points out that
                                    pursuant to the amendments made in
                                    the year 2019, rules were framed. But
                                    there is no reference to the rules in
                                    the affidavit. At this stage, the
                                    learned ASG clarifies that there was
                                    an amendment in the year 2019 to
                                    the Highways Administration Rules,
                                    2004. We direct the Ministry of Road
                                    Transport & Highways to collect data
                                    regarding implementation of the Rules
                                    as amended in the year 2019 from all
                                    the States and file a better affidavit
                                    dealing with the compliance with the
                                    said Rules.
7. There are large number of issues
                                    involved in this Petition. We must
                                    record our appreciation for the
                                    persistent efforts made by the
                                    petitioner - Shri Gyan Prakash to
                                    ensure safety of our National
                                    Highways. However, we will need
                                    assistance of a member of the Bar.
We, therefore, appoint Ms. Swati
                                    Ghildiyal,   learned     Advocate-on-
Record, as Amicus Curiae to assist
                                    the Court. The Registry to provide
                                    soft copies of all the documents on
                                    record and pleadings to the learned
                                    Amicus Curiae. We request the
                                    learned Amicus Curiae to interact
                                    with the petitioner - Shri Gyan
                                    Prakash before the next date so that
                                    she can render effective assistance to
                                    the Court.”
Writ Petition (C) No.1272 of 2019                                        Page 7 of 26
Thereafter, on 27th August 2024, a direction was issued to the
          Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (for short, ‘MoRTH’)
          to constitute a proper team for carrying out frequent and
          regular inspections of all the National Highways. The order
          dated 27th August 2024 reads thus:
“Ms. Swati Ghildiyal, learned Amicus
                                    Curiae, has pointed out that a
                                    circular dated 18th March, 2024 has
                                    been issued by the Ministry of Road
                                    Transport & Highways, Government
                                    of India. Her concern is that if the
                                    encroachments on National Highways
                                    are to be prevented and removed,
                                    proper inspection teams must be
                                    constituted for regular inspection of
                                    Highways. She pointed out that the
                                    inspection frequency laid down in the
                                    Circular dated 18th March 2024 is
                                    the same as prescribed at the
                                    construction stage. This will not
                                    work.
Therefore, we direct the Ministry of
                                    Road Transport & Highways to
                                    constitute proper teams for frequent
                                    and regular inspection of all National
                                    Highways to ascertain whether there
                                    are encroachments. Each team shall
                                    be made responsible for a particular
                                    stretch   of  individual   Highways.
                                    Secondly, a mechanism should be
                                    created to ensure that the Inspecting
                                    Teams, after finding encroachments,
                                    immediately report to the competent
                                    authority empowered to remove
                                    encroachment. The Ministry shall
                                    also develop a portal where citizens
                                    can lodge complaints about the
Writ Petition (C) No.1272 of 2019                                        Page 8 of 26
encroachments on Highways. On the
                                    portal, citizens should be able to
                                    upload photographs and location
                                    details of the encroached portions.
                                    Moreover, a facility must be also
                                    created of a toll free number to report
                                    encroachments. Action taken reports
                                    based on the complaints shall also be
                                    uploaded on the portal. It is also
                                    necessary for the Ministry to give
                                    wide publicity about the availability
                                    of the facility portal and toll-free
                                    number on all National Highways and
                                    in the media so that citizens are
                                    made aware of the facility's existence.
We grant time till 30th September,
                                    2024 to the Government of India to
                                    implement the above directions.
We grant time of one month to the
                                    learned Amicus Curiae to prepare a
                                    note on various issues which arise on
                                    which the directions of this Court are
                                    necessary. The note shall be provided
                                    by learned Amicus Curie by 30th
                                    September, 2024.
We direct the Ministry of Road
                                    Transport & Highways, Government
                                    of India, to place on record the details
                                    of the action taken in terms of the
                                    Circular dated 18th March 2024. The
                                    data shall be placed on record in the
                                    form of an affidavit within three
                                    weeks from today.
The petition shall be listed on 14th
                                    October, 2024 for hearing the parties
                                    and issuing interim directions.
Writ Petition (C) No.1272 of 2019                                          Page 9 of 26
We may also clarify that the
                                     mechanism made available for the
                                     National Highways must be extended
                                     to the State Highways. We propose to
                                     issue the necessary directions on this
                                     behalf on the next date.
There is a committee set up by this
                                     court dealing with the issue of road
                                     safety, headed by Shri Justice Abhay
                                     Sapre, a former judge of this court.
                                     The issue of encroachments on
                                     Highways has a nexus with road
                                     safety. Therefore, the Registry shall
                                     forward a copy of this order and
                                     copies of the orders which may be
                                     passed    hereafter   to  the    said
                                     committee.”
3.        The learned amicus curiae has filed detailed notes dated
          5th October 2024 and 4th November 2024.
4.        Now, we will deal with the 2002 Act.
Section 3
of the
          2002        Act      provides     for   the   establishment   of   Highway
          Administrations, which reads thus:
“3.Establishment        of  Highway
                                     Administrations.— (1) The Central
                                     Government shall, by notification in
                                     the Official Gazette,—
(a) establish, for the purposes of
                                         this Act, a body or authority
                                         consisting of one or more officers
                                         of the Central Government or the
                                         State Government to be known
                                         as Highway Administration to
                                         exercise powers and discharge
Writ Petition (C) No.1272 of 2019                                            Page 10 of 26
functions conferred on it under
                                        this Act; and
(b) define the limits of the
                                        Highway within which, or the
                                        length of Highway on which, a
                                        Highway Administration shall
                                        have jurisdiction:
Provided that the Central Government
                                    may, in the notification issued under
                                    this sub-section or by any general or
                                    special order, impose any condition or
                                    limitation subject to which a Highway
                                    Administration shall exercise powers
                                    and discharge functions conferred on
                                    it under this Act.
(2) The Central Government may
                                    establish one or more Highway
                                    Administrations for a State or Union
                                    territory or for a Highway under sub-
section (1).
(3) Subject to the provisions of this
                                    Act, the Highway Administration shall
                                    exercise   powers   and     discharge
                                    functions conferred on it under this
                                    Act in such manner as may be
                                    prescribed.”
Section 24
deals with the prevention of the occupation of
          highway land. Under
Section 23(1)
, all lands forming part of a
          Highway which vest in the Central Government or which do
          not already vest in the Central Government but have been
          acquired for the purposes of a Highway shall, for the purposes
          of the Act, be deemed to be the property of the Central
          Government.
Section 26
creates a mechanism for the removal
Writ Petition (C) No.1272 of 2019                                        Page 11 of 26
of unauthorised occupation of highways.
Section 26
reads
          thus:
“26. Removal of unauthorised
                                    occupation.—(1) Where the Highway
                                    Administration      or    the    officer
                                    authorised by such Administration in
                                    this behalf is of the opinion that it is
                                    necessary in the interest of traffic
                                    safety or convenience to cancel any
                                    permit issued under sub-section (2) of
section 24
, it may, after recording the
                                    reasons in writing for doing so, cancel
                                    such permit and, thereupon, the
                                    person to whom the permission was
                                    granted shall, within the period
                                    specified by an order made by the
                                    Highway Administration or such
                                    officer restore the portion of the
                                    Highway specified in the permit in
                                    such condition as it was immediately
                                    before the issuing of such permit and
                                    deliver the possession of such portion
                                    to the Highway Administration and in
                                    case such person fails to deliver such
                                    possession within such period, he
                                    shall    be    deemed     to   be     in
                                    unauthorised occupation of highway
                                    land for the purposes of this section
                                    and
section 27
.
(2) When, as a result of the periodical
                                    inspection of highway land or
                                    otherwise,        the         Highway
                                    Administration     or     the    officer
                                    authorised by such Administration in
                                    this behalf is satisfied that any
                                    unauthorised occupation has taken
                                    place on highway land, the Highway
                                    Administration or the officer so
Writ Petition (C) No.1272 of 2019                                          Page 12 of 26
authorised shall serve a notice in a
                                    prescribed form on the person
                                    causing or responsible for such
                                    unauthorised occupation requiring
                                    him to remove such unauthorised
                                    occupation and to restore such
                                    highway land in its original condition
                                    as     before   the      unauthorised
                                    occupation within the period specified
                                    in the notice.
(3) The notice under sub-section (2)
                                    shall specify therein the highway land
                                    in respect of which such notice is
                                    issued, the period within which the
                                    unauthorised occupation on such
                                    land is required to be removed, the
                                    place and time of hearing any
                                    representation, if any, which the
                                    person to whom the notice is
                                    addressed may make within the time
                                    specified in the notice and that failure
                                    to comply with such notice shall
                                    render the person specified in the
                                    notice liable to penalty, and summary
                                    eviction from the highway land in
                                    respect of which such notice is
                                    issued, under sub-section (6).
(4) The service of the notice under
                                    sub-section (2) shall be made by
                                    delivering a copy thereof to the person
                                    to whom such notice is addressed or
                                    to his agent or other person on his
                                    behalf or by registered post addressed
                                    to the person to whom such notice is
                                    addressed and an acknowledgment
                                    purporting to be signed by such
                                    person or his agent or other person
                                    on his behalf or an endorsement by a
                                    postal employee that such person or
Writ Petition (C) No.1272 of 2019                                          Page 13 of 26
his agent or such other person on his
                                    behalf has refused to take delivery
                                    may be deemed to be prima facie
                                    proof of service.
(5) Where the service of the notice is
                                    not made in the manner provided
                                    under sub-section (4), the contents of
                                    the notice shall be advertised in a
                                    local newspaper for the knowledge of
                                    the person to whom the notice is
                                    addressed and such advertisement
                                    shall be deemed to be the service of
                                    such notice on such person.
(6) Where the service of notice under
                                    sub-section (2) has been made under
                                    sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) and
                                    the unauthorised occupation on the
                                    highway land in respect of which such
                                    notice is served has not been removed
                                    within the time specified in the notice
                                    for such purpose and no reasonable
                                    cause has been shown before the
                                    Highway Administration or the officer
                                    authorised by such Administration in
                                    this behalf for not so removing
                                    unauthorised        occupation,     the
                                    Highway Administration or such
                                    officer as the case may be, shall cause
                                    such unauthorised occupation to be
                                    removed at the expenses of the
                                    Central Government or the State
                                    Government, as the case may be, and
                                    impose penalty on the person to
                                    whom the notice is addressed which
                                    shall be five hundred rupees per
                                    square metre of the land so
                                    unauthorisedly occupied and where
                                    the penalty so imposed is less than
Writ Petition (C) No.1272 of 2019                                         Page 14 of 26
the cost of such land, the penalty may
                                    be extended equal to such cost.
(7)     Notwithstanding     anything
                                    contained in this section, the
                                    Highway Administration or the officer
                                    authorised by such Administration in
                                    this behalf shall have power without
                                    issuing any notice under this section
                                    to    remove     the    unauthorised
                                    occupation on the highway land, if
                                    such unauthorised occupation is in
                                    the nature of—
(a) exposing any goods or article—
(i) in open air; or
(ii) through temporary stall,
                                         kiosk, booth or any other shop
                                         of temporary nature,
(b)  construction  or   erection,
                                      whether temporary or permanent,
                                      or
(c) trespass or other unauthorised
                                      occupation which can be removed
                                      easily without use of any machine
                                      or other device, and in removing
                                      such occupation, the Highway
                                      Administration or such officer may
                                      take assistance of the police, if
                                      necessary,    to     remove    such
                                      occupation by use of the reasonable
                                      force necessary for such removal.
(8)    Notwithstanding        anything
                                    contained in this section, if the
                                    Highway Administration or the officer
                                    authorised by such Administration in
                                    this behalf is of the opinion that any
Writ Petition (C) No.1272 of 2019                                          Page 15 of 26
unauthorised occupation on the
                                    highway land is of such a nature that
                                    the immediate removal of which is
                                    necessary in the interest of—
(a) the safety of traffic on the
                                      Highway; or
(b) the safety of any structure
                                      forming part of the Highway,

                                    and no notice can be served on the
                                    person      responsible     for   such
                                    unauthorised occupation under this
                                    section without undue delay owing to
                                    his absence or for any other reason,
                                    the Highway Administration or the
                                    officer     authorised      by    such
                                    Administration may make such
                                    construction including alteration of
                                    any construction as may be feasible
                                    at the prescribed cost necessary for
                                    the safety referred to in clause (a) or
                                    clause (b) or have such unauthorised
                                    occupation removed in the manner
                                    specified in sub-section (7).
(9) The Highway Administration or an
                                    officer    authorised      by     such
                                    Administration in this behalf shall, for
                                    the purposes of this section or
section
                                    27
, have the same powers as are
                                    vested in a civil court under
the Code
                                    of Civil Procedure
, 1908 (5 of 1908),
                                    while trying a suit, in respect of the
                                    following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the
                                      attendance of any person and
                                      examining him on oath;
Writ Petition (C) No.1272 of 2019                                          Page 16 of 26
(b) requiring the discovery and
                                      production of documents;
(c) issuing commissions for the
                                      examination of witnesses; and
(d) any other matter which may be
                                      prescribed,

                                    and any proceeding before such
                                    Administration or officer shall be
                                    deemed to be a judicial proceeding
                                    within the meaning of sections 193
                                    and 228, and for the purpose of
section 196
, of the Indian Penal Code
                                    (45 of 1860) and the Administration
                                    or the officer shall be deemed to be a
                                    civil court for the purposes of section
                                    195 and Chapter XXVI of the
Code of
                                    Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (2 of
                                    1974).”

          Under
Section 26
, a power is conferred on the Highway
          Administrations or the officer authorised by the Highway
          Administrations to cancel the permission granted under sub-
section (2) of
Section 24
.               Sub-section (2) of
Section 26
contemplates periodical inspection of highway land so that
          unauthorised occupation of highway land can be noticed and
          action can be taken by following the procedure laid down in
          sub-sections (2) to (6) of
Section 26
. Sub-section (2) onwards
          lays down the procedure to be followed, which is essential for
          complying with the principles of natural justice.              The mode
          and manner of service of the show cause notice under sub-
          section (2) of
Section 26
is also laid down. Power under sub-
Writ Petition (C) No.1272 of 2019                                         Page 17 of 26
section (6) of
Section 26
is of the removal of unauthorised
          occupation of highway land.
5.        Power under sub-section (8) of
Section 26
is an
          independent power to immediately remove unauthorised
          occupation on highway land. Power under sub-section (8) of
Section 26
can be exercised for the safety of traffic on the
          Highway or for the safety of any structure forming part of the
          Highway. The issues raised in this petition revolve around the
          unauthorised occupation of the highway land.
6.
Under the National Highways Act, 1956
(for short, ‘the
          1956 Act’),
Section 4
provides that the National Highways
          shall vest in the Union of India. In fact, under the 2002 Act,
          there is a provision in the form of
Section 23
, which stipulates
          that highway land shall be deemed to be the property of the
          Central Government.             Therefore, it is the obligation of the
          Central Government to maintain the National Highways. The
          maintenance of highways includes the obligation to keep them
          in good condition. It also includes keeping them free of
          encroachments and, most importantly, providing adequate
          safety measures to reduce the possibility of accidents.
7.         The Highway Administration, under the 2002 Act, was
          established by the notification dated 16 th September 2019.
          The Highway               Administration consists of the Secretary,
          MoRTH;            Member-DG      (Road    Development)   and     Special
          Secretary,          MoRTH;     Chairman    NHAI   (National    Highways
          Authority of India); Managing Director, NHIDCL (National
Writ Petition (C) No.1272 of 2019                                        Page 18 of 26
Highways & Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited)
          and Additional Secretary and Finance Advisor, MoRTH; and
          Joint Secretary, MoRTH.
8.
Section 4
of the 2002 Act deals with the powers and
          functions of the Highway Administration. It only lays down
          that the powers and functions of the Highway Administration
          shall be subject to conditions and limitations as may be
          imposed by the notification issued under sub-section (1) of
Section 3
of the 2002 Act.                An order was passed on 16th
          September 2019, in exercise of the powers under sub-section
          (2) of
Section 3
of the 2002 Act, by which the functions have
          been        assigned         to   three    members    of   the   Highway
          Administration. It is further stated that Project Director of the
          NHAI, General Manager or Deputy General Manager of the
          NHIDCL and Executive Engineer of the National Highways
          wing of the State Public Works Department shall have the
          powers and functions of Highway Administration under
Sections 24
,
26
,
27
,
30
,
33
,
36
,
37
and
43
of the 2002 Act.
9.        The      2004     Rules   were    amended   by   the   Highway
          Administration (Amendment) Rules, 2019.                     Rule 3 was
          substituted, which outlines the powers and functions of the
          Highway Administration. Rule 3 reads thus:
“3. Powers and functions by
                                    Highway     Administrations.-      (1)
                                    Subject to the provisions of the Act
                                    and the conditions or limitations
                                    imposed by the Central Government
                                    under the proviso to subsection (1) of
Writ Petition (C) No.1272 of 2019                                          Page 19 of 26
section 3
of the Act, to the Highway
                                    Administration, it shall:
(a)   lay   down     policies   and
                                      implementation framework for the
                                      Highway Administration consistent
                                      with the provisions of the Act;
(b) issue general orders for
                                      regulation of different types of
                                      traffic on National Highways under
Chapter V of the Act
;
(c) decide on the allocation of
                                      functions    and     responsibilities
                                      among       different        Highway
                                      Administration at different levels;
(d)    issue    executive   orders/
                                      Standard Operating Procedures
                                      (SOPs) in respect of delivery of
                                      various services and enforcement of
                                      provisions of the Act and the rules
                                      and regulations from time to time;
(e) undertake periodical review and
                                      monitor the functioning of Highway
                                      Administration at different levels;
(f) any other functions and
                                      responsibilities assigned under the
                                      Act and the rules thereunder.
(2) Subject to the provisions under
                                    sub-section (2) of
section 3
of the Act,
                                    the Highway Administration, shall:
a) be subject to the overall
                                      superintendence and control of the
                                      Highway               Administration
                                      established under sub-section (1) of
section 3
of the Act.
Writ Petition (C) No.1272 of 2019                                          Page 20 of 26
b) undertake periodic review of the
                                    functioning    of    the    Highway
                                    Administration at different levels in
                                    respect of delivery of services and
                                    ensure enforcement of all the
                                    Standard Operating Procedures and
                                    executive instructions issued by the
                                    Highway Administration.
c) issue executive orders/ Standard
                                    Operating Procedures (SOPs) in
                                    respect of delivery of various
                                    services    and    enforcement    of
                                    provisions of the Act and the rules
                                    and regulations from time to time;
d)    issue   specific  orders  for
                                    regulation of different classes of
                                    traffic on National Highways under
Chapter V of the Act
;
e) any      other    functions and
                                    responsibilities assigned under the
                                    Act and the rules thereunder.”
10.       Returning to the earlier orders of this Court, the
          primary concern of this Court is the removal of unauthorised
          occupation of highway lands through the exercise of power
          under
Section 26
of the 2002 Act. By filing the affidavit, the
          MoRTH has placed on record, the data regarding the action
          taken for the removal of unauthorised occupation in some
          states.         After finding that there was no effective action,
          detailed directions were issued by this Court on 18 th March
          2024.
11.       As far as the direction regarding the development of a
          portal for uploading complaints regarding encroachments on
Writ Petition (C) No.1272 of 2019                                       Page 21 of 26
the highways, the stand taken by the Highway Administration
          is that there is a toll-free number (1033) operational to enable
          the citizens to report incidents, accidents and unsafe driving
          conditions on the National Highways.                    However, it is not
          specifically              mentioned     that     the    complaints       about
          unauthorised occupation on highway lands can be lodged on
          the said toll-free number. It is unclear whether any complaint
          regarding unauthorised occupation of Highways was received
          through the medium of the toll-free number.
12.       Instead of developing the portal, it is claimed by the
          Highway Administration that a mobile application known as
          “Rajmargyatra”, which has various features for Highway users
          to report incidents, hazards or concerns relating to highway
          safety.         The learned amicus curiae has noted that the
          application users can submit complaints with geo-tagged
          photos, videos and remarks.                    The application permits the
          complaints to be filed about various aspects, such as poor
          workmanship, potholes and various other issues. There is a
          facility to track the status of the grievance. The learned
          amicus curiae has also pointed out certain issues in the
          functionality of the app including an unclear procedure of
          redressal          of      complaints   and     lack   of   opportunity       for
          complainants to provide feedback on resolution of their
          complaints. As a response to the issues flagged by the
          amicus, the Highway Administration has submitted that the
          app is being revamped and a portal for reporting complaints
          related to unauthorized encroachments is under development
Writ Petition (C) No.1272 of 2019                                              Page 22 of 26
by NHAI. It is further submitted that the grievance redressal
          portal shall also contain an option to view the status of their
          complaints and action taken, along with an option to appeal.
13.       Now, in view of Rule 3, as amended in the year 2019,
          the Highway Administration has to perform its mandatory
          duties laid down in sub-rules (1) and (2) of Rule 3 of the 2004
          Rules.         The duty of the Highway Administration includes
          formulating Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) in respect
          of the delivery of various services and the enforcement of
          provisions of the 2002 Act. Nothing is brought on record to
          demonstrate the performance of these duties by the Highway
          Administration.              Regarding the removal of unauthorised
          occupation of highway lands, what is important is
Section 24
of the 2002 Act, which provides for the prevention of such
          occupation. Both provisions of
Sections 24
and
26
must be
          implemented in their true letter and spirit.
14.       About regular inspection of the Highways, as rightly
          suggested by the learned amicus curiae, there is a need to
          issue exhaustive circulars on this aspect setting out the
          names and designations of the members of the inspection
          team, the frequency of inspections, the time intervals of
          inspections, allocation of highway stretches to the respective
          inspection teams and timely report of encroachments by the
          inspection          teams.      The   learned   amicus   curiae   rightly
          suggested that it is necessary to constitute a dedicated
          surveillance team consisting of the State Police for manning
Writ Petition (C) No.1272 of 2019                                       Page 23 of 26
the National Highways.                   The surveillance teams must
          constantly            carry    out   patrolling   so      that   there    is   no
          unauthorised occupation of highway lands. In fact, Highways
          must be kept under surveillance by CCTV cameras. As far as
          this petition is concerned, it must remain pending as this is a
          fit case where this Court will have to issue a continuing
          mandamus.                 For the time being, we issue the following
          directions:-
i.    We direct the Highway Administration constituted
                           under sub-section (1) of
Section 3
of the 2002 Act to
                           place on record the steps taken to implement the
                           duties and functions of the Highway Administration
                           in terms of Rule 3 of the 2004 Rules as amended on
                           16th September 2019.             This direction shall be
                           implemented by the 8th respondent–Joint Secretary
                           (Highways), MoRTH, by filing an affidavit along with
                           necessary documents within three months from
                           today;
ii.     We direct the Highway Administration and the 1 st
                           respondent, Union of India, to give wide publicity to
                           the availability of ‘Rajmargyatra’ mobile application
                           on   print,   electronic,   as    well    as    social   media.
                           Information about the availability of this mobile
                           application shall be displayed prominently at toll and
                           food plazas on Highways. This direction shall also be
                           implemented within three months from today;
Writ Petition (C) No.1272 of 2019                                               Page 24 of 26
iii.    We direct the 8th respondent to file on record the
                          details of various categories of complaints lodged on
                          the       ‘Rajmargyatra’       mobile     application,   including
                          complaints regarding unauthorised occupation of
                          highway lands and action taken thereon. We further
                          direct the 2nd respondent, NHAI to report compliance
                          regarding the creation of grievance redressal portal
                          for reporting complaints relating to unauthorised
                          occupation of highways. The compliance affidavits
                          shall be filed within three months from today;
iv.    We direct the Highway Administration to issue a
                          detailed SOP regarding the constitution of teams for
                          inspection         of    the   National    Highways,     including
                          collection of data regarding unauthorised occupation
                          of highway lands;
v.    We direct the 1st respondent, Union of India, to
                          constitute surveillance teams consisting of State
                          Police or other forces. The duty of the surveillance
                          teams       will    be    to   do   patrolling    regularly     and
                          punctually. Even this compliance shall be reported
                          within a period of three months from today;
vi.     We direct the Highway Administration and the
                          concerned respondents who are members of the
                          same to take into consideration the suggestions
                          submitted by the learned amicus curiae on 5th
                          October 2024 and take steps to implement the said
Writ Petition (C) No.1272 of 2019                                                  Page 25 of 26
suggestions. The said suggestions shall be discussed
                          in the meeting of the Highway Administration so that
                          appropriate   decisions   can   be   taken    on     the
                          implementation thereof; and

                   vii.     We record an appreciation for the assistance
                          rendered by Ms Swati Ghildiyal, the learned counsel
                          appointed as amicus curiae.
viii.       List for reporting compliance on 15th September
                          2025.
...…………………………….J.
                                                    (Abhay S Oka)




                                                    ...…………………………….J.
                                                    (Augustine George Masih)
          New Delhi;
May 21, 2025.
Writ Petition (C) No.1272 of 2019                                      Page 26 of 26