[Cites
19
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Dileep Kumar Pandey vs Union Of India on 21 May, 2025
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
2025 INSC 749


                                                                       Non-Reportable


                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO.10899 OF 2013

                            Dileep Kumar Pandey                           … Appellant


                                                      versus


                            Union of India & Ors.                      … Respondents

                                                       with

                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO.11378 OF 2013

                                                     JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1.   The issue involved in these two appeals is whether
                            the Air Force School, Bamrauli, in District Allahabad, is a
                            ‘state or authority’ within the meaning of
Article 12
of the
                            Constitution of India.
2.   Air Force Schools were established in the year 1966
                            for imparting education to the children of the personnel
Signature Not Verified
of the Indian Air Force (IAF).          Indian Air Force
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Educational and Cultural Society (for short, ‘the Society’)
   Date: 2025.05.21
   16:41:52 IST
   Reason:
Civil Appeal No.10899 of 2013, etc.                                         Page 1 of 23
was registered under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860
.
It was registered on 10th November 1987. It was
         established to manage Air Force Schools. The Air Force
         Schools at Bamrauli (for short, ‘the said school’) applied
         for affiliation with the Central Board of Secondary
         Education (CBSE) in 1985.
FACTS IN CIVIL APPEAL NO.10899 OF 2013
3.       According to the case of the appellant (Dileep Kumar
         Pandey) in Civil Appeal No.10899 of 2013, pursuant to a
         public advertisement and selection process conducted by
         the officers of the IAF, on 1st July 2005, he was appointed
         as a trained graduate teacher in the subject of physical
         education in the said school. According to his case, he
         was appointed on probation, and the probation period
         was extended from time to time. On 28 th June 2007, an
         order was served upon the appellant stating that he was
         rendered surplus as the said school decided to appoint a
         more qualified teacher.       An option was given to the
         appellant either to remain employed in the said school on
         contractual basis on a fixed salary from 1 st July 2007 to
         May 2008 or to remain employed under the existing
         arrangement under which his service would come to an
         end on 3rd July 2007. Therefore, the appellant filed a writ
         petition before the Single Judge of the High Court, inter
         alia, praying for a declaration that the appellant is a
Civil Appeal No.10899 of 2013, etc.                                      Page 2 of 23
confirmed teacher in the said school. The writ petition
         was allowed by order dated 13 th January 2010 by a
         learned Single Judge by holding that the said school was
         a ‘State’ within the meaning of
Article 12
of the
         Constitution             of   India    and   was    amenable    to    the
         jurisdiction of the High Court. The learned Single Judge,
         after setting aside the impugned orders, observed that it
         will be open to the Society to consider the claim of the
         appellant for confirmation in accordance with the law.
         An appeal was preferred before the Division Bench
         essentially on behalf of the management of the said
         school, which was allowed by the impugned judgment
         dated 12th July 2010. The Division Bench held that the
         said school was not a state within the meaning of
Article
         12
, and as a result, a writ petition under
Article 226
could not be entertained. Hence, the judgment of the
         learned Single Judge was set aside.
FACTS IN CIVIL APPEAL NO.11378 OF 2013
4.       The appellant Sanjay Kumar Sharma was appointed
         as a post-graduate teacher (Commerce) on 19 th June 1993
         and was later on confirmed by the Officer-in-Charge of
         the said school. The Officer-in-Charge was an officer of
         the IAF.          On 3rd March 2003, he was appointed as the
         officiating          Principal    of   the   said   school     by    Wing
Civil Appeal No.10899 of 2013, etc.                                                  Page 3 of 23
Commander Ajay Kumar, Officer-in-Charge. According to
         the case of the appellant, the 6 th respondent, Smt. Shalini
         Kaul has started acting as the principal without taking
         over charge of the post.              Disciplinary proceedings were
         initiated against him by the 6th respondent. Later on, at
         the instigation of the 6th respondent, girl students filed a
         complaint against the appellant. On the basis of various
         allegations, a show cause notice dated 19 th December
         2005 was issued to the appellant.                On 23rd February
         2006, a charge sheet was filed against the appellant.
         There were two writ petitions filed by the appellant. First
         was the writ petition No.12437 of 2006, wherein the
         appellant sought to challenge the appointment of the 6 th
         respondent as the principal.              Writ petition No.19915 of
         2006 was filed by the appellant for challenging the charge
         sheet dated 23rd February 2006. By the order dated 5 th
         July 2006, though the learned Single Judge held that
         petitions were maintainable, it was observed that as
         disciplinary            proceedings   were   pending   against   the
         appellant, no interference should be made.
5.       There were two special appeals preferred by the
         appellant for challenging the judgment dated 5 th July
         2006 of the learned Single Judge.              By order dated 11 th
         September 2006, the order of remand was passed by the
         Division Bench of the High Court to the Single Judge.
Civil Appeal No.10899 of 2013, etc.                                             Page 4 of 23
Learned Single Judge by his order dated 16 th September
         2010 dismissed the writ petitions by relying upon the
         judgment impugned in Civil Appeal No.10899 of 2013.
         Thereafter, the appellant was terminated from service. A
         special Appeal was preferred by the appellant against the
         judgment and order dated 16th September 2010 in Writ
         Petition No.19915 of 2006. By the impugned judgment
         and order dated 2nd November 2010, the Division Bench
         dismissed the appeal on the ground that the writ petition
         was not maintainable.
SUBMISSIONS OF THE APPELANTS
6.       The learned senior counsel appearing for the
         appellants submitted that the primary function of the Air
         Force schools is the promotion of education, fine arts and
         culture, mainly amongst the past and present employees
         of the IAF, their families and children. The learned senior
         counsel submitted that the documents on record clearly
         show that the Air Force headquarters exercises dominant
         control over the administration and functioning of the Air
         Force schools. Learned senior counsel relied upon an
         application made by the said school to CBSE for
         affiliation, in which the said school claimed that it was
         fully financed by the IAF. He submitted that all Air Force
         school buildings have been constructed using Public
Civil Appeal No.10899 of 2013, etc.                                    Page 5 of 23
Funds under the authorisation of the Ministry of
         Defence. He submitted that the pay scales of the school
         staff are fixed by the Air Force headquarters, which is the
         appropriate                  authority.    The    Command      Schools
         Management Committee has to conform to the pay scales
         as issued/recommended by the Directorate of Education,
         Air Force Headquarters.                   He also pointed out that the
         Command Schools Management Committee has been
         constituted to run Air Force Schools in accordance with
         the rules and regulations specified in the Education Code
         of Air Force Schools of 2005 (for short, “the Education
         Code”).
7.       Inviting our attention to the findings recorded by the
         Division Bench of the High Court, he submitted that the
         High Court had committed an error in holding that there
         was no material on record to show that the said school
         had been set up by using government funds and that it
         was not established that the institution is not governed
         by any statutory regulations. He submitted that there is
         enough material on record to show that the IAF exercises
         deep and pervasive control over the said school and, in
         fact, over all Air Force Schools.                He submitted that the
         IAF provides financial assistance to Air Force Schools.
         He also pointed out that the Society is funded through
Civil Appeal No.10899 of 2013, etc.                                               Page 6 of 23
regimental funds and has received grant-in-aid.                       He
         pointed out that Regimental Funds belong to the IAF.
8.       Learned             senior   counsel   has   relied   upon   the
         following decisions of this Court: -
(i)      Andi Mukta Sadguru Shree Muktajee
                               Vandas   Swami   Suvarna    Jayanti
                               Mahotsav Smarak Trust & Ors. v. V.R.
                               Rudani & Ors.1

                      (
ii)     Pradeep Kumar Biswas v. Indian
                               Institute of Chemical Biology & Ors.2
(
iii) Raj Soni v. Air Officer                     Incharge
                            Administration & Anr.3
(
iv) All India Sainik Schools Employees’
                           Association v. Defence Minister-cum-
Chairman Board of Governors, Sainik
                           Schools Society, New Delhi & Ors.4 and
(
v)      Ajay Hasia & Ors.               v.   Khalid   Mujib
                               Sehravardi & Ors.5
9.       Learned senior counsel submitted that IAF has
         functional and administrative control over the said
         Society and the said school. Therefore, he submitted that
         Air Force Schools are “authority” within the meaning of
Article 12
of the Constitution of India and thus, are
         1 1989(2) SCC 691
         2 2002 (5) SCC 111
         3 1990(3) SCC 261
         4 (1989) Supp (1) SCC 205
         5 (1981) 1 SCC 722
Civil Appeal No.10899 of 2013, etc.                                                  Page 7 of 23
amenable to writ jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the
         Constitution of India.
SUBMISSIONS OF ADDITIONAL SOLICITOR GENERAL
         OF INDIA
10. Learned                  ASG    pointed   out   that   the    IAF    was
         established in the year 1932. Subsequently, Regimental
         Schools were established.                     The Ministry of Defence
         allocated funds for establishing schools for Air Force
         Officers.         However, ownership and tenancy of buildings
         for schools, as well as issues related to the land,
         remained with the local military administration.                         She
         submitted            that     the    Regulations    for    the   Air    Force
         (hereinafter referred to as “the Regulations”) define “Non-
         Public Funds,” which are also known as “Regimental
         Funds.” Learned ASG pointed out that the Regulations
         explain the meaning of “Non-Public Funds Accounts”.
         She submitted that Air Force Schools are governed by
         Non-Public Funds of the Forces. She submitted that the
         schools have sources of income that come from Tuition
         fees, Interest, Activity fees, Admission fees, Development
         fees, Computer fees, and miscellaneous fees.                       Learned
         ASG relied upon the decision of this Court in the case of
Union of India & Anr. v. Chotelal & Ors.
6.                              She
         submitted that
the said decision
is squarely applicable to

         6 1999(1) SCC 554
Civil Appeal No.10899 of 2013, etc.                                                      Page 8 of 23
the facts of the case.            Learned ASG also relied upon a
         decision of this Court in R.R. Pillai (Dead) through LRs.
         v. Commanding Officer, Headquarters Southern Air
         Command (U) and Ors.7.
11. Learned ASG submitted that the entire issue is
         covered against the appellants by the decision of this
         Court in the case of
Army Welfare Education Society,
         New Delhi v. Sunil Kumar Sharma & Ors.
etc.
8 She
         submitted that this decision relied upon the earlier
         decision         of     this   Court   in     the    case   of   St.Mary’s
Education              Society   &     Anr.     v.   Rajendra      Prasad
         Bhargava & Ors.9
.
12. By way of rejoinder, learned counsel appearing for
         the appellants submitted that the cases of Army Welfare
         Education Society8 and St.Mary’s Education Society
         & Ors.9 stand on a different footing.                        He tried to
         distinguish the decisions in the cases of Army Welfare
         Education Society8 and St.Mary’s Education Society
         & Ors.9 and submitted that the said decisions will not
         apply.
7 (2009) 13 SCC 311
         8 (2024) SCC Online SC 1683
         9 (2023) 4 SCC 498
Civil Appeal No.10899 of 2013, etc.                                                   Page 9 of 23
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
13. By the impugned judgments, the Division Bench of
         the Allahabad High Court held that the Society is not a
         ‘state’      within          the   meaning   of
Article   12
of   the
         Constitution. We must refer to the assertions made by
         the appellant in the writ petition filed before the Single
         Judge of the High Court on this aspect.                     In the writ
         petition that is the subject matter of Civil Appeal No.
         10899 of 2013, in paragraphs 5 to 7, the appellant has
         stated thus:
"5. That for the effective management
                              and administration of the Air Force
                              School at various units, the Society
                              has framed an Education Code Air
                              Force Schools 2005. The Code
                              aforesaid is identical to Education
                              Code framed for the managing to
                              Kendriya Vidyalay.
6. That the Air Force Schools are
                              financed by the Central Government,
                              through Indian Air Force School,
                              controlled by the officers of the
                              Indian Air Force and the purposes is
                              to impart education to the children of
                              officers and employees of the Indian
                              Air Force. The Air Force Schools
                              come within the meaning of the word
Civil Appeal No.10899 of 2013, etc.                                                  Page 10 of 23
"State" under
Article    12
of   the
                              Constitution of India.
7. That the Air Force School,
                              Bamrauli, Allahabad, is a school
                              established by the aforesaid Society
                              and the said school comes under the
                              definition of "State" under
Article 12
of the Constitution of India.”
14. In the counter filed before the High Court, the
         respondents contended that the Society is a non-profit
         making welfare association and the said school is a non-
         public fund school. The finance is arranged from the fees
         collected from students under various heads, and the air
         force personnel make a contribution through their welfare
         fund. It is specifically pleaded that neither in the welfare
         fund nor in the school finances is any money of the
         Central Government involved.               Moreover, there is no
         control by the Central Government or the Ministry of
         Defence over the running or management of the school.
         While addressing the contents of paragraph 5 of the
         petition, it is specifically pleaded that the Education Code
         issued by the Society is not identical to the Education
         Code issued by the CBSE or Kendriya Vidyalaya.                It is
         reiterated, while dealing with paragraph 6 of the writ
         petition, that the said school does not receive any grant
         from any agency having a link to any of the governments.
Civil Appeal No.10899 of 2013, etc.                                            Page 11 of 23
15. Now, we will refer to the law laid down on this
         aspect.         Paragraphs 15 and 20 of the decision of this
         Court in the case of Andi Mukta Sadguru Shree
         Muktajee Vandas Swami Suvarna Jayanti Mahotsav
         Smarak Trust1 read thus:
“15. If the rights are purely of a
                              private character no mandamus
                              can issue. If the management of
                              the college is purely a private body
                              with no public duty mandamus
                              will not lie. These are two
                              exceptions to mandamus. But once
                              these are absent and when the
                              party    has no other          equally
                              convenient remedy, mandamus
                              cannot be denied. It has to be
                              appreciated that the appellants
                              trust was managing the affiliated
                              college to which public money is
                              paid as government aid. Public
                              money paid as government aid
                              plays a major role in the control,
                              maintenance      and    working     of
                              educational institutions. The aided
                              institutions    like     government
                              institutions    discharge       public
                              function by way of imparting
                              education to students. They are
                              subject    to     the    rules    and
                              regulations    of    the   affiliating
                              University. Their activities are
                              closely    supervised       by     the
                              University               authorities.
Employment in such institutions,
                              therefore, is not devoid of any
Civil Appeal No.10899 of 2013, etc.                                     Page 12 of 23
public character. [ See The
                              Evolving Indian Administrative
                              Law by M.P. Jain (1983), p. 226] So
                              are the service conditions of the
                              academic        staff.     When      the
                              University      takes      a    decision
                              regarding their pay scales, it will
                              be binding on the management.
The service conditions of the
                              academic staff are, therefore, not
                              purely of a private character. It
                              has super-added protection by
                              University decisions creating a
                              legal     right-duty        relationship
                              between      the     staff    and    the
                              management.        When       there    is
                              existence of this relationship,
                              mandamus cannot be refused to
                              the aggrieved party.
.. ..    ..    ..    ..    .
20. The term “authority” used in
Article 226
, in the context, must
                              receive a liberal meaning unlike the
                              term in
Article 12.
Article 12
is
                              relevant only for the purpose of
                              enforcement of fundamental rights
                              under
Article 32.
Article 226
confers power on the High Courts
                              to issue writs for enforcement of
                              the fundamental rights as well as
                              non-fundamental          rights.     The
                              words “any person or authority”
                              used in
Article 226
are, therefore,
                              not to be confined only to
                              statutory         authorities        and
                              instrumentalities of the State.
They may cover any other person
                              or body performing public duty.
Civil Appeal No.10899 of 2013, etc.                                       Page 13 of 23
The form of the body concerned is
                              not very much relevant. What is
                              relevant is the nature of the duty
                              imposed on the body. The duty
                              must be judged in the light of
                              positive obligation owed by the
                              person or authority to the affected
                              party. No matter by what means
                              the duty is imposed, if a positive
                              obligation    exists    mandamus
                              cannot be denied.
(emphasis added)
16. In the case of Pradeep Kumar Biswas2, this Court
         dealt with the aspect of control over the institution. This
         Court relied upon the decision in the case of Ajay
         Hasia5. In paragraph 40, this Court held thus:
“40. The picture that ultimately
                              emerges is that the tests formulated
                              in
Ajay Hasia [Ajay Hasia v. Khalid
                              Mujib Sehravardi
, (1981) 1 SCC 722 :
                              1981 SCC (L&S) 258] are not a rigid
                              set of principles so that if a body falls
                              within any one of them it must, ex
                              hypothesi, be considered to be a
                              State within the meaning of Article
12. The question in each case
                              would be — whether in the light of
                              the      cumulative         facts     as
                              established, the body is financially,
                              functionally and administratively
                              dominated by or under the control
                              of the Government. Such control
                              must be particular to the body in
Civil Appeal No.10899 of 2013, etc.                                       Page 14 of 23
question and must be pervasive. If
                              this is found then the body is a
                              State within
Article 12.
On the
                              other hand, when the control is
                              merely regulatory whether under
                              statute or otherwise, it would not
                              serve to make the body a State.”
                                         (emphasis added)
17. In          the          case    of     All   India    Sainik     Schools
         Employees Association4, as a matter of fact, it was
         found that the entire funding for running the school was
         provided by the State and Central Governments. Even the
         overall        control         was        found   vested   in    governmental
         authority.
18. In the case of Raj Soni3, this Court, as can be seen
         from paragraph 10, found that it was not necessary to
         decide whether or not the school is a ‘state’ or ‘authority’
         under
Article 12
of the Constitution of India.
19. Now, we turn to the decision of this Court in the
         case of St.Mary’s Education Society9.                           It is true that
         this Court did not consider the decision of this Court in
         the case of Andi Mukta Sadguru Shree Muktajee
         Vandas Swami Suvarna Jayanti Mahotsav Smarak
         Trust1 of this Court. However, this Court has discussed
         all relevant principles.                  The principles
laid down in
the
         said decision
in the case of St.Mary’s Education
Civil Appeal No.10899 of 2013, etc.                                                        Page 15 of 23
Society & Ors. are in paragraphs 75.1 to 75.5, which
         read thus:
“75.1. An application under
Article
                              226
of   the   Constitution   is
                              maintainable against a person or a
                              body discharging public duties or
                              public functions. The public duty
                              cast may be either statutory or
                              otherwise    and    where    it  is
                              otherwise, the body or the person
                              must be shown to owe that duty or
                              obligation to the public involving
                              the public law element. Similarly,
                              for ascertaining the discharge of
                              public function, it must be
                              established that the body or the
                              person was seeking to achieve the
                              same for the collective benefit of
                              the public or a section of it and
                              the authority to do so must be
                              accepted by the public.
75.2. Even if it be assumed that an
                              educational institution is imparting
                              public duty, the act complained of
                              must have a direct nexus with the
                              discharge of public duty. It is
                              indisputably a public law action
                              which confers a right upon the
                              aggrieved to invoke the extraordinary
                              writ jurisdiction under
Article 226
for a prerogative writ. Individual
                              wrongs    or    breach   of   mutual
Civil Appeal No.10899 of 2013, etc.                                   Page 16 of 23
contracts without having any public
                              element as its integral part cannot be
                              rectified through a writ petition
                              under
Article 226.
Wherever Courts
                              have intervened in their exercise of
                              jurisdiction under
Article 226
, either
                              the service conditions were regulated
                              by the statutory provisions or the
                              employer had the status of “State”
                              within the expansive definition under
Article 12
or it was found that the
                              action complained of has public law
                              element.
75.3. It must be consequently held
                              that while a body may be discharging
                              a public function or performing a
                              public duty and thus its actions
                              becoming amenable to judicial review
                              by a constitutional court, its
                              employees would not have the right
                              to invoke the powers of the High
                              Court conferred by
Article 226
in
                              respect of matter relating to service
                              where they are not governed or
                              controlled     by     the     statutory
                              provisions.       An       educational
                              institution may perform myriad
                              functions touching various facets of
                              public life and in the societal sphere.
While such of those functions as
                              would fall within the domain of a
                              “public function” or “public duty” be
                              undisputedly open to challenge and
                              scrutiny under
Article 226
of the
Civil Appeal No.10899 of 2013, etc.                                     Page 17 of 23
Constitution, the actions or decisions
                              taken solely within the confines of an
                              ordinary contract of service, having
                              no statutory force or backing, cannot
                              be recognised as being amenable to
                              challenge under
Article 226
of the
                              Constitution. In the absence of the
                              service conditions being controlled or
                              governed by statutory provisions, the
                              matter would remain in the realm of
                              an ordinary contract of service.
75.4. Even if it be perceived that
                              imparting education by private
                              unaided school is a public duty
                              within the expanded expression of
                              the term, an employee of a non-
teaching staff engaged by the school
                              for the purpose of its administration
                              or internal management is only an
                              agency created by it. It is immaterial
                              whether “A” or “B” is employed by
                              school to discharge that duty. In any
                              case, the terms of employment of
                              contract between a school and non-
teaching staff cannot and should not
                              be construed to be an inseparable
                              part of the obligation to impart
                              education. This is particularly in
                              respect     to    the      disciplinary
                              proceedings that may be initiated
                              against a particular employee. It is
                              only where the removal of an
                              employee of non-teaching staff is
                              regulated     by   some       statutory
Civil Appeal No.10899 of 2013, etc.                                     Page 18 of 23
provisions, its violation by the
                              employer in contravention of law may
                              be interfered with by the Court. But
                              such interference will be on the
                              ground of breach of law and not on
                              the basis of interference in discharge
                              of public duty.
75.5. From the pleadings in the
                              original writ petition, it is apparent
                              that no element of any public law is
                              agitated or otherwise made out. In
                              other words, the action challenged
                              has no public element and writ of
                              mandamus cannot be issued as the
                              action was essentially of a private
                              character.”


                                          (emphasis added)
20. The law
laid down in
this decision was followed by
         this Court in the case of Army Welfare Education
         Society8.             In that case, this Court dealt with a school
         taken over by the Army Welfare Education Society, which
         required          existing   teachers   to   requalify   under   new
         conditions. The High Court held that the school could not
         impose service conditions to the teachers’ disadvantage.
         In
the said decision
, this Court was concerned with a
         case where a school was taken over by the petitioner - the
         Army Welfare Education Society. A letter was sent to the
Civil Appeal No.10899 of 2013, etc.                                             Page 19 of 23
teachers in the school run by St. Gabriel’s Academy
         indicating that those among the teachers who are eligible
         in terms of CBSE guidelines would be considered for
         appointment on ad hoc basis for one year and thereafter,
         they will have to appear and qualify written test
         conducted by the Army Welfare Education Society. The
         teachers approached the High Court.                     Learned Single
         Judge held that the school cannot impose the service
         conditions on the teaching staff to their disadvantage.
         The issue before this Court in the said case was whether
         the Army Welfare Education Society was a "state" or
         "authority" within the meaning of
Article 12
of the
         Constitution.                This Court found that the Society was a
         purely        unaided          private   Society   established   for   the
         purpose of imparting education to the children of the
         army personnel. This Court applied the law
laid down in
the case of St.Mary’s Education Society & Ors.9 and
         held that though the Society was imparting education,
         which involves public duty, the relationship between the
         respondents and the Army ‘Welfare Education Society
         was that of an employee and private employer arising out
         of a private contract. Therefore, a breach of contract does
         not touch any public law element, and the school cannot
         be said to be discharging any public duty in connection
         with the employment of the teachers.
Civil Appeal No.10899 of 2013, etc.                                                   Page 20 of 23
21. We have perused the application made to CBSE for
         affiliation. The application was made on 22 nd August
         1985.         It was in the name of the Air Force Primary
         School.         Although it is stated that the school was fully
         financed by the IAF, there is no evidence to show that the
         school was actually financed by the IAF. The Education
         Code, which applies to Air Force Schools, is not a
         statutory code that has the force of law. It is issued under
         the authority of the Chairman of the Board of Governors
         of the IAF Educational and Cultural Society. It provides
         that all Air Force Schools are administered under the
         Society. As per the Memorandum of Association of the
         Society, the members of the Society are IAF officers who
         hold       their       posts   ex-officio.   The   Command   Schools
         Managing Committees do not have control over the day-
         to-day running of Air Force Schools.                  The day-to-day
         control is with the School Managing Committee. Even if
         the school building is constructed out of Public funds,
         there is no record to show that it receives a grant from
         Public Funds. There is nothing in the Education Code to
         show that the IAF has control over the said school. The
         audited accounts of the school for the period from 2019-
         20 to 2023-24 indicate that no public funds or grants
         were received by the school. Even if pay scales applicable
         to all IAF schools are determined by the IAF, that by itself
Civil Appeal No.10899 of 2013, etc.                                             Page 21 of 23
will not amount to pervasive control by the IAF over the
         functioning of the schools.
22. It is not shown how the IAF headquarters has any
         control        over          the   management    of   the   said   school.
         Although some funds may have originated from the Army
         Welfare Society, it cannot be said that the State or the IAF
         has any control, let alone all-pervasive control, over the
         school. Moreover, the said Society is not governed by any
         statutory rules.
23. In the impugned judgment, the Division Bench
         recorded the undisputed position that the appellants are
         employees of the said school, which is not governed by
         any statutory regulations.                The Education Code, which
         applies to the said school, does not have any statutory
         sanction or force.                 A finding of fact was recorded that
         there is no material to show that the Government or the
         IAF has any control over the management of the school.
         It is not possible for us to take a contrary view.
24. In the circumstances, we are unable to find any
         fault with the view taken by the Division Bench of the
         High Court. The relationship between the appellants and
         the said school is in the realm of private contract.
         Assuming that there was a breach of private contract, the
         same does not involve any public law element.
Civil Appeal No.10899 of 2013, etc.                                                   Page 22 of 23
25. Therefore, there is no merit in the appeals, and the
         same are dismissed. We, however, make it clear that other
         remedies, if any, of the appellants are kept open.
.…………………………….J.
                                          (Abhay S. Oka)



                                           …………………………….J.
                                          (Augustine George Masih)
         New Delhi;
May 21, 2025.
Civil Appeal No.10899 of 2013, etc.                                  Page 23 of 23
REPORTABLE
            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

             CIVIL APPEAL NO.10899 OF 2013


DILEEP KUMAR PANDEY                            …APPELLANT
                        VERSUS
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                        …RESPONDENTS
R1: UNION OF INDIA
R2: CHAIRMAN, SCHOOL MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE AIR FORCE
SCHOOL
R3: EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR/ WING COMMANDER, AIR FORCE
SCHOOL
R4: SHIKSHAK KALYAN SAMITI                    …INTERVENOR

                         WITH

             CIVIL APPEAL NO.11378 OF 2013


SANJAY KUMAR SHARMA                            …APPELLANT
                        VERSUS
CENTRAL BOARD OF SECONDARY EDUCATION & ORS.
…RESPONDENTS
R1: CENTRAL BOARD OF SECONDARY EDUCATION
R2: SCHOOL MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
R3: OFFICER IN-CHARGE/EDUCATION OFFICER
R4: SQR. LDR. U. S. PABLA ENQUIRY OFFICER
R5: PRINCIPAL, AIR FORCE SCHOOL, BAMRAULI
R6: SMT. SHALINI KAUL

                                                     1 of 28
                        J U D G M E N T



AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH, J.
I have had the benefit of perusing the erudite view in the

judgment penned by my senior, learned Brother Hon’ble Mr. Justice

Abhay S. Oka. With great reverence for his scholarly opinion, I am

unable to concur therewith, for reasons that follow.
2.     When there are allegation(s) of wrong-doing alleged by the

appellants-teachers with regard to action taken against them by the

respondent-Air Force School, Bamrauli in the district of Allahabad

(hereinafter referred to as the ‘School’), the moot question which is

required to be answered by us is whether the School would be

amenable to writ jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution of

India (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Constitution’)?
3.     For convenience,
Articles 12
and
226
of the Constitution are

reproduced hereinunder:
‘12. Definition.—In this part, unless the context
       otherwise requires, “the State” includes the
       Government and Parliament of India and the

                                                                  2 of 28
Government and the Legislature of each of the
States and all local or other authorities within the
territory of India or under the control of the
Government of India.
xxx
226. Power of High Courts to issue certain writs.
—(1) Notwithstanding anything in
Article 32
, every
High Court shall have power, throughout the
territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction,
to issue to any person or authority, including in
appropriate cases, any Government, within those
territories directions, orders or writs, including writs in
the           nature          of habeas            corpus,
mandamus, prohibition, quo
warranto and certiorari, or any of them, for the
enforcement of any of the rights conferred by Part III
and for any other purpose.
(2) The power conferred by clause (1) to issue
directions, orders or writs to any Government,
authority or person may also be exercised by any
High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to the
territories within which the cause of action, wholly or
in part, arises for the exercise of such power,
notwithstanding that the seat of such Government or
authority or the residence of such person is not within
those territories.
(3) Where any party against whom an interim order,
whether by way of injunction or stay or in any other
manner, is made on, or in any proceedings relating
to, a petition under clause (1), without—
(a) furnishing to such party copies of such petition
and all documents in support of the plea for such
interim order; and
(b) giving such party an opportunity of being heard,
makes an application to the High Court for the
vacation of such order and furnishes a copy of such
application to the party in whose favour such order
has been made or the counsel of such party, the High
Court shall dispose of the application within a period


                                                              3 of 28
       of two weeks from the date on which it is received or
       from the date on which the copy of such application
       is so furnished, whichever is later, or where the High
       Court is closed on the last day of that period, before
       the expiry of the next day afterwards on which the
       High Court is open; and if the application is not so
       disposed of, the interim order shall, on the expiry of
       that period, or, as the case may be, the expiry of the
       said next day, stand vacated.
(4) The power conferred on a High Court by this
       article shall not be in derogation of the power
       conferred on the Supreme Court by clause (2) of
       Article 32.’
4.     I do not propose to delve into the entire factual prism and

detailed submissions advanced by the respective learned senior

counsel and learned counsel for the parties as need therefor has

been obviated, having been noted by my esteemed senior colleague.
However, some basic but unique facts require to be stated.
5.     The School was set up by the Indian Air Force (hereinafter

referred to as the ‘IAF’) as a welfare measure for the officers and

personnel of the IAF with regard to the education of their

children/wards. Such policy decision was taken at the highest

echelons of the IAF, which itself took up the basic work of setting-up

of the requisite infrastructure for the School, as also providing for a

mechanism to run the School, in future, both administratively and

financially. The system envisaged was that every school will have a

                                                                   4 of 28
School Managing Committee (hereinafter referred to as the

‘Committee’) of its own, which would also comprise officers of the IAF

posted at the local level. Apropos funds, besides fee(s) charged from

students, which was different for different categories, some funds

would arrive by way of aid, either directly from the IAF unit or through

various welfare funds of the IAF, which are contributory funds by the

officers and personnel of the IAF. The School’s building is on IAF land

and has been built entirely by the funds of the IAF.
6.     The next relevant factors pertinent for deciding the issue are

the nature of functions and duties discharged by the School and the

manner in which they are discharged.
7.     It is not in dispute that the school imparts education to the

children and wards, both of IAF personnel and also partly for the non-
IAF persons. This assumes significance for the reason that imparting

education has been held to be a public function as it affects the

public at large. Thus, the School discharges a public function,

undoubtedly. Further, the administrative functioning of the School, as

mentioned above, is directly under the Committee consisting of IAF

personnel posted locally. This, in the view of this Court, indicates that,

ultimately, it is the IAF which is in control of the School’s

                                                                      5 of 28
management and has the last word in the administration of the

school. This, but obviously and consequentially, would include

recruitment of teachers and other officers/employees of the schools

and extend to disciplinary control over the teachers/staff/employees,

including the right to disengage/terminate/dispense with their

services. Examined thus, there cannot be any dispute that the body

exercising such dominant control over the matters referred to supra,

being fully in the hands of the Committee, which itself is made up of

serving locally-posted IAF personnel, leaves no scope of ambiguity

as to the clear fact that the IAF has full and all-pervasive control over

the management of the School, inclusive of disciplinary powers as

also the power to terminate employment, by whatever label styled.
8.
In
Pradeep Kumar Biswas v Indian Institute of Chemical

Biology
, (2002) 5 SCC 111, 7 learned Judges were re-considering

the decision rendered by 5 learned Judges in
Sabhajit Tewary v

Union of India
, (1975) 1 SCC 485, wherein the Council of

Scientific and Industrial Research was held to not be ‘State’ under
Article 12
of the Constitution.
Reversing Sabhajit Tewary
(supra),

the majority in
Pradeep Kumar Biswas
(supra), speaking through

the learned Ruma Pal, J., held:
6 of 28
      ‘40. The picture that ultimately emerges is that the
      tests formulated in
Ajay Hasia [Ajay Hasia v. Khalid
      Mujib Sehravardi
, (1981) 1 SCC 722: 1981 SCC
      (L&S) 258] are not a rigid set of principles so that if a
      body falls within any one of them it must, ex
      hypothesi, be considered to be a State within the
      meaning of
Article 12.
The question in each case
      would be — whether in the light of the cumulative
      facts as established, the body is financially,
      functionally and administratively dominated by or
      under the control of the Government. Such control
      must be particular to the body in question and must
      be pervasive. If this is found then the body is a State
      within
Article 12.
On the other hand, when the control
      is merely regulatory whether under statute or
      otherwise, it would not serve to make the body a
      State.’
                                                 (emphasis supplied)
9.    Additionally, all orders, be they of appointment, extension of

probation, fixation of pay, etcetera are passed under the authority of

the IAF officers. The undersigning of these day-to-day orders

compels us to hold that the control exercised by the IAF, and by

extension the Government of India, on the working of the School is

not merely regulatory in nature but deep and pervasive inasmuch as

it is not only concerned with supervision alone, but even involved in

the banal and mundane workings/proceedings of the School. This is

also apparent from the Notification issued by the Press Information

Bureau   (Defence    Wing)    dated    02.03.2009     announcing   the

appointment of the first Director General (Administration). Here, the

                                                                   7 of 28
        responsibilities delineated for such newly-appointed Director General

        also included ‘looking after the Air Force Schools’. There are multiple

        levels     of    authorities     from    the   IAF        overlooking,   supervising,

        administering, and most importantly, controlling the overall working of

        the School and all other such schools, which discharge a public

        function i.e., imparting education. As rightly pointed out by the

        learned senior counsel for the appellant, at the time of seeking

        affiliation with the Central Board of Secondary Education, the

        application dated 22.08.1985 filed by the Committee clearly states

        that the School is ‘fully financed by the Air Force’.1
10.       In Civil Appeal No.10899 of 2013, learned senior counsel for

        the appellant took a categoric stand that the School’s building(s)

        were constructed through public funds under the authorization of the

        Ministry of Defence and the pay-scales of the school staff were fixed

        by the Air Force Headquarters which is the appropriate/competent

        authority. The Committee has to conform to the pay-scales

        recommended            by      the   Directorate     of     Education,   Air   Force

        Headquarters, IAF. It has also been contended that the Committee

        has been constituted to run Air Force Schools in accordance with the

        Education Code of Air Force Schools of 2005 (hereinafter referred to
1
P-11/Civil Appeal No.10899/2013.
8 of 28
as the ‘Code’) which is identical to the Education Code framed for

management of Kendriya Vidyalayas. The Code, brought out by the

IAF’s Directorate of Education, endeavours to lay down a common

and consolidated mechanism for the working of the school

administrations.   The    Code    encompasses      (a)   Scheme      of

Management, (b) Establishment and Recruitment, (c) Terms and

Conditions of service, (d) Discipline, (e) Students, (f) Admission, (g)

Code of conduct, (h) Accounting, and (i) General. It has also been

submitted that in case of a doubt/ambiguity of any clause/subject

contained in the Code, the interpretation of the Directorate of

Education will be final and binding. It was also pressed into service

that it is the Air Force Headquarters which has established the Indian

Air Force Education and Cultural Society (hereinafter referred to as

the ‘IAFE&CS’) to administer and manage the Air Force Schools set

up all over India. The Board of Governors of the IAFE&CS is the

apex body with an IAF officer in-charge of the administration as its

Chairman and it lays down the broad framework within which the

school functions. Mandatorily, approval of the Air Force Headquarters

is needed for establishment/upgradation/downgradation of any Air

Force School. It is also the duty of the Command Education Officer to

carry out inspection of all Air Force Schools and send a detailed

statement to the Directorate of Education for financial assistance

                                                                   9 of 28
from the Central Welfare Fund. It was further submitted that the Air

Force Order No.132 dated 11.12.1998 provides for annual grants by

the Air Headquarters to all Air Force Schools and under Air Force

Order No.9 dated 08.06.1985, the Committee is to make efforts to

procure grants from various sources and funds, including but not

limited to, the AFWWA Fund, SI Fund, IAF CWF, Command Welfare

Fund, State Governments etc.
11.    It is also mandated that all the Air Force School buildings

should be constructed out of public funds only and the Ministry of

Defence authorizes the construction of the building only from public

funds on defence-owned lands. These schools are at liberty to accept

financial assistance and grants. The existing Air Force Schools are

allowed to continue with and avail of rent-free accommodation and

allied concessions.
12.    In the aforesaid background, we find that for all practical

purposes, in every sphere of activity relating to the School, the

funding consists substantially of funds which are ultimately traceable

to the public exchequer. My learned senior colleague has referred to

a 2-Judge Bench decision in St. Mary’s
Education Society v

Rajendra Prasad Bhargava
, (2023) 4 SCC 498, followed by 2

                                                                 10 of 28
learned Judges in
Army Welfare Education Society v Sunil Kumar

Sharma
, 2024 SCC OnLine SC 1683.
Let us take a look at

Paragraphs 75.1 to 75.5 of St. Mary’s
Education Society
(supra):
‘75.1. An application under
Article 226
of the
      Constitution is maintainable against a person or a
      body discharging public duties or public functions.
      The public duty cast may be either statutory or
      otherwise and where it is otherwise, the body or the
      person must be shown to owe that duty or obligation
      to the public involving the public law element.
      Similarly, for ascertaining the discharge of public
      function, it must be established that the body or the
      person was seeking to achieve the same for the
      collective benefit of the public or a section of it and
      the authority to do so must be accepted by the public.
      75.2. Even if it be assumed that an educational
      institution is imparting public duty, the act complained
      of must have a direct nexus with the discharge of
      public duty. It is indisputably a public law action which
      confers a right upon the aggrieved to invoke the
      extraordinary writ jurisdiction under
Article 226
for a
      prerogative writ. Individual wrongs or breach of
      mutual contracts without having any public element
      as its integral part cannot be rectified through a writ
      petition under
Article 226.
Wherever Courts have
      intervened in their exercise of jurisdiction under
Article 226
, either the service conditions were
      regulated by the statutory provisions or the employer
      had the status of “State” within the expansive
      definition under
Article 12
or it was found that the
      action complained of has public law element.
      75.3. It must be consequently held that while a body
      may be discharging a public function or performing a
      public duty and thus its actions becoming amenable
      to judicial review by a constitutional court, its
      employees would not have the right to invoke the
      powers of the High Court conferred by
Article 226
in
      respect of matter relating to service where they are
      not governed or controlled by the statutory
11 of 28
provisions. An educational institution may perform
myriad functions touching various facets of public life
and in the societal sphere. While such of those
functions as would fall within the domain of a “public
function” or “public duty” be undisputedly open to
challenge and scrutiny under
Article 226
of the
Constitution, the actions or decisions taken solely
within the confines of an ordinary contract of service,
having no statutory force or backing, cannot be
recognised as being amenable to challenge under
Article 226
of the Constitution. In the absence of the
service conditions being controlled or governed by
statutory provisions, the matter would remain in the
realm of an ordinary contract of service.
75.4. Even if it be perceived that imparting education
by private unaided school is a public duty within the
expanded expression of the term, an employee of a
non-teaching staff engaged by the school for the
purpose of its administration or internal management
is only an agency created by it. It is immaterial
whether “A” or “B” is employed by school to
discharge that duty. In any case, the terms of
employment of contract between a school and non-
teaching staff cannot and should not be construed to
be an inseparable part of the obligation to impart
education. This is particularly in respect to the
disciplinary proceedings that may be initiated against
a particular employee. It is only where the removal of
an employee of non-teaching staff is regulated by
some statutory provisions, its violation by the
employer in contravention of law may be interfered
with by the Court. But such interference will be on the
ground of breach of law and not on the basis of
interference in discharge of public duty.
75.5. From the pleadings in the original writ petition, it
is apparent that no element of any public law is
agitated or otherwise made out. In other words, the
action challenged has no public element and writ of
mandamus cannot be issued as the action was
essentially of a private character.’
                                            (emphasis supplied)

                                                             12 of 28
13.    The Court in St. Mary’s
Educational Society
(supra) held

that an application under
Article 226
of the Constitution is

maintainable against a person or a body discharging public duties or

public functions. The public duty cast may be either statutory or

otherwise, and where it is otherwise, the body or the person must be

shown to owe that duty or obligation to the public involving public law

element. Similarly, for ascertaining the discharge of public function, it

must be established that the body or the person was seeking to

achieve the same for the collective benefit of the public or a section

of it and the authority to do so must be accepted by the public.
Further, it has been held that even if it be assumed that an

educational institution is imparting public duty, the act complained of

must have a direct nexus with the discharge of public duty. It is

indisputably a public law action which confers a right upon the

aggrieved to invoke the extraordinary writ jurisdiction under
Article

226
of the Constitution for a prerogative writ. Individual wrongs or

breach of mutual contracts without having any public element as its

integral part cannot be rectified through a writ petition under
Article

226
of the Constitution.
13 of 28
14.    St. Mary’s
Educational Society
(supra) further holds that

even if it be perceived that imparting education by private unaided

schools is a public duty within the expanded expression of the term,

an employee/non-teaching staff engaged by the school for the

purpose of its administration or internal management is only an

agency created by it. It is immaterial whether the person is employed

by the school to discharge that duty. In any case, the terms of

employment of contract between a school and non-teaching staff

cannot and should not be construed as an inseparable part of the

obligation to impart education.
15.    In the present cases, both appellants were teachers. The

teacher is the vital person who is responsible for actually imparting

education, which is a public duty, being performed for the

wards/children of the officers, staff and personnel of the IAF and of

persons who may not be associated with the IAF. The Committee,

which has administrative and disciplinary control over teachers

engaged in discharging the public duty of imparting education, cannot

be said to be a duty unconnected in the discharge of a public duty

cast upon it.
14 of 28
16.     This Court in
Janet Jeyapaul v SRM University
, (2015) 16

SCC 530 held:
‘30. This we say for the reasons that firstly,
      Respondent 1 is engaged in imparting education in
      higher studies to students at large. Secondly, it is
      discharging “public function” by way of imparting
      education. Thirdly, it is notified as a “Deemed
      University” by the Central Government under
Section
      3
of the UGC Act. Fourthly, being a “Deemed
      University”, all the provisions of the
UGC Act
are
      made applicable to Respondent 1, which inter alia
      provides for effective discharge of the public function,
      namely, education for the benefit of the public. Fifthly,
      once Respondent 1 is declared as “Deemed
      University” whose all functions and activities are
      governed by the
UGC Act
, alike other universities
      then it is an “authority” within the meaning of
Article
      12
of the Constitution. Lastly, once it is held to be an
      “authority” as provided in
Article 12
then as a
      necessary consequence, it becomes amenable to
      writ jurisdiction of the High Court under
Article 226
of
      the Constitution.’
                                                 (emphasis supplied)
17.   At the cost of repetition, the School has been established

primarily to impart education which is a ‘public function’. This,

juxtaposed with the dominant and all-pervasive control exercised on

the School, through the Committee by serving officers of the IAF, is

enough to bring the Committee and the School within the

extraordinary and prerogative writ jurisdiction of the High Courts

under
Article 226
of the Constitution. The decisions in
Raj Soni v Air
15 of 28
Officer Incharge Administration, (1990) 3 SCC 261 and All India

        Sainik Schools Employees’ Association v Defence Minister-cum-
Chairman Board of Governors, Sainik Schools Society, New

        Delhi, (1989) Supp (1) SCC 205, relied upon by the appellants, have

        rightly been distinguished by esteemed brother Hon’ble Oka, J. The

        decision in
Ajay Hasia v Khalid Mujib Sehravardi
, (1981) 1 SCC

        722 need not detain us in view of
Pradeep Kumar Biswas
(supra).
Furthermore, as the ultimate ownership of the entire land is with the

        IAF, the contention of Ms. Bhati, learned Additional Solicitor General 2

        that because there is no direct funding or aid given by the

        Government of India, or the Ministry of Defence, the decision of the

        Committee would not be amenable to writ jurisdiction under
Article

        226
of the Constitution, cannot be accepted, primarily for the reason

        that there is overwhelming material on record, of public funds being

        utilized by the School/Committee, coupled with the fact that the

        School is performing a public duty.
18.
In
Andi Mukta Sadguru Shree Muktajee Vandas Swami

        Suvarna Jayanti Mahotsav Smarak Trust v V R Rudani
, (1989) 2

        SCC 691, the question before the Court was whether a mandamus

        can be issued at the instance of a teacher against a Trust which
2
Hereinafter abbreviated to ASG.
16 of 28
was running the educational institution. While upholding the

maintainability of the writ petition, the Court held thus:
‘15. If the rights are purely of a private character no
       mandamus can issue. If the management of the
       college is purely a private body with no public duty
       mandamus will not lie. These are two exceptions to
       mandamus. But once these are absent and when the
       party has no other equally convenient remedy,
       mandamus cannot be denied. It has to be
       appreciated that the appellants trust was managing
       the affiliated college to which public money is paid as
       government aid. Public money paid as government
       aid plays a major role in the control, maintenance
       and working of educational institutions. The aided
       institutions like government institutions discharge
       public function by way of imparting education to
       students. They are subject to the rules and
       regulations of the affiliating University. Their activities
       are closely supervised by the University authorities.
       Employment in such institutions, therefore, is not
       devoid of any public character. [ See The Evolving
       Indian Administrative Law by M.P. Jain (1983), p.
       226] So are the service conditions of the academic
       staff. When the University takes a decision regarding
       their pay scales, it will be binding on the
       management. The service conditions of the academic
       staff are, therefore, not purely of a private character.
       It has super-added protection by University decisions
       creating a legal right-duty relationship between the
       staff and the management. When there is existence
       of this relationship, mandamus cannot be refused to
       the aggrieved party.
xxx
20. The term “authority” used in
Article 226
, in the
       context, must receive a liberal meaning unlike the
       term in
Article 12.
Article 12
is relevant only for the
       purpose of enforcement of fundamental rights under
Article 32.
Article 226
confers power on the High
       Courts to issue writs for enforcement of the
       fundamental rights as well as non-fundamental rights.
17 of 28
      The words “any person or authority” used in
Article
      226
are, therefore, not to be confined only to
      statutory authorities and instrumentalities of the
      State. They may cover any other person or body
      performing public duty. The form of the body
      concerned is not very much relevant. What is
      relevant is the nature of the duty imposed on the
      body. The duty must be judged in the light of positive
      obligation owed by the person or authority to the
      affected party. No matter by what means the duty is
      imposed, if a positive obligation exists mandamus
      cannot be denied.
xxx
22. Here again we may point out that mandamus
      cannot be denied on the ground that the duty to be
      enforced is not imposed by the statute. Commenting
      on the development of this law, Professor de Smith
      states: “To be enforceable by mandamus a public
      duty does not necessarily have to be one imposed by
      statute. It may be sufficient for the duty to have been
      imposed by charter, common law, custom or even
      contract.” [ Judicial Review of Administrative Action,
      4th Edn., p. 540] We share this view. The judicial
      control over the fast expanding maze of bodies
      affecting the rights of the people should not be put
      into watertight compartment. It should remain flexible
      to meet the requirements of variable circumstances.
      Mandamus is a very wide remedy which must be
      easily available “to reach injustice wherever it is
      found”. Technicalities should not come in the way of
      granting that relief under
Article 226.
We, therefore,
      reject the contention urged for the appellants on the
      maintainability of the writ petition.’
                                               (emphasis supplied)
19.   The public duty imparting of education has to be done through

teachers. Teachers form the most vital cog of the educational system

and act as the link between a school and the students. Any matter

                                                                18 of 28
affecting the service conditions, morale and discipline among the

teaching staff would have a direct bearing and nexus with the

imparting of education. As far as the facts stand, the grievances of

appellant-Sanjay Kumar Sharma regarding disciplinary action against

him by the Committee would be amenable to the writ jurisdiction of

the High Court under
Article 226
of the Constitution. The concerned

parties shall, as agreed, remain bound by and continue to honour the

arrangement recorded in our Order dated 28.08.2024, whereunder a

lump-sum amount was to be paid to appellant-Sanjay Kumar Sharma

and appellant-Dileep Kumar Pandey was reinstated without back

wages. Irrespective of the fact that in the above view, no lis between

the appellants and respondents may actually exist, we have decided

the issue of law, as we have been informed that many cases,

especially in the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad are pending,

awaiting the instant decision.
20.    It will not be out of context to refer to the
Zee Telefilms

Limited v Union of India
, (2005) 4 SCC 649, where 5 learned

Judges stated that the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI),

though not amenable to writ jurisdiction under
Article 32
of the

Constitution, was amenable to writ jurisdiction by the High Court

under
Article 226
of the Constitution, as the High Court under
Article

                                                                 19
of 28
226 of the Constitution has much wider scope compared to this Court

under
Article 32
of the Constitution. The law was
laid down by
Hon.

Hegde, J., speaking for the majority, as under:
‘31. Be that as it may, it cannot be denied that the
       Board does discharge some duties like the selection
       of an Indian cricket team, controlling the activities of
       the players and others involved in the game of
       cricket. These activities can be said to be akin to
       public duties or State functions and if there is any
       violation of any constitutional or statutory obligation
       or rights of other citizens, the aggrieved party may
       not have a relief by way of a petition under
Article 32.
But that does not mean that the violator of such right
       would go scot-free merely because it or he is not a
       State. Under the Indian jurisprudence there is always
       a just remedy for the violation of a right of a citizen.
       Though the remedy under
Article 32
is not available,
       an aggrieved party can always seek a remedy under
       the ordinary course of law or by way of a writ petition
       under
Article 226
of the Constitution, which is much
       wider than
Article 32.
xxx
33. Thus, it is clear that when a private body
       exercises its public functions even if it is not a State,
       the aggrieved person has a remedy not only under
       the ordinary law but also under the Constitution, by
       way of a writ petition under
Article 226.
Therefore,
       merely because a non-governmental body exercises
       some public duty, that by itself would not suffice to
       make such body a State for the purpose of
Article 12.
In the instant case the activities of the Board do not
       come under the guidelines
laid down by
this Court
       in
Pradeep Kumar Biswas
case [(2002) 5 SCC 111:
2002 SCC (L&S) 633] hence there is force in the
       contention of Mr Venugopal that this petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution is not maintainable.’
                                                  (emphasis supplied)



                                                                   20 of 28
21.    When the plain language of
Article 226
of the Constitution

indicates a wider coverage, this Court would not accord a restrictive

meaning thereto as
Article 226(1)
of the Constitution itself makes it

clear that notwithstanding anything contained in
Article 32
of the

Constitution, every High Court shall have power throughout the

territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction to issue to any

person or authority including in appropriate cases, any Government

within those territories directions, orders or writs, including writs in the

nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and

certiorari, or any of them for the enforcement of any of the rights

conferred by Part III and ‘for any other purpose’. Thus, we have no

hesitation to hold that the School/Committee is amenable to writ

jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution. It is also of some

import to note that, at the time of recruitment of the teachers, the

officers of the IAF are also part of the body which decides such

recruitment, including interviews for the post of Principal, which

would, once again, denote the pervasive control of the IAF in the

running of the schools. As a matter of fact, the Court cannot shut its

eyes to the claim made by the appellant in Civil Appeal No.11378 of

2013 to the effect that all proceedings against him started when he

objected to a candidate who was junior to him being made the in-
21 of 28
charge Principal, the crucial aspect being that the said junior

happened to be the sister of the Air Vice Marshal concerned, under

whose jurisdiction the School was located. Of course, we may clarify

that we are not returning any finding on this point. But, the direct

influence of the officers of the IAF in the running of the schools under

his/her command, including where his/her subordinates are directly

responsible, would lead to the irresistible conclusion that the

Committee/School cannot be held to fall outside the purview of
Article

226
of the Constitution.
22.    Another issue the learned ASG flagged is with regard to funds

primarily used for running of the School being ‘Non Public Funds’. In

this context, it would be appropriate to reproduce the relevant extract

from the IAF Manual of Management and Accounting of Non-Public

Funds (IAP 3503 (COMPREHENSIVELY REVISED, 2016), produced

as part of the written submissions on behalf of the Respondents:
‘3. As fighting force it is important for the organization
       to maintain high motivation, morale and provide good
       quality of life for its Air warriors and their families.
       Authorization      for     incurring    expenditure     for
       Undertaking all welfare activities out of Public Funds
       being limited, the purpose of creating Non Public
       Funds, is to supplement the scope of Public Funds
       and to cater for welfare needs of troops which cannot
       be provided through Public Funds. The primary
       purpose for creating these Funds is the welfare of
       troops. The Govt of India has provided certain

                                                                     22 of 28
       privileges to these funds by allowing some special
       provisions; Some of these are exemption of the
       income of these funds from income Tax, allowing use
       of certain Govt buildings for these ventures on
       payment of rent/allied charges wherever applicable,
       allowing the recovery of the dues of Non Public
       Funds from salary of individuals, making donations to
       certain NPFs tax free etc.’
                                                  (emphasis supplied)
23.     In view of the aforesaid, on a deeper probe, it appears that

‘Non Public Funds’ is a misnomer inasmuch as while it may not be

labelled as ‘Public Funds’ but the nature is public for the reason that it

includes direct funding from the Air Force Unit/Station and most

importantly, it is also supplemented by the Regimental Fund. Another

reason is that even the so-termed ‘Non Public Funds’ are used for

welfare measures for the IAF personnel such as establishment of

canteens etc. and are exempt from income tax and other statutory

taxes, meaning that the Government foregoes its share by way of

taxes on such funds. Arguendo, if the funding is not direct, the

indirect support of the Government of India/Ministry of Defence

through providing land, granting tax exemptions et al is clearly borne

out from the record.
23 of 28
24.    At this juncture, we would like to refer the judgments cited by

the learned ASG –
Union of India v Chotelal
, (1999) 1 SCC 554 and

R R Pillai v Southern Air Command, Indian Air Force, (2009) 13

SCC 311. In our considered view, these judgments are not applicable

and can be distinguished on facts.
Chotelal
(supra) dealt with the

issue as to whether dhobis appointed to wash the clothes of the

cadets at the National Defence Academy, Khadakwasla, who are

paid from a fund called the ‘Regimental Fund’ can be said to be

holders of civil posts so as to confer jurisdiction on the Central

Administrative Tribunal, whereas R R Pillai (supra) dealt with the

status of employees of an unit-run canteen in the armed forces.
Thus, both relied on cases wherein controversy was pertaining to the

status of the concerned employees, whereas herein the subject-
matter is completely different, relating to the amenability of the

School/Committee,     while    discharging    a   public   function    and

performing a public duty, namely of imparting education and

discharging public function, to writ jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the

Constitution. Quite perceptibly, even the terms and conditions of

service and nature of duties considered in
Chotelal
(supra) and R R

Pillai (supra) were very different.
24 of 28
25.    Hence, upon scrutiny of the facts and circumstances from

various angles, we have not the slightest doubt that the

Committee/School would come within the ambit of ‘authority’ as

employed in the said Article. Further, the Committee/School would

also be covered under ‘other authorities’ in the context of
Article 12
of

the Constitution.
26.     As far as the composition of the Board of Governors of the

IAFE&CS, as also the members of the Committee is concerned, the

clear majority thereof are IAF officers, holding their posts ex-officio. It

would suffice to say that by virtue of their posts in the IAF, they are

part of the Committee. Membership of the IAFE&CS is linked to

serving in the IAF. This reinforces the contention of the appellants

that the IAF is officially involved in running of the schools, through its

officers. Analogy can be drawn at this stage with similar autonomous

bodies of the Governments, both Central and of State, where the

core managing body of like institutions, including fully or partly funded

by public funds, consists of government officials. Such institutions are

distinct entities, autonomous and free to take their decisions, but the

persons taking those decisions, even on a daily basis are

government officials. Similarly, while the IAFE&CS, the supreme body

governing the schools consists of IAF personnel, it is actually the IAF

                                                                     25 of 28
itself which is in command. In other words, every government official

in acting as part of a core managing body referred to above as part of

his/her public duty continues to be a government official even if

taking decisions individually, as part of the core managing body, is

part thereof by reason of the factum of being a government official

and not for any other reason. Here comes into play the distinction

between a private individual acting totally in a private capacity, as

opposed to a government official, in the present case being IAF

personnel, in the view of this Court, are actually acting in their official

capacity and position, by the mere fact of them being the personnel

of the IAF. Thus, it cannot be said that the IAFE&CS or the

Committee functions de hors the trappings of any official control of

the IAF. As discussed in the preceding paragraphs, not just control,

but deep, pervasive and effective control on the School, through the

Committee, finally rests with the IAFE&CS.
27.    As far as the Code which applies to the Air Force Schools not

being statutory in nature is concerned, the said factor alone cannot

have any determinative effect on the question of law before us.
Notably, the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the IAFE&CS is

a senior-ranking Air Marshal of the IAF. All the Air Force Schools



                                                                     26 of 28
register under aegis of the IAFE&CS and as per the Memorandum of

Association of the IAFE&CS, members thereof are IAF officers.
28.    As far as the application made by the School dated

22.08.1985, in which it was stated that the school was fully financed

by the IAF, is concerned, in our view, there need not be any further

evidence as it is a statement by the School/its authorities themselves

before the CBSE and such documents are not denied before this

Court. Stepping further, the School/Committee are estopped from

contending to the contrary. The land on which the School building

stands belongs to and has been constructed utilising the funds of the

IAF. This is enough to establish the financial support enjoyed by the

School from the IAF. The corpus and assets of the IAF are traceable

to the Central Government, being public in nature.
29.    We cannot be oblivious to or unmindful of the purpose behind

establishment of the schools – to take care of the need of the IAF

personnel who may be posted at far-away places not having

educational facilities as also taking into account safety and security.
We find that many such schools have been established within the

campus of the IAF bases/establishments itself. This, incrementally,



                                                                  27 of 28
would also exhibit that the School enjoys privileges and facilities on

account of its linkage to and control by the IAF.
30.    Accordingly for the reasons aforesaid, it is held that the writ

petitions filed by the appellants were maintainable. The orders

impugned are set aside, clarifying the position of law. The High Court

of Judicature at Allahabad will proceed to decide the matters,

ostensibly held up due to the present cases, on merits, in expedition

having regard to the position of the Board.
31.    The appeals stand allowed.
...………………..................…..J.
                                        [AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]
NEW DELHI
MAY 21, 2025




                                                                  28 of 28