[Cites
46
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
P Krishna Mohan Reddy vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh on 16 May, 2025
2025 INSC 725                                                             REPORTABLE
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                            SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 7532 OF 2025



             P KRISHNA MOHAN REDDY                                     …PETITIONER(S)



                                                 VERSUS



             THE STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH                               ...RESPONDENT(S)




                                                  WITH

                             SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO.7533/2025

                                                   AND

                             SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO.7534/2025




                                                ORDER
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2025.05.19
16:19:04 IST
Reason:
SPECIAL LEAVE PETITIONS (CRL.) NO. 7533-34 OF 2025
1. Since the issues involved in the two petitions i.e. SLP (Crl.) No. 7532 of 2025

   and SLP (Crl.) No. 7533 of 2025 wherein anticipatory bail is being prayed for

   are same and the challenge is also to the self-same common impugned order

   passed by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh at Amaravati denying

   anticipatory to the petitioners, those were taken up for hearing analogously

   and are being disposed of by this common order.
2. The petitioners have been denied anticipatory bail by the High Court in

   connection with Crime No.21 of 2024 registered at CID Police Station,

   \angalagiri, Guntur District for the offence punishable under Sections 409,

   420, 12-B read with
Sections 34
&
37
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860

   respectively (now
Sections 316(5)
,
318(4)
,
61(2)
,
3(5)
&
3(8)
of the Bharatiya

   Nyaya Sanhita, 2023) &
Sections 7
,
7A
,
8
and
13(1)(b)
and
13(2)
of the

   Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
3. We need not delve much into the case of the prosecution as put up, more

   particularly, when the High Court has reproduced the same exhaustively in its

   impugned order dated 7-5-2025 passed in Criminal Petition No.4837/2025 and

   Criminal Petition No.4838/2025 respectively.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                     Page 1 of 35
4. However, with a view to give a fair idea as to the case of the prosecution as

   on date, we may just reproduce a portion of the First Information Report which

   reads thus: -
“12. The Committee after examining of records found the
              following:
1. Suppression of the established popular brands and unfair
              discrimination in allocation of OFS.over a period of time
              leading to almost disappearance of some brands from the
              market. 2. Favorable and preferential allocation of orders
              to certain new brands in violations of the existing norms
              giving them undue market share and competitive
              advantage. 3. The procurement system was shifted to
              manual process giving scope for manipulation in OFS
              against the previous system of automated OFS
              compromising the integrity or the process; 4. The MD,
              APSBCL reported that Committee has examined OFS
              (order for supply) data from 2018 onwards, detailed in
              annexures, but they could not ascertain the motive behind
              such discrimination and manipulations observed from the
              records and data related to the procurement process and
              other issues mentioned in the petitiorier, They
              recommended that an external specialized investigation
              agency may be advised to take up such action. 5. The MD,
              APSBCL on the basis of above committee reported that the
              matter may be examined and referred to a Specialized
              Agency for further necessary action. 6. The report has been
              examined and considering the seriousness of the matter as
              per the contents of the enquiry report of the Internal
              Committee mentioning suppression of brands, unfair
              discrimination preferential allocation OFS violation etc,
              the CID, Mangalagiri, AP is requested to take necessary
              action for investigation into the matter as recommended by
              the Internal Committee and the MD, APSBCL. MUKESH
              KUMAR MEENA PRINCIPAL SECRETARY TO
              GOVERNMENT TO The Criminal Investigation
              Department        (CID),     Mangalagiri,      AP     Sc/Sf.
//FORWARDED :: BY ORDER// SECTION OFFICER. The
              complainant requested for necessary legal action in this
              regard. Copy of the complaint is enclosed herewith.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                      Page 2 of 35
13. Action Taken: On 23.09.2024 at 22:00 hrs received an
              English typed report of Sri Mukesh Kumar Meena,
              Principal Secretary to Government, Andhra Pradesh vide
              Memo No.Rev-01/CPE/20/2024-VIG-IV, dated, 20.09:2024
              from O/o the Addl.DGP, CID, A.P., along with memo in
              C.No.7020/EOW C-14/CID-AP/2024, dated: 23.09.2024
              with instructions to register a case. As per the instructions
              I registered the same as case in Cr.No.21/2024 U/S 420,
              409, 120(B)
IPC
is registered at CID PS, A.P, Mangalagiri
              on 23.09.2024 át 22:00 hrs. The original FIR along with the
              complainant's report and enclosures submit to The Hon'ble
              Court of III Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate,
              Vijayawada and copy of FIR along with complainant's
              report and enclosures sent to the 1.0. Sri T.Daiva Prasad,
              DSP, CID, RO, Kurnool for investigation and copies to all
              concerned.”
5. We heard Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, the learned Senior counsel appearing

   for the petitioner namely P. Krishna Mohan Reddy and Mr. Vikas Singh, the

   learned Senior counsel appearing for the petitioner namely K. Dhananjaya

   Reddy.
6. On the other hand, we heard Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, Mr. Siddharth Luthra and

   Mr. Siddharth Aggarwal, the learned Senior counsel appearing for the State of

   Andhra Pradesh.
7. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioners would vehemently submit

   that their clients at the relevant point of time were holding public office. They

   were public servants. They have retired from service. However, due to
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                       Page 3 of 35
political vendetta and bias, they have been arrayed in the alleged crime on the

   allegations that they are a part and parcel of a well-hatched criminal

   conspiracy.
8. It was further submitted that there is no prima facie case worth the name

   against the petitioners. In other words, there is no prima facie case worth the

   name at this point of time to deny anticipatory bail.
9. During the course of hearing, it was brought to our notice that both these

   petitioners have been cooperating with the investigating agency. Their

   statements have been recorded. They have been interrogated and they shall

   continue to cooperate with the investigating agency till the charge-sheet is

   filed.
10.It was also pointed out, that the investigating agency has been adopting

   dubious methods and tactics for the purpose of extracting confessional

   statements from different witnesses by adopting third degree methods. It was

   pointed out that a Writ Petition had to be filed in the High Court of Andhra

   Pradesh at Amaravati seeking necessary relief in this regard and the High

   Court has passed an order permitting a lawyer to remain present at the time of

   interrogation.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                     Page 4 of 35
11.It was further pointed out that at one point of time, the entire issue was looked

   into by the Competition Commission and the Competition Commission did

   not find anything what is being alleged today by the State.
12.The learned counsel appearing for the petitioners would submit that it is a fit

   case for grant of anticipatory bail, more particularly, when the entire case put

   up by the State is actuated by political bias or mala fides.
13.On the other hand, the learned counsel appearing for the State vehemently

   submitted that no error not to speak of any error of law could be said to have

   been committed by the High Court in denying the anticipatory bail to the

   petitioners.
14.They would submit that there is more than a prima facie case against the

   petitioners. The investigation is at a very crucial stage. According to the State,

   there has been misappropriation of public exchequer to the tune to more than

   Rs.3,000 Crore. It was also submitted that the investigating agency may also

   deem fit to pray for custodial interrogation if need arises and if some good

   valid grounds are made out.
15.In short, the submission on behalf of the State is that at this point of time, this

   Court may not exercise its discretionary jurisdiction of grant of anticipatory
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                         Page 5 of 35
bail as it may have its own implications in the investigation which is in

   progress and is at a crucial stage.
16.Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone

   through the materials on record, we are of the view that we should not exercise

   our discretion for the purpose of grant of anticipatory bail. The High Court has

   looked into the matter in details and thereafter, declined to grant anticipatory

   bail as prayed for.
17.The High Court while reaching the conclusion that more than a prima facie

   case has been made out against the petitioners for the purpose of denying

   anticipatory bail to them, has observed thus: -
“22. According to the prosecution, the scheme in question
              favoured select liquor brands such as Adan and Leela, while
              sidelining well-established brands like Pernod Ricard and
              McDowell. As a result, several distilleries either shut down
              operations or diverted their products to other states Despite
              receiving consumer complaints regarding the quality of
              alcohol, no remedial measures were undertaken. The
              distilleries allegedly employed methods such as
              transferring funds to gold traders, procuring GST invoices,
              and remitting cash to the accused after deducting
              commissions. The investigation has revealed suspicious
              transactions amounting to approximately Rs 300-400
              crores. In support of these allegations, the prosecution has
              produced records suspicious transactions involving Leela
              Agro and S.P.Y. Agro; bullion transactions entered into by
              Tilak Nagar Industries Limited: bullion invoices and ledger
              entries of Arham Bullion and Tiiak Nagar Industries
              Limited and details of entities that were found to be non-
              existent.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                       Page 6 of 35
25. The allegations against the petitioners are that they
              were responsible for the discontinuation of popular liquor
              brands and the promotion of favoured brands, collecting
              approximately Rs.3200 Crores in kickbacks for the liquor
              syndicate. The prosecution further claims that, on average,
              the accused received Rs.50-60 crores per month in
              kickbacks, with A.1 allegedly handing over these amounts
              to the petitioners in Crl.P.No.5009 of 2025 and
              Crl.P.No.4838 of 2025.
29. The learned Senior Counsel appearing for the
              Respondent-State argues that the proceedings before the
              Competition Commission of India (CCI) pertain to the
              period from 2019 to 2021, whereas the allegations against
              the accused persons cover the period from 2019 to 2024.
Therefore, the findings recorded by the CCI cannot be
              afforded significant weight in this context. The prosecution
              has relied upon sale transactions presented in a tabular
              form, and the details contained therein, prima facie, support
              the prosecution's case.
Brand           Quantity in 2018-19   Quantity in 2023-24
McDowell's Brandy           22,73,086                  5
Imperial Blue Whisky        20,21,955                  7
Kingfisher Beer            1,02,47,566            11,82,388
Budweiser Beer              22,52,195                  0
Brand            Market share in       Market share in
                                           2018-19               2023-24
               McDowell's Brandy           23.41%                 2.15%
               Kingfisher Beer              29.5%                 3.21%
               Budweiser Beer              11.43%                 1.25%

               S.No.             Name of the Brand           Quantity Intended
               1       Ocean Blue Whiskey                        2,76,706
               2       Daru House Whiskey                       68,83,420
               3       Supreme Blend Whiskey                    77,35,400
               4       Brilliant Blend Whiskey                  37,30,800
               5       9 Sea Horse Whiskey                      46,07,733
               6       Andhra Gold Whiskey                      20,61,711
               7       Good Friend Whiskey                      27,72,050
               8       HD Whiskey                               22,02,555
32 This Court views that the investigating officer deserves
              a free hand to take the investigation to its logical conclusion
              in a case containing severe allegations. With regard to the
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                                Page 7 of 35
Prosecution's case, the Investigation remains incomplete.
Granting anticipatory bail to the Petitioners could
              potentially hinder the ongoing investigation. The
              allegations are severe, and the investigating agency has not
              yet been able to interrogate the Accused/Petitioners. The
              established legal principle is that anticipatory bail is not
              granted as a matter of routine; it should only be provided
              when the Court is convinced that exceptional circumstances
              warrant such an extraordinary remedy.
36. The statements provided by several witnesses have
              underscored the petitioners' prima facie involvement in the
              criminal conspiracy associated with e Excise Policy. It
              cannot lose sight of serious allegations leveled by the
              prosecution and the evidences collected during the course
              of investigation and presented before this Court, which
              prima facie reveal the petitioners ‘role in the offence in
              question. The material placed on record, its face, suggests
              the petitioners involvement in the offence in question. Given
              these circumstances, custodial interrogation is deemed
              essential to confront the petitioners with the gathered
              evidence and to unravel a broader conspiracy implicating
              the accused in the implementation of the Excise Policy.”
18.In view of the aforesaid, it cannot be said that the High Court failed to exercise

   its discretion in a judicious manner while declining to grant anticipatory bail

   to the petitioners as prayed for.
19.Custodial interrogation is qualitatively more elicitation oriented than

   questioning a suspect who is well ensconced with a favourable order under

   Section 438. In corruption cases concerning influential persons, effective

   interrogation of the suspect is of tremendous advantage in disinterring many

   useful information and also materials which are likely to be concealed.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                        Page 8 of 35
Success in such interrogation would elude if the suspected person knows that

   he is well protected and insulated by a pre-arrest bail order during the time he

   is interrogated. Very often interrogation in such condition would reduce to a

   mere ritual. The High Court remained alive and very rightly to the

   apprehension of the investigating agency that the petitioners would influence

   the witnesses, considering particularly the high position they all held at one

   point of time.
20.Anticipatory bail to accused in cases of the present nature would greatly harm

   the investigation and would impede the prospects of unearthing of the

   ramifications involved in the conspiracy. Public interest also would suffer as

   a consequence.
21.It was sought to be argued that the petitioners have already joined the

   investigation and are fully cooperating with the investigating agency and

   therefore, there is no need for custodial interrogation.
22.The petitioners might have been cooperating with the investigation and they

   might have been interrogated also by the investigating agency so far but, at

   the same time, we should not overlook the fact that by grant of anticipatory

   bail, we may come in the way of the investigating agency if at all it wants

   custodial interrogation.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                      Page 9 of 35
23.As held by this Court in
Sumitha Pradeep vs. Arun Kumar C.K. & Anr.
reported in (2022)17 SCC 391 that it would be preposterous as a proposition

   of law to say that if custodial interrogation is not required that by itself is

   sufficient to grant anticipatory bail. Even in cases where custodial

   interrogation may not be required the court is obliged to consider the entire

   case put up by the State, more particularly, the nature of the offence, the

   punishment provided in law for such offence etc.
24.It is needless to say that for the purpose of custodial interrogation, the

   investigating agency has to make out a prima facie case at the time when

   remand is prayed for. Whether any case for police remand is made out or not,

   it is for the Court concerned to look into.
25.In such circumstances
,
referred to above
, we are of the view that we should

   not come in the way of the investigating agency at this point of time and the

   investigation should be permitted to proceed further.
26.At this stage, we would like to observe something important.
27.To some extent, the petitioners could be said to have made out a prima facie

   case of political bias or mala fides but that by itself is not sufficient to grant

   anticipatory bail overlooking the other prima facie materials on record.

   Political vendetta or bias if any is one of the relevant considerations while
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                       Page 10 of 35
considering the plea of anticipatory bail. The courts should keep one thing in

   mind, more particularly, while considering the plea of anticipatory bail that

   when two groups of rival political parties are at war which may ultimately lead

   to litigations, more particularly, criminal prosecutions there is bound to be

   some element of political bias or vendetta involved in the same. However,

   political vendetta by itself is not sufficient for the grant of anticipatory bail.

   The courts should not just look into the aspect of political vendetta and ignore

   the other materials on record constituting a prima facie case as alleged by the

   State. It is only when the court is convinced more than prima facie that the

   allegations are frivolous and baseless, that the court may bring into the element

   of political vendetta into consideration for the purpose of considering the plea

   of anticipatory bail. The frivolity in the entire case that the court may look into

   should be attributed to political bias or vendetta.
Section 30
of the Evidence Act
28.It appears from the impugned order that the High Court looked into few

   disclosure statements made by co-accused and according to the High Court,

   as such disclosure statements are admissible during trial under
Section 30
of

   the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (for short, the “
Evidence Act
”) those can also

   be looked into at the stage of considering the plea of anticipatory bail or even

   regular bail.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                        Page 11 of 35
29.The High Court in its impugned order has observed as under:
“20. The prosecution has also relied upon the confessional
              statements of co-accused persons to establish the
              petitioners' involvement in the commission of the offence.
              However, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the
              petitioners have strongly opposed the reliance on such
              confessional statements, contending that they are
              inadmissible in evidence. In contrast, the learned Senior
              Counsel for the Respondent/State submits that the
              statements made by co-accused persons are subject to
              evaluation during trial, and it would be incorrect to contend
              that confessional statements made by an accused during
              interrogation cannot be considered for the purpose of
              connecting other accused persons. This Court is of the view
              that such disclosure statements made by co-accused can
              indeed be taken into consideration as investigative leads
              and. further, may be admissible during trial under Section
30 of the
Indian Evidence Act
.
21. It is erroneous to say that confessional statement made
              by the accused during interrogation cannot be considered
              or looked into to connect the other co-accused. Such
              disclosure statement of co-accused can certainly be taken
              into consideration for providing lead in investigation and
              even during trial it is admissible under
Section 30
of the
              Indian Evidence Act.”
                                                (Emphasis supplied)
30.Since the High Court has touched
Section 30
of the Evidence Act, we would

   like to say something in this regard. The said provision reads thus: -
“When more persons than one are being tried jointly for the
              same offence, and a confession made by one of such persons
              affecting himself and some other of such persons is proved,
              the court may take into consideration such confession as
              against such other person as well as against the person who
              makes such confession.”
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                      Page 12 of 35
31.As per
Section 5
of Evidence Act, only those facts or facts in issue which are

   considered relevant under
Chapter II of the Act
would be admissible as

   evidence. Section(s) 24 to 30 of the
Evidence Act
, deals with the relevancy

   and admissibility of ‘confessions’ as evidence.
Section 24
of the Evidence Act

   provides when a confession would be relevant by laying down a negative rule

   of relevancy and prescribing the general parameters when a confession would

   be considered irrelevant; namely when such confession is caused by either

   threat, inducement or promise.
32.Section(s) 28 and 29 of the
Evidence Act
respectively are an exception to the

   aforesaid general rule of relevancy of confessions.
Section 28
provides that

   where although any threat, inducement or promise was made to cause a

   confession, yet if such confession was made after the cessation, removal or

   eradication of such improper influence or impression, then such confession

   would be relevant.
Section 29
on the other hand, expands the test of relevancy

   by prescribing a positive rule of when a confession would continue to be

   relevant and provides that a confession made under one particular type of

   promise i.e., a promise of secrecy or made as a result of any deception,

   intoxication or by one’s own volition in response to any question, would not

   render such confession irrelevant.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                   Page 13 of 35
33.
Section 25
of the Evidence Act, goes one step further, by providing that even

   if such confession is not hit by
Section 24
i.e., it is not the result of any threat,

   inducement or promise and thus, considered relevant, still such confession

   would be inadmissible if it was made to a police officer.
Section 26
and
27
of

   the Evidence Act, however, carves out an exception to this.
Section 26
provides that, a confession made by the accused to persons other than police

   officers would be inadmissible, if it was made whilst he was in police custody,

   unless such confession was made in the presence of a magistrate. Whereas,
Section 27
only permits limited use of such statement only to the extent that a

   fact is discovered pursuant to disclosure statement which would connect the

   accused with the crime with authorship of concealment.
34.
Section 30
of the Evidence Act, provides that a confession made by a person

   admitting his own guilt and at the same time implicating another person, such

   confession “may be taken into consideration” by the court against the maker

   as-well as against the person it is being made, if both of them are being “tried

   jointly”.
35.The Privy Council in Bhuboni Sahu v. R reported in 1949 SCC OnLine PC

   12 explained the significance of the expression “may take into consideration”

   used in
Section 30
. It observed that a “confession” does not come within the

   definition of “Evidence” under
Section 3
of the Evidence Act, as it is neither
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                         Page 14 of 35
required to be given on oath, nor in the presence of the co-accused, and the

   same cannot be tested by cross-examination. Thus, although a confession

   against a co-accused, is not an evidence, yet as per
Section 30
, a court may

   take it into consideration and act upon it. However, the courts must be mindful

   that such confessions do not amount to proof, it is only one of the elements in

   the consideration of all other facts proved in a particular case, and therefore,

   there must be other evidence before such confession is taken into

   consideration.
[See also:
K. Hashim v. State of T.N.
, (2005) 1 SCC 237;
State

   (NCT of Delhi) v. Navjot Sandhu
, (2005) 11 SCC 600]
36.This Court in
Kashmira Singh v. State of M.P
reported in (1952) 1 SCC 275

   further explained as to when such confession may be taken into consideration

   against another co-accused. Placing reliance on the decision of Periyaswami

   Moopan, In re. reported in 1930 SCC OnLine Mad 86 it was held that,

   “where there is evidence against the co-accused sufficient, if believed, to

   support his conviction, then the kind of confession described in
Section 30
may

   be thrown into the scale as an additional reason for believing that evidence”

   and “the proper way is, first, to marshal the evidence against the accused

   excluding the confession altogether from consideration and see whether, if it

   is believed a conviction could safely be based on it. If it is capable of belief

   independently of the confession, then of course it is not necessary to call the

   confession in aid. But cases may arise where the Judge is not prepared to act
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                     Page 15 of 35
on the other evidence as it stands even though, if believed, it would be

   sufficient to sustain a conviction. In such an event the Judge may call in aid

   the confession and use it to lend assurance to the other evidence and thus

   fortify himself in believing what without the aid of the confession he would not

   be prepared to accept”. Thus, such a confession can only be pressed into

   consideration by the court as a rule of prudence, to lend assurance to the other

   evidence against such co-accused.
37.The ingredients or conditions required under
Section 30
of the Evidence Act,

   before any confession is made to operate against a co-accused are as under: -
(i)     there must be joint trial for the same offence;
   (ii)    it must be a confession;
(iii)   the confession must inculpate or implicate the maker and to the same
           extent the other accused
(iv)    the confession of guilt must be duly proved.
The aforesaid four conditions have to be strictly established. Such

   confession cannot be taken into consideration under
Section 30
where the

   confession itself was not relevant or inadmissible or where a co-accused was

   not being tried jointly with the accused person who made the confession or

   where he did not make a statement incriminating himself along with the co-

   accused. [See
Mohd. Khalid v. State of W.B.
, (2002) 7 SCC 334; Govt. of

   NCT of Delhi v. Navjot Sandhu, (2003) 10 SCC 586]
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                     Page 16 of 35
38.In Suresh Budharmal Kalani v. State of Maharashtra
reported in (1998) 7

   SCC 337, this Court held that under
Section 30
of the Evidence Act a

   confession of an accused is relevant and admissible against a co-accused if

   both are jointly facing trial for the same offence. However, such confessional

   statements of an accused cannot be used against a co-accused in terms of
Section 30
of Evidence Act, for the purpose of framing charges in the absence

   of any other evidence to do so. Similarly, where one of the accused has been

   discharged, confessional statement of such accused persons cannot be used

   against a co-accused, as the pre-condition under
Section 30
of the Evidence

   Act, namely of there being a joint trial for the same offence is not fulfilled.
39.The High Court has its own understanding of
Section 30
of the Evidence Act.

   It says that what is admissible under
Section 30
can also be looked into at the

   stage of considering the plea of anticipatory bail or even regular bail.

   However, we are not impressed with the view expressed by the High Court.

   We are of the considered opinion that such a confession if any cannot be

   looked into at the stage of anticipatory bail or even regular bail for the

   following reasons: -
(i)    Before a confession is taken into consideration against a co-accused,

          the said confession has to be duly proved against the maker. It has to be

          clearly established that such confession is not vitiated either by
Section

          24
of the Evidence Act nor rendered inadmissible by
Section 25
thereof,
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                      Page 17 of 35
which can only be ascertained in the course of trial. It must be clearly

          established by leading cogent evidence in the course of the trial before

          the case for the prosecution comes to an end. [See: Dipak Bhai

          Jagdishchandra Patel v. State of Gujarat & Anr., (2019) 16 SCC 547].
When confession is made before police official, the same cannot be

          proved in evidence at all. Statement contemplated under
section 30
should be relevant and admissible, and that is the foremost requirement

          of section and sine qua non.
(ii)
Section 30
of Evidence Act postulates that such a confession can be

          taken into consideration only where the accused persons are jointly

          tried. The said provision does not merely require that the persons must

          be accused of the same offence, but rather requires that they must be

          being tried jointly for the said offence. [See:
Queen Empress v. Jagat

          Chandra Mali, ILR
(1894) 22 Cal 50; Naresh v. R, AIR 1938 Cal 479].

          Joint trial here refers to the one provided under
Section 223
of the Code

          of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, the “
Cr.P.C
.”). Thus, where the

          accused persons are either not being tried jointly, or are yet to be

          charged for the same offence and thereafter tried together,
Section 30
of the Evidence Act would be inapplicable.
[See:
Badri Prasad

          Prajapati v. State of M.P.
, (2005) Cr.L.J. 1856]. Thus,
Section 30
of

          the Evidence Act, would not spring into action when the charges are yet

          to be framed and the accused persons are yet to be committed to trial,
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                     Page 18 of 35
and any confession admissible thereunder cannot be taken into

           consideration by the courts.
(iii)   Assuming for a moment that such a confession can be looked into at the

           stage of anticipatory bail or even regular bail, as per
Kashmira

           Singh
(supra), such a confession can only be pressed into consideration

           by the court as a rule of prudence, to lend assurance to the other

           evidence against such co-accused. Thus, there must exist other evidence

           on record, before the court looks into such confession.
40.Where a confessional statement is otherwise excluded or inadmissible by

   virtue of Section(s) 25 or 26 of the
Evidence Act
, respectively, there can be

   no question of such confessional statements being made admissible against

   another co-accused by stretching it with the help of
Section 30
of the Evidence

   Act.
Section 25
places a complete ban on the making of such confession by

   that person whether he is in custody or not.
Section 26
lays down that a

   confession made by a person while he is in the custody of a police officer shall

   not be proved against him unless it is made in the immediate presence of a

   Magistrate. [See:
Sahib Singh v. State of Haryana
, (1997) 7 SCC 231]

   Confessional statement contemplated under
Section 30
of the Evidence Act,

   must be both relevant and admissible in terms of the
Evidence Act
.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                     Page 19 of 35
41.At this stage, we may clarify, with a view to obviate any possibility of

   confusion, whether a confession statement of an accused person implicating

   another co-accused be taken into consideration against such co-accused in

   terms of
Section 161
of the Cr.P.C.
42.It is no more res integra that a person who is accused of an offence or named

   in the first information report, can be examined by the police and his statement

   may be recorded under
Section 161
of the Cr.P.C., in this regard reliance may

   be placed on the decision of this Court in
Nandini Satpathy v. P.L. Dani &

   Anr.
reported in AIR 1978 SC 1025.
However, the question as to whether

   such statement of the accused is admissible in law and in what manner can the

   same be looked into was explained by this Court in
Mahabir Mandal & Ors.

   v. State of Bihar
reported in AIR 1972 1331, wherein it was held that as per
Section 162
of the Cr.P.C. no statement made by any person to a police officer

   in the course of an investigation shall be signed by the person making it or

   used for any purpose at any enquiry or trial in respect of any offence under

   investigation at the time when such statement was made. The only instance

   where such statements may be considered or looked into has been provided in

   the Proviso to sub-section (1) of
Section 162
, which permits the use of such

   statement or any part thereof, to contradict such witness in the manner

   provided by
Section 145
of Evidence Act or in the re-examination of such
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                     Page 20 of 35
witness for the purpose only of explaining any matter referred to in his cross-

   examination.
43.A statement given by an accused to the police under
Section 161
of the Cr.P.C.

   may be either in the form of a confession or an admission. The Privy Council

   in
Pakala Narayana Swami v. Emperor
reported in (1939) PC 47 explained

   that a confession is a statement admitting the offence or at any rate

   substantially all the facts which constitute the offence, whereas an admission

   is only in respect of a gravely incriminating fact. Even a conclusively

   incriminating fact is not of itself a confession.
Where such statement is a

   confessional statement, the rigour of Section(s) 25 and 26 will apply in full

   force, and the said confession would be completely inadmissible as held in
Sahib Singh
(supra) and a catena of other decisions of this Court.
Where,

   however, such statement amounts to an admission, the statement being one

   under
Section 161
, would immediately attract the bar under
Section 162
of the

   Cr.PC., and the same may be used only for the very limited purpose provided

   in the Proviso as held in
Mahabir Mandal
(supra).
44.We are conscious of a handful of decisions of this Court wherein it has been

   held that statements under
Section 161
of the Cr.P.C. ought to be looked into

   by the courts in deciding the question of grant of bail.
Indresh Kumar v. State

   of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
, reported in 2022 SCC OnLine SC 2411 observed
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                    Page 21 of 35
that “statements under
Section 161
of Cr. P.C. may not be admissible in

   evidence, but are relevant in considering the prima facie case against an

   accused in an application for grant of bail in case of grave offence”.
Similarly,

   in
Salim Khan v. Sanjai Singh
reported in (2002) 9 SCC 670, it was held that

   the court is “duty-bound to consider all the statements recorded under
Section

   161
CrPC, examine the gravity of the offence and also examine the question

   of possibility of the accused tampering with the evidence and possibility of

   getting the attendance of the accused during trial and then would be entitled

   to grant bail to an accused”.
45.However, the aforesaid observations cannot be singled out and construed

   devoid of its context. While it is permissible for the courts to examine the

   statements recorded under
Section 161
of the Cr.P.C. for the purpose of

   ascertaining whether a prima-facie case has been made out against the accused

   and the nature or gravity of the allegations, the same applies only insofar as

   such police statements are of witnesses and not accused persons.
46.Both Indresh Kumar
(supra) and
Salim Khan
(supra) have held that in

   deciding the question of grant of bail, it is the statements of witness under
Section 161
of the Cr.P.C. that has to be looked into. Nowhere has this Court

   held that even the police statements of the accused person under
Section 161
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                      Page 22 of 35
of the
Cr.P.C
. must also be looked into at the stage of grant of anticipatory or

   regular bail.
47.This is because a statement of an accused under
Section 161
of the Cr.P.C

   stands on a different footing from a police statement of any ordinary witness.

   Statements of an accused person under
Section 161
of the Cr.P.C. by virtue of

   ordinarily being in the form of either an admission or a confession cannot be

   looked into qua another co-accused, as to say otherwise would be to ignore

   the substantive provisions of Section(s) 17, 21, 25 and 26 of the
Evidence Act
and the well settled cannons of law of evidence. However, the aforesaid does

   not apply, where the statement of an accused under
Section 161
of the Cr.P.C

   is exculpatory in nature, which we shall discuss later.
48.As per Section(s) 17 read with 21 of the
Evidence Act
, the general principle

   is that an admission may be given as evidence against the maker only and

   cannot be used against any other person. The only two exceptions to the

   aforesaid rule are in the context of civil disputes, i.e., where a party having a

   joint interest with others makes an admission relating to a subject-matter, it

   can be used against others or where such admission is sought to be used

   against any heir or persons claiming interest through or under the makers of

   such admission.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                      Page 23 of 35
49.As explained in
Pakala Narayana Swami
(supra), a confession is one specie

   of an admission, this flows from the logic that every confession is an

   admission but not every admission is a confession, while admissions in itself

   is a specie or type of a statement. As a natural corollary to the aforesaid, any

   statement of the accused under
Section 161
of the Cr.P.C. which is in the form

   of an admission that admits any incriminating fact or implicates another

   person by such statement, would be governed by the provisions of
Section 17
of Evidence Act, more particularly the prohibition of usage of such admissions

   against third-persons. An admission by one accused cannot be used against

   another co-accused.
[See:
Chintamani Das v. State
, AIR 1970 Ori 100; Sohar

   Singh v. State of Bihar, AIR 1960 Pat 448]. The aforesaid may be looked at

   from one another angle, since the
Evidence Act
, more particularly, Section(s)

   17 and 30 clearly stipulate in well-defined terms, when an admission or a

   confession, respectively, may be used against another person, the logical

   sequitur of the aforesaid is that, except for the manner laid down under the

   said provisions, no admission or confession may be used against another

   person. Since,
Section 17
of the Evidence Act does not postulate the use of an

   admission by one accused against another, any statement of the accused under
Section 161
of the Cr.P.C., implicating such co-accused cannot be looked into

   by the courts.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                     Page 24 of 35
50.Even where the police statement of an accused person under
Section 161
of

   the Cr.P.C is neither an admission nor a confession, i.e., it is exculpatory in

   nature and not inculpatory, such statements can be looked into by the courts

   only for the limited purpose of culling out the stance of the accused person

   qua the allegations. An exculpatory police statement of an accused person

   under
Section 161
of the Cr.P.C which at the same time implicates another co-

   accused, cannot be relied upon, merely because such statement is not hit by

   the safeguards and rigours that apply in respect of inculpatory statements in

   the form of an admissions or confessions under the
Evidence Act
. The

   fundamental cannon of criminal jurisprudence is that a statement of one

   accused person cannot be used against another co-accused person. The limited

   exception to this aforesaid general principle are inculpatory confessions,

   where the accused person in his confessional statement not only admits his

   own guilt but also implicates another co-accused. The rationale behind this

   limited exception as explained in Bhuboni Sahu (supra), is that an admission

   by an accused person of his own guilt affords some sort of credibility or

   sanction in support of the truth of his confession against others as-well as

   himself. An exculpatory statement is an affront to the aforesaid principle.

   Thus, an exculpatory statement of an accused person under
Section 161
of the

   Cr.P.C. can only be looked into for the limited purpose of either culling out

   the stance of the accused person qua the allegations or for contradicting the

   accused, if the accused chooses to be examined as a witness in terms of Section
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                    Page 25 of 35
315 of the
Cr.P.C
. However, such exculpatory statement insofar as it

   implicates another co-accused person can in no manner be relied upon by the

   courts as against such co-accused as such statements by their nature cannot be

   tested by cross-examination if such accused person declines to be a witness in

   the trial in terms of
Section 315
of the Cr.P.C., and because such exculpatory

   statement has no credibility.
51.Such statements at best could be said to be helpful to the investigating

   authorities for the purpose of ascertaining that the investigation is proceeding

   in the right direction or not, as ordinarily, once the investigation is over, these

   statements are neither supplied to the accused along with chargesheet nor

   placed on record.
52.Thus,
Section 30
itself makes it clear that the whole legal exercise by virtue

   of which this provision of law can be made applicable, depends upon the

   proving of confession before a court which makes it into an admissible one in

   order to implicate the other accused provided the confession given by such

   person is established with full strength on the basis of other materials

   pertaining to the attendant circumstances. It would necessarily mean that mere

   confession alone will not be adequate or sufficient to implicate other persons.

   It is incumbent that there are other materials also which would render support

   or substantiate the case of the confession. However, it is subject to the standard
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                        Page 26 of 35
of proving as contemplated by law. If this is the position, the court should look

   into the statements alleged to have been given by the co-accused and that too

   before a police officer during the course of investigation with great care and

   circumspection. The said statements are directly hit by
Section 161
of the

   Code of Criminal Procedure. Particularly, the statement given by any one of

   the accused persons and recorded by the police officer during the course of

   investigation cannot be relied upon by the prosecution, except subject to the

   limitations provided by
Section 145
of the Indian Evidence Act. The statement

   given by an accused involving himself in the crime and also implicating third

   person cannot be proved legally in the court. It will be in direct conflict with
Sections 25
and
26
respectively of the
Evidence Act
. If such evidence or

   confession cannot be proved, then the occasion for utilizing such statement

   against another person would not arise.
53.From the above exposition of law, the following emerges: -
(i)    A person who is accused of an offence or named in the first information

          report, can be examined by the police and his statement may be recorded

          under
Section 161
of the Cr.P.C., as held in
Nandini Satpathy
(supra).
(ii)   A statement of an accused under
Section 161
of the Cr.P.C, would

          ordinarily be of two kinds, it may be inculpatory in nature or may be

          exculpatory in nature.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                      Page 27 of 35
(iii)   An inculpatory statement again may be in the form of an admission or

           a confession. If such statement admits either a gravely incriminating

           fact or substantially all the facts which constitute the offence,

           respectively, as held in
Pakala Narayana Swami
(supra), then it

           amounts to confession.
(iv)    Where such police statement of an accused is confessional statement,

           the rigour of Section(s) 25 and 26 respectively will apply with all its

           vigour. A confessional statement of an accused will only be admissible

           if it is not hit by Section(s) 24 or 25 respectively and is in tune with the

           provisions of Section(s) 26, 28 and 29 of the
Evidence Act
respectively.
In other words, a police statement of an accused which is in the form of

           a confession is per se inadmissible and no reliance whatsoever can be

           placed on such statements either at the stage of bail or during trial. Since

           such confessional statements are rendered inadmissible by virtue of
Section 25
of the Evidence Act, the provision of
Section 30
would be

           of no avail, and no reliance can be placed on such confessional

           statement of an accused to implicate another co-accused.
(v)     A confessional statement of one accused implicating another co-
accused may be taken into consideration by the court against such co-

           accused in terms of
Section 30
of the Evidence Act, only at the stage of

           trial, where (1) the confession itself was relevant and admissible in

           terms of the
Evidence Act
; (2) was duly proved against the maker; (3)
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                         Page 28 of 35
such confessional statement incriminates the maker along with the co-
accused and; (4) both the accused persons in question are in a joint trial

          for the same offence.
(vi)   Furthermore, because such confessional statements are not “evidence”

          in terms of
Section 3
of the Evidence Act as held in Bhuboni

          Sahu (supra), such a confession as held in
Kashmira Singh
(supra) can

          only be pressed into consideration by the court as a rule of prudence, to

          lend assurance to the other evidence against such co-accused, provided

          that aforesaid ingredients or conditions of
Section 30
read with

          Section(s) 24 to 29 of the
Evidence Act
, are fulfilled.
(vii) Where the police statement of an accused is in the form of an admission,

          such inculpatory statement even if it implicates another co-accused

          cannot be taken into consideration against such co-accused in terms of

          Section(s) 17 read with 21 of the
Evidence Act
, as doing so would

          militate against the general principle, that an admission may be given

          as evidence against the maker alone. The exceptions to the aforesaid

          general principle carved out under the
Evidence Act
, do not permit the

          usage of such admission against a co-accused in any scenario

          whatsoever.
(viii) Where the police statement of the accused is an exculpatory statement

          i.e., it is neither a confession nor an admission, the statement being one

          under
Section 161
, would immediately attract the bar under
Section 162
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                      Page 29 of 35
of the
Cr.PC
., and the same may be used only for the very limited

          purpose provided in the Proviso for the purpose of contradiction or re-

          examination of such accused person alone, as held in
Mahabir Mandal
(supra).
Even if such exculpatory statement of one accused, implicates

          another co-accused, the same cannot be taken into consideration against

          such co-accused, as there can be no credibility attached to an

          exculpatory statement of an accused implicating another co-accused,

          more particularly because it is neither required to be given on oath, nor

          in the presence of the co-accused, the same cannot be tested by cross-

          examination and the exculpatory nature of such statement militates

          against the foundational principle that permits taking into consideration

          a statement of one accused person against another co-accused as

          explained in Bhuboni Sahu (supra), i.e., ‘when a person admits guilt to

          its fullest extent either to a certain incriminating fact or substantially

          all the facts which constitute the offence, and in doing so exposes

          himself and in the process other co-accused persons to the pain and

          penalties provided for the guilt, there exists a sincerity and semblance

          of sanction for the truthfulness of such statement’.
(ix)   Although a handful of decisions of this Court such as
Indresh Kumar
(supra) and
Salim Khan
(supra) have held that statements under
Section

          161
of the Cr.P.C. ought to be looked into by the courts at the stage of

          anticipatory or regular bail for the purpose of ascertaining whether a
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                      Page 30 of 35
prima-facie case has been made out against the accused and the nature

          and gravity of the allegations, yet the aforesaid rule only applies insofar

          as such statements under
Section 161
were made by witnesses and not

          accused persons. A statement of an accused under
Section 161
of the

          Cr.P.C. stands on a completely different footing from a police statement

          of a witness. As already discussed in the foregoing paragraphs, if the

          police statement of an accused is inculpatory in nature, its more in the

          form of a confession or admission rather than a statement, and the

          relevant provisions of Section(s) 17 to 30 of the
Evidence Act
, will

          apply with all its vigour.
Where such statement of the accused is

          exculpatory in nature, the same can be looked into by the courts only

          for the limited purpose of either culling out the stance of the accused

          person qua the allegations or for contradicting the accused, if the

          accused chooses to be examined as a witness in terms of
Section 315
of

          the Cr.P.C.. However, such exculpatory statement insofar as it

          implicates another accused person cannot be looked into by the courts,

          as such statements by their nature cannot be tested by cross-examination

          if such accused person declines to be a witness in the trial in terms of
Section 315
of the Cr.P.C., and because such exculpatory statement has

          no credibility as explained in Bhuboni Sahu (supra).
(x)    Before the court looks into the police statement of any person under
Section 161
of the Cr.P.C for the purpose of anticipatory or regular bail,
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                       Page 31 of 35
the court must first ascertain whether such person is actually a witness

          or an accused person, or likely to be an accused person in respect of the

          offence(s) alleged. This is because, there may be situations where a

          person while giving his statement under
Section 161
of the Cr.P.C may

          not be an accused, but later arrayed as one. In such a scenario the courts

          must be mindful of the fact that because the investigation is still

          ongoing, it is more likely for a person who was originally a witness to

          happen to be later arrayed as an accused person. If the court was to

          blindly place reliance on statement of such a person merely because he

          is not named in the first information report, without first seeing whether

          such person is likely to be arrayed as an accused or not, it would lead

          to an absurd situation where the statement of such a person may be

          relied upon up until such person is arrayed as an accused. We also

          caution the courts, where it emerges from the material on record, that

          such a person is likely to be arrayed as an accused, the courts should

          refrain from expressing any such opinion so that the investigation is not

          prejudiced in any manner.
Allegations of third-degree methods
54.Besides the above, we would also like to make ourselves very clear that the

   investigating agency shall not adopt any third-degree methods or shall not
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                      Page 32 of 35
coerce or exert any undue pressure or bring any undue influence on any of the

   witnesses or any of the co-accused to make statements that may suit the State.

   Tomorrow, if any complaint is made before the court in this context with some

   cogent material, be it the trial Court or the High Court or the Supreme Court,

   the same shall be viewed very seriously. It is expected of the investigating

   agency to carry out a fair, impartial and transparent investigation, more

   particularly, in accordance with law.
55.Before we close this matter, we make it further clear that if the petitioners are

   ultimately arrested, remanded and thereafter sent to judicial custody and if any

   regular bail application is filed, the same shall be considered on its own merits

   in accordance with law. It is needless to say that the principles of grant of

   anticipatory bail substantially differ from the principles of grant of regular

   bail. It is for the Court concerned to apply the correct principles of law so far

   as the grant of regular bail is concerned and decide the same accordingly.
56.With the aforesaid, these Special Leave Petitions are disposed of.
57.If the petitioners have any further apprehension that they may be ill-treated,

   they can approach the High Court and obtain the very same relief that the High

   Court has granted in favour of the other witnesses.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                       Page 33 of 35
SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NO. 7534 OF 2025
1. This petitioner has already been arrested in connection with Crime No.21 of

   2024 registered at CID Police Station, Mangalagiri, Guntur District, State of

   Andhra Pradesh.
2. We are informed that the petitioner was arrested and remanded to judicial

   custody. While reminding him to judicial custody, the investigating officer did

   not pray for any police remand. After being remanded to judicial custody,

   according to the State, the investigating officer has now moved an application

   seeking police remand of the petitioner.
3. We do not say anything in this regard because it will be for the Court

   concerned to consider whether once an accused is remanded to judicial

   custody whether thereafter the Investigating Officer can pray for police

   remand or not.
4. Be that as it may, if any application for regular bail is filed by the petitioner,

   the same shall be looked into by the Court concerned on its own merits by

   applying the well-settled principles of grant of regular bail in accordance with

   law.
5. With the aforesaid, the Special Leave Petition is disposed of.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                       Page 34 of 35
6. Pending applications, if any, shall also stand disposed of.
.......................................................... J.
(J.B. Pardiwala)



                                        .......................................................... J.
(R. Mahadevan)

New Delhi;
16th May, 2025
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7532-34 of 2025                                        Page 35 of 35