[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Shaifali Gupta vs Vidya Devi Gupta on 20 May, 2025
Author:
Pankaj Mithal
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
2025 INSC 739                                                                REPORTABLE



                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                EXTRAORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                              SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 4673 OF 2023



                         SMT. SHAIFALI GUPTA                            …PETITIONER(S)

                                                     VERSUS

                         SMT. VIDYA DEVI GUPTA & ORS.                   …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                       WITH

                              SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.4674 OF 2023


                         DEEPAK LALCHANDANI                             …PETITIONER(S)

                                                     VERSUS

                         SMT. VIDYA DEVI GUPTA & ORS.                   …RESPONDENT(S)




                                                JUDGMENT
PANKAJ MITHAL, J.
1.    These two special leave petitions have been preferred, one
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
by the contesting defendant No.2 to the suit and the other
   geeta ahuja
   Date: 2025.05.20
   17:47:56 IST
   Reason:
by one of the subsequent purchasers (defendant No.5) of
1
some of the suit properties against the rejection of an

               application under
Order VII Rule 11 of Code of Civil

               Procedure
1 by the court of first instance as well as the High

               Court in revision.
2.      Special Leave Petition (C) No.4673/20232 preferred by the

               main contesting defendant to the suit is taken up as the

               lead case, therefore, the facts as stated therein and the

               parties as described therein shall be narrated and taken

               as a base.
3.      The two plaintiffs i.e. the mother and the son being Smt.

               Vidya Devi Gupta (plaintiff No.1) and Shri Sudeep Gupta

               (plaintiff No.2) instituted a Regular Suit No.630A/2018

               against the other son of plaintiff No.1 i.e. Sandeep Gupta

               (defendant No.1) and his wife Smt. Shaifali Gupta

               (defendant No.2). In the said suit, the two sons of the

               defendant No.1 namely Siddharth Gupta and Shantanu

               Gupta were arrayed as defendant Nos.3 and 4. The wife of

               the plaintiff No.2, Smt. Shalini Gupta and his son Sankalp

               Gupta were added as defendant Nos.8 and 9. In addition

               to the above family members, Deepak Lalchandani and
1
In short ‘
CPC
’
2
Smt. Shaifali Gupta vs. Smt. Vidya Devi Gupta & Ors.
2
Surya Prakash Mishra were also arrayed as defendant

     Nos.5 and 6 being the subsequent purchasers of some of

     the properties mentioned in the plaint.
4.   The aforesaid suit is for partition, possession, declaration,

     mandatory & permanent injunction and for accounting

     with regard to the properties alleged to be the family

     properties purchased out of the funds of the joint family or

     derived from the income from the joint family business. In

     other words, the suit is basically between the family

     members. The mother and one son on one side and the

     other son and his family on the other side. The children of

     both the sons are non-active or passive parties.
5.   According to the plaint allegations, the father of the two

     sons referred to above i.e. Shanti Prakash Gupta was into

     a tailoring business. Gradually his tailoring business came

     to an end. He died in the year 1977. He had no immovable

     or movable property at the time of his death.
6.   In the year 1982, the two sons jointly started a tailoring

     business from a rented shop in New Market, TT Nagar,

     Bhopal, in the name of ‘Himalaya Tailors’. This business

     was started by them by selling some jewellery of their
3
mother i.e. plaintiff No.1. The said business was carried on

     by both of them together but the younger brother (plaintiff

     No.2) was appointed and declared to be the sole proprietor.
7.   The family, sometime in 1990, purchased a house in

     Harshwardhan Nagar and they started residing in it. They

     lived there jointly at least up to the year 2011. It appears

     that the elder son (defendant No.1) along with his family

     started residing in a house in Shalimar Park which was

     jointly purchased by the family from the income of the joint

     family business in the year 2014.
8.   Side by side the tailoring business, the elder son

     (defendant No.1) had started a fabric business in the name

     of Hemi Textiles in the year 1986.
9.   A shop was purchased by the family in the New Market, TT

     Nagar, Bhopal, from the combined income of the family

     business of Himalaya Tailors and the Hemi Textiles.
10. It is averred in the plaint that from the original joint family

     business of ‘Himalaya Tailors’, both the parties purchased

     several properties in the name of different persons of the

     family. All the properties were purchased out of the joint

     family funds or the income derived from the joint family
4
business. It was categorically asserted that the properties

                have been purchased in the name of the plaintiffs and the

                defendants or the members of the family and were the joint

                properties of the Joint Hindu Family. The said properties

                were described in paragraph 6 of the plaint. Some of the

                properties mentioned in paragraph 6 of the plaint at Serial

                Nos.19, 20 and 21 were sold by Shaifali Gupta (defendant

                No.2), wife of the elder son, in favour of defendant Nos.5

                and 6 and as such it has been alleged that the said sales

                are void.
11. It is on the basis of the above averments that the suit for

                declaration, partition, injunction in respect of the suit

                properties was instituted by the mother (plaintiff No.1) and

                the younger son (plaintiff No.2). In the said suit, the

                subsequent purchasers defendant Nos.5 and 6 moved an

                application purported to be under
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
contending that the suit is not maintainable in view of the

                provisions of Benami Transaction (Prohibition) Act, 19883.

                It is made clear that no such application was filed by the

                main contesting defendants to the suit i.e. by the elder
3
Hereinafter referred to as ‘the
Benami Act
’
5
brother or his family members. They never alleged that the

                suit is not maintainable or is barred by any provision of

                the statute.
12. The above application was contested by the plaintiffs and

                a reply was filed stating that the
Benami Act
(as amended

                in 2016) came into force w.e.f. 11.01.2016 and all the

                family properties were purchased prior to the above date

                and as such the suit would not be hit by the said Act. The

                suit is not for adjudication of any matter in relation to

                benami transaction as envisaged in the
Benami Act
rather

                it is a suit essentially under the Hindu Succession Act,

                19564. The suit properties are Hindu Joint Family

                properties and the relief claimed in the suit is purely in

                respect of the said properties and as such it does not stand

                prohibited by the
Benami Act
. The said Act nowhere bars

                the institution of a suit for a partition, declaration or

                injunction in connection with the properties belonging to

                the Hindu Joint Family. Moreover, the objections raised

                by defendant Nos.5 and 6 to the maintainability of the suit

                are mixed questions of fact and law and are to be
4
Hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’
6
considered only on the basis of the pleadings and the

               evidence of the parties and not at the threshold on the

               basis of the plaint allegations alone.
13. The court of first instance by the order impugned dated

               25.02.2019    after   elaborately   discussing   the   plaint

               averments, came to the conclusion that the issue whether

               suit properties are the Joint Hindu Family properties or

               are the properties of the individual family members and

               whether they are liable for partition, is a question

               dependent upon facts to be adjudicated upon after the

               parties have adduced evidence. On the averments made in

               the plaint, the suit is not barred by any law and in view of

               the judgment in the case of
Popat and Kotecha Property

               vs. State Bank of India Staff Association5
, the

               provisions of
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
are not attracted.

               Accordingly, application under
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
was

               rejected.
14. Aggrieved by the aforesaid decision, the subsequent

               purchasers i.e. defendant Nos.5 and 6 filed Civil Revision

               No.324/2019. The said revision has been dismissed by the
5
(2005) 7 SCC 510
7
impugned judgment and order dated 26.09.2022 holding

     that the trial court has rightly held that the issue as to

     whether the properties belong to the Joint Hindu Family

     properties or they have been purchased from the joint

     hindu family funds is to be proved by the parties on the

     basis of evidence. The plaint of the suit is not liable to be

     rejected as from the averments made therein it cannot be

     said that it is barred by any statutory provision of law.
15. The decision of the court of first instance rejecting the

     application under
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
was not

     challenged by the main contesting parties i.e. the elder

     brother and his wife (defendant Nos.1 and 2) or their

     children.
16. After having failed in the two courts below in getting the

     plaint rejected in exercise of powers under
Order VII Rule

     11 CPC
, Deepaklal Chandani (defendant No.5) alone has

     preferred   Special   Leave   Petition   (C)   No.4674/2023

     whereas Special Leave Petition (C) No.4673/2023 has been

     preferred by the Shaifali Gupta (defendant No.2).
17. At the very outset, it is pertinent to mention that Shaifali

     Gupta (defendant No.2) had neither moved application
8
under
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
for the rejection of the plaint

    nor she has filed any revision challenging the order of the

    court of first instance rejecting such an application moved

    by the defendant Nos.5 and 6. Therefore, she is not a

    person aggrieved by the rejection of the application under

    Order VII Rule 11 and cannot be permitted to assail the

    impugned orders. She has acquiesced to the jurisdiction of

    the trial court and has by her conduct accepted the order

    of the court of first instance and chosen to contest the

    suits on merits.
18. The   defendant    Nos.5       and   6   are   only   subsequent

    purchasers of some of the properties. They cannot claim

    any knowledge of the nature of the property in the hands

    of the original owners. They cannot have any personal

    knowledge as to if the said properties in the hands of the

    original owners are Joint Hindu Family property or are

    their individual properties or they have been acquired

    benami by the family members or are the properties

    possessed by the female hindu in absolute sense. In such

    a situation, they are not the right person to move

    application under
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
for the rejection
9
of the plaint as allegedly barred by
Section 4
of the Benami

    Act.
19. We have heard Shri Navin Pahwa, learned senior counsel

    for the petitioner(s) and Shri Kavin Gulati, learned senior

    counsel for the respondents.
20. The submission of learned counsel for the defendants is

    twofold. First, the suit is barred by
Section 4
read with
Section 14
of the Act, as some of the suit properties are in

    the exclusive name of the defendant No.2 and as such

    would be treated in entirety as her personal properties and

    would not be amenable to partition. Secondly, the suit is

    hit by
Section 4
of the Act. Lastly, since the properties

    stand exclusively in the name of different persons, no party

    can claim joint ownership or right of partition in respect

    thereof.
21. In response to the above argument, Shri Kavin Gulati,

    learned senior counsel for the plaintiffs, submitted that the

    bar of
Section 4
read with 14 of the Act, was never raised

    by the defendants in their application under
Order VII Rule

    11 CPC
and the said point was not argued on their behalf

    either before the court of first instance or before the High
10
Court. Therefore, they are not entitled to raise the said plea

     for the first time before this Court. Moreover, the above

     provisions do not bar a suit of such a nature in respect of

     joint family property in any manner. Secondly, the suit is

     also not barred by
Section 4
of the Act, as according to the

     plaint averments, all the properties were purchased from

     the nucleus of the joint family, may be in the exclusive

     name of some of the family members. They fall in the

     exempted category as per
Section 2(9)(A)
Exception (ii) of

     the
Benami Act
.
22. He further submitted that upon the simple reading of the

     plaint allegations, the suit is not barred by any provision

     of law and, therefore, Order VII Rule 11 (d) does not stand

     attracted so as to reject the plaint. The defence or the

     issues raised by the defendants are factual in nature which

     are dependent upon the facts to be proved inter se the

     parties on the basis of the evidence to be adduced.
23.
Section 4
of the Benami Act bars the suit, claim or action

     in respect of a property held benami by person at the

     behest of the person claiming to be its true owner. It reads

     as under:
11
“4(1). No suit, claim or action to enforce any
           right in respect of any property held benami
           against the person in whose name the
           property is held or against any other person
           shall lie by or on behalf of a person claiming
           to be the real owner of such property.”
24. The above provision bars an action in respect of ‘property

     held benami’. However, whether the property in respect of

     which the suit, claim or action has been brought about is

     a benami property or not, is the issue of prime

     consideration.
25. The plaint allegations all through describe the suit

     properties as the Joint Hindu Family properties and that

     they have been purchased either from the nucleus of the

     Joint Hindu Family property or the income derived from

     the joint family business. The properties are not described

     as benami in the name of any member of the family.

     Therefore, from the plaint reading, the suit properties

     cannot ex-facie be held to be benami properties in respect

     whereof the suit may not be maintainable in view of
Section 4
of the Benami Act.
26.
The Benami Act
further defines ‘benami property’ and

     ‘benami transaction’ under
Sections 2 (8)
and
2 (9)
of the

     said Act. Benami property is the property which is the
12
subject matter of benami transaction whereas benami

    transaction is a property held by a person in respect

    whereof consideration has been provided by some other

    person but would not include certain categories of

    properties such as where a person is holding a property in

    a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of another person.
27. In such circumstances, whether a property is a benami,

    has to be considered not in the light of
Section 4
of the

    Benami Act alone but also in connection with
Sections 2

    (8)
and
2 (9)
of the said Act i.e. whether the property if

    benami falls in the exception. It is only where the property

    is benami and does not fall within the exception contained

    in Sub-Section (9) of
Section 2
that a suit may be said to

    be barred. However, the issue whether the property is

    benami and is not covered by the exception, is again an

    issue to be decided on the basis of evidence and not simply

    on mere averments contained in the plaint. The defendants

    have to adduce evidence to prove the property to be

    benami.
13
28.
In
Pawan Kumar vs. Babu Lal6
, a similar issue arose

               before this Court in a matter concerning rejection of plaint

               under Order VII Rule 11 (d)
CPC
. This Court held that for

               rejecting a plaint, the test is whether from the statement

               made in the plaint it appears without doubt or dispute that

               the suit is barred by any statutory provision. Where a plea

               is taken that the suit is saved by the exception to the

               benami transaction, it becomes the disputed question of

               fact which has to be adjudicated on the basis of the

               evidence. Therefore, the plaint cannot be rejected at the

               stage of consideration of application under
Order VII Rule

               11 CPC
.
29. The ratio of
the above case
squarely applies to the facts of

               the case at hand. Accordingly, in our opinion, the courts

               below have not committed any error of law in rejecting the

               application under
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
on the above

               score.
30. As regard the contention that the plaint is also hit by
Section 14
of the Act, it is important to point out that no

               such specific plea was taken by the defendants in the
6
(2019) 4 SCC 367
14
application under
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
. Such a plea was

    never raised and argued before either of the courts below.

    There is no finding by any court on the above aspect.

    Therefore, it has rightly been submitted by the counsel for

    the plaintiff that the defendants cannot be permitted to

    raise such a plea for the first time in the Special Leave

    Petition without there being any foundation to that effect.
31. More importantly,
Section 14
of the Act simply provides

    that the property possessed by a female Hindu shall be

    held by her as a full owner. It does not bar or prohibit a

    suit in respect of such a property. Therefore, in the

    absence of any bar contained in the above provision, the

    suit plaint is not liable to be rejected as barred by law.
32. The courts below have rejected the application filed by

    defendant Nos.5 and 6 under
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
and

    have refused to reject the plaint as barred by any statute.

    It means that the parties are at liberty to contest the suit

    on merits. They have right to get the necessary relevant

    issues framed in the suit including that of suit being

    barred by any provision of law and if any such issue is

    framed, it will be open for the court to consider the same
15
on merits after the parties have led evidence. In such a

     situation, the defendants have not suffered any prejudice

     and there is no miscarriage of justice so as to permit them

     to avail the discretionary jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 136
of the Constitution of India.
33. Accordingly, we do not deem it necessary to entertain these

     Special Leave Petitions and the same are dismissed.
.............……………………………….. J.
(PANKAJ MITHAL)



                          .............……………………………….. J.
(AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH)

 NEW DELHI;
MAY 20, 2025.
16