[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
S. Janaki Iyer vs Union Of India on 20 May, 2025
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
2025 INSC 742
                                                                                    REPORTABLE

                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                           CIVIL APPEAL No.10858 OF 2024
                                              (@ SLP (C) No. 29718 of 2018)

                             S. JANAKI IYER                                   … APPELLANT

                                                               VERSUS



                            UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                         … RESPONDENTS


                                                          JUDGMENT
AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH, J.
1. The challenge in this appeal is to the judgment dated

                              24.07.2018 passed by the Division Bench of the Bombay

                              High Court upholding the judgment and order dated

                              29.09.2004 and 23.02.2005 passed by the Central

                              Administrative           Tribunal     (“CAT”)   in   the    original

                              application and the review petition respectively, whereby

                              the order of dismissal from service of the Appellant was
Signature Not Verified     sustained.
Digitally signed by
POOJA SHARMA
Date: 2025.05.20
18:47:58 IST
Reason:
CIVIL APPEAL No.10858 OF 2024                             Page 1 of 22
2. The primary ground taken for challenge to the Order of

  the Tribunal as well as the High Court is that Courts

  failed to appreciate the violation of the principles of

  natural justice, which were not allegedly adhered to by

  the     Respondents          due   to   the   non-supply     of    the

  preliminary Inquiry Report, where prima facie the

  Appellant was found to have violated the rules governing

  the service i.e. The Central Civil Services (Classification,

  Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965 [“CCS (CCA) Rules,

  1965”].
3. The other ground which has been taken is that the

  chargesheet as served upon the Appellant is vague,

  which has prejudiced and adversely affected her defence.
4. The next ground which has been pressed into service is

  the inordinate delay of nine years during which the

  inquiry proceedings continued. Not only this, certain

  documents which were sought by the Appellant were

  also not provided to her. Yet, another plea which has

  been taken is that the disciplinary authority although

  had returned a finding that the transfer order on the
CIVIL APPEAL No.10858 OF 2024                             Page 2 of 22
basis of which the Appellant was transferred from

  Kendriya Vidyalaya, Bangalore to Kendriya Vidyalaya,

  Mumbai was a fake order, but no findings were returned

  that the Appellant was in any manner involved in the

  issuance of the same.
5. Yet, another plea which has been taken is that the

  disciplinary authority, despite there being no findings

  against       the    Appellant     in    the   Inquiry   Report      as

  submitted, proceeded to hold the Appellant guilty of the

  charge merely because she was the beneficiary of the

  said     order      and     that   too    without   any    evidence

  establishing her connection with procurement of the

  said transfer order. The violation of the statutory rules,

  specially Rule 15(2) of the CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965 stands

  established as this mandatory provision was not

  complied with. On this basis, prayer has been made for

  accepting the appeal by setting aside the impugned

  judgments and the order of dismissal.
6. On the other hand, the Respondents have supported the

  judgments impugned as well as the order of dismissal by
CIVIL APPEAL No.10858 OF 2024                             Page 3 of 22
asserting that the principles of natural justice and

statutory rules were duly complied with as there being

no prejudice caused to the Appellant. The grounds which

have been pressed into service in the present appeal,

according to Respondents, would not lead to a situation

where the impugned orders could be set aside. They

have also asserted that the evidence, both documentary

and oral, proves the charges against the Appellant. The

principle which has been pressed into service is with

regard to the standard of proof, where a preponderance

of probability would operate to establish misconduct

during the disciplinary proceedings vis-à-vis the proof

beyond doubt as in criminal matters. That burden

having been discharged, the findings as returned by the

Inquiry Officer and thereafter by the disciplinary

authority, passes the test as has been laid down in the

various judgments of this Court as also the mandate of

the Statute. Prayer has thus been made for upholding

the impugned orders and dismissal of the appeal.
CIVIL APPEAL No.10858 OF 2024                 Page 4 of 22
7. Having considered the submissions made by the

   Counsel for the Appellant as well as the Counsel for the

   Respondents, we proceed to decide the present appeal.
8. Facts in brief, which are essential for adjudication of the

   present matter, are that the Appellant was appointed as

   a Hindi trained graduate teacher on probation at

   Kendriya Vidyalaya Sanghathan at Bangalore with effect

   from 11.01.1989, and as a permanent teacher from

   16.04.1992. As her husband was working in Mumbai,

   she sought her transfer from Bangalore to Mumbai or

   Pune. A transfer order is alleged to have been served on

   her dated 01.10.1991 wherein she was transferred from

   Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan, Bangalore to Kendriya

   Vidyalaya, Mumbai. The said transfer order pertains to

   twelve teachers which was issued and signed by Mr. VK

   Jain, Assistant Commissioner (Headquarters) K.V.

   Sanghathan, New Delhi. In pursuance to the said

   transfer order, Appellant was relieved on 14.10.1991

   and she reported at Mumbai on 18.10.1991. As the said

   transfer order had not been received by the Principal at
CIVIL APPEAL No.10858 OF 2024                    Page 5 of 22
Mumbai, she was asked to wait for some time.
Ultimately, she was permitted to join on 24.10.1991

     provisionally with an undertaking to the effect that she

     would report back at Bangalore in case the transfer

     order was reversed or cancelled.
9.   The Appellant found a discrepancy in her transfer order,

     where she was mentioned as a teacher of Social Studies,

     whereas she was in fact a Hindi teacher. Accordingly, a

     letter was sent by her to the Headquarters at New Delhi

     seeking correction in the transfer order. No response

     thereto was received, instead an order dated 13.07.1992

     was served upon the Appellant placing her under

     suspension pending disciplinary inquiry.
10. A chargesheet dated 10.02.1993 was issued and served

     upon her, alleging that the Appellant had managed to

     get    herself     transferred   from   Kendriya   Vidyalaya,

     Bangalore to Kendriya Vidyalaya, Bombay under a fake

     transfer order.
11. Reply to the chargesheet was filed by the Appellant on

     25.06.1993 where the said allegations were denied. The
CIVIL APPEAL No.10858 OF 2024                       Page 6 of 22
reply was found not satisfactory leading to initiation of

    disciplinary inquiry. The Inquiry proceedings thereafter

    proceeded as per the CCS (CCA), Rules 1965. The said

    proceedings         continued     for     almost     9      years.      A

    representation was submitted by the Appellant for

    revocation of the order of suspension after having

    exceeded the period as has been provided for under the

    CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965. The said suspension order was

    eventually revoked and the Appellant was directed to

    join at Baran, Jodhpur vide letter dated 26.03.2001. The

    Appellant insisted upon a formal transfer order to

    Jodhpur before proceeding and as is apparent, she never

    joined     in    Jodhpur.       The     fact   remains      that     the

    departmental proceedings continued, and she was being

    paid her subsistence allowance regularly as per the

    Rules.
12. The      disciplinary       proceedings        concluded,     and       a

    communication dated 30.03.2001 was received by the

    Appellant from the disciplinary authority indicating that

    the proceedings have concluded on 30.03.2001 and the
CIVIL APPEAL No.10858 OF 2024                                Page 7 of 22
findings were to the effect that the transfer order dated

      01.10.1991 was fake, and since the Appellant, being the

      sole beneficiary of the transfer order why should the

      further proceedings be not held against her and suitable

      punishment be not imposed specially when all other

      eleven teachers mentioned in the said transfer order had

      been transferred under different orders which were

      found to be genuine. The disciplinary authority,

      therefore has prima facie opined that the charges levelled

      against the Appellant stood true. The Appellant was

      called upon to put forth a response to the Inquiry report

      which      was      duly        supplied   along   with   the    said

      communication dated 30.03.2001.
13.   The Appellant submitted a detailed representation

      dated 09.04.2001 disputing and challenging the findings

      of the Inquiry Officer that the transfer qua Appellant was

      fake whereas that of the others were genuine. The aspect

      with regard to the other findings was also challenged,

      taking the plea of non-compliance of the statutory rules

      as also the aspect of the conclusion drawn by the Inquiry
CIVIL APPEAL No.10858 OF 2024                             Page 8 of 22
Officer not connecting her with the procurement of the

     said transfer order which was alleged to be fake. The said

     representation was duly considered by the disciplinary

     authority but was not accepted rather the disciplinary

     authority proceeded to hold the Appellant guilty of the

     charges which she was called upon to face in the

     Departmental Inquiry and passed the punishment of

     dismissal from service vide order dated 16.11.2001.
14. The reason assigned in the said order of dismissal, apart

     from the fact that the said transfer order dated

     01.10.1994 was fake, for coming to the conclusion with

     regard to the charge having been proved against the

     Appellant       was     that    the   Appellant   was   the    sole

     beneficiary of the said order and except for her no other

     employee had obtained any undue benefit out of the said

     order as all the other eleven teachers had been

     transferred by various other separate orders.
15. Against this order of dismissal, the Appellant preferred

     a statutory appeal which was considered by the

     appellate authority and after affording personal hearing
CIVIL APPEAL No.10858 OF 2024                           Page 9 of 22
to the Appellant proceeded to reject the same vide order

     dated 11.02.2002.
16. This led to the institution of an Original Application

     before the CAT at Mumbai in the year 2002 which was

     decided vide order dated 29.09.2004 dismissing the

     same upholding the order of dismissal. The Review

     Petition preferred by the Appellant was also dismissed

     on 23.02.2005 leading to the filing of the writ petition

     before the High Court of Bombay which also ended up in

     dismissal vide the impugned order dated 24.07.2018.
17. The present appeal is the outcome of the challenge to the

     said orders, judgments of the CAT and the High Court.

     The challenge primarily is based upon the basic

     principle of non-compliance of the principles of natural

     justice. To press for the said assertion the first plea

     which has been taken is the vagueness of the

     chargesheet.
18. A perusal of the chargesheet dated 10.02.1993 would

     show that not only did it contain the charges against the

     Appellant but the same was supported by documents as
CIVIL APPEAL No.10858 OF 2024                   Page 10 of 22
well. The charge against the Appellant was that she

    managed to get herself transferred from Kendriya

    Vidyalaya, Bangalore to Kendriya Vidyalaya, Bombay

    under a fake transfer order. In this respect, the language

    of the said chargesheet in our view is very clear and

    specific. A common man on going through the same,

    would understand as to what were the charges which an

    employee was called upon to face and defend. The

    consequence thereof was obviously that she was the

    beneficiary of a fake transfer order. It is further apparent

    and is made clear from the fact in unambiguous terms

    that she was the sole beneficiary of the said transfer

    order. The plea therefore with regard to the vagueness of

    the chargesheet cannot be sustained.
19. The aspect with regard to non-supply of the copy of the

    Preliminary Inquiry Report again would not hold for long

    for the simple reason that it was never made the basis

    for coming to a conclusion in the regular Departmental

    Inquiry with regard to the guilt of the Appellant. It is an

    admitted fact that after the preliminary Inquiry,
CIVIL APPEAL No.10858 OF 2024                    Page 11 of 22
chargesheet was issued to the Appellant and thereafter

    a regular Departmental Inquiry was held where both the

    parties had led their respective evidence and on that

    basis the Inquiry Officer has returned his findings.
20. The principles of natural justice are founded on three

    fundamental rules that ensure fairness in legal and

    administrative proceedings. Firstly, the Hearing Rule

    (Audi Alteram Partem) which mandates that no person

    should be judged without being given a fair opportunity

    to present his case. Secondly, the Bias Rule (Nemo Judex

    in Causa Sua) which asserts that no one should act as a

    judge in its own case, thereby safeguarding impartiality

    and preventing any form of bias. Lastly, the principle of

    Reasoned Decision, also known as Speaking Orders,

    requires every decision to be supported by valid and

    clearly stated reasons to promote transparency and

    accountability in the decision-making process.
21. No prejudice having been caused because of the non-

    supply of the preliminary Inquiry Report to the

    Appellant, the plea of violation of the principles of
CIVIL APPEAL No.10858 OF 2024                    Page 12 of 22
natural justice would not be available to the Appellant.

    As a matter of principle, violation of the principles of

    justice cannot be on the touchstone of technical

    infringement made the basis of setting aside the action

    taken by the authority against an employee unless it is

    established that grave prejudice has been caused to an

    employee        because          of   non-supply   of   a   particular

    document. Nothing has also come on record which

    would indicate that the Appellant had ever sought for the

    Preliminary Inquiry Report after the issuance of the

    chargesheet. Similar would be the position with regard

    to the other documents also which are alleged to have

    not been supplied to her as the nature and extent of

    disadvantage or handicap caused or suffered by the

    Appellant, in the absence of the documents, is missing

    in the departmental proceedings or the pleadings.
22. No grounds have been laid down indicating the prejudice

    which has been caused to her either during the inquiry

    or at the stage of projecting her response to the show

    cause notice given by the disciplinary authority. Mere
CIVIL APPEAL No.10858 OF 2024                               Page 13 of 22
assertion that some documents have not been supplied

          or even mentioning the said documents would not be

          enough unless the consequential prejudice which would

          or has been caused to a delinquent employee is put

          forth.
23. The Court is not bound to simply accept an assertion of

          a delinquent employee and proceed to question the

          disciplinary proceedings without being satisfied with

          regard to any prejudice having been caused to the

          employee.
24. The position in law on this aspect as has been culled out

          by the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in the

          case of
Managing Director, ECIL, Hyderabad and Others vs.

          B.    Karunakar       and       Others1
followed and explained

          thereafter by this Court expounded the doctrines of

          reasonable opportunity and natural justice to have been

          conceived and evolved not as a mechanical or a

          ritualistic formality, but as substantive principles

          intended to safeguard the rule of law and to facilitate the
1
(1993) 4 SCC 727
CIVIL APPEAL No.10858 OF 2024                           Page 14 of 22
assertion of legitimate rights by individuals.          It was

categorically held that these principles are not to be

invoked as mere procedural sacred words that have

magical effect when said on every occasion, irrespective

of context. The Court underscored the aspect as to

whether prejudice has in fact been occasioned to an

employee by the non-supply of the inquiry report which

must be assessed with reference to the specific facts and

circumstances of each case. Upon such assessment, if it

is evident that no different outcome would have emerged

even after the inquiry report or documents had been

furnished, to reinstate the employee and grant him

consequential benefits in such situation would amount

to a distortion of justice. In other words, it would amount

to conferring a premium upon misconduct and to stretch

the doctrine of natural justice to an illogical and

unwarranted           extent.   Such   an   expansive     and

indiscriminate application of the principle would,

paradoxically, undermine the very concept of justice it

seeks to uphold.
CIVIL APPEAL No.10858 OF 2024                      Page 15 of 22
25. Similar is the position with regard to the plea of

    prolongation of the Inquiry for 9 years in concluding the

    same. The explanation as has been given by the

    Respondents with regard to the time consumed during

    the inquiry is fully justified as it had to be and actually

    was held at different places on different occasions as the

    matter related to different stations pertaining to the

    transfer orders of eleven teachers which were in

    question. The availability of the relevant documents and

    other aspects including the witnesses so posted etc. at

    different stations is also taken as a ground in

    explanation. It is not the case of the Appellant that she

    was     not     provided        with   appropriate   subsistence

    allowances or facilities for attending the Inquiry

    proceedings which would have in any manner caused

    hindrance or difficulty to participate in or attend the

    same.
26. Mere delay during the inquiry proceedings, when it is

    explained with regard to the time taken for the inquiry

    to conclude and that too justifying the same with no
CIVIL APPEAL No.10858 OF 2024                          Page 16 of 22
prejudice having been caused, cannot be made the basis

    for vitiating the departmental proceedings. Inordinate or

    unexplained delay in the departmental proceedings may

    be a justifiable ground if tampered with prejudice having

    been established to have been caused to the delinquent

    employee in the said process for interference by the

    Court. In the present case, the same is absent and

    therefore the said plea of delay fails.
27. The other ground which has been pressed into service is

    with regard to non-compliance of the statutory rules in

    the departmental proceedings which were held against

    the Appellant. Specific reference has been made to Rule

    15(2), CCS (CCS) Rules, 1965 which reads as follows:
“The disciplinary authority shall forward or cause to
            be forwarded a copy of the report of the inquiry, if
            any, held by the disciplinary authority or where the
            disciplinary authority is not the inquiring authority,
            a copy of the report of the inquiring authority
            together with its own tentative reasons for
            disagreement, if any, with the findings of inquiring
            authority on any article of charge to the Government
            servant who shall be required to submit, if he so
            desires, his written representation or submission to
            the disciplinary authority within fifteen days,
            irrespective of whether the report is favourable or not
            to the Government servant.”
CIVIL APPEAL No.10858 OF 2024                               Page 17 of 22
28. A perusal of the above rule would show that in case the

    disciplinary authority disagrees with the findings

    returned by the inquiry authority, it would, along with

    the inquiry report forward its own tentative reasons for

    disagreement with the findings of the inquiry authority

    calling upon the delinquent employee to submit his

    representation/response to the disciplinary authority.

    The said procedure has been duly complied with and

    followed in the present case. The perusal of the inquiry

    report indicates that not only has the inquiring authority

    come to a definite conclusion that the transfer order was

    fake but has also concluded that the charges have been

    proved against her meaning thereby that she had

    managed to get herself transferred. Merely because the

    person through whom she has been able to procure or

    manage to secure the fake transfer order has not come

    in the findings of the Inquiry Officer would not lead to

    exoneration of the Appellant. There is nothing on record

    which would indicate that the Inquiry Officer had given

    a clean chit to the Appellant. It is also apparent from the
CIVIL APPEAL No.10858 OF 2024                   Page 18 of 22
records that the Appellant is the sole beneficiary of the

    said transfer order. It has come on record and in the

    Departmental Inquiry as well that eleven other teachers

    whose names find mention in the transfer order in

    question dated 01.10.1991 had been transferred by

    different earlier orders and their transfer orders were not

    dependent solely or relatable to the order in issue. The

    plea thus of the Appellant on this count is also

    unsustainable.
29. As regards the submission that the findings as recorded

    by the Inquiry Officer with regard to the transfer order

    being fake are based on no evidence which could have

    been the only ground on which interference by the Court

    would be permissible also falls flat with an answer to the

    questionnaire served upon Shri VK Jain, the Assistant

    Commissioner            in       Kendriya   Vidyalaya   Sanghathan

    (Headquarters), New Delhi who is said to be the person

    under whose signatures the order dated 01.10.1991 was

    passed, when he had responded that the signatures on

    the alleged order dated 01.10.1991 had not been signed
CIVIL APPEAL No.10858 OF 2024                            Page 19 of 22
by him and it was not his signature. The said transfer

    order was fake which assertion when put to test in the

    cross-examination in the departmental inquiry has not

    been shaken where again the said fact has been

    reiterated. When the alleged author himself denying the

    said signatures on the document and has gone to the

    extent of saying that he had not issued the said order,

    the    requirements             of   the   statutory   rules   in     a

    departmental inquiry stand fulfilled. What has been

    stated above is that these are not criminal proceedings

    but departmental proceedings where the test with regard

    to the proof on the basis of evidence is different. The

    preponderance and probability being the touchstone in

    the departmental proceedings the same having been

    fulfilled, the plea as has been sought to be raised by the

    Appellant cannot sustain.
30. Another argument which has been raised by the

    Appellant is that the transfer order dated 01.10.1991,

    which had been issued with an intention to benefit Ms.

    Sandhya Jain in place of the Appellant at Mumbai at the
CIVIL APPEAL No.10858 OF 2024                              Page 20 of 22
behest of Assistant Commissioner Kendriya Vidyalaya

      Sanghathan, Bombay Region Mr. RK Jain appointed the

      daughter        of     Assistant   Commissioner,   Kendriya

      Vidyalaya Sanghathan (Headquarters), New Delhi. The

      Appellant argued that this action was actuated by mala

      fides and driven by an oblique motive, and therefore, the

      transfer order was arbitrary and not in accordance with

      law.
31.   The said plea was neither taken before the CAT nor

      pleaded in the writ petition. The same, when pressed

      into service orally, was rejected by the High Court on the

      ground of non-pleading of the same as also non-

      impleadment of the parties against whom mala fide were

      being pressed into service. For the same reason before

      this Court the said plea, although having been sought to

      be projected, cannot be permitted. It would not be out of

      way to mention that here again in this appeal, the said

      persons are not parties.
32. In view of the above, there has been no violation of any

      statutory rules nor has there been violation of principles
CIVIL APPEAL No.10858 OF 2024                      Page 21 of 22
of natural justice with their being ample evidence to

     establish with regard to the transfer order dated

     01.10.1991 being fake which fulfilled the requirements

     as have been
laid down in
the statutory rules as well as

     the law finalized by this Court. The Impugned Orders

     being in accordance with law do not call for any

     interference.
33. The appeal being devoid of merit stands dismissed.
34. There shall be no orders as to cost.
35. Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
……...……….……………………..J.
                                     [ ABHAY S. OKA ]




                                      ……..………..……………………..J.
                                     [ AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH ]


NEW DELHI;
MAY 20, 2025
CIVIL APPEAL No.10858 OF 2024                      Page 22 of 22