[Cites
20
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Umashankar Yadav vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh Home ... on 8 May, 2025
Author:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Reportable
 2025 INSC 653


                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.439 OF 2018


                  Umashankar Yadav & Anr.                               .… Appellant(s)

                                                      Versus


                State of Uttar Pradesh,
                Through Chief Secretary & Anr.                         …. Respondent(s)



                                                JUDGMENT
Joymalya Bagchi, J.
1. Appellants have assailed a cryptic order dated 02.07.2015

                         whereby the High Court refused to quash Crime No.93 of 2014

                         under
Sections 186
and
353
of Indian Penal Code1.
2. Guria is a well known and reputed organization fighting against

                         human    trafficking   and   commercial   sexual   exploitation   of
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
INDU MARWAH
girls/children in the State of Uttar Pradesh. Due to its relentless
Date: 2025.05.08
17:57:28 IST
Reason:
1
For short, ‘
IPC
’
Page 1 of 13
efforts a number of minor girls have been rescued from the

                clutches of traffickers.     While the pioneering efforts of the

                organization received accolades at national and international

                levels, its foot soldiers i.e. the appellants have suffered the

                ignominy   of   being      branded        as   “criminals”   for   alleged

                overzealousness in course of a raid to rescue bonded labour/minor

                children from a brick kiln at Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh.
3. The unfortunate saga commenced when the first appellant, a

                Project Coordinator at Guria submitted an application before the

                District Magistrate, Varanasi alleging bonded/child labourers

                were engaged in a brick kiln at Varanasi and prayed that the

                exploited labourers including children be rescued. In response to

                the application, Deputy District Magistrate, Varanasi ordered

                Assistant Labour Commissioner to take necessary action.
4. Pursuant to the directions of the Assistant Labour Commissioner,

                on 06.06.2014 at 10 am, one Raja Ram Dubey2, Ram Avatar

                Sharma and Ram Lakhan Swarnkar (Labour Employment

                Officers), Inspector Ajit Kumar Singh of Anti Human Trafficking

                Force (AHTF) and two constables of Lohta Thana Varanasi
2
Informant
Page 2 of 13
proceeded to inspect the spot. Appellants also accompanied the

  team.
5. Appellants contend they found children and labourers at the brick

  kiln who were brought to the Police Station. At that time the owner

  of the brick kiln intervened and took away the labourers. First

  appellant submitted a faxed message disclosing these facts to the

  District Magistrate.
6. On the other hand, informant lodged a complaint at Lohta Police

  Station though no child was found working at the spot, alleging

  when his team had reached Shakti Mark Brick Kiln, appellants

  along with others forcibly put the labourers and the children in

  dumpers and took them away.             Appellants did not obey the

  instructions of the joint team and did not let them record their

  statements before taking away the labourers.          Thereby they

  obstructed and hampered their discharge of official duty.
7. On his complaint, FIR came to be registered under
Sections 186
,
353
and
363
IPC.
8. On further statement of one of the labourers, namely, Om

  Prakash,
Section 363
IPC was dropped.           Statements of other

  witnesses were recorded and charge sheet under
Sections 186
and
Page 3 of 13
353
IPC
came to be filed.           Magistrate took cognizance of the

    chargesheet which was assailed before the High Court. The High

    Court by the impugned order refused to quash the chargesheet

    holding as follows :-
“From the perusal of the material on record and looking into the
          facts of the case at this stage it cannot be said that no offence is
          made out against the applicants. All the submission made at the
          bar relates to the disputed questions of fact, which cannot be
          adjudicated upon by this Court under
Section 482
, Cr.P.C. At this
          stage only a prima facie case is to be seen in the light of the law
          laid down by the Supreme Court in cases of
R.P. Kapur Vs. State
          of Punjab
, AIR 1960 SC 866, State of Haryana Vs. Bhajan Lal,
          1992 SCC (Cr.)
426,
State of Bihar Vs. P.P. Sharma
, 1992 SCC
          (Cr.)
192 and lastly
Zandu Pharmaceutical Works Ltd. Vs. Mohd.
          Saraful Haq and another
(Para-10) 2005 SCC (Cr.) 283. The
          disputed defence of the accused cannot be considered at this
          stage. Moreover, the applicants have got a right of discharge
          under
section 239
,
245(2)
or 227/228, Cr. P.C. as the case may
          be through a proper application for the said purpose and they are
          free to take all the submissions in the said discharge application
          before the trial Court.”
9. Above quoted paragraph shows the High Court did not advert

    either to the facts of the case or the contentions raised on behalf

    of the appellants. In a perfunctory manner it observed the issues

    involved disputed questions of fact which could not be adjudicated

    before the court under
Section 482
Cr.PC. It also observed the

    appellants have right to seek discharge before the trial court.
10. However, prior to arriving at such finding it is the duty of the High

    Court to ascertain whether the uncontroverted allegations in the

    FIR/Chargesheet constitute an offence, or continuation of the
Page 4 of 13
proceeding suffers from a legal bar or is wholly vexatious and an

           abuse of process of law.
11. Summoning of an accused is a serious matter which affects liberty

           and dignity of the individual concerned.                   Judicial intervention

           under
Section 482
Cr.PC to weed out vexatious proceedings is of

           pivotal importance in order to protect individuals from untelling

           harassment and misery and to ensure unmerited prosecutions do

           not crowd overflowing dockets of criminal courts and yield space

           for deserving cases. Faced with the agony of a lame prosecution,

           it is of little solace to a litigant to be told that inherent powers are

           shut out as he is entitled to approach the trial court and pray for

           discharge. The inherent power of the High Court to prevent abuse

           of process of court is much wider in amplitude than the discharge

           powers and cannot be whittled down on the plea of existence of

           such remedy3.
12. As the High Court had not adverted to the facts of the case at all

           and mechanically recorded a finding that the case did not merit
3
Ashok Chaturvedi & Ors. vs. Shitul H. Chanchani & Anr.
, (1998) 7 SCC 698.
Page 5 of 13
intervention at the preliminary stage, we have           ourselves

   undertaken such exercise.
13. What emerges from scanning the allegations in the chargesheet

   and statements of witnesses is that the appellants had

   accompanied a team of Labour Enforcement Officers to verify the

   allegation that bonded/child labour were employed at the brick

   kiln.   During inspection, a difference of opinion cropped up

   between the labour officers and the appellants as to the manner

   in which the inspection was to be conducted. While the appellants

   wanted the workmen and children to be brought to the Police

   Station for interrogation, the members of the labour officers

   intended to record their statements at the site before taking

   further action.
14. In this backdrop, the appellants had put the labourers and the

   children in a Dumper and carried them away from the site before

   their statements could be recorded. Thereby, it is alleged they had

   obstructed discharge of official duties.
15. Appellants have a counter version. Even prior to lodging of FIR,

   first appellant through a faxed message had informed the District

   Magistrate that at the intervention of the brick kiln owner the
Page 6 of 13
labourers and children who had been taken to the Police Station

   were illegally released.
16. We need not detain ourselves with regard to truthfulness of the

   rival versions.
17. The moot issue is do the uncontroverted allegations as narrated in

   the chargesheet disclose the ingredients of offences under
Sections

   186
and
353
IPC ?
18. Essential ingredients of offence under
Section186
are as follows:-
(i) Obstruction of a public servant in discharge of public

         functions
(ii) Such obstruction is done voluntarily and with the intention

         to prevent discharge of official duties.
19.
Section 353
is attracted when the following ingredients are

   satisfied:-
(i) Use of assault or criminal force on a public servant during

         execution of his duty.
(ii) With the intention :-
(a) to prevent or deter discharge of such duty; or
(b) as a consequence of anything done or attempted to be
            done in the lawful discharge of his duty.
Page 7 of 13
20. The words force and criminal force are defined in
Sections 349
and
356
IPC and ‘assault’ is defined in
Section 351
of the said Code.
21. A person is said to use force when :
(i) He causes motion, change in motion or cessation of motion of

        another person by :
(a)   use of bodily power; or
(b) using a substance which comes in contact of the body,

        wearing apparel etc or with anything which affects the other

        person’s senses; or
(c) inducing any animal to move or change its motion or

         cease to move.
22. Criminal force is defined as use of force by a person in order to

   commit an offence or done with the intention that such force is to

   cause or likely to cause injury, fear and annoyance to other

   person.
23. Assault involves any gesture or preparation which is done with

   the intention that such gesture or preparation will cause an

   apprehension about use of criminal force. Use of criminal force or

   assault on a public servant is essential to attract
Section 353
IPC.
Page 8 of 13
24. Coming to the facts of the case, uncontroverted allegations in the

   chargesheet do not disclose use of force or holding out threatening

   gestures giving rise to an apprehension of use of force towards

   public servant. Physical movement of the labourers would not

   amount to use of force far less criminal force on a public servant.
25. Given this situation, we can safely conclude uncontroverted

   allegations in the chargesheet do not disclose the ingredients of

   offence under
Section 353
IPC.
26. This brings us to
Section 186
IPC.       It would be argued the

   appellants obstructed discharge of official duties by not permitting

   the statements of bonded labourers/children to be recorded before

   removing them from the site. Obstruction to a public servant must

   be done with the requisite mens rea i.e. to prevent the latter from

   discharging his official duty.
27. Statements of labourers unequivocally show that no force was

   used to take them away and they were promptly released. These

   statements do not give an impression that such action was with

   the intention to impede discharge of official duty. It appears there

   was a genuine difference of opinion between the appellants and

   the officials concerned. Members of the social organization were
Page 9 of 13
of the impression that bonded labourers/children ought to be

   interrogated at a neutral place i.e.      Police Station whereas the

   officers wanted to interrogate them at the site.
28. It goes without saying the manner and mode of interrogation was

   to be decided by the labour officers but appellants’ endeavours

   were not to impede interrogation but to ensure it was conducted

   in a more effective manner. Such factual position denudes their

   action of the requisite mens rea, i.e. intention to obstruct official

   duty. When profile of the allegations emerging from the factual

   matrix of the case renders existence of mens rea patently absurd

   or inherently improbable, such prosecution is liable to be quashed

   as an abuse of process of law.
29. Malicious animus of the labour officials towards the appellants is

   evident from the reports annexed to the counter affidavit.

   Annexure CA/2 is a report of the Additional Labour Commissioner,

   U.P to National Commission for Protection of Child Rights

   regarding the incident. In the report, the Additional Commissioner

   had gone to the extent of alleging the appellants had offered bribes

   to the labourers to make false statements. Such insinuations are

   wholly unfounded and not borne out from the statements recorded
Page 10 of 13
during investigation.            This hostile stance of the department

           fortifies our conclusion that registration of the criminal case was

           a product of malice and personal vendetta against the appellants.
30. Even assuming the ingredients under
Section 186
are disclosed,

           prosecution under the said section simplicitor suffers from various

           insurmountable legal hurdles.
31. Firstly,
Section 186
is a non-cognizable offence and in absence of

            ingredients of
Section 353
(cognizable offence) disclosed in the

            FIR, prior permission of Magistrate under
Section 155 (2)
Cr.PC

            was necessary to register FIR.4 No such permission was obtained

            rendering the registration of FIR and ensuing investigation bad in

            law.
32. Secondly, cognizance of offence under
Section 186
IPC was taken

            on a police report in breach of
Section 195
Cr.PC.
Section 195
,

            inter alia, provides no court shall take cognizance of offence under
Section 186
save and except on a complaint in writing by the

            aggrieved public servant or his superior.
In view of the aforesaid
4
State of Haryana and others v. Bhajan Lal and others
1992 Supp (1) SCC 335 [see Para 102(4)]
Page 11 of 13
legal bar, cognizance taken of the offence under
section 186
on a

     police report/chargesheet is impermissible in law.
33. It would be argued as FIR was registered for both cognizable

     (
section 353
IPC) and non-cognizable offences (
section 186
), even

     if
Section 353
IPC is quashed, police report under
Section 186
may be treated as ‘complaint’ in view of the Explanation to
Section

     2(d)
Cr.P.C.
34.
Section 2(d)
Cr.P.C. reads as follows:-
“2(d). complaint" means any allegation made orally or in writing to a
        Magistrate, with a view to his taking action under this Code, that some
        person, whether known or unknown, has committed an offence, but
        does not include a police report.”
        Explanation.- A report made by a police officer in a case which
        discloses, after investigation, the commission of a non-cognizable
        offence shall be deemed to be a complaint; and the police officer by
        whom such report is made shall be deemed to be the complainant.”


     As per the explanation appended to the definition clause, a police

     report disclosing a non-cognizable offence (
section 186
in the

     present case) shall be deemed to be a complaint and the police

     officer shall be deemed to be the complainant. Even then, the

     legal embargo under
section 195
Cr.PC is not dispelled as the legal

     fiction deems the police officer and not the aggrieved public

     servant as the complainant.
Page 12 of 13
35. Similar view has been taken in
B.N. John v. State of U.P. & Anr.5
36. For the aforesaid reasons, impugned prosecution is quashed and

          the appeal is allowed. Pending applications, if any, shall stand

          disposed of.
….……..…..……...……………………….J.
                                     (PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA)


                                     ….……..…..……...……………………….J.
                                                 (JOYMALYA BAGCHI)
       New Delhi,
       May 08, 2025
5
2025 SCC OnLine SC 7
Page 13 of 13