[Cites
26
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sulthan Said Ibrahim vs Prakasan on 23 May, 2025
2025 INSC 764                                                    REPORTABLE

                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7108 OF 2025

                         (@SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 4307 OF 2022)


          SULTHAN SAID IBRAHIM                                     …Appellant(s)


                                        VERSUS


          PRAKASAN & ORS.                                        …Respondent(s)




                                     JUDGMENT
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2025.05.23
15:02:56 IST
Reason:
J. B. PARDIWALA, J.
1.    Leave granted.
2.    The path to justice is often winding, shaped by the weight of hierarchy and

        the labyrinth of procedure. The seeker, weary yet resolute, climbs each rung

        of the judicial ladder, only to stand at the summit with hope overshadowed

        by the fear of denied relief. The respondent no. 1 before us embodies this

        relentless pursuit—a traveller in the quest for justice, yearning for its elusive

        embrace.
3.    The present appeal arises from the judgment and order dated 29.11.2021

        passed by the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam in OP(C) No. 2290 of

        2013 whereby the High Court dismissed the original petition filed by the

        appellant and thereby affirmed the order passed by the Principal Sub Judge,

        Palakkad in I.A. No. 2348/2012 in O.S. No. 617/1996 rejecting the

        application filed by the appellant seeking the deletion of his name from the

        array of parties.
A.    FACTUAL MATRIX
4.    The appellant is the grandson of one Late Jameela Beevi. Late Jameela

        Beevi was the original defendant in O.S. No. 617 of 1996, instituted by the
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                     Page 1 of 38
respondent no. 1 herein (original plaintiff) before the Principal Sub Court,

        Palakkad seeking specific performance of the agreement to sell dated

        14.06.1996 executed between the original plaintiff and the original

        defendant, whereby the original defendant undertook to transfer the suit

        property to the original plaintiff for a total consideration of Rs. 6,00,000/-,

        upon payment of the balance sale consideration of Rs. 1,50,000/- within

        three months from the execution of the agreement. Pertinently, the appellant

        herein was one of the witnesses to the sale agreement.
5.    The suit property, measuring 1 cent, situated in Keezhumuri Desom, Ward

        No. 3, Block 42, Survey No. 1895, Palakkad Town, Kerala, comprises of a

        tiled-roofed shop with walls on three sides and two shutters on the front side

        along with the land on which the shop stands. The same was purchased by

        the original defendant vide assignment deed dated 10.09.1976. It is

        noteworthy that clause 8 of the said deed if read with the property

        description indicates the factum of tenancy, inter alia, of one of the sons of

        the original defendant and the father of the appellant, Late Shahul Hameed.

        It is the case of the appellant that his father was a tenant of the suit property

        from 1969 till his death on 01.11.1992.
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                     Page 2 of 38
6.    The case before us has a convoluted history and there have been delays at

        multiple stages of the proceedings. Despite having obtained an ex-parte

        decree way long back in 1998, and a final decree after contested hearing in

        2003, the original plaintiff is yet to obtain the possession of the suit property.

        For the sake of clarity, we must look into and discuss the different stages

        wherein delay was caused under different headings so as to demonstrate

        how well the process of law can be abused by dubious litigants in this

        country.
Phase - I
7.    The case of the original plaintiff before the Trial Court was that although he

        was always ready and willing to pay the balance consideration, yet the

        original defendant was not inclined towards executing the sale deed for the

        suit property. As the original defendant failed to execute the sale deed

        within a period of three months from the date of entering into the agreement,

        despite issuing a legal notice, he instituted a suit for specific performance.
8.    The O.S. No. 617/1996 instituted by the original plaintiff was decreed ex

        parte on 30.06.1998 and the original defendant was directed to execute the

        sale deed in favor of the original plaintiff upon payment of the balance

        consideration.
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                      Page 3 of 38
9.    The original defendant filed I.A. No. 2204 of 1998 seeking to set aside the

        ex parte decree, which was dismissed by the Trial Court on 30.06.1999. The

        original defendant challenged the order of the Trial Court before the High

        Court in CMA No. 125 of 1999, which came to be allowed, thereby restoring

        the suit for trial.
Phase - II
10. Upon restoration, the original defendant filed written statement before the

        Trial Court contesting that there was no agreement to sell existing between

        the parties and he had no interest in selling the property. The suit property

        was being utilised by her son for selling sugar and other grocery items, and

        she had to obtain a loan of Rs 4,50,000/- for the purpose of the wedding of

        her granddaughter. In lieu of the loan, the original plaintiff had obtained

        some signed papers from her and had misused them to forge the agreement

        to sell.
11. The suit came to be decreed by the Trial Court on 17.03.2003, which held

        that the execution of the agreement to sell was proved by the original

        plaintiff and the defence put forth by the original defendant was not credible.

        The Trial Court directed the original defendant to execute the sale deed upon

        payment of the remaining sale consideration.
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                   Page 4 of 38
Phase - III
12. The order of the Trial Court decreeing the suit was challenged by the

        original defendant by way of filing RFA No. 281 of 2003 before the High

        Court. However, the High Court dismissed the same and affirmed the order

        of the Trial Court vide its judgment dated 02.08.2008.
13. The original defendant further challenged the order of the High Court before

        this Court by way of SLP (C) No. 18880 of 2008. However, the same also

        came to be dismissed vide order dated 13.08.2008, thereby conclusively

        affirming the decree for specific performance granted by the Trial Court.


        Phase - IV
14. Upon failure of the original defendant to execute the sale deed after

        accepting the balance consideration, the original plaintiff moved the I.A.

        No. 2548/2003 in O.S. No. 617/1996 under Section 28(5) read with
Order

        XXI Rule 19 of the Code of Civil Procedure
(for short, “
the CPC
”) on

        30.07.2003 seeking the execution of the sale deed in its favour by the

        intervention of the court.
15. During the pendency of the execution proceedings, the original defendant

        passed away on 19.10.2008, necessitating impleadment of her legal heirs.

        The original plaintiff filed I.A. No. 3823 of 2008 in I.A. No. 2548/2003 in
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                Page 5 of 38
O.S. No. 617/1996 on 20.11.2008 to bring her legal heirs on record which

        came to be allowed by the Trial Court.
16. Objections were raised by some of the legal heirs of the original plaintiff,

        inter alia, on the ground that the relief of possession was not granted by the

        Trial Court despite having been pleaded and thus there was no liability to

        hand over the possession to the original plaintiff even if a sale deed had to

        be executed. Further, the original plaintiff had failed to deposit the entire

        balance sale consideration in time and had deposited only the balance

        amount after deducting the costs awarded by the Trial Court while decreeing

        the suit. For the aforesaid reasons, the execution was objected on the ground

        that the contract stood rescinded. It is pertinent to note that the appellant

        herein, being one of the impleaded parties, initially raised no objection to

        his impleadment.
17. I.A. No. 669/2009 in O.S. No. 617/1996 under
Section 28
of the Specific

        Relief Act, 1963 (for short, “the SRA, 1963”) was also filed by some of the

        legal heirs of the original defendant seeking a declaration that the contract

        stood rescinded.
18. The Principal Sub Court, Palakkad, dismissed the I.A. No. 669 of 2009 on

        11.04.2012, observing that the deposit of Rs. 97,116/- made on 30.07.2003
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                  Page 6 of 38
by the original plaintiff was valid and in compliance with I.A. No. 931 of

        2004, wherein the High Court, during the pendency of the first appeal

        against the decree, had permitted the respondent to deposit the balance

        amount after deducting costs. The court further ruled that possession of the

        property was implicit in the decree for specific performance of the

        agreement to sell.
Phase - V
19. Aggrieved by the aforesaid, the legal heirs of the original defendant filed

        CRP No. 233 of 2012 before the High Court of Kerala, which came to be

        dismissed on 14.06.2012, affirming that rescission of contract was

        unwarranted.
Phase - VI
20. Shortly thereafter, the appellant filed I.A. No. 2348 of 2012 in I.A. No.

        2548/2003 in OS No. 617 of 1996 on 19.07.2012 under Order I Rule 10(2)
of the CPC
seeking deletion of his name from the array of parties, on the

        ground that he was wrongly impleaded as a legal heir under the

        Mohammedan Law and further asserting that he was a tenant in the suit

        property, having inherited the tenancy from his late father. He submitted that

        he was carrying on business from the suit property and his tenancy rights
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                  Page 7 of 38
could not have been adjudicated in the execution proceedings. The original

        plaintiff objected to the said I.A., inter alia, on the ground that the appellant

        had failed to raise any of the said objections on any prior occasion and was

        doing the same only to obstruct and delay the execution proceedings.
21. The Trial Court dismissed the said I.A. on 19.06.2013 and held that the

        appellant was attempting to delay the execution by raising frivolous issues

        and that too after having failed to raise during the prior proceedings. The

        court noted that the appellant was a witness to the sale agreement dated

        14.06.1996, had previously participated in litigation without objecting, and

        was now employing a strategy of filing repetitive interlocutory applications

        to obstruct the execution of the decree. The relevant observations made by

        the Trial Court are reproduced hereinbelow:
“[…] The records would show that supplemental respondents 2
            to 14 in I.A. 2548/2003 were sought to be impleaded as per I.A.
            3823/2008. On filing that petition notice thereof was issued on
            26.11.2008 to the proposed supplemental respondents 2 to 14.
Those respondents tendered appearance. That was the first
            opportunity for the petitioner herein to contend that he is not a
            legal heir of Jameela Beevi and he ought not to be impleaded.
            That was not done by him. It is to be noted that the court would
            implead under
Order XXII Rule 4 CPC
after due enquiry. During
            that enquiry the petitioner ought and might have contended that
            he is not a legal heir of Jameela Beevi. After his impleadment
            several petitions were preferred. I.A. 669/2009 is a petition
            under
section 28
of the specific Relief Act to rescind the contract.
            The petitioner herein was a respondent in that petition. After
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                     Page 8 of 38
detailed enquiry that petition was dismissed on 11.04.2012.
Against that order CRP 233/12 was preferred before the Hon.
            High Court. The petitioner herein was the 5th respondent in that
            CRP. That CRP was dismissed on 14.06.2012. In these
            proceedings also petitioner herein had no case that he is an
            unnecessary party. On the other hand, he participated in those
            proceedings. On 24.07.2012 this petition is filed. It is to be noted
            that the decree directing execution of sale deed was passed on
            17.03.2003, a decade ago, RFA 281/2003 was dismissed on
            02.04 2008. The decree attained finality. I.A.2548/2003 was
            pending while dismissing RFA 281/2003. Since then the
            supplemental respondents, one after other, is filing petitions in
            their cunning strategy to delay the execution of a sale deed
            pursuant to the decree, I.A. 669/2009 was one such petition, CRP
            233/2012 against the order of dismissal of that petition was
            dismissed on 14.06.2012, Next month, on 24.07.2012, the
            petitioner has come forward with this petition, on experimental
            basis to open a new battle field, on the frantic attempt to delay
            the implementation of the decree, claiming tenancy right over the
            subject property alleged to be inherited from his father. So long
            as he is in the party array as legal heir of deceased original
            defendant the new plea cannot be put forward. It is to circumvent
            that situation now he has come forward with this plea to remove
            him from the party array as he being not a legal heir of Jameela
            Beevi despite the fact that such a plea was not taken over these
            years either at the time of his impleadment or while participating
            in a series of interlocutory applications. This petition, is yet
            another ruse adopted by the respondents to delay the execution
            of a sale deed pursuant to the decree. The petition is barred by
            constructive resjudicata besides being devoid of bonafides.
            Therefore, it is dismissed with cost to the 1st
            respondent/plaintiff.”
22. The appellant challenged the order of the Trial Court before the High Court

        in O.P. (C) No. 2290 of 2013, however the same came to be dismissed vide

        the impugned order dated 29.11.2021. The High Court observed that the

        impleadment of the appellant was valid and his I.A. seeking deletion from
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                   Page 9 of 38
the array of parties was barred by res judicata. The High Court also observed

        that the claim of the appellant for independent possession was also rightly

        rejected by the Trial Court. The relevant observations made by the High

        Court are reproduced hereinbelow:
“5. The undisputed facts reveals that the petitioner, along with
            other legal heirs of Jameela Beevi, were impleaded after due
            enquiry under Order I Rule 10 (2)
of CPC
. No objection was
            raised by the petitioner at that stage and the order by which he
            was impleaded as the additional 8th respondent has become
            final. Hence, the interlocutory application filed thereafter,
            seeking deletion of petitioner's name from the party array, is
            barred by res judicata.
6. The contention of the petitioner that he is having independent
            possession over the property was rightly rejected by the trial
            court, petitioner having failed to raise such contention earlier or
            even in I.A.No.669 of 2009, filed by his own siblings.
Circumstances being as above, I am constrained to hold that the
            attempt of the petitioner is to delay the consideration in
            I.A.No.2548 of 2003 filed by the first respondent, seeking
            execution of the sale deed through court.”
23. In such circumstances referred to above, the appellant-original defendant

        has come up before us with the present appeal.
B.    SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT
24. Mr. V. Chitambaresh, the learned Senior Counsel, appearing for the

        appellant, vehemently submitted that the High Court committed a grave

        error in taking the view that as the impleadment of legal heirs under Order
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                 Page 10 of 38
I Rule 10(2)
of the CPC
was not objected to by the appellant at the

        appropriate stage, the subsequent application filed by the appellant for

        deletion of his name would be barred by virtue of the doctrine of res

        judicata.
25. The learned counsel submitted that in the instant case, since the relief of

        possession was not granted in O.S No. 617 of 1996 while decreeing the suit

        for specific performance, the decree got fully satisfied upon execution of the

        sale deed. The counsel placed reliance on the judgment of this Court in
Birma Devi & Ors v. Subhash & Anr.
, reported in 2024 SCC Online SC

        3676, wherein it was held that relief of possession must be specifically

        sought when the suit property is in possession of a third party.
He also

        referred to the decision in
P.C. Varghese v. Devaki Amma Balambika Devi
reported in (2005) 8 SCC 486 wherein this Court held that
Section 22
of the

        SRA, 1963 enacts a rule of pleading to avoid multiplicity of proceedings.
26. The learned counsel further argued that
Section 11
of the Kerala Buildings

        (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1965, contains a non obstante clause

        restricting eviction except in accordance with the provisions of the said Act.

        Therefore, before ordering delivery of possession, the status of the appellant

        as a tenant must necessarily be adjudicated.
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                 Page 11 of 38
27. Relying on the decision of this Court in
B. Bal Reddy v. Teegala Narayana

        Reddy
reported in (2016) 15 SCC 102, the counsel submitted that the

        interest of a protected tenant continues to be operative and subsisting so long

        as the protected tenancy is not validly terminated.
28. The learned counsel pointed out that the father of the appellant, Late Shahul

        Hameed, was a tenant in the suit property since the year 1969, and the

        assignment deed No. 2805/1976 acknowledges his tenancy, which

        continued with the appellant as his legal heir. Further, in 1992, Municipality

        License No. 215/92-93 was also issued in the name of the father of the

        appellant. He contended that the Municipality License No. PH2-27607/11

        was thereafter issued in the name of the appellant on 16.04.2011 thereby

        showing the exclusive possession of the appellant on the suit property owing

        to the tenancy.
29. It was also contended that under the Mohammedan Law, the legal heirs of a

        pre-deceased son are not the legal heirs of their grandmother, who in the

        instant case was the original defendant and the judgment debtor. The

        doctrine of representation does not apply under the Mohammedan Law. The

        sale deed also indicates that the property was individually owned by Jameela

        Beevi, and the descendant of her pre-deceased son would have no legal
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                  Page 12 of 38
claim. As a sequitur, the tenancy rights of the appellant cannot be

        adjudicated and decided upon by impleading him as a legal heir.
30. The learned counsel stressed that an order allowing impleadment under

        Order I Rule 10(2)
of the CPC
is merely a summary procedure and cannot

        operate as res judicata. Placing reliance on the decision in
Mumbai

        International Airport (P) Ltd. v. Regency Convention Centre & Hotels (P)

        Ltd.
reported in (2010) 7 SCC 417, he submitted that this Court in
the said

        decision
held that the courts retain the power to strike out parties at any stage

        of the proceeding under Order I Rule 10(2)
of the CPC
.
31. The learned counsel also referred to the decision in Ramankutty Guptan v.
Avara reported in (1994) 2 SCC 642, wherein this Court held that

        jurisdiction of the court does not cease after passing a decree for specific

        performance, and the court retains control over the decree. He also

        submitted that the appellant has no role in the application filed for the

        recission of contract.
32. In such circumstances
referred to above
, the learned counsel prayed that

        there being merit in his appeal, the same may be allowed.
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                    Page 13 of 38
C.    SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
33. Mr. Mukund P. Unny, the learned counsel appearing for respondent no.1,

        vehemently submitted that the present appeal has been filed solely with a

        view to delay the execution of the decree, despite the fact that the judgment

        and decree dated 17.03.2003 in favor of respondent no.1 attained finality

        after dismissal of the SLP(C) No. 18880 of 2008 arising therefrom on

        13.08.2008. He emphasised that the respondent no.1 has not been able to

        obtain possession of the suit property and thereby reap the fruits of the

        decree in his favour due to persistent attempts by the appellant to stall

        execution proceedings.
34. The learned counsel referred to the findings of the High Court in the

        impugned order wherein the challenge by the appellant to the dismissal of

        IA No. 2348 of 2012 seeking deletion of the appellant from the party array

        was rejected. He argued that the key finding of the High Court is that the

        impleadment under Order I Rule 10(2)
of the CPC
had already attained

        finality and that the belated attempt by the appellant to question the same

        was barred by res judicata.
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                Page 14 of 38
35. The learned counsel also brought to our attention the observations made by

        the Trial Court while dismissing the IA No. 2348 of 2012 in OS No. 617 of

        1996. He submitted that the Trial Court took note of the following:
a. The appellant had ample opportunity in prior proceedings to object to

            his impleadment but failed to do so.
b. The appellant, rather than raising an objection to his impleadment,

            participated in the proceedings, including the application to rescind the

            contract.
c. The appellant through various frivolous petitions was seeking to delay

            the execution of the decree dated 17.03.2003.
36. On the aspect of tenancy rights of the appellant in the suit property, the

        learned counsel submitted that the claim of tenancy in the suit property

        inherited from the father of the appellant is devoid of merit. He argued that

        the tenancy arrangement mentioned in the 1976 sale deed by which Jameela

        Beevi purchased the suit property, was not carried forward in the sale

        agreement of 1996, to which the appellant himself was a witness. The

        learned counsel emphasized that there is no documentary evidence, much

        less any other evidence, to support the claim of tenancy raised by the

        appellant.
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                Page 15 of 38
37. On the aspect of tenancy, he submitted that unlike the assignment deed of

        1976, the agreement to sell of 1996 did not contain any clause conferring or

        transferring the right to deal with tenants to the proposed buyer. He argued

        that such omission indicates that the tenancy rights did not carry forward

        after the death of the father of the appellant.
38. The learned counsel pointed out that the suit for specific performance was

        decreed in OS No. 617 of 1996, and the execution proceedings were initiated

        thereafter. Despite the decree being affirmed right upto this Court, the

        appellant and his family have been repeatedly filing interlocutory

        applications to delay the execution. He pointed out that IA No. 669 of 2009,

        seeking rescission of the contract, was dismissed by the Trial Court, and the

        dismissal was affirmed by the High Court in CRP No. 233 of 2012.
39. The learned counsel pointed out that the High Court, in the impugned

        judgment, upheld the findings of the Trial Court, rejected the claims of the

        appellant and reaffirmed the impleadment under Order I Rule 10(2). The

        High Court also observed that the contention of the appellant regarding

        tenancy was baseless and did not warrant interference.
40. The learned counsel submitted that the sale deed has already been executed

        on 22.11.2022 at the instance of the Trial Court. However, the appellant has
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                Page 16 of 38
locked the premises, preventing the original plaintiff from obtaining actual

        possession. In view of this, he argued that the present appeal is infructuous

        as it seeks relief that is no longer relevant.
41. In such circumstances, the learned counsel prayed that there being no merit

        in this appeal, the same deserved to be dismissed with costs.
D.    ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION
42. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone

        through the materials on record, the following questions fall for our

        consideration:
a. Whether the High Court committed any error in rejecting the original

            petition filed by the appellant on the ground that the I.A. for deletion of

            name of the appellant from the array of parties was barred by res

            judicata?
b. Whether the appellant is entitled to the benefit of
Section 11
of the

            Kerala Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1965?
c. Whether in the facts of this case the transfer of possession of the suit

            property was implicit in the decree of specific performance in the facts

            of the case?
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                  Page 17 of 38
E.    ANALYSIS
43. Order I Rule 10 inter alia empowers the court to allow addition, substitution

        or deletion of a party to a suit at any stage of the proceedings. It reads as

        follows:
“10. Suit in name of wrong plaintiff.—
            (1) Where a suit has been instituted in the name of the wrong
            person as plaintiff or where it is doubtful whether it has been
            instituted in the name of the right plaintiff, the Court may at any
            stage of the suit, if satisfied that the suit has been instituted
            through a bona fide mistake, and that it is necessary for the
            determination of the real matter in dispute so to do, order any
            other person to be substituted or added as plaintiff upon such
            terms as the Court thinks just.
(2) Court may strike out or add parties.—
            The Court may at any stage of the proceedings, either upon or
            without the application of either party, and on such terms as may
            appear to the Court to be just, order that the name of any party
            improperly joined, whether as plaintiff or defendant, be struck
            out, and that the name of any person who ought to have been
            joined, whether as plaintiff or defendant, or whose presence
            before the Court may be necessary in order to enable the Court
            effectually and completely to adjudicate upon and settle all the
            questions involved in the suit, be added.
(3) No person shall be added as a plaintiff suing without a next
            friend or as the next friend of a plaintiff under any disability
            without his consent.
(4) Where defendant added, plaint to be amended.—
            Where a defendant is added, the plaint shall, unless the Court
            otherwise directs, be amended in such manner as may be
            necessary, and amended copies of the summons and of the plaint
            shall be served on the new defendant and, if the Court thinks fit,
            on the original defendant
            (5) Subject to the provisions of the 1 [Indian Limitation Act, 1877
            (XV of 1877)],
section 22
, the proceedings as against any person
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                 Page 18 of 38
added as defendant shall be deemed to have begun only on the
            service of the summons.”
44. For the purpose of answering the pivotal question at hand, we only need to

        refer to Sub-rules (2) of Order I Rule 10. A bare reading of the provision

        extracted above indicates that Sub-rule (2) vests a very broad and substantial

        power in the court to delete or add a party, at any stage of the suit

        proceedings, either suo motu or upon an application of either of the parties

        before it. It provides that the court may delete the name of a party on such

        terms as may appear to the court to be just and proper. It may add any party

        whose presence before the court is necessary for the effective and complete

        adjudication and settlement of all the questions involved in the suit.
45. The power to strike out or add parties under Sub-rule (2) can be exercised

        by the court on an application made by the parties before it, or upon an

        application by a third party who desires to be added as a party, or even suo

        motu. Explaining the object underlying Order I Rule 10, this Court in
Ramesh Hirachand Kundanmal v. Municipal Corpn. of Greater Bombay
reported in (1992) 2 SCC 524 observed thus:
“6. Sub-rule (2) of Rule 10 gives a wide discretion to the Court
            to meet every case of defect of parties and is not affected by the
            inaction of the plaintiff to bring the necessary parties on record.
            The question of impleadment of a party has to be decided on the
            touchstone of Order 1 Rule 10 which provides that only a
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                 Page 19 of 38
necessary or a proper party may be added. A necessary party is
            one without whom no order can be made effectively. A proper
            party is one in whose absence an effective order can be made but
            whose presence is necessary for a complete and final decision on
            the question involved in the proceeding. The addition of parties
            is generally not a question of initial jurisdiction of the Court but
            of a judicial discretion which has to be exercised in view of all
            the facts and circumstances of a particular case.
xxx xxx xxx
8. The case really turns on the true construction of the rule in
            particular the meaning of the words “whose presence before the
            Court may be necessary in order to enable the Court effectually
            and completely to adjudicate upon and settle all the questions
            involved in the suit”. The Court is empowered to join a person
            whose presence is necessary for the prescribed purpose and
            cannot under the rule direct the addition of a person whose
            presence is not necessary for that purpose. If the intervener has
            a cause of action against the plaintiff relating to the subject
            matter of the existing action, the Court has power to join the
            intervener so as to give effect to the primary object of the order
            which is to avoid multiplicity of actions.
xxx xxx xxx
10. The power of the Court to add parties under Order 1 Rule 10,
CPC
, came up for consideration before this Court in Razia
            Begum [1959 SCR 1111 : AIR 1958 SC 886]. In that case it was
            pointed out that the courts in India have not treated the matter of
            addition of parties as raising any question of the initial
            jurisdiction of the Court and that it is firmly established as a
            result of judicial decisions that in order that a person may be
            added as a party to a suit, he should have a direct interest in the
            subject matter of the litigation whether it be the questions
            relating to movable or immovable property.
xxx xxx xxx
14. It cannot be said that the main object of the rule is to prevent
            multiplicity of actions though it may incidentally have that effect.
But that appears to be a desirable consequence of the rule rather
            than its main objective. The person to be joined must be one
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                  Page 20 of 38
whose presence is necessary as a party. What makes a person a
            necessary party is not merely that he has relevant evidence to
            give on some of the questions involved; that would only make him
            a necessary witness. It is not merely that he has an interest in the
            correct solution of some question involved and has thought of
            relevant arguments to advance. The only reason which makes it
            necessary to make a person a party to an action is so that he
            should be bound by the result of the action and the question to be
            settled, therefore, must be a question in the action which cannot
            be effectually and completely settled unless he is a party. The line
            has been drawn on a wider construction of the rule between the
            direct interest or the legal interest and commercial interest. It is,
            therefore, necessary that the person must be directly or legally
            interested in the action in the answer, i.e., he can say that the
            litigation may lead to a result which will affect him legally that
            is by curtailing his legal rights. It is difficult to say that the rule
            contemplates joining as a defendant a person whose only object
            is to prosecute his own cause of action. Similar provision was
            considered in Amon v. Raphael Tuck & Sons Ltd. [(1956) 1 All
            ER 273 : (1956) 1 QB 357], wherein after quoting the
            observations of Wynn-Parry, J. in Dollfus Mieg et Compagnie
            S.A. v. Bank of England [(1950) 2 All ER 605, 611], that their
            true test lies not so much in an analysis of what are the
            constituents of the applicants' rights, but rather in what would be
            the result on the subject matter of the action if those rights could
            be established, Devlin, J. has stated:
“The test is ‘May the order for which the plaintiff is asking
                   directly affect the intervener in the enjoyment of his legal
                   rights’.””
                                                           (Emphasis supplied)
46. In the present case, the appellant, along with other legal heirs of the original

        defendant came to be impleaded in the execution proceedings before the

        Trial Court as the original defendant passed away during the pendency of

        the execution proceedings. Impleadment of the legal heirs of a defendant
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                    Page 21 of 38
who passes away during the pendency of suit proceedings is governed by

        Order XXII Rule 4. The same reads as under:
“4. Procedure in case of death of one of several defentlants or
            of sole defendant.—
            (1) Where one of two or more defendants dies and the right to
            sue does not survive against the surviving defendant or
            defendants alone or a sole defendant or sole surviving defendant
            dies and the right to sue survives, the Court, on an application
            made in that behalf, shall cause the legal representative of the
            deceased defendants to be made a party and shall proceed with
            the suit.
(2) Any person so made a party may make any defence
            appropriate to his character as legal representative of the
            deceased defendant.
(3) Where within the time limited by law no application is made
            under sub-rule (1), the suit shall abate as against the deceased
            defendant.
(4) The Court whenever it thinks fit, may exempt the plaintiff from
            the necessity of substituting the legal representatives of any such
            defendant who has failed to file a written statement or who,
            having filed it, has failed to appear and contest the suit at the
            hearing; and judgment may, in such case, be pronounced against
            the said defendant notwithstanding the death of such defendant
            and shall have the same force and effect as if it has been
            pronounced before death took place.
(5) Where—
(a) the plaintiff was ignorant of the death of a defendant,
                   and could not, for that reason, make an application for the
                   substitution of the legal representative of the defendant
                   under this rule within the period specified in the
Limitation
                   Act, 1963
(36 of 1963), and the suit has, in consequence,
                   abated, and
(b) the plaintiff applies after the expiry of the period
                   specified therefore in the
Limitation Act, 1963
(36 of
                   1963), for setting aside the abatement and also for the
                   admission of that application under
section 5
of that Act
                   on the ground that he had, by reason of such ignorance,
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                  Page 22 of 38
sufficient cause for not making the application with the
                  period specified in the said Act,
            the Court shall, in considering the application under the said
section 5
, have due regard to the fact of such ignorance, if
            proved.”
47. It is important to note the Sub-rule (2) of the Rule (4) as extracted above.
The said Sub-rule provides that any party which is sought to be impleaded

        as a legal heir of a deceased defendant is at liberty to take up any defence as

        regards his character as the legal representative of the deceased defendant.
48. Rule 5 of Order XXII is of importance in the facts of this litigation. It reads

        thus:
“5. Determination of question as to legal representative.—
            Where a question arises as to whether any person is or is not the
            legal representative of a deceased plaintiff or a deceased
            defendant, such question shall be determined by the Court:
Provided that where such question arises before an Appellate
            Court, that Court may, before determining the question, direct
            any subordinate Court to try the question and to return the
            records together with evidence, if any, recorded at such trial, its
            findings and reasons therefor, and the Appellate Court may take
            the same into consideration in determining the question.”
49. A perusal of the extracted provision indicates that if a question arises as

        regards whether any person is or is not the legal representative of a deceased

        defendant then such a question shall be determined by the court.
50. As we have discussed in the preceding parts of this judgment, the Trial

        Court, while dismissing the application moved by the appellant under Order
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                  Page 23 of 38
I Rule 10, observed in clear terms that the appellant had the opportunity of

        contesting his impleadment as the legal heir of the original defendant when

        the application for impleadment and amendment of plaint was moved by the

        original plaintiff. The Trial Court has also noted that the appellant was not

        only served with the notice of the impleadment application, but he also

        entered appearance. However, the appellant, for reasons best known to him,

        chose to remain silent for more than four years and did not raise any

        objections as regards his status of not being a legal heir of the original

        defendant.
51. The position of law is well settled that the power to strike out or add a party

        to the proceedings under Order I Rule 10 can be exercised by the court at

        any stage of the proceeding. However, the same cannot be construed to

        mean that when a particular party has been impleaded as a legal heir under

        Order XXII Rule 4 after due inquiry by the court and without any objections,

        the party can approach the court anytime later and seek his deletion from

        the array of parties by filing an application under Order I Rule 10. If at all

        the appellant was aggrieved by his impleadment as a legal heir, the suitable

        course of action was to first object to his impleadment under Sub-rule (2) of

        Order XXII Rule 4. Even then if the Trial Court would have decided against

        the appellant, it would have been open to him to approach the High Court
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                 Page 24 of 38
by filing a revision application against the order of impleadment. However,

        the appellant chose to sit tight in the impleadment proceedings despite

        entering appearance. He was also a respondent in the application preferred

        by some of the legal heirs under
Section 28
of the SRA seeking rescission

        of the contract, both before the Trial Court and later before the High Court

        in the revision preferred against the rejection of the said application.

        However, he chose not to raise any objection in either of these proceedings

        as well.
52. The timing of the application preferred by the appellant also raises serious

        doubts as regards his bona fides. While the appellant remained silent over

        his objections as regards tenancy and impleadment as legal heir from 2008

        till the rejection of the revision preferred by some of the legal heirs against

        the rejection of the application for rescission of the contract, he filed the

        application under Order I Rule 10 for the deletion of his name from the array

        of parties within a month of the said revision petition. This, when seen in

        the context of the delays caused by multiple applications preferred by the

        appellant and the other legal heirs of the original defendant, only goes on to

        lend credence to the allegation of the original plaintiff that the application

        for deletion from array of parties is merely one more attempt to further

        thwart and prolong what has already been an unduly protracted litigation for
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                  Page 25 of 38
the original plaintiff. Furthermore, while the appellant raised no objection

        to the application for rescinding the contract either before the Trial Court or

        the High Court despite being a respondent in both the proceedings, it has

        been submitted by the counsel appearing on his behalf that the said

        proceedings were not being undertaken with the approval of the appellant.

        It is not possible for us to accept such a contention at this stage of the

        proceedings having regard to the conduct exhibited by the appellant.
53. The High Court, in its impugned order, held the application of the appellant

        under Order I Rule 10 to be barred by res judicata and thus not maintainable

        on that ground. We find no infirmity in the said observation mad by the High

        Court. This Court in
Bhanu Kumar Jain v. Archana Kumar
reported in

        (2005) 1 SCC 787 observed that the principles of res judicata apply not only

        to two different proceedings but also to different stages of the same

        proceeding as well. The relevant observations are reproduced hereinbelow:
“18. It is now well settled that principles of res judicata apply in
            different stages of the same proceedings. (See
Satyadhyan
            Ghosal v. Deorajin Debi
[AIR 1960 SC 941 : (
1960) 3 SCR 590]
            and Prahlad Singh v. Col
. Sukhdev Singh [(1987) 1 SCC 727] .)
19. In Y.B. Patil [(1976) 4 SCC 66] it was held: (SCC p. 68, para
4)
                   “4. … It is well settled that principles of res judicata can
                   be invoked not only in separate subsequent proceedings,
                   they also get attracted in subsequent stage of the same
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                  Page 26 of 38
proceedings. Once an order made in the course of a
                  proceeding becomes final, it would be binding at the
                  subsequent stage of that proceeding.”
                                      xxx xxx xxx
21. Yet again in Hope Plantations Ltd. [(1999) 5 SCC 590] this
            Court laid down the law in the following terms: (SCC p. 604,
            para 17)
                  “17. … One important consideration of public policy is
                  that the decisions pronounced by courts of competent
                  jurisdiction should be final, unless they are modified or
                  reversed by appellate authorities; and the other principle
                  is that no one should be made to face the same kind of
                  litigation twice over, because such a process would be
                  contrary to considerations of fair play and justice.””
                                                        (Emphasis supplied)
54. Thus, as the dictum of the law as extracted aforesaid indicates, the only

        manner in which a decision arrived at by a court of competent jurisdiction

        can be interfered with is by modification or reversal by the appellate

        authorities. In the present case, the order for impleadment of the appellant

        as a legal heir was made by the Trial Court after due inquiry under Order

        XXII, as also observed by the Trial Court in its order rejecting the

        application under Order I Rule 10. Evidently, neither any objection was

        raised by the appellant before the Trial Court nor any revision was preferred

        subsequently against the said order. Thus, it could be said that the issue as

        regards the impleadment of the appellant as a legal heir of the original

        defendant had attained finality between the parties and thus the subsequent
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                Page 27 of 38
application under Order I Rule 10 seeking to get his name deleted from the

        array of parties could be said to be barred by res judicata. Undoubtedly, the

        expression “at any stage of the proceedings” used in Order I Rule 10 allows

        the court to exercise its power at any stage, however the same cannot be

        construed to mean that the defendant can keep reagitating the same

        objection at different stages of the same proceeding, when the issue has been

        determined conclusively at a previous stage. Allowing the same would run

        contrary to the considerations of fair play and justice and would amount to

        keeping the parties in a state of limbo as regards the adjudication of the

        disputes.
55. This Court in the case of
Satyadhyan Ghosal v. Deorajin Debi
reported in

        [1960] 3 SCR 590, has noted that the principle of res judicata is essential in

        giving a finality to judicial decisions. The relevant observations are

        reproduced hereinbelow:
“The principle of res judicata is based on the need of giving a
            finality to judicial decisions. What it says is that once a res is
            judicata, it shall not be adjudged again. Primarily it applies as
            between past litigation and future litigation. When a matter —
            whether on a question of fact or a question of law — has been
            decided between two parties in one suit or proceeding and the
            decision is final, either because no appeal was taken to a higher
            court or because the appeal was dismissed, or no appeal lies,
            neither party will be allowed in a future suit or proceeding
            between the same parties to canvass the matter again. This
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                 Page 28 of 38
principle of res judicata is embodied in relation to suits in
Section 11
of the Code of Civil Procedure; but even where
Section 11
does not apply, the principle of res judicata has been
            applied by courts for the purpose of achieving finality in
            litigation. The result of this is that the original court as well as
            any higher court must in any future litigation proceed on the
            basis that the previous decision was correct. The principle of res
            judicata applies also as between two stages in the same litigation
            to this extent that a court, whether the trial court or a higher
            court having at an earlier stage decided a matter in one way will
            not allow the parties to re-agitate the matter again at a
            subsequent stage of the same proceedings. …”
                                                           (Emphasis supplied)
56. This Court in
S. Ramachandra Rao v. S. Nagabhushana Rao
reported in

        2022 SCC OnLine SC 1460 observed that although a decision may be

        erroneous, yet it would bind the parties to the same litigation and concerning

        the same issue, if it is rendered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The

        observations read thus:
“31. For what has been noticed and discussed in the preceding
            paragraphs, it remains hardly a matter of doubt that the doctrine
            of res judicata is fundamental to every well regulated system of
            jurisprudence, for being founded on the consideration of public
            policy that a judicial decision must be accepted as correct and
            that no person should be vexed twice with the same kind of
            litigation. This doctrine of res judicata is attracted not only in
            separate subsequent proceedings but also at the subsequent
            stage of the same proceedings. Moreover, a binding decision
            cannot lightly be ignored and even an erroneous decision
            remains binding on the parties to the same litigation and
            concerning the same issue, if rendered by a Court of competent
            jurisdiction. Such a binding decision cannot be ignored even on
            the principle of per incuriam because that principle applies to
            the precedents and not to the doctrine of res judicata.”
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                  Page 29 of 38
57. A five-Judge Bench of the Calcutta High Court in
Tarini Charan

        Bhattacharya v. Kedar Nath Haldar
reported in 1928 SCC OnLine Cal

        172 considered the question as regards whether an erroneous decision on a

        point of law would operate as res judicata between the parties or not. The

        court inter alia observed that it is not always open to the party to raise a

        point of law. It further held that
Section 11
of the CPC makes the decision

        of the court conclusive between the parties notwithstanding the reasoning

        employed by the court in arriving at
the said decision
. The relevant

        observations are as under:
“(1) The question whether a decision is correct or erroneous has
            no bearing upon the question Whether it operates or does not
            operate as res judicata. The doctrine is that in certain
            circumstances the Court shall not try a suit or issue but shall deal
            with the matter on the footing that it is a matter no longer open
            to contest by reason of a previous decision. In these
            circumstances it must necessarily be wrong for a Court to try the
            suit or issue, come to its own conclusion thereon, consider
            whether the previous decision is right and give effect to it or not
            according as it conceives the previous decision to be right or
            wrong. To say, as a result of such disorderly procedure, that the
            previous decision was wrong and that it was wrong on a point of
            law/or on a pure point of law, and that therefore it may be
            disregarded, is an indefensible form of reasoning. For this
            purpose, it is not true that a point of law is always open to a
            party.
(2) In India, at all events, a party who takes a plea of res judicata
            has to show that the matter directly and substantially in issue has
            been directly and substantially in issue in the former suit and
            also that it has been heard and finally decided. This phrase
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                   Page 30 of 38
“matter directly and substantially in issue” has to be given a
            sensible and businesslike meaning, particularly in view of Expl.
4 to
sec. 11
of the Code of Civil Procedure which contains the
            expression “grounds of defence or attack.”
Sec. 11
of the Code
            says nothing about causes of action, a phrase which always
            requires careful handling. Nor does the section say anything
            about point or points of law, or pure points of law. As a rule
            parties do not join issue upon academic or abstract questions but
            upon matters of importance to themselves. The section requires
            that the doctrine be restricted to matters in issue and of these to
            matters which are directly as well as substantially in issue.

            (3) Questions of law are of all kinds and cannot be dealt with as
            though they were all the same. Questions of procedure, questions
            affecting jurisdiction, questions of limitation, may all be
            questions of law. In such questions the rights, of parties are not
            the only matter for consideration. The Court and the public have
            an interest. When a plea of res judicata is raised with reference
            to such matters, it is at least a question whether special
            considerations do not apply.
(4) In any case in which it is found that the matter directly and
            substantially in issue has been directly and substantially in issue
            in the former suit and has been heard and finally decided by such
            Court, the principle of res judicata is not to be ignored merely
            on the ground that the reasoning, whether in law or otherwise,
            of the previous decision can be attacked on a particular point.
            On the other hand it is plain from the terms of
sec. 11
of the Code
            that what is made conclusive between the parties is the decision
            of the Court and that the reasoning of the Court is not necessarily
            the same thing as its decision. The object of the doctrine of res
            judicata is not to fasten upon parties special principles of law as
            applicable to them inter se, but to ascertain their rights and the
            facts upon which these rights directly and substantially depend;
            and to prevent this ascertainment from becoming nugatory by
            precluding the parties from re-opening or recontesting that
            which has been finally decided.”
                                                          (Emphasis supplied)
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                 Page 31 of 38
58. We are aware of the decision of this Court in
Pankajbhai Rameshbhai

        Zalavadiya v. Jethabhai Kalabhai Zalavadiya
reported in (2017) 9 SCC

        700 wherein it was held that an application under Order I Rule 10 would not

        be liable to be rejected solely on the ground that an application under Order

        XXII Rule 4 had been found to not be maintainable.
However, the facts

        before us are quite different from the facts before the Court in
Jethabhai
(supra). Therein, the subsequent application under Order I Rule 10 was

        allowed on the ground that the initial application under Order XXII Rule 4

        was filed under a mistake of law and fact as the defendant had passed away

        prior to the institution of the suit, whereas order XXII Rule 4 only

        contemplates a situation wherein the defendant passes away during the

        pendency of the proceedings. Thus, in such a scenario, it was observed that

        the appropriate application would be under Order I Rule 10. However, in

        the present case, the appropriate remedy for the appellant lay in raising an

        objection under Sub-rule (2) of Rule (4) of Order XXII at the time of the

        impleadment and not under Order I Rule 10 four years after the impleadment

        came to be allowed.
59.
In lieu of the aforesaid discussion, although it is immaterial for us to

        examine the contention of the appellant that Mohammedan law does not

        accord the son of a predeceased son the status of a legal heir of the
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                Page 32 of 38
grandfather by virtue of inapplicability of the doctrine of representation, yet

        we may refer to the observations of the Privy Council in the case of Moolla

        Cassim bin
Moolla Ahmed v. Moolla Abdul Rahim
reported in 1905 SCC

        OnLine PC 17 wherein it was observed thus:
“It is a well-known principle of Mahomedan law that if any of
            the children of a man die before the opening of the succession to
            his estate, leaving children behind, these grandchildren are
            entirely excluded from the inheritance by their uncles and aunts.
            […]”
60. Thus, had the appellant taken up the objection at the right stage of the

        proceedings, it would have been open to the court to look into the said

        objection under Order XXII Rule 5 and disallow his impleadment as a legal

        heir of the original defendant. However, having failed to act at the

        appropriate stage, it was not open to the appellant to subsequently approach

        the court with an application under Order I Rule 10. Further, as we shall

        shortly discuss, the appellant having failed to raise the plea of his tenancy

        and possession over the suit property, the rejection of his application under

        Order I Rule 10 has no material effect on the ultimate outcome of the lis.
61. The appellant also contended before the Trial Court as well as the High

        Court that he is a tenant in the suit property by virtue of having inherited the

        tenancy from his deceased father in 1992. Thus, he enjoys the protection of
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                   Page 33 of 38
Section 11
of the Kerala Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1965

        which provides that a tenant cannot be evicted, even in execution of a

        decree, except in accordance with the procedure prescribed under the said

        Act. However, the said contention of the appellant was rejected by both the

        courts and in our opinion, rightly so.
62. The appellant has relied on the assignment deed of the year 1976 and the

        License No. 215/92-93 issued by the Palakkad Municipality under
Section

        204
of the Kerala Municipality Act, 1960 to contend that his deceased father

        was a tenant in the suit property prior to his demise in 1992. He has also

        relied upon the Municipality License No. PH2-27607/11 issued in his name

        on 16.04.2011 to contend that he enjoys the exclusive possession of the suit

        property owing to the tenancy. However, we are of the view that the same is

        merely one more weapon from the arsenal of dubious tactics employed by

        the appellant in collusion with the other legal heirs of the original defendant

        to protract the execution proceedings.
63. While it may be true that the deceased father of the appellant was a tenant

        in the suit property at the time the same was purchased by the original

        defendant in the year 1976 and that he continued as a tenant till his demise
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                  Page 34 of 38
in 1992, however we are of the view that the appellant has failed to establish

        his tenancy or possession over the suit property for the following reasons:
a. The appellant is one of the witnesses to the agreement to sell entered

            into between the original plaintiff and the original defendant in the year

            1996.
b. There is no clause or recital as regards the tenancy of the appellant in

            the agreement to sell unlike the assignment deed of the year 1976.
c. The appellant did not raise any objection in any of the proceedings on

            the ground of tenancy until the application filed by him in 2012 from

            which the present proceedings arise.
d. The appellant has failed to produce any documents indicating his

            tenancy or exclusive possession over the suit property from the time of

            the execution of the agreement to sell upto the filing of the execution

            application by the original plaintiff.
e. The Municipality license of 2011 has been issued long after the suit was

            decreed in the favor of the original plaintiff and during the pendency of

            the execution proceedings.
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                 Page 35 of 38
f. Both the courts below have recorded concurrent findings rejecting the

            claim of tenancy and exclusive possession over the suit property by the

            appellant.
64. Before we part with the matter, we deem it appropriate to briefly address the

        contention of the appellant that in the absence of decree granting possession

        to the original plaintiff, the decree gets satisfied with the execution of the

        sale deed and the original plaintiff is not entitled to seek possession over the

        suit property. The position of law is settled on this aspect and has been

        reiterated by us in our recent decision in
Rohit Kochhar v. Vipul

        Infrastructure Developers Ltd.
reported in 2024 SCC OnLine SC 3584.
In
the said decision
, relying on the decision of this Court in
Babu Lal v. Hazari

        Lal Kishori Lal
reported in (1982) 3 SCR 94, it was observed thus:
“23. This Court in
Babu Lal
(supra), upon a combined reading
            of
Sections 22
and
28(3)
of the Specific Relief Act respectively
            and
Section 55
of the Transfer of Property Act, observed that the
            it was only “in an appropriate case” that the plaintiff was
            required to separately seek the relief of possession, partition, or
            separate possession, as the case may be, along with the relief of
            specific performance. The Court observed that in other cases,
            say for example a case where the exclusive possession of the suit
            property is with the contracting party, a decree for specific
            performance of the contract of sale simpliciter, without
            specifically providing for delivery of possession, may give
            complete relief to the decree-holder. This, the Court observed,
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                   Page 36 of 38
was the mandate flowing from
Section 55
of the Transfer of
            Property Act. […]”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
65. Thus, as in the present case, both the courts below have arrived at the

        conclusion that the exclusive possession of the suit property could be said

        to be with the original defendant when the suit was decreed, the relief of

        transfer of possession is implicit in the decree for specific performance

        directing the original defendant to execute a sale deed in the favour of the

        original plaintiff. For the same reason, the decision of this Court in
Birma

        Devi
(supra) is of no avail to the appellant.
66. It has been brought to our knowledge that during the pendency of the present

        petition, a sale deed has already been executed in the favour of the original

        plaintiff by the legal heirs of the original defendant, however the possession

        has not yet been granted.
F.    CONCLUSION
67. In light of the aforesaid discussion, we are of the view that the High Court,

        as well as the Trial Court, committed no error, much less any error of law,

        in arriving at their respective decisions. As a result, the appeal fails and is,

        hereby, dismissed with costs of Rs 25,000/- to be paid by the appellant and
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                   Page 37 of 38
deposited with the Legal Services Authority within a period of two weeks

        from today.
68. The sale deed having already been executed in favour of the respondent no.
1, the Executing Court shall now proceed to ensure that vacant and peaceful

        possession of the suit property is handed over to the respondent no.1 in his

        capacity as the decree holder as well as the title holder of the suit property

        and, if necessary, with the aid of police. This exercise shall be completed

        within a period of two months from today without fail.
69. Pending application(s), if any, shall also stand disposed of.
………………………..J.

                                                               (J.B. Pardiwala)



    New Delhi;                                            ………………………..J.

    May 23rd, 2025                                             (R. Mahadevan)
SLP (C) No. 4307 of 2022                                                 Page 38 of 38