[Cites
36
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Nagarajan vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 15 May, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
2025 INSC 703                                                                    REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1390 OF 2025
                               [ARISING OUT OF SLP(CRL.) NO. 8401/2022]


             NAGARAJAN & ANR.                                               … APPELLANT(S)

                                                         VS.

             THE STATE OF TAMIL NADU                                     … RESPONDENT(S)

                                                        WITH

                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2054 OF 2025
                              [ARISING OUT OF SLP(CRL.) NO. 2217 OF 2022]


             NARESH CHANDRA @ NARESH BABU                                  … APPELLANT(S)

                                                         VS.

             STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH                                      … RESPONDENT(S)



                                                  JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
THE APPEALS
1.
Signature Not Verified   The two criminal appeals before us, arising from different incidents
Digitally signed by
JATINDER KAUR
Date: 2025.05.15
17:30:29 IST
Reason:                  of crime, question the correctness of two decisions of the respective

                            High Courts involving the same question of law. We, therefore,
         propose to decide the said two appeals by this common judgment

         and order.
2.   In the lead appeal, the appellants - Nagarajan and Selvaraj - have

         assailed the judgment of the High Court of Judicature at Madras1

         dated 04th June, 2019 dismissing the criminal revision2 filed by them

         on the grounds assigned therein.
3.   In the connected appeal, the appellant - Naresh Chandra - has

         assailed the judgment of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad3

         dated 04th July, 2019. The criminal revision4 filed by the appellant

         was dismissed thereby on similar grounds.
FACTUAL MATRIX
4.   The case of the prosecution in the lead appeal is that a sample of

         curd was taken from the shop of the appellants on 26th June, 2001 at

         about 14:30 hours and sent for analysis. The analysis revealed that

         the standard, prescribed under the Prevention of Food Adulteration

         Act, 19545 and the relevant rules, was not fulfilled. A complaint came

         to be registered followed by trial. Upon perusal of the evidence, vide

         judgment and order dated 18th June, 2006, the Trial Court convicted

         Nagarajan and Selvaraj under Sections 7(1) and 16(1)(a)(i) r/w

         Section 2(ia)(a)(m) of the PoFA Act and sentenced them to undergo

         simple imprisonment for 6 (six) months each and to pay a fine of Rs.
1
Madras High Court
2
CRLRC (MD) No. 111/2010
3
Allahabad High Court
4
CRLR No. 1660/1998
5
PoFA Act
2
3000/- each, in default to undergo simple imprisonment for 2 (two)

         months each.
5.   Aggrieved, Nagarajan and Selvaraj filed an appeal6 before the

         concerned Appellate Court, which confirmed the conviction and the

         sentence of the Trial Court vide judgment and order dated 18th

         December, 2009.
6.   Still aggrieved, Nagarajan and Selvaraj invoked the revisional

         jurisdiction of the Madras High Court unsuccessfully.
7.   The case of the prosecution in the connected appeal is that at about

         10:45 hours on 20th March, 1985, in the area of Karkala Bazaar, the

         concerned Food Inspector found Naresh Chandra selling spice, chilli

         powder, flour, cooking oil, salt and other stuff. Upon suspicion, the

         Food Inspector presented Form VI to Naresh Chandra who refused to

         accept and sign it. The Food Inspector then called on witnesses

         present there; however, no one agreed to take part except one

         Radhey Lal (PW2). Thereupon, an attempt was made by the Food

         Inspector to take a sample on his own. Naresh Chandra intimidated

         the Food Inspector and refused to allow him to take a sample. The

         complaint lodged by the Food Inspector eventually led to a trial. The

         Trial Court vide order dated 25th August, 1987 convicted Naresh

         Chandra u/s Section 7/10(1) r/w Section 16(1)(c)(d) of the PoFA Act

         and sentenced him to undergo simple imprisonment for 6 (six)
6
CA No. 183 of 2004
3
months and fine of Rs. 1000/-, in default to undergo simple

         imprisonment for 2 (two) more months.
8.   The conviction and sentence had been carried in appeal7 by Naresh

         Chandra whereupon, the Appellate Court upheld the same and

         dismissed the appeal vide order dated 16th November, 1988.
9.   The appellate judgment and order having been subjected to challenge

         before the Allahabad High Court in its revisional jurisdiction, vide the

         impugned judgment, the court refused to interfere and dismissed the

         revision.
CONTENTIONS
10.      Mollification of sentence is sought on behalf of the two sets of

         appellants by learned counsel appearing on their behalf on the

         common following grounds:
a. That Section 20AA of the PoFA Act effectively denies the benefit

                of probation for first-time offenders, thereby violating
Article

                14
of the Constitution of India.
b. That Section 20AA of the PoFA Act violates
Article 21
of the

                Constitution as denial of probation impacts the liberty of

                individuals without due consideration of their circumstances

                considering that the Probation of Offenders Act, 19588 is to

                rehabilitate offenders and reduce the burden on the prison

                system.
7
Criminal Appeal No. 138 of 1987
8
Probation Act
4
c. That Section 20AA of the PoFA Act contradicts the reformative

                 justice approach enshrined in
Section 360
of the Criminal

                 Procedure Code, 19739 which encourages rehabilitation of

                 offenders.
d. That the Food Safety and Standards Act, 200610, which

                 repealed the PoFA Act, does not include a provision equivalent

                 to Section 20AA evincing the legislative intent to move towards

                 a reformatory framework.
11.      However, learned counsel for the respondent in the lead appeal -
State of Tamil Nadu - has placed great reliance on the express words

         in Section 20AA of the PoFA Act, prescribing a categorical and

         complete exclusion of the applicability of the
Probation Act
and

         Section 360 of the Cr. PC. Therefore, according to the State, the

         legislative intent is clear that food adulteration is a crime against

         public health and the perpetrators of such crimes must face

         consequences for their acts of crimes. Furthermore, emphasis was

         laid on incorporation of Section 20AA in the PoFA Act by way of

         amendment and reliance was placed on the Statement of Object and

         Reasons for such amendment highlighting the growing concern over

         the prevalence of food adulteration and the inadequacy of existing

         provincial laws to address the issue uniformly.
12.      The State of Uttar Pradesh has not pressed any arguments before us.
9
Cr. PC
10
FSS Act
5
THE LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
13.   Section 20AA was introduced in the PoFA Act though an amendment

      in 1976. It reads thus:
20AA.
Application of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958
and
section 360
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.—Nothing
            contained in the Probation of offenders Act, 1958 (20 of 1958) or
section 360
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall
            apply to a person convicted of an offence under this Act unless that
            person is under eighteen years of age.
14.   The PoFA Act was repealed by the
FSS Act
. We may also refer to
Section 97
of the FSS Act, which deals with ‘repeal and savings’. The

      proviso to Section 97 specifically saves certain aspects of the PoFA

      Act. The relevant part is reproduced below:
97. Repeal and savings.–
            …
            Provided that such repeal shall not affect:—
(i)   the previous operations of the enactment and Orders under
                  repeal or anything duly done or suffered there under; or
(ii)  any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or
                  incurred under any of the enactment or Orders under repeal;
or
(iii) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of
                  any offences committed against the enactment and Orders
                  under repeal; or
(iv) any investigation or remedy in respect of any such penalty,
                  forfeiture or punishment, and any such investigation, legal
                  proceedings or remedy may be instituted, continued or
                  enforced and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may
                  be imposed, as if this Act had not been passed.
…
15.   The appellants have largely based their arguments on the basis of
Article 20(1)
of the Constitution, which is as follows:
20. Protection in respect of conviction for offences.—(1) No
            person shall be convicted of any offence except for violation of a law
            in force at the time of the commission of the Act charged as an
            offence, nor be subjected to a penalty greater than that which might
            have been inflicted under the law in force at the time of the
            commission of the offence.
6
16.
Article 15(1)
of the International Covenant on Civil and Political

         Rights, 1966, which was ratified by India in 1979, includes a provision

         similar to
Article 20(1)
of the Constitution. It says:
Article 15.
1. No one shall be held guilty of any criminal offence on
                account of any act or omission which did not constitute a criminal
                offence, under national or international law, at the time when it was
                committed. Nor shall a heavier penalty be imposed than the one that
                was applicable at the time when the criminal offence was committed.
                If, subsequent to the commission of the offence, provision is made
                by law for the imposition of a lighter penalty, the offender shall
                benefit thereby.
17.      Section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 189711 notes the effect of a

         repeal of any enactment:
6. Effect of repeal.—Where this Act, or any Central Act or
                Regulation made after the commencement of this Act, repeals any
                enactment hitherto made or hereafter to be made, then, unless a
                different intention appears, the repeal shall not—
(a) revive anything not in force or existing at the time at which the
                repeal takes effect; or
(b) affect the previous operation of any enactment so repealed or
                anything duly done or suffered thereunder; or
(c) affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued
                or incurred under any enactment so repealed; or
(d) affect any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect
                of any offence committed against any enactment so repealed; or
(e) affect any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of
                any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or
                punishment as aforesaid; and any such investigation, legal
                proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and
                any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if the
                repealing Act or Regulation had not been passed.
18.
Section 26
of the GC Act positing a situation of an offence being

         punishable under two or more enactments, ordains that the offender

         shall be liable to punishment only under one of those enactments and

         not under both [quite falling in line with
Article 20(2)
of the

         Constitution]. It reads thus:
11
GC Act
, hereafter
7
26. Provision as to offences punishable under two or more
            enactments.—Where an act or omission constitutes an offence
            under two or more enactments, then the offender shall be liable to
            be prosecuted and punished under either or any of those enactments,
            but shall not be liable to be punished twice for the same offence
19.   The relevant part of Section 16 of the PoFA Act stipulating penalties

      reads as follows:
16. Penalties.—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1A) if
            any person—
(a) Whether by himself or by any other person on his behalf,
                  imports into India or manufacturers for sale or stores, sells or
                  distributes any article of food—
(i) which is adulterated within the meaning of sub-
clause (m) of clause (ia) of
section 2
or misbranded
                          within the meaning of clause (ix) of that section or the
                          sale of which is prohibited under any provision of this
                          Act or any rule made thereunder or by an order of the
                          Food (Health) Authority;
(ii) Other than an article of food referred to in sub-
                          clause (I), in contravention of any of the provision of
                          this Act or of any rule made thereunder, or
                          …
(c) prevents a food inspector from taking a sample as
                  authorised by this Act; or
(d) prevents a food inspector from exercising any other power
                  conferred on him by or under this Act;
…
            he shall, in addition to the penalty to which he may be liable under
            the provisions of
section 6
, be punishable with imprisonment for a
            term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend
            to three years, and with fine which shall not be less than one
            thousand rupees:
…



QUESTIONS
20.   Special Leave Petitions having been presented before this Court by

      the two sets of appellants, separate coordinate Benches issued

      notice, limited to the question of sentence.
21.   Based on the rival contentions, two short but interesting inter-
connected questions of law arise for decision in the present appeals:
8
(i) whether the benefit of the provisions of the
Probation Act
can be

         granted to the respective appellants? (ii) should the answer to the

         above question be in the negative, can the reduced sentence that the
FSS Act
envisages be imposed on the appellants instead?
ANALYSIS
22.      We now proceed with our analysis. The task ought to commence with

         a study of judicial precedents.
PRECEDENTS
23.      The parties before us have referred to a catena of decisions of this

         Court in support of their contentions. A study of such decisions along

         with a few other decisions would provide guidance for the ultimate

         disposal of these appeals.
24.      Prior to 1976, i.e., before Section 20AA was included in the PoFA Act,

         there was no doubt that the
Probation Act
applied to the offences

         committed under the PoFA Act. A profitable reference may be made

         to the decision in
Ishar Das v. State of Punjab12
, wherein Hon’ble

         H.R. Khanna, J. (as His Lordship then was) speaking for the Bench

         observed:
“9. The provisions of
Probation of Offenders Act
, in our opinion, point
               to the conclusion that their operation is not excluded in the case of
               persons found guilty of offences under the
Prevention of Food
               Adulteration Act
. Assuming that there was reasonable doubt or
               ambiguity, the principle to be applied in construing a penal act is that
               such doubt or ambiguity should be resolved in favour of the person
               who would be liable to the penalty (see Maxwell on Interpretation of
               Statutes, p. 239, 12th Edn). It has also to be borne in mind that the
Probation of Offenders Act
was enacted in 1958 subsequent to the
               enactment in 1954 of the
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act
. As the
12
(1973) 2 SCC 65
9
legislature enacted the
Probation of Offenders Act
despite the
               existence on the statute book of the
Prevention of Food Adulteration
               Act
, the operation of the provisions of Probation of Offenders Art
               cannot be whittled down or circumscribed because of the provisions
               of the earlier enactment viz.
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act
.
Indeed, as mentioned earlier, the non obstante clause in
Section 4
of the Probation of Offenders Act is a clear manifestation of the
               intention of the legislature that the provisions of the
Probation of
               Offenders Act
would have effect notwithstanding any other law for
               the time being in force...”

         However, Their Lordships rightly cautioned against resorting to the

         provisions in the
Probation Act
in normal circumstances and instead

         advocated adoption thereof on a case-to-case approach such that the

         Court is convinced about the application of the
Probation Act
:
“10. Adulteration of food is a menace to public health.
The Prevention
               of Food Adulteration Act
has been enacted with the aim of eradicating
               that anti-social evil and for ensuring purity in the articles of food. In
               view of the above object of the Act and the intention of the legislature
               as revealed by the fact that a minimum sentence of imprisonment
               for a period of six months and a fine of rupees one thousand has
               been prescribed. The courts should not lightly resort to the provisions
               of the
Probation of Offenders Act
in the case of persons above 21
               years of age found guilty of offences under the
Prevention of Food
               Adulteration Act
...”
                                                                  (emphasis supplied)
25.      Thereafter, a three-Judge Bench of this Court dealing with an offence

         under the PoFA Act in
Jai Narain v. Municipal Corpn. of Delhi13
,

         while upholding the view expressed in
Ishar Das
(supra), held that

         the conduct of the appellant therein being anti-social did not merit

         the application of the
Probation Act
.
26.      Yet again, in the case of
Pyarali K. Tejani v. Mahadeo

         Ramchandra Dange14
, this Court, through Hon’ble V.R. Krishna
13
(1972) 2 SCC 637
14
(1974) 1 SCC 167
10
Iyer, J., upheld the view in
Ishar Das
(supra) and observed that the

         offence under the PoFA Act is an economic offence and would

         therefore, not be easily susceptible to the probationary process. We

         quote His Lordship hereunder:
“28. The kindly application of the probation principles is negatived
               by the imperatives of social defence and the improbabilities of moral
               proselyti-sation. No chances can be taken by society with a man
               whose anti-social operations, disguised as a respectable trade,
               imperil numerous innocents. He is a security risk. Secondly, these
               economic offences committed by white-collar criminals are unlikely
               to be dissuaded by the gentle probationary process. Neither casual
               provocation nor motive against particular persons but planned profit-
               making from numbers of consumers furnishes the incentive — not
               easily humanised by the therapeutic probationary measure. It is not
               without significance that the recent report (47th report) of the Law
               Commission of India has recommended the exclusion of the Act to
               social and economic offences by suitable amendments. It observed:
‘We appreciate that the suggested amendment would be in
                      apparent conflict with current trends in sentencing. But
                      ultimately, the justification of all sentencing is the protection
                      of society. There are occasions when an offender is so anti-
                      social that his immediate and sometimes prolonged
                      confinement is the best assurance of society's protection. The
                      consideration of rehabilitation has to give way, because of the
                      paramount need for the protection of society. We are,
                      therefore, recommending suitable amendment in all the Acts,
                      to exclude probation in the above cases’.”
27.      Shortly after the amendment in 1976, this Court speaking through

         Hon’ble P.N. Bhagwati, J. (as His Lordship then was) in
Prem Ballab

         v. State (Delhi Admn
.)15, while deciding on a similar issue arising

         from the unamended statute, observed that:
“7. …The imperatives of social defence must discourage the
               applicability of the probation principle. No chances can be taken by
               society with a man whose anti-social activities, in the guise of a
               respectable trade, jeopardise the health and well-being of numerous
               innocent consumers. The adulterator is a social risk. It might be
               dangerous to leave him free to carry on his nefarious activities by
               applying the probation principle to him. Moreover, it must be
               remembered that adulteration is an economic offence prompted by
15
(1977) 1 SCC 173
11
profit motive and it is not likely to lend itself easily to therapeutic
                 treatment by the probationary measure. It may be pointed out that
                 the Law Commission also in its Forty-seventh Report recommended
                 the exclusion of applicability of the probationary process in case of
                 social and economic offences and presumably in response to this
                 recommendation, the legislature has recently amended the
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954
by introducing Section
                 20AA providing that nothing contained in the
Probation of Offenders
                 Act, 1958
or
Section 360
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
                 shall apply to a person convicted of an offence under the Act unless
                 that person is under eighteen years of age. This amendment of
                 course would not apply in the present case but it shows the legislative
                 trend which it would not be right for the court to ignore. We cannot,
                 therefore, give the benefit of the
Probation of Offenders Act, 1958
to
                 the appellants and release them on probation.”
                                                                    (emphasis supplied)
28.      However, another three-Judge Bench of this Court in T. Barai v.
Henry Ah Hoe16, was called upon to decide various issues including

         the issue whether a convict is entitled to the mollified sentence on

         account of the fact that the new Central enactment provided for a

         lesser punishment for the same offence as compared with an older

         State enactment under which the appellant was convicted. Hon’ble

         A.P. Sen, J. (as His Lordship then was) speaking for the Bench ruled

         that:
“11. It was not long before Parliament stepped in to meet the
                 growing menace of the anti-social offence of adulteration of articles
                 of food meant for human consumption which was a threat to the
                 national well-being and it was felt that such offences must be
                 ruthlessly dealt with. It was also felt that there should be a summary
                 trial of these offences.
The Prevention of Food Adulteration
                 (Amendment) Act, 1976
was accordingly brought into force with
                 effect from April 1, 1976. It not only created new offences but also
                 enhanced the punishment provided. But at the same time it also
                 provided for graded punishment for various types of offences.
                 Incidentally, it mollified the rigour of the law by providing for a
                 reduced punishment for an offence punishable under
Section
                 16(1)(a)
. We are however not concerned with other types of offences
                 except the one punishable under
Section 16(1)(a)
and for this the
16
(1983) 1 SCC 177
12
maximum punishment provided was for a term of three years instead
            of six years…
            …
22. It is only retroactive criminal legislation that is prohibited under
Article 20(1).
The prohibition contained in
Article 20(1)
is that no
            person shall be convicted of any offence except for violation of a law
            in force at the time of the commission of the act charged as an
            offence prohibits nor shall he be subjected to a penalty greater than
            that which might have been inflicted under the law in force at the
            time of the commission of the offence. It is quite clear that insofar as
            the Central Amendment Act creates new offences or enhances
            punishment for a particular type of offence no person can be
            convicted by such ex post facto law nor can the enhanced punishment
            prescribed by the amendment be applicable. But insofar as the
            Central Amendment Act reduces the punishment for an offence
            punishable under
Section 16(1)(a)
of the Act, there is no reason why
            the accused should not have the benefit of such reduced punishment.
The rule of beneficial construction requires that even ex post facto
            law of such a type should be applied to mitigate the rigour of the law.
            The principle is based both on sound reason and common sense.
23. To illustrate, if Parliament were to reenact Section 302 of the
            Penal Code, 1860 and provide that the punishment for an offence of
            murder shall be sentence for imprisonment for life instead of the
            present sentence of death or imprisonment for life, then it cannot be
            that the courts would still award a sentence of death even in pending
            cases.
…
25. It is settled both on authority and principle that when a later
            statute again describes an offence created by an earlier statute and
            imposes a different punishment, or varies the procedure, the earlier
            statute is repealed by implication…The rule is however subject to the
            limitation contained in
Article 20(1)
against ex post facto law
            providing for a greater punishment and has also no application where
            the offence described in the later Act is not the same as in the earlier
            Act i.e. when the essential ingredients of the two offences are
            different.
26. In the premises, the Central Amendment Act having dealt with
            the same offence as the one punishable under
Section 16(1)(a)
and
            provided for a reduced punishment, the accused must have the
            benefit of the reduced punishment. We wish to make it clear that
            anything that we have said shall not be construed as giving to the
            Central Amendment Act a retrospective operation insofar as it
            creates new offences or provides for an enhanced punishment.”
                                                               (emphasis supplied)
29.   T. Barai (supra) is no doubt a leading decision on the aspect of the

      principle of beneficial interpretation of penal statutes for the purposes

      of sentencing. However, we are not convinced that the same is wholly
13
applicable in the instant case as (i) the dispute therein was between

         a Central enactment and a State enactment pertaining to the same

         offence, (ii) the case concerned punishment to be provided and was

         not a decision related to release of an offender on probation and (iii)

         in that case, there existed no such provision similar to either Section

         20AA of the PoFA Act or even
Section 97
of the FSS Act and obviously,

         was not a case dealing with repeal.
30.      Shortly after the decision in T Barai (supra), this Court in the case

         of
Babu Ram v. State of Haryana17
, in no uncertain terms held that

         the special provision made in the form of Section 20AA of the PoFA

         Act, would override the provisions of the
Probation Act
.
“2. The appellant was convicted under
Section 16(1)(a)(i)
of the
               Prevention of Food Adulteration Act. The facts are not in dispute. The
               respondent has been sentenced to 6 months' rigorous imprisonment
               and to pay a fine of Rs 1000. Notice was issued confined to the
               question of sentence. The learned counsel argues that this is a fit
               case where the appellant should be admitted to probation. On the
               other hand, Mr Mahajan for the respondent points out the provision
               in Section 20AA in support of his submission that the
Special Act
excludes application of the
Probation of Offenders Act
. We are
               inclined to agree with him that the special provision made in the
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act
overrides the provision of the
Probation of Offenders Act
and therefore the appellant will not be
               entitled to the benefit thereof…”
                                                                (emphasis supplied)
31.
In the case of
Nemi Chand v. State of Rajasthan18
, this Court

         applying the decision in T. Barai (supra) modified the sentence of six

         months’ imprisonment and fine of Rs. 1000/- to Rs. 50,000 for an

         offence committed under Sections 7/16 of the PoFA Act.
17
1987 Supp SCC 12
18
(2018) 17 SCC 448
14
32.   Recently, a co-ordinate bench of this Court in A.K. Sarkar & Co. v.
State of W.B.19, placing reliance on T Barai (supra) held that:
“10.
The Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954
was repealed by
             the introduction of the
Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006
where
             Section 52 provides a maximum penalty of Rs 3,00,000 for
             misbranded food. There is no provision for imprisonment…
             …
15. Considering all aspects, more particularly the nature of offence,
             though we uphold the findings of the courts below regarding the
             offence, but we hereby convert the sentence of Appellant 2 from
             three months of simple imprisonment along with fine of Rs 1000 to a
             fine of Rs 50,000 (Rupees fifty thousand only). The sentence of
             Appellant 1 which is for a fine of Rs 2000 is upheld. The amount shall
             be deposited with the court concerned within a period of three weeks
             from today. Accordingly, the appeal is partly allowed.”
33.   Two more decisions have been cited before us, which we believe are

      inapplicable to the present lis. The reasons are assigned below:
a. In
Paramjit Singh v. Municipal Corpn.20
, the Court held that

             since the offence pertained to November 1968 at which point

             of time the Courts had the power to release the offender on

             probation, the same should be done as the facts did not

             necessitate the passing of a sentence of imprisonment upon the

             appellant therein. This case is, therefore, clearly distinguishable

             from the present matter.
b. The decision in
Santosh Kumar v. Municipal Corpn.21
is also

             not applicable to the facts at hand as that was a case of

             commutation of sentence under Section 433(d), Cr. PC.
19
(2024) 10 SCC 727
20
(1982) 3 SCC 317
21
(2000) 9 SCC 151
15
34.      At this stage, we would also like to highlight a few other decisions of

         this Court that would seem to be applicable for resolution of the

         controversy.
35.
In the case of
Rattan Lal v. State of Punjab22
, Hon’ble K. Subba

         Rao, J. (as His Lordship then was) speaking for the majority in a 3-

         Judge Bench decision held that:
“6. …Every ex post facto law is necessarily retrospective. Under
Article 20
of the Constitution, no person shall be convicted of any
               offence except for violation of a law in force at the time of the
               commission of that act charged as an offence, nor be subjected to a
               penalty greater than that which might have been inflicted under the
               law in force at the time of the commission of the offence. But an ex
               post facto law which only mollifies the rigour of a criminal law does
               not fall within the said prohibition. If a particular law makes a
               provision to that effect, though retrospective in operation, it will be
               valid. The question whether such a law is retrospective and, if so, to
               what extent depends upon the interpretation of a particular statute,
               having regard to the well-settled rules of construction. Maxwell in his
               book On Interpretation of Statutes, 11th Edn., at pp. 274-75,
               summarizes the relevant rule of construction thus:
‘The tendency of, modern decisions, upon the whole, is to
                     narrow materially the difference between what is called a strict
                     and a beneficial construction. All statutes are now construed
                     with a more attentive regard to the language, and criminal
                     statutes with a more rational regard to the aim and intention
                     of the legislature, then formerly. It is unquestionably right that
                     the distinction should not be altogether erased from the
                     judicial mind, for it is required by the spirit of our free
                     institutions that the interpretation of all statutes should be
                     favourable to personal liberty, and this tendency is still evinced
                     in a certain reluctance to supply the defects of language, or to
                     eke out the meaning of an obscure passage by strained or
                     doubtful influences. The effect of the rule of strict construction
                     might almost be summed up in the remark that, where an
                     equivocal word or ambiguous sentence leaves a reasonable
                     doubt of its meaning which the canons of interpretation fail to
                     solve, the benefit of the doubt should be given to the subject
                     and against the legislature which has failed to explain itself.
                     But it yields to the paramount rule that every statute is to be
                     expounded according to its expressed or manifest intention
                     and that all cases within the mischiefs aimed at are, if the
22
1964 SCC OnLine SC 40
16
language permits, to be held to fall within its remedial
                       influence.’
7. Let us now proceed to consider the question raised in the present
               case. This is not a case where an act, which was not an offence before
               the Act, is made an offence under the Act; nor this is a case where
               under the Act a punishment higher than that obtaining for an offence
               before the Act is imposed. This is an instance where neither the
               ingredients of the offence nor the limits of the sentence are
               disturbed, but a provision is made to help the reformation of an
               accused through the agency of the court. Even so the statute affects
               an offence committed before it was extended to the area in question.
It is, therefore, a post facto law and has retrospective operation. In
               considering the scope of such a provision we must adopt the rule of
               beneficial construction as enunciated by the modern trend of judicial
               opinion without doing violence to the provisions of the relevant
               section. …
As the Act
does not change the quantum of the sentence,
               but only introduces a provision to reform the offender, there is no
               reason why the legislature should have prohibited the exercise of
               such a power, even if the case was pending against the accused at
               one stage or other in the hierarchy of tribunals…”
36.
In
Basheer v. State of Kerala23
, a batch of appeals was heard on

         the point of the constitutional validity of the proviso to
Section 41(1)
of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Amendment)

         Act, 2001. The unamended statute made no distinction between “any

         quantity” and “small quantity”. In all the appeals before the Court,

         the accused were convicted by the trial courts and had filed appeals

         before the respective High Courts. Further, their appeals were

         pending before the High Courts on 2nd October, 2001, when the

         amending Act came into force. The accused were found guilty of

         offences and were sentenced to rigorous imprisonment of 10 years

         and a fine of Rs one lakh each, which was the minimum punishment

         prescribed under the unamended statute. The new Act, however,

         provided for graded punishment on the basis of the quantity of drugs
23
(2004) 3 SCC 609
17
in the possession of the accused. This Court ruled that the concerned

rule of beneficial construction of a penal statute is limited to the

reduction of any sentence and the conviction remains under the old

Act. The amendment had in effect created a new set of offences, and

therefore, the benefit of graded punishment would not be available

to the appellants therein. Relevant passages read thus:
“13. Nothing much however, turns on this principle as far as the
     appeals before us are concerned. Notwithstanding the application of
     the mollifying provisions of the Act retrospectively, by the proviso to
     Section 41(1), Parliament has expressly declared that the benefit of
     the retrospective mollificatory provisions would not be available to
     the cases ‘pending in appeal’. What is crucial is whether this
     segregation of ‘cases pending in appeal’ and their exclusion from the
     application of the beneficial effects of the amending Act infringes the
     equality right guaranteed under
Article 14
of the Constitution.
     …
22. Inasmuch as Act 9 of 2001 introduced significant and material
     changes in the parent Act, which would affect the trial itself,
     application of the amended Act to cases where the trials had
     concluded and appeals were pending on the date of its
     commencement could possibly result in the trials being vitiated,
     leading to retrials, thereby defeating at least the first objective of
     avoiding delay in trials. The accused, who had been tried and
     convicted before 2-10-2001 (i.e. as per the unamended 1985 Act)
     could possibly urge in the pending appeals, that as their trials were
     not held in accordance with the amended provisions of the Act, their
     trials must be held to be vitiated and that they should be retried in
     accordance with the amended provisions of the Act. This could be a
     direct and deleterious consequence of applying the amended
     provisions of the Act to trials which had concluded and in which
     appeals were filed prior to the date of the amending Act coming into
     force. This would certainly defeat the first objective of avoiding delay
     in such trials. Hence, Parliament appears to have removed this class
     of cases from the ambit of the amendments and excluded them from
     the scope of the amending Act so that the pending appeals could be
     disposed of expeditiously by applying the unamended Act without the
     possibility of reopening the concluded trials.
23. Thus, in our view, the Rubicon indicated by Parliament is the
     conclusion of the trial and pendency of appeal. In the cases of
     pending trials, and cases pending investigation, the trial is yet to
     conclude; hence, the retrospective mollification of the rigour of
     punishment has been made applicable. In the cases where the trials
     are concluded and appeals are pending, the application of the
     amended Act appears to have been excluded so as to preclude the
18
possible contingency of reopening concluded trials. In our judgment,
               the classification is very much rational and based on clearly
               intelligible differentia, which has rational nexus with one of the
               objectives to be achieved by the classification. There is one
               exceptional situation, however, which may produce an anomalous
               result. If the trial had just concluded before 2-10-2001, but the
               appeal is filed after 2-10-2001, it cannot be said that the appeal was
               pending as on the date of the coming into force of the amending Act,
               and the amendment would be applicable even in such cases. The
               observations of this Court in Nallamilli case [(2001) 7 SCC 708]
               would apply to such a case. The possibility of such a fortuitous case
               would not be a strong enough reason to attract the wrath of
Article
               14
and its constitutional consequences. Hence, we are unable to
               accept the contention that the proviso to Section 41 of the amending
               Act is hit by
Article 14.
…
28. In the result, we are of the view that the proviso to Section 41(1)
               of the amending Act 9 of 2001 is constitutional and is not hit by
Article 14.
Consequently, in all cases, in which the trials had
               concluded and appeals were pending on 2-10-2001, when amending
               Act 9 of 2001 came into force, the amendments introduced by the
               amending Act 9 of 2001 would not be applicable and they would have
               to be disposed of in accordance with the
NDPS Act, 1985
, as it stood
               before 2-10-2001. Since there are other contentions of law and fact
               raised in each of these cases, they would have to be placed before
               the appropriate Benches for decision and disposal in accordance with
               the law.”
37.      Lastly, in the case of Arvind Mohan Sinha v. Amulya Kumar

         Biswas24, Y.V. Chandrachud, J (as His Lordship then was) arising

         from a conviction under the
Customs Act, 1962
succinctly delineated

         the purpose, purport and object of the
Probation Act
in the following

         words:
“11.
The Probation of Offenders Act
is a reformative measure and its
               object is to reclaim amateur offenders who, if spared the indignity of
               incarceration, can be usefully rehabilitated in society. A jail term
               should normally be enough to wipe out the stain of guilt but the
               sentence which the society passes on convicts is relentless. The
               ignominy commonly associated with a jail term and the social stigma
               which attaches to convicts often render the remedy worse than the
               disease and the very purpose of punishment stands in the danger of
               being frustrated. In recalcitrant cases, punishment has to be
               deterrent so that others similarly minded may warn themselves of
               the hazards of taking to a career of crime. But the novice who strays
24
(1974) 4 SCC 222
19
into the path of crime ought, in the interest of society, be treated as
            being socially sick. Crimes are not always rooted in criminal
            tendencies and their origin may lie in psychological factors induced
            by hunger, want and poverty.
The Probation of Offenders Act
recognises the importance of environmental influence in the
            commission of crimes and prescribes a remedy whereby the offender
            can be reformed and rehabilitated in society. An attitude of social
            defiance and recklessness which comes to a convict who, after a jail
            term, is apt to think that he has no more to lose or fear may breed a
            litter of crime. The object of the
Probation of Offenders Act
is to nip
            that attitude in the bud. Winifred A. Elkin describes probation as a
            system which provides a means of re-education without the necessity
            of breaking up the offender's normal life and removing him from the
            natural surroundings of his home [ English Juvenile Courts, (1938)
            p. 162] . Edwin H. Sutherland raises it to a status convicted offender.
[ Principles of Criminology 4th Edn. (1947) p. 383]
            …
13. There is no foundation for the fear that offenders released on
            probation may hold the society to ransom and the society may
            therefore look upon the release of offenders on probation as the
            triumph of criminals over the weaknesses of law. An offender
            released on probation is convicted but not forthwith sentenced in the
            sense of penal laws. Under the disposition made by the Court the
            sentence is suspended during the period of probation.
Section 4(1)
of the Act provides that instead of sentencing the offender ‘at once’,
            the Court may direct his release on his entering into a bond to
            ‘receive sentence when called upon’ during the probationary period
            and in the meantime to keep the peace and be of good behaviour.
            Thus it is only in a limited, though a socially significant, sense that
            the Act constitutes an exception to the broad and general principle
            of criminal law embodied, for example, in Sections 245(2), 258(2),
            306(2) and
Section 309(2)
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, that a
            sentence shall follow on a conviction.”
38.   We preface our observations that this Court has consistently held that

      the safety of citizens is paramount. The safety of consumers was the

      goal of the PoFA Act as safety standards of food is essential for the

      health and well-being of its citizens. The PoFA Act, now repealed by

      the
FSS Act
, was instrumental in preventing adulterated food in the

      market by creating a framework wherein adulterated food could not

      be sold as they would endanger the lives of consumers. Food, as we
20
all know, is essential for life and no leeway must be given in such

      circumstances.
APPLICATION OF THE PROBATION OF OFFENDERS ACT
39.   A canonical rule of statutory interpretation, i.e, the rule of literal

      construction, is that the words of a statute should be read as it is and

      should be understood in their natural and ordinary sense. A reference

      to the rule of beneficial construction of a statute or any other rule of

      statutory interpretation may be resorted to only if the literal rule fails

      to provide suitable guidance or results in absurdity.
40.   There can be no quarrel that Section 20AA, introduced by way of

      amendment, is too clear admitting of no absurdity and seals this

      question of law against the appellants. Nothing in these decisions

      have shown us that the rule of beneficial construction can also be

      extended to the release of offenders on probation, especially

      considering the express provision present in Section 20AA of the PoFA

      Act.
41.   This Court has often lamented the lack of sentencing guidelines in

      this country, which we echo. That being said, we are of the firm

      opinion that there exists a fundamental difference between reduction

      or mollification of a sentence and releasing an offender on probation.

      The probationary process envisages that first time offenders who are

      capable of reformation can be provided a benefit such that they can

      continue to a be a part of society as capable and law-abiding citizens
21
in the future. The thrust of penology in the past few decades has been

      focused on the reformation of an individual. “Every saint has a past,

      and every sinner has a future”. While there is no quarrel with the

      probationary process, we ought to remain subservient to the wisdom

      of the legislature in applying the benefit of probation. This Court

      cannot offend the express provisions present in any legislative

      instrument merely to provide a benefit to an offender, not envisaged

      under the law. Section 20AA of the PoFA Act read with
Section 97
of

      the FSS Act makes it clear that the benefit under the
Probation Act
cannot be made applicable to an offence committed between 1976

      (when Section 20AA was introduced) up to the repeal of the statute

      in 2006 by the
FSS Act
in line with the decision rendered in
Babu

      Ram
(supra).
42.   Therefore, the first question is decided against the appellants.



MOLLIFICATION OF PUNISHMENT
43.   While deliberating on the second question, we have also considered

      the claim that the sentence should at least be reduced as per the
FSS

      Act
. Several decisions have been cited before us to contend that

      mollification of a punishment on the ground that the new enactment

      provides for a lesser punishment is permissible. We are, however, in

      respectful disagreement with such proposition insofar as the instant

      case is concerned. A ‘repeals and savings’ clause in any statute is not
22
mere surplusage that the Courts may ignore in the interpretation of

      the law. When a ‘repeal and savings’ clause specifically protects a

      penalty provided for in the old enactment, the intention of the

      legislature is clear. This Court, in its enthusiasm, cannot and should

      not provide a benefit to the accused that is not permitted in law.

      Mollification must only be provided in cases where a provision in

      relation to ‘repeal and savings’ is either not present or where the

      ‘repeal and savings’ clause envisages such a possibility. This is in line

      with the decision rendered in
Basheer
(supra). Therefore, the second

      question too is decided against the appellants.
44.   At this stage, a plea to our conscience has been made that despite

      the order issuing notice being limited to sentence, to look at the

      grounds for conviction and to provide some relief in the lead appeal.

      Considering the age of the appellants and the fact that the offences

      took place in 2001 and 1985, we consider it appropriate to look into

      the record to see whether we may interfere with the conviction

      recorded against these appellants.
45.   In the lead appeal, the cause for the offence is that the appellants

      were selling curd that was found to have a fat content lower than the

      standard prescribed for buffalo milk, leading to its classification as

      adulterated. The record before us suggests that the Food Inspector

      took 12 samples of curd, mixed them in a vessel and out of that

      mixture took a sample and sent it for analysis. The Food Inspector

      had not marked whether the milk was buffalo milk or cow milk, and
23
the standard for buffalo milk was taken for the purpose of analysis.
The public analyst recorded that there was 4.6% fat against a

         minimum of 5% fat as required under the standard for buffalo milk.

         However, the curd was also sent for analysis to the Central Food

         Laboratory, Kolkata. It reported that the percentage of fat in the

         sample was 8.3%, which is higher than the minimum percentage

         required. This apparent discrepancy should be interpreted to the

         benefit of the accused.
46.
In
C.    Mohammed         v.   State    of   Kerala25
,    the   sentence    of

         imprisonment was converted to a sentence of fine on the ground that

         there was a discrepancy between the reports as to the percentage of

         adulteration:
“3. The appellant was found guilty of an offence punishable under
Sections 16(1)(a)(i)
and (ii) read with
Sections 7(1)
and (2)(ix)(d)
                 of the
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954
. A sample of moong
                 dal (black gram dal) was taken from the shop of the appellant on 20-
                 3-1989 and it was sent for chemical analysis and it was found by the
                 Regional Analytical Laboratory at Calicut that it contained 0.28% of
                 talc as foreign matter. The appellant was not satisfied with the report
                 and sent the second sample to be examined by the Central Food
                 Laboratory and the Central Food Laboratory issued a certificate dated
                 1-8-1989 wherein the percentage of talc was described as 1.363%
                 and the learned Single Judge held the appellant guilty of the offence
                 punishable under the sections as aforesaid of the
Prevention of Food
                 Adulteration Act
.
4. Counsel for the appellant submits that talc is not an inorganic
                 foreign matter as it does not come within the Explanation contained
                 in clause A.18.06.11 (sic A.18.06.10) of the Prevention of Food
                 Adulteration Rules, 1955 and whereas the said contention was
                 refuted by the counsel for the State. Counsel for the appellant also
                 contended that this is not a harmful substance and the talc was added
                 only as preservative and to prevent the sticking of the grains of dal
                 and therefore, the sentence of imprisonment may be converted to
                 that of a sentence of fine.
25
(2006) 13 SCC 290
24
5. Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case that
            though the certificate issued by the Central Food Laboratory
            supersedes the report of the Regional Analytical Laboratory, it should
            be noticed that the first report showed the percentage only at 0.28
            which was much below the prohibited percentage. In view of the
            aforesaid circumstances, we hold that the sentence of imprisonment
            be converted into a sentence of fine and a sum of Rs 10,000 is
            imposed as fine. The appellant to remit the fine so imposed within a
            period of two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.”
                                                             (emphasis supplied)

      Therefore, the approach adopted in
C. Mohammed
(supra) can be

      followed and the lead appeal calls for being allowed in part.
47.   With reference to the connected appeal, we do not find any reason to

      interfere with the conviction of the courts below. However, the

      decision of the coordinate Bench in
A.K. Sarkar & Co.
(supra) weighs

      on us heavily. Being a decision of a coordinate Bench, ordinarily we

      ought to follow the same. However, we have our own reservations on

      the reasoning that led to the conclusion in such decision.
This is

      primarily because the Bench had not been taken through the ‘repeal

      and savings’ clause in the
FSS Act
, when it provided the benefit of

      mollified sentence, and also because of reliance placed on T. Barai

      (supra) which we, for reasons assigned above, have held not to be

      applicable here. While the normal course of action calls for a

      reference of the question of law to a larger Bench for an answer, we

      believe that this will only lead to protracted litigation and would leave

      the appellant - Naresh Chandra - at the mercy of the sword of

      Damocles which has been looming over him for forty summers.
Therefore, notwithstanding that we are unable to be ad idem with the

      dictum in
A.K. Sarkar & Co.
(supra) but, in the interest of justice,
25
equity, propriety and judicial comity, we propose to follow the same

      and proceed to partly allow the connected appeal too.



  CONCLUSIONS AND RELIEF
48.   Therefore, resting on our discussion aforesaid, we conclude that:
a. The benefit that the
Probation Act
envisages is inapplicable to

           an offence committed under the PoFA Act, if the offence has

           been committed between introduction of Section 20AA in 1976

           and its repeal in 2006 by the
FSS Act
, in line with the decision

           rendered in
Babu Ram
(supra);
b. The benefit of mollification of sentence cannot be given when a

           ‘repeal and savings’ clause in the repealing statute expressly

           saves a penalty incurred under the repealed statute;
c. As per the approach in
C. Mohammed
(supra), the lead appeal

           has   to   be   partly   allowed   considering   the   facts   and

           circumstances and the discrepancy in the analysis reports of

           the seized curd;
d. The connected appeal also needs to be partly allowed on the

           basis of the dictum in
A.K. Sarkar & Co.
(supra).
49.   For the aforesaid reasons, both the appeals are partly allowed.
50.   Sentences of imprisonment for 6 (six) months imposed on Nagarajan

      and Selvaraj stand converted to a fine of Rs. 30,000/- each, while in
26
case of Naresh Chandra, the sentence of imprisonment is converted

      to that of fine of Rs.20,000/.
51.   All three appellants are given time till end of June, 2025 to pay the

      fine, failing which this order shall stand revoked and they shall expose

      themselves to be taken in custody for serving the prison term of six

      months, minus set-off for any period they were in custody earlier.
………………………………J.
                                                   (DIPANKAR DATTA)




                                                 ………………………………J.
                                                      (MANMOHAN)

NEW DELHI;
MAY 15, 2025.
27