[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Kamla Nehru Memorial Trust vs U.P. State Industrial Development ... on 30 May, 2025
Author:
Surya Kant
Bench:
Surya Kant
2025 INSC 791
                                                                              REPORTABLE


                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        Civil Appeal Nos. ________ / 2025
                                  (Arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 31887-88/2017)


          Kamla Nehru Memorial Trust & Anr.                                     …Appellants


                                                     Versus


          U.P. State Industrial Development
          Corporation Limited & Ors.
                                                                            … Respondents


                                                  JUDGEMENT
SURYA KANT, J.
Leave Granted.
2.             These appeals have been preferred by the Kamla Nehru Memorial

                         Trust (KNMT) against the final common judgment and order dated

                         29.05.2017 passed by the High Court of Allahabad at Lucknow Bench

                         (Impugned Order), whereby it upheld the cancellation of allotment of
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NITIN TALREJA
land admeasuring 125 acres situated in the Utelwa Industrial Area,
Date: 2025.05.30
17:00:32 IST
Reason:
Page 1 of 29
Jagdishpur, District Sultanpur, Uttar Pradesh (Subject Land) by the

     Uttar Pradesh State Industrial Development Corporation (UPSIDC).
3.   The crux of the dispute pending before us relates to the legality of the

     decision of cancellation of allotment of the Subject Land by UPSIDC.

     However, it would be apropos to discuss the factual matrix before

     delving into the analysis pertaining to the alleged procedural

     irregularities in the cancellation of allotment of the Subject Land.


A.   FACTS
4.   In this vein, the sequence of events has been briefly adduced as

     follows:
4.1. KNMT is stated to be a charitable trust incorporated in the year 1975.
It resolved in March, 2003 to purchase land for the purpose of

     floriculture. Accordingly, on 10.07.2003, KNMT submitted an

     application and deposited earnest money amounting to INR 62,600/-

     for allotment of the Subject Land for the aforesaid purpose.


4.2. UPSIDC, in an uncharacteristically swift manner, accepted the

     application of KNMT and allotted the Subject Land vide allotment

     letter dated 18.09.2003 (Allotment Letter). The allotment was made

     conditional upon compliance with certain terms, the relevant

     provisions of which are reproduced below:
Page 2 of 29
“xxx xxx xxx
3.You shall deposit at this office an amount of Rs.
12,02,187.50. (Earnest Money of Rs. 62,500.00 has been
adjusted) towards reservation money in respect of the
above plot latest by 18-10-2003. This amount (together with
Earnest money) is approximately equal to 10 percent of the
total premium of the plot at the provisional rate of Rs. 25.00
per sq. mtr. and locational charges @ Rs. Nil per sq. mtr. for
first five acres and is subject to adjustment according to
actual measurement of the plot. If the above amount falls
short of the amount equal to 10 percentage of the total
premium according to actual measurement, the balance will
be deposited by you within seven days of the receipt of
demand from us.
If the payments are not made as stipulated above this
allotment will stand automatically cancelled/and the whole
amount of the Earnest Money deposited by you will stand
forfeited to this corporation, even if the area of the plot either
exceeds or is less than the area of 20% or less of the area
applied for. However, if the area of the land allotted either
exceeds the area applied for or falls short of the applied for
by an area more than 20% of it, the Earnest Money will not
be forfeited if this allotment is not accepted, provided
intimation is sent to us in this respect by the date stipulated
above.
Note: - the premium herein is provisional and is liable to be
enhanced in accordance with the provisions of Licence
Agreement/Lease Deed.
xxx xxx xxx
5.The remaining 90% of the provisional premium shall have
to be paid by you in 8 equal half yearly installments each
of which will be due for payment on 1st day of January and
1st day of July each year. The first installments of each
payment will fall due for payment on 01.01.2006. The
second and subsequent installments of the premium will fall
due on 1st day of July and 1st day of January each year.
An interest at 15.00% per annum shall be charged on the
outstanding (balance) premium with effect from the date of
allotment and will be payable along with installments of
premium as stipulated in clause 3 above subject to a rebate
of 3.00% per annum and payment on or before the
prescribed date and if there are no arrears of dues. The
amount of the balance premium and the interest due on it
from time to time shall remain first charge on the land and
Page 3 of 29
the building and machinery erected thereon till it is (they
          are) paid in full.
Note: - the premium mentioned herein is provisional and is
          liable to be enhanced in accordance with the provisions of
          licence agreement/Lease Deed.
xxx xxx xxx
9. The plot has been allotted on as it is where it is basis and
          leveling etc, if any, is to be undertaken by you at expenses.
          You will pay to the U.P. State Industrial Development
          Corporation Ltd. Within 30 days from the date of the
          demands made by this corporation from time to time such
          recurring fee in the nature of service and/or maintenance
          charges as determined by this corporation. In case of
          default you will be liable to pay interest @15.00% p.a. on
          the amount due.
xxx xxx xxx
13. You will have to take over possession of the land
          executing the lease deed within 30 days from the date of
          inviting you to do so or within 3 months from the date of this
          letter whichever is earlier.”
                                                                    [Sic]


4.3. After allotment, KNMT inspected the Subject Land and asserted that

    it was encroached upon by third parties, seeking demarcation by the

    relevant State Authorities. Simultaneously, KNMT defaulted in paying

    the ‘reservation money’ by the prescribed date of 18.10.2003.

    Responding to this default, UPSIDC, vide communication dated

    04.11.2003, granted an extension until 17.11.2003 for payment along

    with interest, while clearly stipulating that non-compliance would

    result in automatic cancellation of the allotment.


4.4. KNMT deposited the reserve amount through two demand drafts

    dated 17.11.2003 and requested that UPSIDC not levy any interest
Page 4 of 29
until physical possession of the Subject Land was granted to it.

   UPSIDC, vide letter dated 11.12.2003, categorically rejected the

   aforesaid request by stating that the same was violative of its policy.

   Thereafter, UPSIDC afforded KNMT a three-day window to provide its

   unconditional consent to preserve the validity of the allotment.


4.5. Subsequently, KNMT, admittedly, vide letter dated 15.12.2003,

   responded to UPSIDC’s communication, confirming payment of the

   interest   amount   while   simultaneously    expressing    discontent

   regarding the levy of such interest and requested UPSIDC to

   reconsider its decision. Ultimately, after multiple correspondences,

   this issue was finally resolved vide letter dated 07.01.2004, whereby

   KNMT accepted the conditions of the Allotment Letter. Appellant No.

   2 (official of KNMT) thereafter explicitly agreed to the original terms

   and conditions, including to deposit the reservation amount along

   with requisite interest, for completion of allotment of the Subject

   Land. Concurrently, it bears emphasis that KNMT wrote several

   letters seeking demarcation and handing over of possession of the

   Subject Land after the removal of alleged encroachments. However,

   no action was allegedly taken in respect of these communications.
Page 5 of 29
4.6. Soon thereafter, vide letter dated 21.02.2004, UPSIDC apprised KNMT

    of a policy change, whereby KNMT was directed to execute the lease

    deed prior to delivery of possession. Accordingly, KNMT was required

    to furnish the necessary documents and make requisite payments for

    the execution of the lease deed within 15 days, failing which UPSIDC

    cautioned that it would proceed with cancellation of allotment of the

    Subject Land.
4.7. Notably, the Allotment Letter required KNMT to make payments in a

    scheduled manner. KNMT nonetheless failed to pay the instalments

    and requested rescheduling of the same vide letter dated 11.03.2005.

    UPSIDC, in response, assured them of consideration of their request

    and, in the interim, directed them to pay the lease rent and also to

    provide the necessary documents for the execution of the lease deed.


4.8. UPSIDC, on 01.07.2005, approved the request for rescheduling the

    payment and directed KNMT to pay the total amount of INR

    1,44,27,313/- in ten instalments over a period of 5 years along with

    15% interest starting from the date of issuance of the aforesaid letter,

    which reads as follows:
“Please refer your undated letter on the above subject by
          which you requested to reschedule the total amount of your
          plot and sought permission to pay the first installment in
          July 2005. In this connection, you are informed that
Page 6 of 29
according to your request, the approval of the headquarter
           has been issued to reschedule the total amount of
           Rs.1,44,27,313=10 paise to be paid in 10 six monthly
           installments including 15°/o interest and the first
           installments of 10% amounting to Rs. 14,42,731=35 paise
           is payable by 01.07.2005. The balance 90 % amount is to
           be paid in six monthly (a) further installments including the
           interest. You are therefore requested to please arrange to
           deposit the first installment of the amount of Rs.
           14,42,731=35 paise as early as possible.”
                                                                  [Sic]


4.9. However, KNMT failed to adhere to the aforesaid schedule as well and,

    having defaulted in payment, UPSIDC issued a notice dated

    14.12.2005, thereby mandating it to deposit a sum of INR

    39,76,404.85/- (inclusive of interest and the previous pending

    amount). KNMT, conversely, continued to request UPSIDC to

    handover possession and to reconsider the decision to levy interest.


4.10. Following the continued non-compliance, UPSIDC issued a final

    notice dated 13.11.2006, calling upon KNMT to deposit an amount of

    INR 68,49,869.20/- as well as to submit the necessary documents for

    execution of the lease deed. The notice stipulated a deadline of 10

    days, failing which the allotment of the plot would be cancelled as per

    the terms of the Allotment Letter. The relevant portion of the notice is

    as follows:
“…. Now last and final notice is hereby given to you to
           please submit an amount of Rs. 68,49,869.20 accrued upto
           30.6.2006 and submit the desired documents within TEN
Page 7 of 29
DAYS from the date of this letter failing which allotment of
           plot shall be cancelled as per Clause No. 15(a) & (b) of
           allotment letter dated 18.9.03 and the money deposited by
           you shall stand forfeited.”


4.11. In response, KNMT, without making the payment, vide letter dated

    04.12.2006, repeated its earlier request to hand over the possession

    of   the   land    after   demarcation   and    sought    removal      of   the

    encroachment.       UPSIDC     replied   on    13.12.2006,     stating      that

    possession of the land could only be handed over after execution of

    the sale deed. The letter also underscored KNMT’s failure to deposit

    the requisite documents for execution of the lease deed or any amount

    except the reserve amount since 2003. In this light, UPSIDC finally

    declined KNMT’s        representation.   The letter      dated 13.12.2006

    elucidated that:
“In this regard, it is informed you that the above said land
           was allotted to you in September, 2003 thereafter you have
           deposited only 10°/o amount of allotment. Later on in the
           year, 2005 the re-schedulement was made on your request,
           but despite that no payment has been made by you till
           today, only writing for marking. As per the rules of the
           Corporation, the possession of the land can be given after
           due payment and execution of lease deed. Neither you have
           made payment nor have submitted the requisite documents
           of lease deed. You have only taking time by way of
           unnecessary correspondence.
You had been requested to get execute the lease deed after
           making due payment so that the possession can be given to
           you. But, the aforesaid actions, you by not making the
           payment of dues and execution of lease deed, you want to
           evade the matter by making unnecessary correspondences.
           Hence, the representation submitted by you is declined.”
                                                                   [Sic]
Page 8 of 29
4.12. Feeling aggrieved, KNMT assailed the letter dated 13.12.2006 before

    the High Court through Writ Petition No. 349/2007 (MB) (First Writ).
Meanwhile, the allotment of the Subject Land was cancelled vide the

    order dated 15.01.2007, which was also challenged by KNMT by

    amending the First Writ Petition.
4.13. The High Court, vide interim order dated 13.02.2007, restrained

    UPSIDC from making any fresh allotment of the Subject Land.


4.14. Ultimately, the High Court disposed of the First Writ vide order dated

    27.05.2009 with a direction to restore the allotment in favour of

    KNMT, subject to certain conditions, including completion of all

    formalities in accordance with the Allotment Letter and revalidation

    of demand drafts.
4.15. Aggrieved, UPSIDC challenged the order dated 27.05.2009 before

    this Court vide SLP (C) No. 14680/2009, wherein the matter was

    remitted back to the High Court with the following observations:
“It is apparent from the impugned order that the
           respondents challenged the cancellation order dated
           January 15, 2007 by filing a petition for amendment in the
           writ petition. Admittedly, the Court, without discussing the
           validity of the order dated January 15, 2007, decided the
           matter in favour of the respondents and directed to restore
           the allotment and revalidate the demand drafts of
           ‘91,27,139.65 and to execute the lease deed in favour of the
           respondents.
Page 9 of 29
Learned counsel for the parties accept that the High Court
           ought to have given reasons regarding validity of the order
           of cancellation dated January 15, 2007 before passing the
           impugned order.
In the circumstances, we are of the view that the case
           should be remitted to the Division Bench of the High Court
           for its decision on merits.
We, accordingly, allow this appeal, set aside the impugned
           judgment and order dated May 27, 2009, and remit the case
           to the Division Bench of the High Court for its decision on
           merits expeditiously.”


4.16. It is pertinent to note that, in the interregnum, UPSIDC allotted the

    Subject Land to M/s Jagdishpur Paper Mills Ltd i.e. Respondent No.3,

    which was challenged by KNMT before the High Court through

    another Writ Petition bearing Misc. Bench No. 11055/2013 (Second

    Writ). The High Court therein directed the parties to maintain status

    quo with regard to the Subject Land. UPSIDC challenged the said

    interim order dated 27.11.2013 by means of SLP (C) No. 7952/2014

    wherein vide order dated 07.04.2017, this Court directed the High

    Court to expeditiously adjudicate both the Writ Petitions filed by

    KNMT.
4.17. Consequently, the High Court heard the matter and, vide the

    Impugned Order, upheld the cancellation of the allotment of Subject

    Land. In doing so, the High Court held that:
Page 10 of 29
i)    KNMT failed to follow the stipulations of the allotment as it did

           not adhere to the payment schedule;
ii)   The explanation for delayed payment provided by KNMT, though

           reasonable, failed to form part of the terms and conditions of

           allotment. In other words, strict adherence to the payment

           schedule was necessary; and
iii) UPSIDC rightly cancelled the allotment of Subject Land by

           complying with the terms of The Manual for Marketing and

           Management of Industrial Areas (Manual), specifically citing

           Clause 3.04 (vii), which postulates that:
“(vii) If an allottee has not paid the dues despite three
               consecutive legal notices, the Regional Manager shall be
               required either to cancel the allotment or send his
               recommendation for issue of Recovery Certificate.”


4.18. It is in this factual backdrop that the aggrieved KNMT is before this

     Court. It must further be noted that, during the pendency of the

     instant appeals, this Court, vide order dated 17.11.2017, stayed the

     operation of the Impugned Order.
B.   CONTENTIONS OF THE PARTIES
Page 11 of 29
5.   We have heard Learned Senior Counsels for the parties at a

     considerable length and meticulously perused the documents

     submitted on record.
6.   Mr. Maninder Singh, Learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of

     KNMT made the following contentions:
a.   The High Court erred in its conclusion that KNMT failed to make

          payment of the allotment price as per the schedule. On the

          contrary, UPSIDC failed to transfer the physical possession of the

          Subject Land and merely continued to demand the outstanding

          amount without fulfilling its reciprocal contractual obligations.

          KNMT wrote several letters requesting to deliver possession.

          However, UPSIDC continued to make excuses and used the

          outstanding dues as a cloak for not handing over possession of

          the Subject Land to KNMT. In other words, UPSIDC allegedly

          frustrated the contract.
b.   UPSIDC’s refusal to demarcate the Subject Land contravenes the

          provisions contained in the Allotment Letter. It was thus

          emphasized that UPSIDC was not in a position to handover the

          physical possession as the farmers were still holding the Subject

          Land and continued to cultivate it for agricultural purposes.
Page 12 of 29
c.   Pursuant to the High Court’s directions dated 27.05.2009, KNMT

          duly deposited the due amount with UPSIDC, which has

          remained unutilized for more than ten years. Evidently, KNMT

          duly abided by both the terms of the Allotment Letter as well as

          the directions given by the High Court.
d.   The High Court erroneously interpreted Clause 3.04 (vii) of the

          Manual, which stipulates that UPSIDC must give three legal

          notices to defaulters. In the instant case, UPSIDC sent only one

          such notice dated 13.11.2006. UPSIDC, therefore, failed to abide

          by the conditions prescribed in the Manual, and the cancellation

          order suffers from procedural infirmities. In other words, the

          cancellation of allotment is procedurally flawed and legally

          untenable, as it disregarded both the mandatory notices as

          contemplated under the Manual as well as the fundamental

          principle of reciprocal contractual obligations, where possession

          and demarcation ought to have preceded demands for full

          payment.
7.   Per contra, Mr. K.K. Venugopal and Mr. Atmaram N.S. Nadkarni,

     Learned Senior Counsels, represented UPSIDC and canvassed the

     following submissions:
Page 13 of 29
a.   UPSIDC provided ample opportunities for KNMT to make

     payment as per the terms and conditions of the allotment.

     However, KNMT chose to delay payment for more than six years

     from the date of allotment on false, misleading and specious

     grounds. Moreover, KNMT could not honour its commitment even

     after UPSIDC, taking a lenient view, rescheduled the payment

     terms. Furthermore, despite the High Court’s directions dated

     12.03.2007, KNMT paid only the outstanding principal amount

     without any interest or additional fees for restoration.
b.   The procedure outlined in Clause 3.04 of the Manual was duly

     adhered to by UPSIDC through notices dated 14.12.2004,

     1.07.2005,     14.12.2005,        and     13.11.2006.       Strangely,

     notwithstanding the rejection of its request for waiving of interest,

     KNMT repeatedly implored UPSIDC to reconsider the same rather

     than making payment towards the allotment price.


c.   The    allegations    regarding     the        non-demarcation     and

     encroachment on the Subject Land are false and vexatious. The

     Allotment Letter issued to KNMT itself contained the site plan

     along with precise measurements and the area of land in the plot.

     Furthermore,    to the satisfaction       of    KNMT,   UPSIDC     had
Page 14 of 29
demarcated the Subject Land on 03.03.2005, which was duly

          acknowledged by KNMT in its letter dated 11.03.2005.


     d.   UPSIDC had charged the interest in consonance with the terms

          of the Allotment Letter accepted by KNMT. In this regard, a

          pointed reference was made to Clauses 3 and 5 of the Allotment

          Letter, whereunder the method of computation of interest on the

          outstanding balance was duly provided.
e.   Lastly, KNMT itself has admitted the non-payment of dues before

          this Court. Further, the current market value of the Subject Land

          is valued in the range of more than a hundred crores. In these

          circumstances, the instant appeal is wholly without merit and

          ought to be dismissed.
C.   ISSUES
8.   Having considered the rival contentions advanced by the parties, it is

     evident that the central issue concerns the legality of the cancellation

     of allotment by UPSIDC. Given the nature of the dispute and the

     competing interpretations regarding procedural compliance, we find it

     appropriate to examine the following issues:
i)   Whether UPSIDC is responsible for frustrating the performance

          of the allotment contract?
Page 15 of 29
ii)   Whether the cancellation of allotment of the Subject Land was

           procedurally defective and legally untenable?
D.   ANALYSIS

D.1 ISSUE NO.1: Whether UPSIDC is responsible for frustrating the

performance of the allotment contract.
9.   Although the issue in these Appeals revolves around the cancellation

     of allotment by UPSIDC, we deem it necessary first to address the

     KNMT’s plea pertaining to the alleged frustration of the contract. To

     clarify, these contentions concern the purported non-demarcation,

     alleged encroachment, and non-delivery of possession of the Subject

     Land by UPSIDC. For our analysis, we must collocate these instances

     against the factual matrix as well as the terms of allotment to

     conclusively ascertain the plausibility of frustration of the contract.
10. Firstly, on a careful scrutiny of the record, we find that though KNMT

     addressed multiple communications to UPSIDC alleging non-

     demarcation of the Subject Land, such communications were,

     however, ex-facie an afterthought. We say so for the reason that the

     site plan appended with the Allotment Letter has described precise

     measurements and all other relevant details pertaining to the Subject
Page 16 of 29
Land. That apart, the allotment was made on an ‘as it is where it is’

    basis.
11. In any case, UPSIDC demarcated the Subject Land on 03.03.2005 to

    the satisfaction of KNMT, and the latter also acknowledged such

    factum vide letter dated 11.03.2005, which reads as under:
“It is to inform that the demarcation of the said land has
             been made on 03.03.2005 by the department, which I
             agree. Please inform the value of the stamp papers required
             for the execution of the registry of the said land, so that I
             may get the lease deed of the said land executed, so that
             further work may be proceeded.”
12. There is thus no merit in the contention that KNMT suffered any

    prejudice due to the purported non-demarcation of the Subject Land.
13. Secondly, in so far as the encroachment at the site is concerned, the

    affidavits filed by UPSIDC enumerate details of the 276 Khasra

    numbers constituting the Subject Land. UPSIDC has further clarified

    that possession of the said land was duly taken after completing the

    acquisition process, which included payment of compensation to the

    landowners. These averments are duly supported with documentary

    proof. We, therefore, find that the allegation of encroachment is thus

    devoid of any merit.
Page 17 of 29
14. Lastly, we must consider whether UPSIDC erred in not handing over

    possession of the Subject Land despite several requests made by

    KNMT. In this regard, Clause 2.15 of the Manual, which deals with

    the delivery of possession of plots, proves instructive. It provides that:
“2.15. POSSESSION OF PLOTS
(i) The date of Possession of Plots shall be fixed by the
           Regional Manager after registration of Lease Deed itself.
(ii) That date so fixed shall be intimated to the lessor
           alongwith the second copy of the lease deed and the
           concerned Junior Engineer for necessary action on their part
           through a letter.
(iii) Effort shall be made to hand over possession within 15
           days of the registration of the lease deed as far as
           practicable.
(iv) If the lessee fails to take possession even after issuance
           of two letters, legal notice of the same may be issued and
           action may be taken accordingly.”
15. It may be seen that UPSIDC was obligated to hand over possession

    only after registering the lease deed, which was a mandatory

    condition. The Clause categorically stipulates that the Regional

    Manager shall fix the date of possession only ‘after registration of

    Lease Deed itself’, thereby creating a sequential condition wherein

    registration must precede possession.
16. That being so, it becomes pellucid that the insistence of UPSIDC to

    furnish requisite documents for registration of the lease deed was both

    legitimate and in conformity with the prescribed procedure. Since
Page 18 of 29
KNMT failed to furnish the necessary documents in a timely manner,

    it is itself to blame for the non-delivery of possession.
17. Our examination of all three contentions raised by KNMT reveals that

    none of the alleged acts—non-demarcation, removal of encroachment,

    or non-delivery of possession—constitute conduct that would

    frustrate the performance of the allotment terms. On the contrary, the

    record demonstrates that UPSIDC acted in accordance with

    prescribed procedures and as per the terms of allotment. In contrast,

    KNMT failed to fulfil its obligations, particularly regarding the timely

    submission of documents required for executing the lease deed. The

    foundation upon which KNMT forges its argument of frustration thus

    crumbles.
D.2 Issue No.2: Whether the cancellation of allotment of the Subject

Land was procedurally defective and legally untenable.
18. Adverting to the alleged illegality in the cancellation of allotment by

    UPSIDC, KNMT relies on Clause 3.04 of the Manual, which prescribes

    the procedure to address defaults by allottees. The relevant Clause in

    this regard is reproduced in totality below for ease of analysis:
“3.04 ACTION AGAINST DEFAULTERS
           In case payment is not received by 31st January/31st July
           legal notice shall be issued to the defaulting
           allottees/licences/lessees in the following manner.
Page 19 of 29
(i) The Regional Manager shall ensure that the legal notice
in all the defaulting cases are issued by 10th February and
10th August.
(ii) A separate file shall be opened in every Regional Office
in which the Dealing Assistant and concerned officer shall
give a certificate that notice to all defaulting allottees have
been issued. This certificate shall be verified by the Regional
Manager.
(iii) The legal notice shall be sent by Registered Post with
A/D and appropriate entry in the Legal Notice Register shall
be made. The legal notice shall be issued in terms of the
allotment letter/licence agreement/lease deed and the
period by which the payment is required shall also be
strictly in accordance with the terms of allotment
letter/licence agreement/lease deed.
(iv) After the expiry of the period of legal notice and
confirmation of its service it shall be the responsibility of the
Dealing Assistant to process the file within 15 days. The
same shall then be put up before the Regional Manager for
his orders and instruction for cancellation or otherwise.
(v) If the Regional Manager decides not to cancel the
allotment of plot and the next due date of payment of
instalment of premium/interest has fallen, then another
legal notice shall be issued in the manner specified above.
(vi) After the expiry of the legal notice, if no payment is
received it shall be the responsibility of the concerned officer
to put up the file to the Regional Manager and obtain his
orders about cancellation of allotment or issuance of
Recovery Certificate or otherwise.
(vii) If an allottee has not paid the dues despite three
consecutive legal notices, the Regional Manager shall
be required either to cancel the allotment or send his
recommendation for issue of Recovery Certificate.
However, if Regional Manager feels that further time should
be accorded, he shall do so with the approval of Head Office
only.
(viii) List of defaulters for amount exceeding Rs.20,000/-
may be published in newspaper in the month of
February/September at least once in a year, after obtaining
approval of Head Office.”

                                      [Emphasis Supplied]
Page 20 of 29
19. A bare perusal of the above-reproduced provision reveals a well-
defined procedure prescribed to address defaults by allottees. During

     arguments, KNMT placed considerable emphasis on sub-clause (vii),

     contending that UPSIDC had failed to issue the stipulated three

     consecutive legal notices. KNMT nevertheless conceded that the notice

     dated 13.11.2006 could be considered a ‘legal notice’ within the

     meaning of the aforesaid Clause. Per contra, UPSIDC maintains that

     the previous correspondence dated 14.12.2004, 01.07.2005, and

     14.12.2005 also substantially satisfied the ingredients of a ‘legal

     notice’ as contemplated under the Manual.
20. It seems to us that this issue ought to be examined through the prism

     of administrative law principles vis-à-vis the contractual powers of the

     State. While it is well-settled that land allotment authorities such as

     UPSIDC possess the inherent right to cancel allotments upon violation

     of stipulated conditions, this Court has consistently emphasized that

     judicial intervention in matters concerning land revocation should be

     circumscribed to ensure adherence to procedural safeguards. 1 This

     paradigm underscores the administrative autonomy vested in such




1
Dilip Singh and Ors v. State of Haryana and Ors.
, (2019) 11 SCC 422, paragraph 22.
Page 21 of 29
authorities while safeguarding allottees’ rights through procedural

    fairness.
21. As already elucidated, KNMT relies upon Clause 3.04 (vii) of the

    Manual to assert that non-issuance of the requisite legal notices by

    UPSIDC resulted in procedural illegality. In this light, it becomes

    incumbent upon us to ascertain whether the correspondence issued

    by UPSIDC satisfies the threshold requirement of ‘three consecutive

    legal   notices’   as   mandated   under   the   said   provision   and,

    consequently, whether the cancellation of allotment was procedurally

    sound. To resolve this issue, we must determine the essential

    characteristics that embody a ‘legal notice’ within the contemplation

    of the Manual.
22. It may be recapitulated that the notice dated 13.11.2006 has been

    understood as a ‘legal notice’ by both sides. Upon comparative

    analysis of the communications, particularly those dated 14.12.2004

    and 14.12.2005, we find that these bear substantial similarity with

    the notice dated 13.11.2006. It is beyond our comprehension as to

    what prejudice has really been caused to KNMT merely because these

    notices are not captioned as legal notices.
Page 22 of 29
23. It further appears to us that the expression ‘legal notice’ connotes an

    unambiguous communication along with legal consequences to a

    noticee who is alleged to be in default. Illustratively, the essential

    elements of a legal notice would include:
a.   It should contain a clear and concise set of facts which convey

         the information leading to the relevant circumstances. This

         element is also fulfilled when reference is made to any earlier

         communications issued between the concerned parties;


    b.   It should convey the intimation of any impending legal obligation

         or breach committed by any party;
c.   It should convey the intention of the party issuing the

         communication to hold the other party liable to appropriate legal

         action or charge; and


    d.   The communication in toto must be unambiguous and should not

         mislead or suppress material information. If issued under a

         Statute,   it must   comply with the relevant requirements

         prescribed therein as well.
24. If   the   communications    dated   14.12.2004,    14.12.2005,    and

    13.11.2006 are juxtaposed to the abovementioned ingredients, we
Page 23 of 29
have no reason to doubt that these constitute valid ‘legal notices’ and

     thus, UPSIDC has duly complied with the process envisaged under

     Clause 3.04(vii) of the Manual.
25. We may hasten to add at this stage that the dues for the Subject Land,

     allotted in 2003, remained unpaid despite multiple communications

     spanning several years. KNMT not only failed to make timely

     payments but also sought unwarranted concessions, including waiver

     of interest and rescheduling of dues. This persistent non-compliance

     establishes KNMT as a chronic defaulter, while the continued

     attempts to seek waiver evince a deliberate strategy to avoid payment

     obligations. UPSIDC’s action in treating KNMT as a defaulter was,

     therefore, both justified and necessary to preserve the integrity of the

     allotment process. Allowing such deliberate defaults to persist

     unchecked would undermine the entire framework of land allocation

     and set a detrimental precedent.
26. For the reasons stated, we are satisfied that the cancellation of

     allotment by UPSIDC is fully justified and in accordance with law.


E.   INVOKING THE PUBLIC TRUST DOCTRINE IN THE ALLOCATION OF

     RESOURCES.
Page 24 of 29
27. The prolonged litigation initiated by KNMT has spanned over fifteen

    years, unnecessarily burdening the judicial system and impeding the

    efficient functioning of public authorities. Such protracted disputes

    highlight the need for more stringent initial evaluation processes to

    prevent chronic defaults.
28. While we have upheld the cancellation due to KNMT’s default, the

    circumstances reveal systemic concerns in the original allocation

    process. UPSIDC allotted the Subject Land to KNMT within merely two

    months of application, raising questions about the thoroughness of

    the evaluation. Furthermore, during the pendency of this dispute,

    UPSIDC demonstrated remarkable alacrity in considering alternative

    allotments to M/s. Jagdishpur Paper Mills Ltd.
29. We, therefore, consider it necessary to examine whether UPSIDC’s

    procedure   for   industrial   land   allotment   meets   standards     of

    administrative propriety, particularly in light of the Public Trust

    Doctrine (Doctrine) mandating that public resources be managed

    with due diligence, fairness, and in conformity with public interest.
30. The Doctrine emanates from the ancient principle that certain

    resources (seashores, rivers and forests) are so intrinsically important

    to the public that they cannot be subjected to unrestricted private
Page 25 of 29
control. Rooted in Roman law and incorporated into English common

     law, this Doctrine recognizes that the Sovereign holds specific

     resources as a trustee for present and future generations.2
31. In the Indian context, the Doctrine has evolved to encompass public

     resources meant for collective benefit, reflecting the constitutional

     mandate under
Article 21.
As held in Natural Resources Allocation

     In re, while the Doctrine does not impose an absolute prohibition on

     transferring public trust property, it subjects such alienation to

     stringent judicial review to ensure legitimate public purpose and

     adequate safeguards.3
32. When a substantial tract of industrial land is allocated without a

     comprehensive        evaluation,      it   raises      critical   questions   about

     adherence to these principles. The Doctrine requires that allocation

     decisions be preceded by a thorough assessment of public benefits,

     beneficiary      credentials,     and      safeguards        ensuring    continued

     compliance with stated purposes.
33. The allocation of 125 acres of industrial land to KNMT without a

     competitive process fundamentally violated the Doctrine, which



2
M.C. Mehta v. Kamal Nath
, (1997) 1 SCC 388, para 24-25.
3 (2012) 10 SCC 1.
Page 26 of 29
demands proper procedure and substantive accountability in public

     resource allocation.4 UPSIDC ought to have considered verifiable

     evidence of economic benefits, employment generation potential,

     environmental           sustainability,        and      alignment        with       regional

     development objectives to demonstrate that the decision serves the

     collective benefit. The failure to adopt transparent mechanisms not

     only deprived the public exchequer of potential revenue—as evidenced

     by the substantial appreciation in the value of such a large tract of

     land—but also created a system where privileged access supersedes

     equal opportunity. This betrays the fiduciary relationship between the

     State and its citizens.
34. Having upheld the cancellation due to KNMT’s chronic default, we

     observe that the hasty allotment followed by years of litigation

     exemplifies systemic deficiencies in the allocation process. This

     necessitates        comprehensive          directions      to   ensure      that     future

     allocations uphold principles of transparency and accountability,

     thereby preventing prolonged disputes while ensuring that public

     resources genuinely promote industrial development and economic

     growth.
4 Centre for
Public Interest Litigation v. Union of India
, (2012) 3 SCC 1, para 94-96.
Page 27 of 29
F.   CONCLUSION AND DIRECTIONS
35. In light of our detailed examination of the contentions raised by the

     parties, the comprehensive analysis of the factual and legal matrix

     and the resultant conclusions, we uphold the cancellation of the

     allotment by UPSIDC.
36. The actual allotment or any offer thereof made by UPSIDC in favour

     of M/s Jagdishpur Paper Mills Ltd (Respondent No.3) for the Subject

     Land is also declared to be illegal, contrary to public policy and is

     consequently annulled. However, if any earnest money or any

     payment has been received from the said prospective allottee, the

     same is directed to be refunded along with interest at the rate granted

     by the Nationalized Banks.
37. The appeals are accordingly dismissed with no order as to costs.
38. However, considering the broader implications for the transparent

     allocation   of   public   resources   and   the    need   to   strengthen

     administrative accountability in industrial land distribution, we deem

     it appropriate to issue the following directions:
i)   The State Government of Uttar Pradesh and UPSIDC are directed

          to ensure that any such allotment in the future be made in a
Page 28 of 29
transparent, non-discriminatory and fair manner by ensuring

          that such allotment process fetches maximum revenue and also

          achieves the larger public interest like industrial development

          priorities, environmental sustainability, and regional economic

          objectives; and
ii)   The Subject Land shall also be allotted strictly in accordance with

          the procedure as illustrated in direction (i) above.
39. Ordered accordingly. Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed

    of in the above terms.
…..........................J.
                                                              (SURYA KANT)



                                  ………….………………..........................J.
                                   (NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH)



NEW DELHI;
Dated: May 30, 2025
Page 29 of 29