[Cites
13
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Shivappa Reddy vs S. Srinivasan on 19 May, 2025
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
2025 INSC 729
                                                                             NON-REPORTABLE

                                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL No. 4363 OF 2024


                                  SHIVAPPA REDDY                              … APPELLANT

                                                                    VERSUS


                                  S. SRINIVASAN                              … RESPONDENT



                                                                 JUDGMENT
AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH, J.
1.      Present Appeal is challenging the order dated 23.09.2023

                                 passed by the Single Judge of the High Court of Karnataka

                                 at Bengaluru, whereby the petition filed under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter,

                                 “
CrPC
”) challenging the proceedings arising out of a

                                 complaint filed by the Appellant under
Section 200
CrPC

                                 for the offence punishable under
Section 138
of the

                                 Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (hereinafter, “
NI Act
”) has
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
been allowed at the behest of Respondent-Accused No.4.
   DEEPAK SINGH
   Date: 2025.05.19
   16:43:47 IST
   Reason:
Criminal Appeal No. 4363 of 2024                   Page 1 of 11
2.      In brief, the facts leading to the filing of the petition before

        the High Court were that the Appellant had filed a

        complaint against M/s AVS Constructions - a Partnership

        Firm (Accused No.1), and its partners i.e., S. Yuvaraju

        (Accused No.2), S. Sundaraiah (Accused No.3 and S.

        Srinivasan (Accused No.4) for dishonouring of twelve

        cheques of ₹50,00,000/-                (Rupees Fifty Lakhs) each

        aggregating ₹6,00,00,000/- (Six Crore) towards the refund

        of sale consideration as issued by accused No.1 - M/s AVS

        Constructions (hereinafter, “Partnership Firm”) being

        signed by Accused No.2, the authorized signatory. The

        cheques, upon presentation, stood dishonoured due to

        ‘stop payment’ instructions issued by the drawee.
3.      After      duly       serving   the   Statutory   notice   upon       the

        Respondent and the other accused, when no amount was

        received of the dishonoured cheques, a complaint under
Section 200
CrPC for an offence punishable under
Section

        138
of the NI Act was preferred. After recording the

        preliminary evidence, summons was issued to the accused
Criminal Appeal No. 4363 of 2024                              Page 2 of 11
on taking cognizance of the offence under
Section 138
of

        the NI Act.
4.      At this stage, S. Srinivasan (Accused No.4) (Respondent

        herein), preferred a petition under
Section 482
CrPC before

        the High Court, taking the plea that the proceedings

        against the Respondent could not be continued as he had

        ceased to be a partner of the Partnership Firm (Accused

        No.1).
4A.        It was asserted therein that in reply to the legal notice

          which was served upon the Accused by the Appellant-

          Complainant, Respondent-Accused No.4 brought to the

          notice of the Appellant the fact that he had retired from

          the Partnership Firm on 01.04.2015, and hence the

          proceedings could not be sustained against him.
5.       Upon notice being issued, the Appellant appeared and

        filed his response wherein it was clearly stated that the

        Statutory mandates as provided under
Sections 32
,
62
and
63
of the Indian Partnership Act 1932 (hereinafter,

        “
Partnership Act
”) had not been complied with.
Criminal Appeal No. 4363 of 2024                   Page 3 of 11
5A. The Appellant obtained a certified copy of Form-A on

      27.08.2020, maintained by the Registrar of Firms, which

      depicted that the Respondent is the partner of Partnership

      Firm (Accused No.1). It was only after verifying the said

      aspect that the legal notice was issued to the Respondent.

      Allegations were also made that the Respondent, in an

      attempt to escape his liability, had fabricated a backdated

      retirement deed in connivance with the other accused and

      got an entry made in the ledger of the Registrar of Firms

      on 20.10.2020 that he had ceased to be a partner.


5B. It is asserted that this entry in the Register maintained by

      the Registrar of Firms is subsequent to the date of

      issuance of the cheques as also after the issuance of the

      legal notice.
5C.
Section 72
of the Partnership Act has also not been

      complied with, which mandates and requires a retired

      partner to publish a public notice in one of the vernacular

      newspapers circulated in the district where the Firm is

      located. No such document or publication had been

      produced, nor any such public notice mentioned to have
Criminal Appeal No. 4363 of 2024                  Page 4 of 11
been published in any newspaper in the reply filed to the

        legal notice. The mandate of the Statute has not been

        followed, and in the absence of public notice, the

        Respondent cannot wriggle out of the liability as a partner

        of the Firm.
5D. Another aspect which has been asserted is that after

        cognizance was taken by the Court, an application under
Section 239
of the CrPC had been preferred by the

        Respondent seeking discharge on the ground that he had

        ceased to be a partner of the Partnership Firm (Accused

        No.1). The Appellant had filed detailed objections to this

        application.
5E. The Trial Court, after hearing both parties, dismissed the

        application on merits vide order dated 01.09.2021. On

        these grounds, the petition under Section 482, as

        preferred by the Respondent, was opposed.
6.      The learned Single Judge, on considering the submissions,

        had allowed the petition. The Court observed that the

        cheques had not been signed by the Respondent. Rather,

        it is S. Yuvaraju (Accused No.2), who had issued the
Criminal Appeal No. 4363 of 2024                  Page 5 of 11
cheques in his individual capacity and not as a partner of

        the Partnership Firm (Accused No.1).      It was held that

        there was no legally enforceable debt against the

        Respondent for which the cheques were issued. Further,

        the High Court accepted the contention that it had been

        established that the Respondent had ceased to be the

        partner of the Firm on the date of issuance of the cheques,

        and therefore could not be prosecuted for an offence under
Section 138
of the NI Act.
7.      The Counsel for the Parties have argued their case on the

        basis of the above pleadings and factual assertions.
8.      On considering the submissions made by the Counsel for

        the parties. It is apparent that the plea of the Respondent,

        as has been accepted by the High Court vide impugned

        order, regarding his claim of not being a partner of the

        Partnership Firm (Accused No.1), in whose name and on

        whose behalf the cheques have been issued, signed by S.

        Yuvaraju (Accused No.2), an authorized signatory, does

        not in any manner, foist liability upon the Respondent
Criminal Appeal No. 4363 of 2024                   Page 6 of 11
herein needs to be tested on the anvil of the pleadings and

        the Statutory requirements.
9.      Since the Partnership Firm (Accused No.1) is a Firm

        registered with the Registrars of Firms, the provisions of

        the
Partnership Act
need to be referred to.               A perusal of
Section 72
of the Partnership Act would show that notice

        of retirement must be given to the Registrar of Firms under
Section 63
and by publication in the Official Gazette, and

        in at least one vernacular newspaper circulated in the

        district where the Firm to which it relates has its place or

        principal place of business, such notice needs to be

        published. This should relate to the retirement of a

        partner,         which          includes   admission,   expulsion,        or

        resignation from the Firm in any manner that is including

        or excluding a partner in a partnership Firm.
Section 32
of

        the Partnership Act deals with the retirement of a partner.

        In addition,
Section 62
of the Partnership Act deals with

        the information to be submitted with regard to the change

        in the names and addresses of the partners to the

        Registrar of Firms. What, therefore, is mandated under the

        Statute is that if any registered Firm intends to include or
Criminal Appeal No. 4363 of 2024                              Page 7 of 11
exclude by way of resignation, expulsion or addition of any

     partner in the Firm, an intimation to the said effect has to

     be forwarded and conveyed to the Registrar of Firms. As

     per
Section 63
, the Registrar shall make a record of the

     notice in the entry relating to the Firm in the Register of

     Firms and shall file a notice along with a statement

     relating to the Firm as provided for under
Section 59
of the

     Partnership Act.
10. None of these requirements as provided and mandated for

     under the Statute, have been adhered to by Respondent

     No.1. Merely putting forth a resignation or the partners

     entering into an agreement or drafting a deed or/and

     accepting the resignation of a partner of the Firm is

     insufficient for discharging the liability of a partner of the

     Firm unless a proper entry to the said effect after the

     publication has been given effect to with the same, having

     been recorded in the Register of Firms in the office of the

     Registrar of Firms as provided for in
Section 63
of

     Partnership Act.
Criminal Appeal No. 4363 of 2024                     Page 8 of 11
11. Further, simply because the cheques were signed by S.

     Yuvaraju          (Accused        No.2), who was     the   authorized

     signatory of the Partnership Firm (Accused No.1), does not

     discharge the liability of the Respondent. This is especially

     so when in the complaint filed under
Section 200
of the

     CrPC by the Appellant, a categorical averment is made that

     the Respondent along with the other two partners of the

     Partnership Firm (Accused No.1) is involved in day-to-day

     affairs of the said Firm. In the complaint, it has clearly

     been pleaded that the Respondent-Accused No.4 was

     present at the residence of Accused No.2 when the cheques

     were signed. Further allegations are there to the effect that

     Accused No.3 and Respondent Accused No.4 had stated

     that they would ensure that the money is repaid. These

     facts collectively demonstrate that the requirements under
Section 141
of the NI Act have been satisfied. Therefore,

     the      Respondent             cannot   escape   from   the    liability

     concerning the cheques which were issued by the

     Respondent.
12. The findings, therefore, with regard to the Respondent

     being no longer a partner of Partnership Firm (Accused No.
Criminal Appeal No. 4363 of 2024                              Page 9 of 11
1) on the date of the issuance of the cheques is

     unsustainable, as it is contrary to the mandate of the

     Statute and prima facie the factual aspect.
13. All these aspects are mixed questions of fact and law

     touching on the anvil of disputed questions calling for

     proof by way of evidence, which cannot be gone into and

     decided in a proceeding under
Section 482
CrPC. Such

     matters require the parties to lead evidence as per their

     respective stands, and hence, calling for no interference by

     the High Court. Without further going into the details of

     the pleadings relatable to the facts, we are of the view that

     the High Court has erred in law by exceeding its

     jurisdiction while exercising its powers under
Section 482
CrPC.
14. In view of the above, the present appeal is allowed. The

     order dated 23.09.2023 passed by the High Court is

     hereby set aside. Proceedings before ACMM, Bengaluru in

     CC No.17788/2020 are restored. Trial Court is directed to

     proceed in accordance with the law.
Criminal Appeal No. 4363 of 2024                    Page 10 of 11
15. Any observations made in this order shall have no bearing

      on the merits of the case in the trial, and the same, if any,

      are restricted to the decision in the limited compass of the

      jurisdictional sphere as exercised by the High Court.
16. Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
……...……….……………………..J.
                                      [ ABHAY S. OKA ]



                                       ……..………..……………………..J.
                                      [ AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH ]


   NEW DELHI;
MAY 19, 2025
Criminal Appeal No. 4363 of 2024                    Page 11 of 11