[Cites
18
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
K.H. Kamaladini vs State on 20 May, 2025
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
2025 INSC 745


                                                                       NON-REPORTABLE

                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.5380 OF 2024

                            K. H. Kamaladini                                  … Appellant


                                                          versus


                            State                                           … Respondent


                                                      JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1.      The appellant has challenged the order dated 27 th March
                            2023 passed by the High Court of Bombay at Goa dismissing
                            the Criminal Revision Application No.195 of 2023. The
                            appellant was aggrieved by the order dated 15th February
                            2023 passed by the Sessions Judge, North Goa, Panaji,
                            framing charges against the appellant for the offences
                            punishable under
Sections 409
and
468
of the Indian Penal
                            Code, 1860 (for short, ‘the
IPC
’) and
Section 13(1)
read with
Section 13(2)
of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (for
                            short, ‘the
PC Act
’) and dismissing the appellant’s plea for
Signature Not Verified   discharge.
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2025.05.20
19:16:18 IST
Reason:
Criminal Appeal No.5380 of 2024                                                          Page 1 of 14
2.       A complaint dated 30th January 2013 was received by
            the Chief Minister of Goa and Chief Vigilance Officer of Goa,
            containing allegations pertaining to 19 short tender notices
            comprising 847 numbers of water supply works in the Works
            Division XVII (PHE-N), Public Works Department, Porvorim,
            Goa. It was alleged that the tender notices were not published
            in newspapers as required by the Central Public Works
            Department Manual.       It was also alleged that some works
            were unnecessarily split without any valid justification, and
            the works were allotted to the same party or their cronies. The
            Department of Vigilance conducted an enquiry into the
            complaint and furnished a report dated 26 th March 2013,
            which revealed that 19 Short Tender Notices enclosed in the
            complaint were never published in any newspaper. The works
            were quoted 4.8% to 14.95% above their estimated cost, and
            for most works, only two bidders had quoted bids, which
            clearly indicated that the Government did not get the benefit
            of competitive bidding and caused a loss to the Government.
            The report further revealed that the appellant was working as
            an Executive Engineer at the relevant division of the Public
            Works Department, Porvorim, from 21 st October 2009 till the
            date of the enquiry report, i.e. 26 th March 2013. The report
            noted that the appellant was given an opportunity to explain
            the allegations during enquiry, wherein he had submitted that
            the decision of not advertising the tenders costing up to Rs.10
            Lakhs was approved by the then Public Works Department
            Minister for the purpose of saving time, and this decision was
Criminal Appeal No.5380 of 2024                                               Page 2 of 14
approved           by   other     stakeholders.   During    the   enquiry,
            photocopies of each document were collected from the relevant
            Division, and it was observed that the signature of the
            Minister of the Public Works Department was obtained in
            every case, after obtaining approvals from the Superintending
            Engineer and the Chief Engineer of the Public Works
            Department.
3.       The enquiry report finally concluded that the appellant,
            after approvals from the aforesaid authorities, inserted in his
            own handwriting “approved to take short tender without
            publishing in newspaper and issue W/O” just above the
            signature of the then Public Works Department Minister on
            each document, so as to project as if it was an instruction
            from the Minister himself. The enquiry report also addressed
            the order dated 16th April 2007, which granted financial
            powers        to      Executive    Engineers,     Chief   Engineers,   and
            Superintendent Engineers for emergent maintenance and
            repair work costing up to Rupees Ten Lakhs. However, it was
            alleged that the appellant undertook works such as painting
            and fixing floor tiles, which could not be categorised as
            emergent works.
4.       Relying on the said enquiry report, the Chief Technical
            Examiner of the Directorate of Vigilance, Government of Goa,
            lodged a complaint dated 05th June 2023, which led to the
            registration of Crime No.6 of 2013. After obtaining the
            requisite sanction dated 5th February 2020 from the Principal
Criminal Appeal No.5380 of 2024                                                          Page 3 of 14
Chief Engineer, Public Works Department, Panaji under
Section 19(1)(b)
of the PC Act read with
Section 197
of the
            Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, ‘the
CrPC
’), the
            Respondent filed the chargesheet No. 02 of 2020 dated 22 nd
            May 2020 for the offences punishable under
Sections 409
,
468
and
471
of the IPC and
Section 13(1)(d)
read with
Section
            13(2)
of the PC Act. During the course of the investigation, a
            report       from     the   Central   Forensic   Science   Laboratory,
            Hyderabad (for short, ‘the CFSL’) was called for, which opined
            that the alleged handwritten remarks on the documents
            matched the handwriting of the appellant. The chargesheet
            also contained the statement of Mr. Churchill Alemao, who
            was the Public Works Department Minister at the relevant
            time, recorded on 26th March 2015, wherein he alleged that he
            never directed the appellant to write any remark on the tender
            documents. He also stated that he signed the documents
            placed before him without making any additions or edits. If
            any additions were required, he would generally write them
            himself. The charge sheet also alleged recovery of jewelry and
            cash of Rs.18,00,500/- from the appellant’s bank locker.
            However, the offence of criminal conspiracy under
Section
            120-B
of the IPC, which was initially included in the First
            Information Report, was dropped while filing the chargesheet,
            as there was no evidence.
5.       The appellant’s application for discharge under
Sections
            226
and
227
of the CrPC came to be dismissed by the
            Sessions Judge, North Goa, Panaji. Relying on the test laid
Criminal Appeal No.5380 of 2024                                                      Page 4 of 14
down by this Court in the cases of
Niranjan Singh Karam
            Singh Punjabi v. Jitendra Bhimraj Bijjaya & Ors.1
and
            Madjavrao Jiwajirao Scindia & Ors. v. Sambhajirao
            Chandrojirao Angre & Ors2, the Sessions Judge held that if
            the statements of the forensic expert and the PWD Minister
            are not controverted in the cross-examination, such evidence
            would be sufficient to convict the appellant. Thus, the
            evidence was sufficient to frame a charge for the offence
            punishable under
Sections 409
and
468
of the IPC for
            dishonestly inserting words in the documents which were
            entrusted to him in order to avoid publication of tenders. The
            Sessions Judge also proceeded to frame a charge for the
            offence under
Section 13(1)(d)
read with
Section 13(2)
of the
            PC Act, after holding that the use of forged reports in the
            execution of Government work without publication of tenders
            shall amount to criminal misconduct for personal gains.
6.       The appellant filed Criminal Revision Application No.195
            of 2023 before the High Court of Bombay at Goa, contending
            that none of the ingredients of the offences charged against
            him were made out by the material produced in the
            chargesheet, if they were taken to be true at their face value.
            In the judgment impugned before us, the High Court held that
            the allegation of not following the procedure laid down for
            awarding tenders for benefitting a cartel of contractors by
            inflating the cost of tenders may satisfy the ingredients of


            1 (1990) 4 SCC 76
            2 (1998) 1 SCC 692
Criminal Appeal No.5380 of 2024                                                 Page 5 of 14
criminal misconduct, laid down in
Section 13(1)(d)
of the PC
            Act. The High Court relied on the material produced in the
            chargesheet to hold that the act of overwriting above the
            signature of the Minister for the purpose of showing that it is
            the Minister who approved the action of non-publication,
            discloses the existence of ingredients constituting the offence
            of criminal breach of trust and forgery.
SUBMISSIONS
7.       The learned counsel appearing for the appellant argued
            that the nineteen tenders in question, wherein the procedure
            of publication in newspapers was not followed, pertained to
            the work urgently required to be carried out to meet a grave
            water crisis in Porvorim and other regions of North Goa. The
            High Court of Bombay at Goa was seized of the matter in PIL
            No.1 of 2010 titled “Soter D’Souza and Anr. v. The
            Principal Chief Engineer PWD Altinho, Panji Goa” of water
            supply to the citizens. The High Court had already taken the
            PWD and all responsible engineers, including the appellant, to
            task. In accordance with the directions of the High Court in
            the order dated 3rd June 2010, the appellant filed an affidavit
            dated 14th October, 2010 stating that the Public Works
            Department shall make all efforts and endeavours to supply
            water for at least one hour a day. The counsel for the
            appellant contended that in order to resolve the crisis and
            expedite the regular supply of water, one of the measures was
            to do away with the publication of tenders. In furtherance of
            this decision, 741 reports and 847 works, executed between
Criminal Appeal No.5380 of 2024                                               Page 6 of 14
21st October 2009 and 24th November 2011, contained
            written instructions of the Public Works Department Minister
            of not publishing the tenders in newspapers. It was further
            contended that on the basis of a lack of evidence to prove
            forgery, the appellant was exonerated in the departmental
            inquiry proceedings by the Inquiring Officer.
The learned
            counsel for the appellant, relying on the judgements of this
            Court in the cases of
Radhe Shyam Kejriwal v. State of
            West Bengal3
and Ashoo Tiwari v. CBI4 submitted that the
            standard of proof required in a criminal proceeding where the
            case has to be proved beyond a reasonable doubt, is much
            higher        than       the    standard       of     proof    in   departmental
            proceedings,            which     is     based        on      preponderance     of
            probabilities.          Therefore,     since        the    appellant   has   been
            exonerated in the departmental proceedings, on the same
            facts      and        allegations,     criminal      proceedings       cannot   be
            pursued.
8.       The learned counsel appearing for the respondent-State,
            supported the impugned order and submitted that the action
            of the appellant of not publishing tenders was in violation of
            the CPWD Manual and he was never directed to take any
            decisions in contravention to the established practices of the
            Public Works Department. It was further submitted that the
            findings of the CFSL indicate that the handwriting of the
            appellant matches the handwriting on the notings/reports. As


            3 (2011) 3 SCC 581
            4 (2020) 9 SCC 636
Criminal Appeal No.5380 of 2024                                                                  Page 7 of 14
far as the findings of the Inquiry Officer are concerned, the
            learned counsel for the respondent submitted that no reliance
            can be placed on the report of the Inquiry Officer exonerating
            the appellant, as disciplinary proceedings contemplate a
            varied scope of enquiry and can run parallel to the criminal
            proceedings, and that the outcome of the disciplinary
            proceedings can have no bearing on the criminal proceedings
            pending against the appellant.
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
9.       In this case, the appellant sought discharge. The prayer
            for discharge was rejected by the Special Court. Therefore, a
            revision application under Section 401 read with
Section 397
of the CrPC was preferred by the appellant.            As far as the
            scope of hearing at the time of framing of the charge is
            concerned, the law is well settled. Firstly, at this stage, the
            Court can examine only the documents forming part of the
            charge sheet, and no other material can be considered.
            Secondly, after considering the material on record, the Court
            has to decide whether or not there exists a sufficient ground
            for proceeding with the trial against the appellant. Thirdly, at
            this stage, the Court cannot sift the evidence forming a part
            of the chargesheet with a view to separating the grain from
            the chaff.            Fourthly, if the Court is of the view that the
            evidence without cross-examination or rebuttal shows that
            the accused has not committed any offence, then an order of
Criminal Appeal No.5380 of 2024                                                    Page 8 of 14
discharge must be passed.             Lastly, if the evidence adduced
            before the Court creates a grave suspicion against the
            accused, the Court will not discharge the accused.
10.      Therefore, at this stage, the outcome of the disciplinary
            proceedings cannot be examined, and what needs to be
            examined is the material forming part of the chargesheet. The
            allegation against the appellant pertains to a tender process.
            The appellant was, at the relevant time, Executive Engineer of
            Works Division at Porvorim, Goa. The allegation concerns 19
            short-term tender notices.               The allegation against the
            appellant is that after the Hon’ble Minister for the Public
            Works Department signed the note/report granting approval
            for issuing of tenders, above the signature of the Hon’ble
            Minister, the appellant inserted the following words: “approved
            to take short tender without publishing in newspaper and
            issue w/o”. Further allegation against the appellant is that
            he committed forgery by inserting the aforesaid words with
            the object of showing that the addition was made by the
            Hon’ble Minister. There is an opinion of the Scientist of the
            CFSL that the inserted words were in the handwriting of the
            appellant.            The allegation is that by not publishing tender
            notices, loss was caused to the Exchequer for two reasons:
firstly, the revenue could have earned by the sale of the tender
            documents, and secondly, the revenue could have been
            benefited from getting competitive bids.
Criminal Appeal No.5380 of 2024                                                     Page 9 of 14
11.      The appellant has been charged with the offences
            punishable under
Section 468
of the IPC, which reads thus:
“468. Forgery for purpose of
                                  cheating.—Whoever commits forgery,
                                  intending that the document or
                                  electronic record forged shall be used
                                  for the purpose of cheating, shall be
                                  punished with imprisonment of either
                                  description for a term which may
                                  extend to seven years, and shall also
                                  be liable to fine.”

            ‘Forgery’ is defined under Section 463. Whoever makes any
            false document or part of a document with the intent to cause
            damage or injury to the public commits forgery. Considering
            the allegations made in the charge sheet and the report of the
            CFSL, a case is made out to proceed against the appellant for
            the offence punishable under
Section 468
of the IPC. If the
            case of the prosecution is considered without controverting it,
            obviously, there is prima facie material against the appellant
            to proceed for the offence under
Section 468
of the IPC.
12.      Another offence alleged against the appellant is under
Section 409
of the IPC. In this case, the reports/documents
            signed by the Hon’ble Minister were entrusted to the
            appellant. The allegation is that he dishonestly inserted the
            portion quoted above the signature of the Minister. Therefore,
            taking the case of the prosecution as it is, even the offence
            under Section 409 is also attracted. If we take the statements
            of the witnesses and, in particular, the Hon’ble Minister as it
Criminal Appeal No.5380 of 2024                                               Page 10 of 14
is, a case was made out to proceed against the appellant for
            the offences punishable under
Sections 409
and
468
of the
            IPC.
13.      Apart from these
IPC
offences, the allegation against the
            appellant is of commission of the offence punishable under
Section 13(1)(d)
read with
Section 13(2)
of the PC Act. We are
            concerned with
Section 13
as it stood prior to its amendment,
            which came into force with effect from 26 th July 2018.
Section 13(1)
as it stood prior to 26th July 2018, reads thus:
“13. Criminal misconduct by a public
                             servant.–(1) A public servant is said to
                             commit      the     offence   of   criminal
                             misconduct, –
(a) if he habitually accepts or obtains
                                    or agrees to accept or attempts to
                                    obtain from any person for himself
                                    or for any other person any
                                    gratification    other  than    legal
                                    remuneration as a motive or reward
                                    such as is mentioned in
section 7
;
or
(b) if he habitually accepts or obtains
                                      or agrees to accept or attempts to
                                      obtain for himself or for any other
                                      person, any valuable thing without
                                      consideration or for a consideration
                                      which he knows to be inadequate
                                      from any person whom he knows to
                                      have been, or to be, or to be likely
                                      to be concerned in any proceeding
                                      or business transacted or about to
                                      be transacted by him, or having
                                      any connection with the official
                                      functions of himself or of any
                                      public servant to whom he is
Criminal Appeal No.5380 of 2024                                                  Page 11 of 14
subordinate, or from any person
                                     whom he knows to be interested in
                                     or related to the person so
                                     concerned; or
(c) if he dishonestly or fraudulently
                                      misappropriates     or    otherwise
                                      converts for his own use any
                                      property entrusted to him or under
                                      his control as a public servant or
                                      allows any other person so to do; or
(d) if he –
(i)   by corrupt or illegal means,
                                            obtains for himself or for any
                                            other person any valuable
                                            thing or pecuniary advantage;
or
(ii) by abusing his position as a
                                           public servant, obtains for
                                           himself or for any other person
                                           any     valuable    thing    or
                                           pecuniary advantage; or
(iii) while holding office as a public
                                            servant, obtains for any person
                                            any    valuable      thing   or
                                            pecuniary advantage without
                                            any public interest; or
(e) if he or any person on his behalf, is
                                      in possession or has, at any time
                                      during the period of his office, been
                                      in possession for which the public
                                      servant     cannot     satisfactorily
                                      account, of pecuniary resources or
                                      property disproportionate to his
                                      known sources of income.”
Criminal Appeal No.5380 of 2024                                                Page 12 of 14
14.      There is no allegation made in the chargesheet that the
            appellant obtained for himself or for any other person any
            valuable thing or pecuniary advantage. Therefore, on a plain
            reading, clause (d) of sub-section (1) of
Section 13
of the PC
            Act will not be attracted. In this case, there is no allegation
            that      the     appellant    agreed    to   accept   or    accepted   any
            gratification.        There is no allegation that he had agreed or
            accepted          any    valuable       thing    or    had     dishonestly
            misappropriated or converted for his own use any property
            entrusted to him.             Therefore, the ‘criminal misconduct’ as
            provided in
Section 13(1)
is not attracted in this case. That is
            how even the offence punishable under
Section 13(2)
of the
            PC Act is not attracted. In short, there was no case made out
            to proceed against the appellant for the offences punishable
            under
Section 13(1)(d)
read with
Section 13(2)
of the PC Act.
            To this extent, the impugned orders will have to be modified.
15.      Accordingly, the order dated 15th February 2023 passed
            by the learned Sessions Judge and the order dated 27 th March
            2023 passed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court
            are, hereby, modified and the direction to frame charge for the
            offences under
Section 13(1)(d)
read with
Section 13(2)
of the
            PC Act is, hereby, set aside. The order of framing of charge for
            the offences under
Section 409
and
468
of the IPC is
            maintained.
Criminal Appeal No.5380 of 2024                                                           Page 13 of 14
16.      We clarify that the observations made in this judgment
            are only for the purposes of considering the plea of discharge.
            The same will not bind the Trial Court at the time of the final
            hearing of the case.
17.      The appeal is, accordingly, partly allowed on the above
            terms.
………..…………………...J.
                                                  (Abhay S. Oka)




                                                   ………..…………………...J.
                                                   (Augustine George Masih)
            New Delhi;
May 20, 2025.
Criminal Appeal No.5380 of 2024                                                Page 14 of 14