[Cites
15
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Ashok Kumar Jain vs The State Of Gujarat on 1 May, 2025
Author:
Pankaj Mithal
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
NON-REPORTABLE

2025 INSC 614                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.            OF 2025
                                       (@ S.L.P.(Criminal) No. 1850 OF 2022)

             ASHOK KUMAR JAIN
                                                                              … APPELLANT(S)

                                                      VERSUS

             THE STATE OF GUJARAT
             AND ANOTHER
                                                                            … RESPONDENT(S)

                                                   JUDGMENT
S.V.N. BHATTI, J.
1.             Leave granted.
2.             The appellant filed R/Criminal Misc. Application No. 11506 of 2017

             before the High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad under section 482 of The
Code of Criminal Procedure
(“the Code”) for quashing the FIR bearing C.R. No.

             I- 06 of 2017 registered with Salabatpura, Police Station, Surat for the alleged

             offences punishable under
sections 406
and
420
of the Indian Penal Code

             (“
IPC
”). The said Criminal Misc. Application was dismissed (“Impugned

             Order”) by the High Court resulting in the filing of the Criminal Appeal.
3.              The second respondent claims that he is running a business at Surat

             Textile market under the name and style of “Ansh Prints”. The nature of the

             business activity of the second respondent is to subject the Grey cloths

             purchased from weavers and process them for “Dyeing prints” and “Bal
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
geeta ahuja
Date: 2025.05.01
prints”. As a further process, the printed sarees are sent for cutting and saree
   17:24:16 IST
   Reason:
work. The second respondent sells the finished printed and work saree
1
products. The appellant is the director of a company registered in Sri Lanka

and is doing business under the name and style of “Maayu Import and Export

Ltd,” having its registered office at 103, 3rd Cross Street, Colombo-11, Sri

Lanka. The places of business activity of the appellant and the respondent are

noted to appreciate the subtle intricacy involved in the matter. In March 2012,

the appellant and the second respondent came into contact with each other

and commenced the business of exporting sarees sold by the second

respondent. The export of sarees sold by the second respondent and

purchased by the appellant has been facilitated through M/s. Oswal

Overseas, inasmuch as the goods could be exported through an entity with

an export-import license from the Government of India. The above narrative

is not disputed by the parties and is stated to appreciate the setting in which

an FIR has been lodged by the second respondent against the appellant.

Shorn of too many details, it is noted that on 03.01.2017, the second

respondent filed an FIR under
sections 406
and
420
of the IPC before the

Salabatpura Police Station, Surat. The FIR is registered as I-06 of 2017. The

alleged offence is stated to have occurred between 16.10.2013 and

05.04.2014. The accusations in the FIR refer to the initiative of the appellant

and the second respondent to establish a business relationship between

them. The FIR presents a detailed narrative on the beginning of a transaction

between the second respondent and the appellant. The accusations have been

noted with sufficient details in the judgment impugned in the appeal. Hence,

the contents of the FIR are stated in brief:
3.1   The second respondent from 2012 to 2014 was running his business at

Surat Textile market, parking project shop number 133, in the name of Ansh

Prints. The business is to process the grey clothes from weavers, and after the
2
process of Dyeing, printing, and Bal print, the goods are sent for work, and

after cutting the saree and packing, the same is sold to the parties directly or

through a broker.
3.2   In March 2012, the appellant had come to the shop of the respondent

no. 2, told him that he was having his office at Maayu Import & Export Pvt.
Ltd., Maayu Impex No.103, Third Cross Street, Colombo 11, Sri Lanka and

was interested in doing business with the respondent no. 2. Since the sold

goods were to be sent out of India and the respondent no. 2 did not possess

an import-export licence, the appellant had asked him to send the goods

through Vikrambhai Mahendrabhai Barmecha (“Vikrambhai”), owner of M/s.

Oswal Overseas, at Raghunandan Textile Market. It was agreed that the

payment would be made via a cheque within 60 to 90 days.

3.3   From 16.10.2013 to 05.03.2014, the second respondent, vide different

bills, had sent reniyal sarees, work sarees and cotton work quality goods of

75,515 metres and 44,753 pieces, along with saree packing material bags,

handwork beads and stone goods of a total worth of Rs. 39,18,108/- to the

appellant through M/s. Oswal Overseas. The above-mentioned Vikrambhai of

M/s. Oswal Overseas used to stamp and sign the invoice bill of the second

respondent and share the container bill and the customs clearance bill for

sending goods to Sri Lanka.
3.4   The Packing List No. AP- 1 to 98 goods were sent through M/s. Oswal

Overseas to the appellant in Sri Lanka. However, the other packing list No.

AP- 99 to 103 worth Rs. 4,46,764/- for some reason could not be sent by

Vikrambhai to the appellant in Sri Lanka. Vikrambhai paid the money for the

said goods to the second respondent. Hence, the total goods worth

Rs. 34,71,344/- were exported through M/s. Oswal Overseas to the accused.
3
3.5     Until March 2014, the second respondent had sent the goods to the

appellant,    but   despite   repeated   demand,    no   payment     was   made.

Consequently, the second respondent had himself gone to Sri Lanka to the

appellant, and the appellant had assured him of payment regarding the same.

After the second respondent returned to Surat, the appellant stopped

receiving his calls in March 2016. Hence, the FIR was registered.
4.      The appellant filed R/Criminal Misc. Application No. 11506 of 2017

under
section 482
of the Code for quashing the subject FIR. The foremost

grounds, from the nature of the relationship between the appellant and the

respondent for invoking the jurisdiction of the High Court under
section 482
of the Code are summarised as thus:
a. The FIR refers to the date of business transactions between 16.10.2013

        and 05.04.2014.
b. On 03.01.2017, the FIR was filed and registered under
sections 406
and
420
of the IPC.
c. The export of goods from the second respondent to the appellant, on

        the very showing of the second respondent, is through M/s. Oswal

        Overseas. The second respondent sold or supplied goods to M/s Oswal

        Overseas, and the said exporter has exported the goods to the appellant.

     d. The claim of the second respondent is based on the unpaid sale

        consideration of goods sold. There is no privity of contract or a shred of

        document establishing a tri-partite arrangement between the second

        respondent/seller on one hand and M/s. Oswal Overseas/exporter and

        the appellant/the importer, on the other hand.
e. None of the ingredients of
sections 406
and
420
are attracted from the

        accusations in the FIR, and on the mere statement of the second
4
respondent, the transaction does not turn out to be an offence under
IPC
.
5.    The High Court, through the impugned order, dismissed R/Criminal

Misc. Application No. 11506 of 2017. The gist of the consideration of the High

Court is that the appellant misrepresented to the respondent no. 2 and

convinced the latter to do business with the appellant through the exporter.

The High Court, after relying upon judicial pronouncements defining essential

ingredients of criminal breach of trust and cheating, observed that the

distinction between mere breach of contract and offence of cheating has to be

kept in mind. It emphasised that the same would depend upon the intention

of the accused at the time of the alleged inducement, and mere breach of

contract cannot give rise to criminal prosecution for cheating unless a

fraudulent or dishonest intention is shown at the inception of the transaction.

The High Court considered the details provided by the respondent no. 2,

showing how the appellant misrepresented and induced the second

respondent to deliver the goods. On the basis of documents of supply of goods

placed on record and affidavit filed by the respondent no. 2 stating that others

were also cheated by the appellant, the High Court found that the offences as

mentioned in the FIR were substantiated and refused to exercise the powers

under
section 482
of the Code to quash the FIR.
6.    Mr. P.S. Patwalia, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant,

argues that the accusations in the FIR do not make out an offence of criminal

breach of trust or cheating. The FIR refers to the total outstanding from the

export made through M/s. Oswal Overseas as Rs. 39,18,108/- and the

consignment worth Rs. 4,46,764/- could not be exported to the appellant.

M/s. Oswal Overseas, through one Vikrambhai, paid the said amount to the
5
second respondent, thus reducing the unpaid sale consideration of exports

made to the appellant to Rs. 34,71,344/-. Either for un-exported or exported

goods, the liability towards the unpaid sale price is with M/s. Oswal Overseas.

As per the transfer documents, the unpaid sale price can be recovered only

by M/s. Oswal Overseas and the second respondent by treating the director

of M/s. Oswal Overseas, as a witness, cannot convert a pure and simple

dispute on unpaid sale price by the appellant into criminal prosecution under
sections 406
and
420
of the IPC. The appellant prays for quashment of the

FIR not by looking at any extraneous documents but by accepting the

accusation in the FIR.
7.    Mr. Mohit D. Ram, learned Counsel, appearing for the second

respondent, contends that business transactions have happened, and sarees

have been exported through M/s. Oswal Overseas on the negotiations held

between the appellant and the second respondent. M/s. Oswal Overseas is a

mere facilitator. The goods sold have finally benefited the appellant. The non-

payment of the full sale price amounts to criminal Breach of trust and

cheating. The investigation into the allegations of the FIR would disclose

whether the case warrants filing a chargesheet or closure report. At this stage,

invoking the power of
section 482
of the Code by the appellant is illegal. He

invites our attention to a status report filed by the first respondent, to the

evidence gathered so far and argues that the complicity of the appellant to

convince the second respondent to do business through M/s. Oswal Overseas

can be investigated. The High Court, according to him, has rightly dismissed

the prayer.
8.    We have heard the learned Counsel and perused the record. The

appellant prays for quashment of FIR, and we are conscious of the exercise of
6
jurisdiction in interdicting an FIR and the legal position is fairly well

established by a catena of decisions, and we refer to the following three

decisions:
8.1
State of Odisha v. Pratima Mohanty1

       As
per     the   settled   proposition   of   law,   while   examining   an

FIR/complaint, quashing of which is sought, the court cannot embark upon

any enquiry as to the reliability or genuineness of allegations made in the

FIR/complaint. Quashing a complaint/FIR should be an exception rather

than any ordinary rule. Normally, the criminal proceedings should not be

quashed in exercise of powers under
section 482
of the Code when, after a

thorough investigation, the charge-sheet has been filed. At the stage of

discharge and/or considering the application under
section 482
of the Code,

the courts are not required to go into the merits of the allegations and/or

evidence in detail as if conducting a mini-trial. As held by this Court, the

powers under this section are very wide, but the conferment of wide power

requires the court to be more cautious. It casts an onerous and more diligent

duty on the Court.
8.2
Kaptan Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh2

       The
inherent jurisdiction under
section 482
of the Code, though wide,

is to be exercised sparingly, carefully and with caution, only when such

exercise is justified by tests specifically
laid down in
the section itself. Further,

the appreciation of evidence is not permissible at this stage.
8.3
Pratibha v. Rameshwari Devi3
1 (2022) 16 SCC 703.
2 (2021) 9 SCC 35.
3 (2007) 12 SCC 369.
7
It is not open to the High Court to rely on the report of the investigating

agency, nor can it direct the report to be submitted before it as the law is very

clear that the report of the investigating agency may be accepted by the

Magistrate, or the Magistrate may reject the same on consideration of the

material on record. Such being the position, the report of the investigating

agency cannot be relied on by the High Court while exercising powers under
section 482
of the Code.
9.     The FIR has been registered under
sections 406
and
420
of the IPC. The

scope and expanse of these sections is better appreciated in the company of
sections 405
and
415
of the IPC. This court in the case of
Radheyshyam v.

State of Rajasthan4
, culled out the following ingredients to constitute the

criminal breach of trust:
“11. For an offence punishable under
Section 406
, IPC, the
           following ingredients must exist:
i. The accused was entrusted with property, or entrusted
           with dominion over property;
ii. The accused had dishonestly misappropriated or
           converted to their own use that property, or dishonestly
           used or disposed of that property or wilfully suffer any other
           person to do so; and
           iii. Such misappropriation, conversion, use or disposal
           should be in violation of any direction of law prescribing the
           mode in which such trust is to be discharged, or of any legal
           contract.”

9.1    This court, while discussing the expression “entrustment” in
Rashmi

Kumar v. Mahesh Kumar Bhada5
, observed that it carries with it the

implication that the person handing over any property or on whose behalf that

property is handed over to another, continues to be its owner. Entrustment is

not necessarily a term of law. It may have different implications in different



4 2024 SCC OnLine SC 2311.
5 (1997) 2 SCC 397.
8
contexts. In its most general significance, all its imports is handing over the

possession for some purpose which may not imply the conferment of any

proprietary right therein. The ownership or beneficial interest in the property

in respect of which criminal breach of trust is alleged to have been committed,

must be in some person other than the accused and the latter must hold it

on account of some person or in some way for his benefit.

9.2    Further, in
Hridaya Ranjan Prasad Verma v. State of Bihar6
, this

court observed as follows:
“15. In determining the question it has to be kept in mind
           that the distinction between mere breach of contract and the
           offence of cheating is a fine one. It depends upon the
           intention of the accused at the time of inducement which
           may be judged by his subsequent conduct but for this
           subsequent conduct is not the sole test. Mere breach of
           contract cannot give rise to criminal prosecution for cheating
           unless fraudulent or dishonest intention is shown right at
           the beginning of the transaction, that is the time when the
           offence is said to have been committed. Therefore it is the
           intention which is the gist of the offence. To hold a person
           guilty of cheating it is necessary to show that he had
           fraudulent or dishonest intention at the time of making the
           promise. From his mere failure to keep up promise
           subsequently such a culpable intention right at the
           beginning, that is, when he made the promise cannot be
           presumed.”
                                                    (Emphasis supplied)

9.3    The ingredients to constitute an offence under
sections 415
read with

420 of
IPC
have been considered and
laid down by
this court in
Prof. R.K.

Vijayasarathy and Anr v. Sudha Seetharam and Anr7
, as under:
“16. The ingredients to constitute an offence of cheating are
           as follows:
16.1. There should be fraudulent or dishonest inducement
           of a person by deceiving him:
16.1.1. The person so induced should be intentionally
           induced to deliver any property to any person or to consent
           that any person shall retain any property, or

6 (2000) 4 SCC 168.
7 (2019) 16 SCC 739.
9
16.1.2. The person so induced should be intentionally
          induced to do or to omit to do anything which he would not
          do or omit if he were not so deceived; and
          16.2. In cases covered by 16.1.2. above, the act or omission
          should be one which caused or is likely to cause damage or
          harm to the person induced in body, mind, reputation or
          property.
17. A fraudulent or dishonest inducement is an essential
          ingredient of the offence. A person who dishonestly induces
          another person to deliver any property is liable for the
          offence of cheating.
18.                   xxx    xxx   xxx
19. The ingredients to constitute an offence under
Section
          420
are as follows:
19.1 A person must commit the offence of cheating under
Section 415
; and
          19.2 The person cheated must be dishonestly induced to:
(a) deliver property to any person; or
(b) make, alter or destroy valuable security or anything
            signed or sealed and capable of being converted into
            valuable security.”
                                                  (Emphasis supplied)


9.4   Put succinctly, to constitute an offence under
sections 415
and
420
of

the IPC, the above ingredients are present in the FIR .
10.   This court in
AM Mohan v. State Represented by SHO & Another8
,

has observed as follows:
“13. It could be thus seen for attracting the provision of
Section 420
of IPC, the FIR/complaint must show that the
          ingredients of
Section 415
of IPC are made out and the
          person cheated must have been dishonestly induced to
          deliver the property to any person; or to make, alter or
          destroy valuable security or anything signed or sealed and
          capable of being converted into valuable security. In other
          words, for attracting the provisions of
Section 420
of IPC, it
          must be shown that the FIR/complaint discloses:
(i) the deception of any person;
(ii) fraudulently or dishonestly inducing that person to
          deliver any property to any person; and
(iii)      dishonest intention of the accused at the time of
          making the inducement.”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)

8 2024 INSC 233.
10
11.   As stated in the FIR:
(i) In March 2012, the appellant had directly contacted the respondent no.
2, gave him his visiting card, and saw the samples of the work being

      done by the latter;
(ii) Further, the appellant also enquired from respondent no. 2 from whom

      he was purchasing the goods of sarees. After 2-3 days, he came to the

      office of the appellant and demanded other samples;
(iii) Appellant had asked respondent no. 2 to prepare goods and informed

      that he would make the payments in 60 to 90 days; and
(iv) Appellant had assured and given trust for making timely payments,

      stating that he has his own house in Chennai and had good contacts

      with political persons.
12.   From the above, respondent no. 2 has not availed the services of M/s.

Oswal Overseas as a transport carrier. It is unclear whether the invoice has

been raised in the name of the appellant or the exporter. The “bill of lading”

would have disclosed the transfer of title in goods in favour of the appellant.

On the contrary, the FIR is filed showing that the appellant, as accused, had

an intention to cheat and commit breach of trust. The documents belie the

allegations in the FIR. Looking at the controversy from any perspective, a mere

civil dispute has been given the colour of an offence of cheating and criminal

breach of trust. We have perused the FIR and are convinced that the

inducement is an explanation to contradict the documents through which

exports have been completed. In the circumstances of this case, by referring

to inducement, the continuation of investigation/prosecution into the offence

of cheating and breach of trust would amount to an abuse of the process of
11
law. Further, what begs the question is whether such non-payment of the sale

price can be an offence of criminal breach of trust and cheating at the hands

of the second respondent. The answer is clearly no.
13.   As per the FIR, the goods were to be exported out of India. The

respondent no. 2, since did not possess an import/export license, the

appellant had asked respondent no. 2 to export the goods through M/s. Oswal

Overseas. Accordingly, from 16.10.2013 to 05.03.2014, respondent no. 2 has

in all exported sarees worth Rs. 34,71,344/- through Vikrambhai, owner of

M/s. Oswal Overseas to the appellant.
14.   By keeping in perspective the ratio in the judgments referred supra and

also the well-established position of law under
section 482
of the Code, we

will examine the crux of the complaint. The respondent no. 2 complains that

the appellant, after appropriating the goods exported, has not paid the sale

price of Rs. 34,71,344/-. M/s. Oswal Overseas is the exporter, and the

primary liability for the goods entrusted lies with the appellant. The

respondent no. 2 has treated the Director/Partner of M/s. Oswal Overseas as

a witness to bring home the accusation of breach of trust and cheating. We

do not want to hold a mini trial and observe whether such an effort, either in

the course of the investigation by the police or finally in the prosecution, will

bring home the aforesaid charges. In the documents filed as Annexure P2,

which is a true copy of the invoices and the payment receipt made by the

appellant, the appellant is shown as the consignee and M/s. Oswal Overseas

is the exporter. Annexure P2 is as follows:
“69.     Beneficiary Customer Name and Address
                 /912020045714085
                 M/s Oswal Overseas
                 2014-2017 Raghunandan Textile
                 Market Ring Ring Road Surat
12
India 395002.
71A: Details of Charges
                SHA”
15.   Therefore, the entrustment was made to M/s. Oswal Overseas by

respondent no. 2 and not to the appellant.
16.   The sale price was agreed to be debited to the account of M/s. Oswal

Overseas accepted the same as part payment against the subject export of

goods from the appellant. It might be true that the appellant is yet to discharge

the sale price of the subject export. The respondent no. 2, by referring to an

oral arrangement of inducement, tries to plead a case contrary to the

documents through which the final “entrustment” of the exported goods

happened in Sri Lanka.
17.   For the above reasons, and particularly appreciating Annexures-P1 to

P3, we are of the view that the continuation of the FIR against the appellant

is an abuse of the process of law, and at best, the non-payment of the sale

price could be a civil dispute between the appellant and M/s. Oswal Overseas.

The appeal is accordingly allowed, the impugned order is set aside and FIR

No. I-06 of 2017 is quashed.
……….…………………J
                                                         [PANKAJ MITHAL]




                                                        ..…………………………J
                                                        [S.V.N. BHATTI]
New Delhi;
May 1, 2025.
13