[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
P. Shanthi Pugazhenthi vs State Rep. By. Inspector Of Police ... on 13 May, 2025
Author:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
2025 INSC 674
                                                                           REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.         OF 2025
              (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO.3472 OF 2018)


            P. SHANTHI PUGAZHENTHI                                      …APPELLANT
                                                     VERSUS
            STATE REPRESENTED BY THE
            INSPECTOR OF POLICE
            SPE/CBI/ACB/ CHENNAI                                        …RESPONDENT


                                                JUDGMENT
SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J.
1.                     Leave granted.
2.                     The appellant before this Court, who was working as an

                            Assistant Superintendent in the Chennai Port Trust assails

                            the judgment and order dated 10.01.2018 passed by the High

                            Court of Madras (hereinafter ‘High Court’) which has sustained

                            her conviction and sentence under
section 109
of the Indian

                            Penal Code (hereinafter ‘
IPC
’) read with
Section 13(2)
and
Section 13(1)(e)
of the Prevention of Corruption Act 1988
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Jayant Kumar Arora
Date: 2025.05.13
(hereinafter ‘1988 Act’). The co-accused (husband of the
   17:54:38 IST
   Reason:
appellant, at the time) was also convicted and sentenced by
1
the same order under
section 13(2)
and
13(1)(e)
of the 1988

     Act.
3.   In June 2009, an FIR was registered against the appellant’s

     husband alleging that he had illegally demanded and received

     Rs. 3000 for handing over a cheque relating to a motor

     accident claim. While investigating the FIR, certain raids were

     conducted at the appellant’s husband’s house and on

     31.12.2009 another FIR under
section 13(2)
read with 13(1)(e)

     of the 1988 Act was registered against the appellant’s

     husband, while he was serving as a public servant on the post

     of Divisional Manager in United India Insurance Co. Ltd. When

     the search was conducted on the residential premise of the

     appellant’s   husband,   various   incriminating   documents

     relating to movable and immovable property in the name of the

     appellant and her husband were found. Primarily, it was

     alleged that during the check period between 1.09.2002 and

     16.06.2009, the appellant’s husband had acquired movable

     and immovable properties which were disproportionate to his

     income. The properties were in the appellant’s name, as well

     as of her husband.
2
4.   On 18.12.2010, a chargesheet was filed and the appellant was

     charged under
section 109
IPC read with 13(2) and 13(1)(e) of

     the 1988 Act, while her husband was charged under
section

     13(2)
read with 13(1)(e) of the 1988 Act, with details of the

     various movable and immovable assets acquired by them

     during the check period. It was alleged that disproportionate

     assets amounting to Rs. 60,99,216 have been acquired by the

     accused.
5.   After perusing the evidence on record, the Trial Court vide

     order dated 27.05.2013 found the appellant and her husband

     guilty and held that the appellant’s husband has acquired

     disproportionate assets to the extent of Rs. 37,98,752 during

     the check period beyond his known sources of income. The

     appellant was held guilty of abetting her husband in acquiring

     such disproportionate assets. The appellant’s husband was

     convicted under
section 13(2)
read with 13(1)(e) of the 1988

     Act and sentenced to 2 years of R.I. Whereas the appellant was

     sentenced under
section 109
IPC read with 13(2) and 13(1)(e)

     of the 1988 Act and sentenced to 1 year of R.I.
6.   Both the appellant and her husband preferred their criminal

     appeal against the above order of conviction and sentence. On
3
10.01.2018, the High Court dismissed the appeal and found

     no ground to interfere with the findings of the Trial Court.

     While dismissing the appeal, the High Court observed that

     although there are minor discrepancies in the calculation of

     known     sources    of    income     of   the   accused,     the

     disproportionality of assets is hugely excessive. Specifically the

     High Court observed that there is no material to show that the

     assets acquired during the check period, were acquired from

     their known source or sources of income, and even if the

     explanations provided by the accused is accepted it does not

     still remove the disproportionality. Now the appellant is before

     this Court.
7.   The case of the appellant is that the courts below have grossly

     erred in convicting her for abetting her husband (the main

     accused) in acquiring disproportionate assets during the

     check period, and that any property disproportionately

     purchased by her husband in her name during the check

     period, cannot be held to be disproportionate in the hands of

     the appellant. Further, the appellant would argue that the co-

     accused is no longer her husband and he has subsequently

     re-married. The prosecution, on the other hand, contends that
4
the appellant was hand in glove with her husband in

      commission of the crime and she abetted the commission of

      offence under
section 13(1)(e)
of the 1988 Act.
8.    We have heard both the sides and perused the material on

      record.
9.    The only question that comes up for our consideration is

      whether the appellant was rightly convicted for abetment of

      offence under
section 13(1)(e)
of the 1988 Act.
10.
Section 107
of IPC defines and illustrates as to what is

      abetment.
Section 107
of IPC reads as follows:
“107. Abetment of a thing.—A person abets the
                doing of a thing, who—
                First.—Instigates any person to do that thing; or
                Secondly.—Engages with one or more other person
                or persons in any conspiracy for the doing of that
                thing, if an act or illegal omission takes place in
                pursuance of that conspiracy, and in order to the
                doing of that thing; or
                Thirdly.—Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal
                omission, the doing of that thing.
                Explanation 1.—A person who, by wilful
                misrepresentation, or by wilful concealment of a
                material fact which he is bound to disclose,
                voluntarily causes or procures, or attempts to cause
                or procure, a thing to be done, is said to instigate
                the doing of that thing.
Illustration
                A, a public officer, is authorised by a warrant from
                a Court of Justice to apprehend Z, B, knowing that
                fact and also that C is not Z, wilfully represents to
                A that C is Z, and thereby intentionally causes A to
5
apprehend C. Here B abets by instigation the
       apprehension of C.
       Explanation 2.—Whoever, either prior to or at the
       time of the commission of an act, does anything in
       order to facilitate the commission of that act, and
       thereby facilitates the commission thereof, is said
       to aid the doing of that act.”
Section 108
of IPC defines ‘Abettor’ as follows:
“108. Abettor—A person abets an offence,
       who abets either the commission of an offence, or
       the commission of an act which would be an
       offence, if committed by a person capable by law of
       committing an offence with the same intention or
       knowledge as that of the abettor.
       Explanation 1.—The abetment of the illegal
       omission of an act may amount to an offence
       although the abettor may not himself be bound to
       do that act.
Explanation 2.—To constitute the offence of
       abetment it is not necessary that the act abetted
       should be committed, or that the effect requisite to
       constitute the offence should be caused.
Illustrations
(a) A instigates B to murder C. B refuses to do so. A
       is guilty of abetting B to commit murder.
(b) A instigates B to murder D. B in pursuance of
       the instigation stabs D. D recovers from the wound.
A is guilty of instigating B to commit murder.
       Explanation 3.—It is not necessary that the person
       abetted should be capable by law of committing an
       offence, or that he should have the same guilty
       intention or knowledge as that of the abettor, or any
       guilty intention or knowledge.
Illustrations
(a) A, with a guilty intention, abets a child or a
       lunatic to commit an act which would be an offence,
       if committed by a person capable by law of
       committing an offence, and having the same
6
intention as A. Here A, whether the act be
committed or not, is guilty of abetting an offence.
(b) A, with the intention of murdering Z, instigates
B, a child under seven years of age, to do an act
which causes Z's death. B, in consequence of the
abetment, does the act in the absence of A and
thereby causes Z's death. Here, though B was not
capable by law of committing an offence, A is liable
to be punished in the same manner as if B had been
capable by law of committing an offence, and had
committed murder, and he is therefore subject to
the punishment of death.
(c) A instigates B to set fire to a dwelling-house. B,
in consequence of the unsoundness of his mind,
being incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or
that he is doing what is wrong or contrary to law,
sets fire to the house in consequence of A's
instigation. B has committed no offence, but A is
guilty of abetting the offence of setting fire to a
dwelling-house, and is liable to the punishment
provided for that offence.
(d) A, intending to cause a theft to be committed,
instigates B to take property belonging to Z out of
Z's possession. A induces B to believe that the
property belongs to A. B takes the property out of
Z's possession, in good faith, believing it to be A's
property. B, acting under this misconception, does
not take dishonestly, and therefore does not
commit theft. But A is guilty of abetting theft, and
is liable to the same punishment as if B had
committed theft.
Explanation 4.—The abetment of an offence being
an offence, the abetment of such an abetment is
also an offence.
Illustration
A instigates B to instigate C to murder Z. B
accordingly instigates C to murder Z, and C
commits that offence in consequence of B's
instigation. B is liable to be punished for his offence
with the punishment for murder; and, as A
7
instigated B to commit the offence, A is also liable
             to the same punishment.
Explanation 5.—It is not necessary to the
             commission of the offence of abetment by
             conspiracy that the abettor should concert the
             offence with the person who commits it. It is
             sufficient if he engages in the conspiracy in
             pursuance of which the offence is committed.
Illustration
             A concerts with B a plan for poisoning Z. It is agreed
             that A shall administer the poison. B then explains
             the plan to C mentioning that a third person is to
             administer the poison, but without mentioning A's
             name. C agrees to procure the poison, and procures
             and delivers it to B for the purpose of its being used
             in the manner explained. A administers the poison;
             Z dies in consequence. Here, though A and C have
             not conspired together, yet C has been engaged in
             the conspiracy in pursuance of which Z has been
             murdered. C has therefore committed the offence
             defined in this section and is liable to the
             punishment for murder.”
11.   The law was laid down by this Court with respect to offences

      under
section 109
IPC read with 13(1)(e) of the 1988 Act, in
P.

      Nallammal & Anr. v. State
, represented by Inspector of

      Police (1999) 6 SCC 559, where this court was considering

      whether the appellants therein are liable to be convicted of

      abetting crime under 13(1)(e) of the 1988 Act.
12.
In
P. Nallamal
(Supra), it was contended before this Court

      that an offence under
section 13(1)(e)
of the 1988 Act cannot

      be abetted by a non-public servant. Further, that there is no
8
provision in the 1988 Act which provides punishment for

abetment of offence under
section 13(1)(e)
whereas it provides

punishment for abetment of some other offences under the

1988 Act. However, after discussing the history of
Section 13
of the 1988 Act which was a substitute for some of the

provisions of Chapter-IX of
IPC
which deals with offences by

or relating to public servants, this Court held that an offence

under
section 13(1)(e)
of the 1988 Act can be abetted by any

other person. After reading
Section 107
of IPC and accepting

suggestions of Counsel, this Court gave illustrations that how

even a person who is not a public servant can abet the offence

under
section 13(1)(e)
of the 1988 Act. The relevant

paragraphs are as follows:
“24. Shri Shanti Bhushan cited certain
    illustrations which, according to us, would
    amplify the cases of abetments fitting with
    each of the three clauses in Section 107 of the
    Penal Code vis-a-vis
Section 13(1)(e)
of the PC
    Act.
The first illustration cited is this:
If A, a close relative of the public servant tells
    him of how other public servants have become
    more       wealthy      by     receiving   bribes
    and A persuades the public servant to do the
    same in order to become rich and the public
    servant acts accordingly. If it is a proved
    position there cannot be any doubt that A has
    abetted the offence by instigation.
    Next illustration is this:
9
Four persons including the public servant
          decide to raise a bulk amount through bribery
          and the remaining persons prompt the public
          servant to keep such money in their names. If
          this is a proved position then all the said
          persons are guilty of abetment through
          conspiracy.
The last illustration is this:
If a public servant tells A, a close friend of his,
          that he has acquired considerable wealth
          through bribery but he cannot keep them as he
          has no known source of income to account, he
          requests A to keep the said wealth in A's
          name, and A obliges the public servant in
          doing so. If it is a proved position A is guilty of
          abetment falling under the “Thirdly” clause of
          Section 107 of the Penal Code.
25. Such illustrations are apt examples of how
          the offence under
Section 13(1)(e)
of the PC Act
          can be abetted by non-public servants. The
          only mode of prosecuting such offender is
          through the trial envisaged in the
PC Act
.”
                                     (Emphasis Provided)
13.   In other words, any person who persuades a public servant to

      take bribes, decides to raise money through bribes along with

      a public servant and prompts such public servant to keep the

      wealth with him/her or keeps the amassed wealth of a public

      servant in his/her own name is guilty of committing the

      offence of abetment of offence under
section 13(1)(e)
of the

      1988 Act. We must also note that the 2018 Amendment to the

      1988 Act has substituted
Section 12
of 1988 Act and made all
10
offences under the 1988 Act abettable. This
Section 12
of 1988

      Act reads as follows:
“12.    Punishment       for    abetment       of
           offences.—Whoever       abets    any     offence
punishable under this Act, whether or not that
           offence is committed in consequence of that
           abetment,    shall    be     punishable     with
           imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
           than three years, but which may extend to
           seven years and shall also be liable to fine.”

      In any case, there is no doubt that offence under
section

      13(1)(e)
was abettable even prior to the 2018 Amendment.
14.   In the case at hand, it is an admitted position that the

      appellant’s husband has acquired assets (disproportionate to

      his income), during the check period, in appellant’s name.

      Both the courts below have given concurrent findings on this

      aspect, and it is not required for us to deal with that aspect in

      detail.
15.   If we apply the principles
laid down in
the
P. Nallammal
case

      (supra), the present appellant’s case would definitely fall either

      in the 2nd or 3rd illustration. It is not clear from the record

      whether the appellant and her husband entered into a prior

      conspiracy to amass a huge bulk of wealth through bribery,

      but there is no doubt that after such disproportionate wealth

      was amassed, the appellant has been actively involved in
11
concealing such wealth by keeping assets in her name. By

doing so, the appellant is undoubtedly guilty of offence of

abetment falling under
section109
IPC read with 13(2) and

13(1)(e) of the 1988 Act.
Moreover, we would like to note that even the appellant

was a public servant at the time of commission of the offence,

as she was holding the post of Assistant Superintendent in the

Chennai Port Trust, though she has been prosecuted here in

her capacity as the wife of the main accused. We would also

like to note that the appellant’s argument that she is no longer

the wife of co-accused as the co-accused has remarried, has

no force because at the time of commission of offence, she was

the wife of the co-accused. Even if we assume that she was not

the wife at the time of commission of crime, then also it is

immaterial since it is proven that she had allowed the co-

accused to accumulate assets in her name and thus, assisted

the co-accused in accumulation of assets disproportionate to

the known sources of income. It is a well settled law that even

a non-public servant can be convicted under
section 109
IPC

read with 13(1)(e) of the 1988 Act. We, therefore, find no reason
12
to hold that the appellant could not have been convicted under
section 109
IPC read with 13(2) and13(1)(e) of the 1988 Act.
16.   Considering all the facts and circumstances of the case, we are

      of the opinion that the finding of both the courts below does

      not require any interference. The appeal is accordingly

      dismissed.
17.   The appellant, who is on bail, is directed to surrender within

      four weeks from today.
18.   Interim order(s), if any, stand(s) disposed of. Pending

      application(s), if any, stand(s) disposed of.
…......………………………….J.
                                        [SUDHANSHU DHULIA]




                                         ….....………………………….J.
                                         [K. VINOD CHANDRAN]


 NEW DELHI,
 MAY 13, 2025.
13