[Cites
20
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Hdfc Bank Ltd vs State Of Maharashtra on 22 May, 2025
Author:
Sanjay Kumar
Bench:
Sanjay Kumar
2025 INSC 759                                                          REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                           CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.        OF 2025
                    (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NO. 6964 OF 2024)



             HDFC BANK LIMITED                                        APPELLANT (s)

                                                  VERSUS

             STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND ANR.                            RESPONDENT(s)



                                              JUDGMENT
K.V. Viswanathan, J.
1.             Leave granted.
2.             The present appeal calls in question the correctness of the

             judgment dated 10.01.2024 passed by the High Court of Judicature at

             Bombay in Criminal Writ Petition No. 275 of 2022. By the said

             judgment, the High Court has quashed the criminal proceedings under
Section 138
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (for short ‘NI
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
babita pandey
Date: 2025.05.22
Act’) insofar as it was against Respondent No. 2-Mrs. Ranjana
   17:52:34 IST
   Reason:
1
Sharma was concerned. The proceedings have been quashed on the

ground that there were no sufficient averments in the complaint filed

by the appellant to invoke the vicarious liability against the

respondent No. 2 under
Section 141
of the NI Act. Aggrieved, the

appellant is before us.
BRIEF FACTS: -
3.   The facts lie in a narrow compass. The respondent no. 2 - Mrs.

Ranjana Sharma along with her daughter Ms. Rachana Sharma and

one Mr. Rakesh Rajpal were directors of a company named M/s R

Square Shri Sai Baba Abhikaran Pvt. Ltd. According to the complaint

filed by the appellant, the accused no. 1 - company along with

respondent no. 2 (accused no.2) and other two directors approached

the appellant/complainant for grant of credit facility in the form of

Revolving Loan Facility as Inventory Funding for the working capital

requirements. According to the appellant, loan amounts were

extended and on account of the failure of the accused to repay the

outstanding dues, the account of the company was classified as a

Non-Performing Asset on 27.03.2018 in accordance with the
2
guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank of India. It is the case of the

appellant that a cheque issued by the accused for a sum of Rs.

6,02,04,217/- on deposit was dishonored for the reason “account

blocked”. According to the appellant, a legal notice was issued to all

the accused.         However, the said notice was returned back as

“unclaimed”. The appellant thus prosecuted the company and the

three    directors    and    prayed     for   appropriate     punishment        of

imprisonment as well as direction to pay fine up to double the amount

of the dishonored cheque. On 16.12.2018, the Trial Court issued

process to the respondents in the complaint.
4.      Since the complaint has been quashed on the ground of lack of

adequate averments, it will be necessary to extract the crucial

averments that are made in the complaint:-
“2. That, Accused No 1 is a Company registered and
           incorporated under the provisions of
Indian Companies Act, 2013
[existing within the purview of
Companies Act, 1956
] and
           having it registered and corporate office at the address mentioned
           aforesaid and engaged in the business of sale of cars and spare
           parts manufactured by Hyundai Motors (I) Ltd Accused Nos 2 to
           4 are the Directors of Accused No 1 Company and is
           responsible for its day to day affairs, management and
           working of the Accused No 1 Company furthermore the
           Accused No 3 is the signatory of the dishonored cheque.
3
3. That, Accused No 1, through Accused Nos 2 to 4, had
approached the complainant above named for grant of credit
facility in the form of Revolving Loan Facility as Inventory
Funding for the working capital requirements That after due
deliberation and negotiations with Accused Nos 2 to 4 the
complainant granted the Revolving Loan facility initially to
the extent of Rs 5,00,00,000/ (Rupees Five Crores only)
[Inventory funding Rs 3.00 Crores + Inventory Funding
Adhoc: Rs 2.00 Crores vide sanction letter dated 09.08.2014
Hereto annexed and marked as Exhibit B is the copy of said
Sanction letter dated 09. 08.2014 for Revolving Loan Facility
granted to Accused No. 1.
4. That, upon further request made by Accused No. 1,
complainant had enhanced the said facility from Rs 5.00 Crore to
Rs. 6.00 Crores vide sanction letter dated 27.10.2015 The said
facilities were further enhanced from Ra 6.00 Crores to Rs 6.50
Crores vide sanction letter dated 22.02.2016 and lastly the said
facility was enhanced from Rs 6.50 Crores to Rs 8.00 Crores vide
sanction letter dated 12.09.2016. Hereto annexed and marked as
Exhibit C-1 to Exhibit C-3 are the copies of sanction letter dated
27.10.2015, 22.02.2016 and 12.09.2016 respectively
5. The Loan account of Accused No. 1 maintained by
complainant was numbered as loan account No
02400450029354. That in consideration of grant of the said
facilities, accused(s) had executed various loan and security
documents in favor of Complainant from time-to time inter
alia accepting the terms and conditions of respective
documents It is submitted that the Accused No. 1 lastly, amongst
other, entered into Loan agreement with Complainant on
17.09.2016 and executed Demand Promissory Note for a sum of
Rs. 8,00,00,000/- on 20.09.2016 Hereto annexed and marked as
Exhibit 'D-1 IS the copy of Supplemental and Amendatory Loan
Agreement dated 17.09.2016 and Exhibit' D 2" is the Demand
Promissory Note dated 20 09 2016.
6. Be that as it may, the Complainant states that the
sanctioned/renewed credit facilities were duly availed and
utilized by the Accused without any demur. The Complainant
further states that after availing the aforementioned credit
facilities, Accused No. 1 failed to maintain the account with
Complainant Bank in the manner agreed to and defaulted in
making timely repayments.
4
7. Thus, owing to the failure on the part of Accused(s) to repay
         the outstanding dues on time, thereby willfully defaulting in the
         same, Complainant was constrained to classify the account of the
         Accused No. 1 as a Non-Performing Asset on 27.03.2018 in
         accordance with the guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank of
         India from time to time.
8. That, complainant states that despite various oral and written
         requests, the Accused failed to regularize and maintain the
         account. It is submitted that Accused Company did not pay any
         heed to the requests and reminders of the Complainant and
         willfully neglected discharging their obligations thereby
         depriving the Complainant its legitimate dues.”
                                                     (Emphasis supplied)
5.   It will be noticed that in Para 2 of the complaint quoted above, it

has been categorically averred as under:
“Accused Nos. 2 to 4 are the directors of the accused no.
         1 - company and is responsible for its day-to-day
         affairs, management and working of the accused no. 1
         – company. Furthermore, the accused no. 3 is the
         signatory of the dishonored cheque”.
(Emphasis supplied)
6.   Not only this, it is further averred in Para 3 that accused no. 1

(the company) through accused nos. 2 to 4 had approached the

complainant above named for grant of credit facility in the form of

Revolving Loan Facility as inventory funding for the working capital

requirements. It has been stated : -
5
“That, after, due deliberation and negotiations with
            Accused nos. 2 to 4, the Complainant granted the
            Revolving Loan facility initially to the extent of……”.
7.    In the Board resolution of the accused no. 1 - company dated

28.09.2018 annexed to the complaint the following statement

occurs: -
“RESOLVED FURTHER THAT Ms. Rachana Sharma and/or
            Mrs. Ranjana Sharma be and are hereby authorized jointly and/or
            severally to further negotiate with HDFC Bank and accept the
            revised terms and conditions the securities on behalf of the
            company.”
It is further resolved as under: -
“RESOLVED FURTHER THAT the property(s) (belonging to
            the Company, stipulated as security ‘owe’ me Additional Credit
            Facility(ies) sanctioned by HDFC Bank shall be mortgaged in
            favor of the Bank, by way of Equitable or Registered Mortgage
            as may be required by HDFC Bank and Ms. Rachana Sharma
            and/or Mrs. Ranjana Sharma be to and are hereby
            authorized, jointly and/or severally to be present in HDFC
            Bank and deposit /redeposit the original tittle deeds of the
            Company's immovable properties with an intention to create
            security thereof and to make necessary declarations on behalf
            of the Company.”
                                                       (Emphasis supplied)
8.    It will be seen that apart from negotiations, Mrs. Ranjana

Sharma - respondent no. 2, was also authorized to deposit the original
6
title deeds of the company’s immovable property. Further the board

resolution provides as under: -
“RESOLVED FURTHER THAT the draft of the document
         received from HDFC Bank (a) respect credit facility (ies) be and
         is/are hereby approved and Ms. Rachana Sharma and/or Mrs.
         Ranjana Sharma and/or hereby authorized, jointly and/or to
         execute, sign and issue all/any such Demand Promissory
         notes Hypothecation Agreements, mortgages (in such form as
         HDFC bank may require), guarantees, indemnities all/any
         other documents, writings and instruments and all renewals
         and/or      amendments     there    to     including       after
         Acknowledgement of Debt/balance confirmations HDFC
         Banks(s) may require from time to time in this regard,
         RESOLVED FURTHER THAT Ms. Rachana Sharma and/or
         Mrs. Ranjana Sharma be and are hereby authorized jointly
         and/or severally on behalf of the company to file the requisite
         particulars of charge created in favor of HDFC Bank with
         the Registrar of Companies or any other regulatory body
         within the time frame prescribed therefor,
         RESOLVED FURTHER THAT Ms. Rachana Sharma and/or
         Mrs. Ranjana Sharma be and are hereby authorized jointly
         and/or severally to be present at the office of Sub-Registrar
         for effecting the regulation of various documents on behalf of
         the Company whenever required and to do all such acts,
         deeds and things as may be necessary or expedient to
         implement/give effect to this resolution.
RESOLVED FURTHER THAT Ms. Rachana Sharma and/or
         Mrs. Ranjana Sharma be and are thereby authorized jointly
         and/or severally to affix the Common Seal of the company on all
         the agreement documents writing and instruments and all
         renewals/amendments after Acknowledgement of debt/barar
         (sic.) conditions there of mentioned above as may be required by
         HDFC Bank in conformity with provisions of the Articles of
         Association, the Companies Act, 1956 and the
Companies Act,
         2013
of the Companies (sic.)”
                                                     (Emphasis supplied)
7
9.   Under the resolution, the respondent no. 2-Ranjana Sharma was

authorized to sign demand promissory notes, hypothecation

agreements, mortgages, guarantees and indemnities and any other

documents, writings and instruments, as may be required, from time

to time. Further, respondent no. 2 was also authorized to file the

requisite particulars of charge created in favor of the bank with the

Registrar of Companies. The respondent no. 2 was also authorized to

be present at the office of Sub-Registrar for registration of various

documents and also authorized to affix the common seal on all the

relevant documents.
10. In the sanction letter dated 22.02.2016 which was also annexed

to the complaint, under the head “Security for Inventory Funding

(AUIF)”, the performance guarantee of the directors - Ms. Rachana

Sharma and respondent no. 2 - Mrs. Ranjana Sharma were required to

be given. This clause occurs in the further sanction letter dated

12.09.2016 also.
8
11. It is in this background that the correctness of the judgment of

the High Court needs to be appreciated.
12. We have heard learned Senior Counsel/Counsel for the parties

and perused the records. Learned Senior Counsel for the appellant

contends that a perusal of the averments in the complaint read with

the documents filed leave no manner of doubt that the respondent no.

2 - Ranjana Sharma was in charge of, and was responsible for the

conduct of the business of the company inasmuch as she had

participated in the negotiations and was authorized to sign all the

relevant documents and her performance guarantee was also taken. In

view of this, learned Senior Counsel contends that the High Court was

not justified in quashing the complaint insofar as the respondent no. 2
- Ranjana Sharma was concerned.
13. Learned Senior Counsel for the appellant contends that

respondent No.2-Mrs.Ranjana Sharma is the Director of the Accused

No.1-Company and she submitted a personal guarantee and also

signed a supplemental continuing guarantee dated 17.09.2016 for the

loan transaction. It is submitted that the Company is a family-run
9
private entity. Learned Senior Counsel for the appellant relied upon

certain judgments of this Court in support of his submission.
14.
In response, learned counsel for the respondent No.2 submitted

that the averments in the complaint fell short of the requirement

mandated in
S.M.S. Pharmaceuticals Ltd. vs. Neeta Bhalla and

Another
, (2005) 8 SCC 89; that the words “was in charge of” and

“was responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of

the company” cannot be read disjunctively and the same ought to be

read conjunctively; that as held in
Siby Thomas vs. Somany

Ceramics Limited
, (2024) 1 SCC 348 if it is not averred in the

complaint that the accused was “in charge of the conduct of the

business” at the relevant time, the prosecution must fail; and that not

only the basic averment as enshrined in
Section 141
of the NI Act has

to be incorporated in the complaint but also the specific role should be

attributed to the persons who are directors or employees of the

company. Learned counsel for the respondent also relied on certain

other judgments which will be dealt with in the course of the

discussion herein below.
10
QUESTION FOR CONSIDERATION: -
15. In the above background, the question that arises for

consideration is whether the High Court was justified in quashing the

complaint insofar as respondent no. 2 – Mrs. Ranjana Sharma was

concerned on the ground that necessary averments were lacking?

ANALYSIS AND REASONING: -
16.
Section 141(1)
of the NI Act along with its provisos reads as

under:-
“141. Offences by companies.—(1) If the person committing an
     offence under
Section 138
is a company, every person who, at
     the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was
     responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of
     the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be
     guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against
     and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall
     render any person liable to punishment if he proves that the
     offence was committed without his knowledge, or that he had
     exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
     offence.
Provided further that where a person is nominated as a
     Director of a company by virtue of his holding any office or
     employment in the Central Government or State Government or
     a financial corporation owned or controlled by the Central
     Government or the State Government, as the case may be, he
     shall not be liable for prosecution under this Chapter.”
11
17. It will be noticed that
Section 141
of the NI Act employs the

phrase “was in charge of, and was responsible to the company for the

conduct of the business of the company”. Insofar as the aspect of

vicarious liability is concerned, in the present case, the averments

made are to the following effect:-
“Accused Nos. 2 to 4 are the Directors of Accused No.1

    Company” and

    “Is responsible for its day-to-day affairs, management and

    working of the Accused No.1-Company”
18. The real question is, is the above averment along with the other

averments in the complaint sufficient to meet the tests
laid down by
this Court in the leading judgment of
S.M.S. Pharmaceuticals-I
(supra).
19. Before we advert to
S.M.S. Pharmaceuticals-I
(supra), it will

be useful to refer to the meaning of the word “in charge of”. P.

Ramanatha Aiyar’s Advanced Law Lexicon defines the word “in

charge of” as follows:-
12
“A person “in charge of” and responsible to the company for the
     conduct of the business of the company must be a person in
     overall control of the day-to-day business of the company or
     firm”.
20. It will be seen that the averment made in the complaint, in the

present case, clearly uses the phrase “responsible for its day-to-day

affairs, management and working of the Accused No.1 Company”,

which going by the dictionary meaning set out hereinabove in

substance is the same as “in charge of and was responsible to the

Company for the conduct of the business of the Company”.
21. Read in the background of the other averments, the above

averment clearly fulfils the requirement of
Section 141
.               The

contention of the learned counsel for the respondent no. 2, however, is

that actual words mentioned in
Section 141
in the same form be

employed in the complaint, for the complaint to be sustained. Learned

Counsel placed strong reliance on
S.M.S. Pharmaceuticals-I
(supra).
22. To answer this issue, a closer look at the judgment in
S.M.S.

Pharmaceuticals-I
(supra) needs to be undertaken.
S.M.S.

Pharmaceuticals -I
(supra) arose out of a reference by a two-Judge
13
Bench of this Court. This Court, in
the said judgment
, set out for

determination the following questions: -
“(a) Whether for purposes of
Section 141
of the Negotiable
      Instruments Act, 1881, it is sufficient if the substance of the
      allegation read as a whole fulfil the requirements of the said
      section and it is not necessary to specifically state in the
      complaint that the person accused was in charge of, or
      responsible for, the conduct of the business of the company.
(b) Whether a director of a company would be deemed to be in
      charge of, and responsible to, the company for conduct of the
      business of the company and, therefore, deemed to be guilty of
      the offence unless he proves to the contrary.
(c) Even if it is held that specific averments are necessary,
      whether in the absence of such averments the signatory of the
      cheque and or the managing directors or joint managing director
      who admittedly would be in charge of the company and
      responsible to the company for conduct of its business could be
      proceeded against.”
23. The following principles are deducible from
the said judgment
.
(i)   “
Section 141
contains conditions which have to be satisfied

before the liability can be extended to officers of a company. Since

the provision creates criminal liability, the conditions have to be

strictly complied with. The conditions are intended to ensure that a

person who is sought to be made vicariously liable for an offence of

which the principal accused is the company, had a role to play in
14
relation to the incriminating act and further that such a person should

know what is attributed to him to make him liable”. [See Para 4]
(ii)   “There is nothing which suggests that simply by being a director

in a company, one is supposed to discharge particular functions on

behalf of a company. It happens that a person may be a director in a

company but he may not know anything about the day-to-day

functioning of the company.       As a director he may be attending

meetings of the Board of Directors of the company where usually they

decide policy matters and guide the course of business of a company.

It may be that a Board of Directors may appoint sub-committees

consisting of one or two directors out of the Board of the company

who may be made responsible for the day-to-day functions of the

company. These are matters which form part of resolutions of the

Board of Directors of a company. Nothing is oral. What emerges

from this is that the role of a director in a company is a question

of fact depending upon the peculiar facts in each case. There is

no universal rule that a director of a company is in charge of its

everyday affairs”. [See Para 8]                   (Emphasis supplied)
15
(iii) “Mere use of a particular designation of an officer without more,

may not be enough by way of an averment in a complaint. When the

requirement in
Section 141
, which extends the liability to officers of

the company, is that such a person should be in charge of and

responsible to the company for conduct of business of the company,

how can a person be subjected to liability of criminal prosecution

without it being averred in the complaint that satisfies those

requirements.   Not every person connected with a company is

made liable under
Section 141
. Liability is cast on persons who

may have something to do with the transaction complained of. A

person who is in charge of and responsible for conduct of business

of a company would naturally know why the cheque in question

was issued and why it got dishonoured”. [See Para 8]

                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
(iv) “What is required is that the persons who are sought to be made

criminally liable under
Section 141
should be, at the time the offence

was committed, in charge of and responsible to the company for the

conduct of the business of the company. Every person connected
16
with the Company shall not fall within the ambit of the provision.

It is only those persons who were in charge of and responsible for

the conduct of business of the company at the time of commission

of an offence, who will be liable for criminal action. It follows

from this that if a director of a company who was not in charge of and

was not responsible for the conduct of the business of the company at

the relevant time will not be liable under the provision”. [See Para 10]

                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
(v)   “Therefore, in order to bring a case within
Section 141
of the

Act, the complaint must disclose the necessary facts which make a

person liable”. [See Para 12]
24. After setting out the above principles, this Court in
S.M.S.

Pharmaceuticals-I
(supra), cited a whole host of judgments of

various High Courts and this Court, including the judgment of this

Court which was then the latest in line, namely,
Monaben Ketanbhai

Shah and Another vs. State of Gujarat and Others
, (2004) 7 SCC
15. This Court in
S.M.S. Pharmaceuticals-I
(supra) cited
Monaben

Ketanbhai Shah
(supra) which had held that it was not necessary to
17
reproduce the language of
Section 141
verbatim in the complaint

since the complaint was required to be read as a whole.
Monaben

Ketanbhai Shah
(supra) had held that if the substance of the

allegations made in the complaint fulfil the requirements of
Section

141
, the complaint has to proceed and is required to be tried with.
It

was further held in
Monaben Ketanbhai Shah
(supra) that in

construing a complaint, a hypertechnical approach should not be

adopted and the laudable object of preventing bouncing of cheques

and sustaining the credibility of commercial transactions had to be

borne-in-mind.
25. After setting out the holding in
Monaben Ketanbhai Shah
(supra), this Court in
S.M.S. Pharmaceuticals-I
(supra) in para 18

held as follows:-
“18. To sum up, there is almost unanimous judicial opinion that
     necessary averments ought to be contained in a complaint before
     a person can be subjected to criminal process. A liability under
Section 141
of the Act is sought to be fastened vicariously on a
     person connected with a company, the principal accused being
     the company itself. It is a departure from the rule in criminal law
     against vicarious liability. A clear case should be spelled out
     in the complaint against the person sought to be made liable.
Section 141
of the Act contains the requirements for making
     a person liable under the said provision. That the
     respondent falls within the parameters of
Section 141
has to
18
be spelled out. A complaint has to be examined by the
     Magistrate in the first instance on the basis of averments
     contained therein. If the Magistrate is satisfied that there are
     averments which bring the case within
Section 141
, he would
     issue the process. We have seen that merely being described
     as a director in a company is not sufficient to satisfy the
     requirement of
Section 141
. Even a non-director can be
     liable under
Section 141
of the Act. The averments in the
     complaint would also serve the purpose that the person
     sought to be made liable would know what is the case which
     is alleged against him. This will enable him to meet the case
     at the trial.”
                                                (Emphasis supplied)
26. Thereafter, in para 19, the conclusion was recorded in the

following terms:-
“19. In view of the above discussion, our answers to the
    questions posed in the reference are as under:
(a) It is necessary to specifically aver in a complaint under
Section 141
that at the time the offence was committed, the
    person accused was in charge of, and responsible for the conduct
    of business of the company. This averment is an essential
    requirement of
Section 141
and has to be made in a complaint.
Without this averment being made in a complaint, the
    requirements of
Section 141
cannot be said to be satisfied.
(b) The answer to the question posed in sub-para (b) has to be in
    the negative. Merely being a director of a company is not
    sufficient to make the person liable under
Section 141
of the
    Act. A director in a company cannot be deemed to be in
    charge of and responsible to the company for the conduct of
    its business. The requirement of
Section 141
is that the person
    sought to be made liable should be in charge of and
    responsible for the conduct of the business of the company at
    the relevant time. This has to be averred as a fact as there is
    no deemed liability of a director in such cases.
19
(c) The answer to Question (c) has to be in the affirmative. The
    question notes that the managing director or joint managing
    director would be admittedly in charge of the company and
    responsible to the company for the conduct of its business. When
    that is so, holders of such positions in a company become liable
    under
Section 141
of the Act. By virtue of the office they hold as
    managing director or joint managing director, these persons are in
    charge of and responsible for the conduct of business of the
    company. Therefore, they get covered under
Section 141
. So far
    as the signatory of a cheque which is dishonoured is concerned,
    he is clearly responsible for the incriminating act and will be
    covered under sub-section (2) of
Section 141
.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
27. Hence, it is very clear that the conclusion in para 19(a) in
S.M.S.

Pharmaceuticals-I
(supra) has to be read with the other holdings in

judgment especially the ratio extracted hereinabove culminating in

para 18. Merely reading para 19(a) to contend that what is required is

parroting of the words of the section for a complaint to be sustained is

completely unjustified. Para 19(a) does not mention that the words of

the
Section 141
has to be mechanically parroted. In fact, the cases

that we discuss hereinbelow have expressly rejected the said

contention.
28. After the reference in
S.M.S. Pharmaceuticals-I
(supra) was

answered by the three-Judge Bench and before the case of the said
20
parties could be taken up for disposal by the two judge Bench, came

the   judgment    in
Sabitha    Ramamurthy      and    Another     vs.

R.B.S.Channabasavaradhya
, (2006) 10 SCC 581.
This Court, after

noticing
S.M.S. Pharmaceuticals-I
(supra), held that it was not

necessary for the complainant to specifically reproduce the wordings

of the section but what was required was a clear statement of fact so

as to enable the Court to arrive at a prima facie opinion that the

accused are vicariously liable. Such vicarious liability can be inferred

only if the requisite statements, which are required to be averred in

the complaint petition are made so as to make the accused therein

vicariously liable for the offence committed by the company. It was

also held that before a person can be made vicariously liable, strict

compliance with the statutory requirements should be insisted. On

facts, the Court found that the averments did not meet the

requirements in the said case.
29. Thereafter, came the judgment in
S.M.S. Pharmaceuticals Ltd.

vs. Neeta Bhalla and Another
, (2007) 4 SCC 70 (hereinafter referred

to as
S.M.S. Pharmaceuticals-II
(supra).
Referring to para 18 and 19

of the order in the three-Judge Bench reference in
S.M.
S.
21
Pharmaceuticals-I (supra) and following the judgment in
Sabitha

Ramamurthy
(Supra), the averments in the complaint were tested and

it was found that the complaint petition when read in its entirety, the

averments therein fell short of the requirements to implicate the

respondent-accused
in that case
.
30. To the same effect is the judgment of this Court in
A.K.

Singhania vs. Gujarat State Fertilizer Company Limited and

Another
, (2013) 16 SCC 630, wherein this Court categorically ruled

as under:-
“14. From a plain reading of the aforesaid provision it is
     evident that every person who at the time the offence was
     committed was in charge of and responsible to the company
     shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence under
Section 138
of the Act. In the face of it, will it be necessary to specifically
     state in the complaint that the person accused was in charge of
     and responsible for the conduct of the business of the
     company? In our opinion, in the case of offence by the
     company, to bring its Directors within the mischief of
Section 138
of the Act, it shall be necessary to allege that
     they were in charge of and responsible to the conduct of the
     business of the company. It is a necessary ingredient which
     would be sufficient to proceed against such Directors.
     However, we may add that as no particular form is
     prescribed, it may not be necessary to reproduce the words
     of the section. If reading of the complaint shows and the
     substance of accusation discloses necessary averments, that
     would be sufficient to proceed against such of the Directors
     and no particular form is necessary. However, it may not be
     necessary to allege and prove that, in fact, such of the Directors
22
have any specific role in respect of the transaction leading to
     issuance of cheque.
Section 141
of the Act makes the Directors
     in charge of and responsible to the company “for the conduct
     of the business of the company” within the mischief of
Section
     138
of the Act and not particular business for which the cheque
     was issued. We cannot read more than what has been mandated
     in
Section 141
of the Act.”
                                               (Emphasis supplied)
31.
In
Ashok Shewakramani and Others vs. State of Andhra

Pradesh and Another
, (2023) 8 SCC 473, a judgment relied upon by

Respondent No.2, the averments did not satisfy the ingredients of
Section 141
and this Court observed that all that was averred
in that

case
(the first set of appeal therein) was that the accused were liable

for the transactions of the company and they were fully aware of the

issuance of the cheque and dishonor of the cheque. This Court held

that even taking a broad and liberal view of the pleadings in the

complaint, there was no compliance with the requirements of
Section

141 (1)
.   In the second set of appeals therein the accused directors

were not even described as directors of the first accused company

therein. On that simple ground proceedings were quashed. In the third

set of appeals therein, insofar as the directors were concerned who
23
were accused nos. 4 to 7 an omnibus averment was made in the

following terms.
"(1) It is submitted that the complainant is the proprietor
        of Chakra Cotton Traders, doing business in cotton,
        resident of bearing Door No. 3/917-1, Sri Chackra
        Nilayam, YMR Colony, Proddatur Town-516 360,
        Kadapa District, A.P.
              Accused 1 is the private limited Company
        concerned and registered under the
Companies Act
.
Accused 2 is Chairman of Accused 1. Accused 3 is the
        Managing Director of Accused 2 and Accused 4 to 7 are
        the Directors of Accused 1 Company and Accused 2 to 7
        are managing the Company and busy with day-to-day
        affairs of the Company and all are managing the
        Company and also in charge of the Company and all are
        jointly and severally liable for the acts of Accused 1
        Company.”



Considering these averments the Court while quashing the

proceedings held that merely because somebody is managing the

affairs of company, per se they do not become in charge of the

conduct of the business of the company or the person responsible for

the company for the conduct of the business of the company. It was

further held that the averment that the accused were busy with the

day-to-day affairs was also insufficient to attract the ingredients of
24
Section 141(1)
. Proceeding further, the Court held that merely

averring that the accused were in-charge of the company was neither

here nor there as such averment was insufficient to conclude that the

accused were responsible to the company for the conduct of the

business. This is vastly different from the averments in the present

case wherein it is clearly averred that the respondent no. 2 was

responsible for the day-to-day affairs, management and working of

the accused no. 1 company.
32.
Ashok Shewakramani
(supra) turned on the special facts of that

case. This is more so since the averments in the complaint therein

extracted hereinabove lumping the role of the directors with others

and making omnibus averments, was found to be insufficient to attract

the vicarious liability under
Section 141(1)
of the NI Act.
33.
In
Ashutosh Ashok Parasrampuriya and Another vs. Gharrkul

Industries Private Limited and Others
, (2023) 14 SCC 770, after

noticing that the averments in the complaint were to the effect that the

directors of the accused company were responsible for its business

and all the appellant-accused therein were involved in the business of
25
the company and are responsible for all the affairs of the company,

this Court held that reading the complaint as a whole, the ingredients

of
Section 141
were satisfied.
34. What is important to note is that the repetition of the exact

words of the Section in the same order, like a mantra or a magic

incantation is not the mandate of the law. What is mandated is that the

complaint should spell out that the accused sought to be arrayed falls

within the parameters of
Section 141(1)
of the NI Act. Only then

could vicarious liability be inferred against the said accused, so as to

proceed to trial. Substance will prevail over form.
35. Strong reliance is placed on
Siby Thomas
(supra) by learned

counsel for the respondent No.2 to contend that in the absence of the

words “was in charge of”, the present case against respondent No.2

cannot be proceeded. We are unable to countenance the said

submission.
This Court, in
Siby Thomas
(supra), on facts, found that

on an overall reading of the complaint it did not disclose any clear and

specific role to the appellant-accused therein. It was further held that

what was averred was only that the accused being partners are
26
responsible for the day-to-day conduct of business of the company.

This is vastly different from the averments in the present case as

discussed hereinabove. In this case, it is clearly averred that the

respondent No.2 along with the accused Nos. 3 and 4 being directors

were responsible for its day-to-day affairs, management and working

of accused No.1 - Company.
Hence, the judgment in
Siby Thomas
(supra) can be of no help to the respondent No.2 as the case turned on

its own facts.
36. The other aspect of the matter canvassed by the learned counsel

for the respondent No.2 is that not only are the basic averments as

enshrined in
Section141
to be mandatorily incorporated but also the

specific role be attributed to the persons who are mere directors or

employees of the company.        We are unable to agree with the

submission of the learned counsel.
37. Recently, this Court in
S.P. Mani and Mohan Dairy vs. Dr.

Snehalatha Elangovan
, (2023) 10 SCC 685, after reiterating the

principle that it was not necessary to reproduce the language of
Section 141
verbatim in the complaint further reiterated the holding in
27
K.K.Ahuja vs. V.K. Vora and Another
, (2009) 10 SCC 48.
In
K.K.

Ahuja
(supra), it was held that insofar as the director was concerned,

an averment in the complaint that he was in charge of, and was

responsible to the company, for the conduct of the business of the

company was enough and no further averment was necessary though

some particulars will be desirable.
Thereafter, this Court in
S.P. Mani
(supra), in para 58.2 of the judgment concluded as under:-
“58.2. The complainant is supposed to know only generally as to
    who were in charge of the affairs of the company or firm, as the
    case may be. The other administrative matters would be within
    the special knowledge of the company or the firm and those who
    are in charge of it. In such circumstances, the complainant is
    expected to allege that the persons named in the complaint are in
    charge of the affairs of the company/firm. It is only the Directors
    of the company or the partners of the firm, as the case may be,
    who have the special knowledge about the role they had played in
    the company or the partners in a firm to show before the Court
    that at the relevant point of time they were not in charge of the
    affairs of the company. Advertence to
Sections 138
and
Section
    141
, respectively, of the
NI Act
shows that on the other elements
    of an offence under
Section 138
being satisfied, the burden is on
    the Board of Directors or the officers in charge of the affairs of
    the company/partners of a firm to show that they were not liable
    to be convicted. The existence of any special circumstance that
    makes them not liable is something that is peculiarly within their
    knowledge and it is for them to establish at the trial to show that
    at the relevant time they were not in charge of the affairs of the
    company or the firm.”
28
38. As was rightly held therein, the administrative role of each

director would be within the special knowledge of the company or the

director of the firm and it is for them to establish that they were not in

charge of the affairs of the company. In view of this, the contention

of the learned counsel for the respondent No.2 that the specific role

attributed to the directors should be set out in the complaint does not

merit acceptance.     Reliance has been placed on
National Small

Industries Corporation Limited vs. Harmeet Singh Paintal and

Another
, (2010) 3 SCC 330 by the learned counsel for the respondent

No.2 in support of the proposition canvassed. We are unable to

countenance the said submission. If the learned counsel by the said

submission seeks to contend that the complainant in a
Section 138
complaint is obliged to plead administrative matters which are

especially within the knowledge of the company and the directors,

then he is completely wrong in the understanding of the ingredients of
Section 141
.
As held in
K.K. Ahuja
(supra) and reiterated in
S.P.

Mani
(supra), the complainant is supposed to know only generally as

to who are in charge of the affairs of the company.
Harmeet Singh

Paintal
(supra) when it holds in para 22 that
29
“further, in order to fasten the vicarious liability in accordance

   with
Section 141
, the averment as to the role of the Directors

   concerned should be specific. The description should be clear

   and there should be some unambiguous allegations as how the

   Directors concerned were alleged to be in charge of and were

   responsible for the conduct of the affairs of the company”

should be understood to only mean vis-à-vis the transaction

concerning the issue of the cheque, in question, which are within the

knowledge of the complainant.
K.K. Ahuja
(supra) where it holds that

   “in the case of a Director, secretary or manager [as defined in
Section 2(24)
of the Companies Act] or a person referred to in

   clauses (e) and (f) of
Section 5
of the Companies Act, an

   averment in the complaint that he was in charge of, and was

   responsible to the company, for the conduct of the business of

   the company is necessary to bring the case under
Section

   141(1)
of the Act. No further averment would be necessary in

   the complaint, though some particulars will be desirable. They

   can also be made liable under
Section 141(2)
by making
30
necessary averments relating to consent and connivance or

   negligence, in the complaint, to bring the matter under that

   sub-section”

sets out the correct legal position.
A harmonious reading of the

judgments in
K.K. Ahuja
(supra),
Harmeet Singh Paintal
(supra)

and
S.P. Mani
(supra) brings out the position that there is no

obligation on the complainant to plead in the complaint as to matters

within the special knowledge of the company or the directors or firm

about the specific role attributed to them in the company.
39. Applying the said legal position to the facts of the present case,

it is found that the averments in the complaint set out hereinabove

against the respondent No.2 – Mrs. Ranjana Sharma fulfill the

requirement of
Section 141(1)
of the NI Act, and this is not a case

where trial against her can be aborted by quashment of proceedings.

The High Court was completely unjustified in quashing the

proceedings against her.
40. The appeal is, accordingly, allowed and the judgment of the

High Court of Judicature at Bombay dated 10.01.2024 in Criminal
31
Writ Petition No. 275 of 2022 is set aside. Consequently, the order

dated 16.12.2019 issuing process to respondent No.2 in proceeding in

C.C. No. 2486/SS/2019 is restored to the file of the Metropolitan

Magistrate, 7th Court, Bhiwandi, Dadar, Mumbai to be proceeded with

in accordance with law.
……….........................J.
                                      [MANOJ MISRA]


                                      .……….........................J.
                                      [K. V. VISWANATHAN]
New Delhi;
22nd May, 2025
32