[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Rajumon T.M vs Union Of India on 7 May, 2025
Author:
Surya Kant
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
,
Surya Kant
2025 INSC 644                                                           REPORTABLE


                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                            CIVIL APPEAL No.998 OF 2025
                                                (@ DIARY NO. 20836 OF 2022)


                     RAJUMON T.M.                                               …APPELLANT (S)

                                                           VERSUS


                     UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                  …RESPONDENT(S)



                                                  JUDGMENT
NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH, J.
The present appeal has been preferred against the judgment and

                   final order dated 17.01.2013 passed by the Armed Forces Tribunal, Regional

                   Bench, Kochi in OA No.100 of 2011 by which the claim of the appellant for

                   grant of disabilities pension was denied to the appellant.
2.       Only the relevant facts in brief for the purpose of deciding this appeal

                   may be adverted to.
3.
Signature Not Verified
The appellant, Rajumon T.M. No.13978552W was enrolled in the
Digitally signed by
ARJUN BISHT
Date: 2025.05.08
11:33:01 IST
Reason:
Indian Army on 17.11.1988 as a sepoy and after serving more than 9 (nine)
Page 1 of 31
years he was discharged from service on being diagnosed with Schizophrenia.

His discharge on medical invalidation was based on the opinion of the

Invalidating Medical Board held on 30 March, 1998 at the Command

Hospital, Western Command, Chandimandir which found that the onset of the

invalidating disease was in August 1993 during which period the appellant

had served in a peace station and that the disability was neither attributable to

nor aggravated by military service and the said disease of the appellant was

constitutional in nature and not connected with the service. The disability was

assessed at 30 percent for two years. Accordingly, the appellant’s claim for

disability pension was rejected by the CCDA (Pension), Allahabad vide letter

dated 04.01.1999 which was communicated to the appellant by the AMC

Records vide letter dated 15.01.1999.
4.    The said rejection was challenged before the first appellate committee

which was dismissed. The appellant, thereafter, made an unsuccessful attempt

for redressal of his grievances through a Member of the Parliament. The

appellant was informed by the Ministry of Defence vide communication dated

07.11.2009 that the matter had already been considered and his appeal against

rejection of disability pension claim was turned down earlier by the competent

authority. He was also informed that he had not preferred the second appeal

after his first appeal was dismissed.
Page 2 of 31
5.    Being aggrieved by the rejection of his claim for disability pension, the

appellant unsuccessfully approached the Armed Forces Tribunal, Original

Bench at Kochi in OA No.100 of 2011 which was heard with other applicants

seeking similar reliefs.
6.    Before the Armed Forces Tribunal it was pleaded by the appellant that

he had been found medically fit at the time of enrolment and nothing adverse

was noted at that point of time and the appellant became afflicted with the said

disease during his service which had nothing to do with the family conditions

and since the said disease developed in course of his service, he was entitled

to the disability pension.
7.    The respondents contested the claim of the appellant before the Armed

Forces Tribunal by contending that the appellant had been posted at peace

station at the time of onset of the disease and being deployed in peace stations,

and it could not have contributed to the said illness nor can the service said to

have aggravated the disease, which was confirmed by the Medical Board on

examination of the appellant as mentioned above. Further, it was contended

that nothing was brought on record to contradict the finding of the Medical

Board and as such the claim of the appellant could not be entertained.
8.
In support of the claim of the respondents, a number of decisions of this

Court were relied upon namely;
Union of India & Ors. vs. Keshar Singh
,
Page 3 of 31
(2007) 12 SCC 675;
Union of India & Ors. vs. Surinder Singh Rathore
,

(2008) 5 SCC 747;
Secretary, Ministry of Defence and Ors. vs.

A.V.Damodaran (Dead
) through LRs.
and others, (2009) 9 SCC 140;
Union

of India & Ors. vs. Jujhar Singh
, (2011) 7 SCC 735;
Union of India and

Anr. vs. Talwinder Singh
, (
2012) 5 SCC 480, No. 14666828M EX CFN

Narsingh Yadav vs. Union of India & Ors.
(2019) 9 SCC 667, and the

decision of Kerala High Court in
Baby vs. Union of India
, 2003 (3) KLT 362

(FB).
9.      The Tribunal, on consideration of the aforesaid decisions and relevant

Rules made the following observations in para 17 of the impugned judgment,

which are reproduced herebelow:-
“17. The legal portion as emerged out from the aforesaid
               decisions is shortlisted as follows :
(i) The disability pension is payable only when the
                            disability has occurred due to wound, injury or
                            disease which is attributable to military service or
                            existed before or arose during military service and
                            has been and remains aggravated during the military
                            service and recorded as such by the service medical
                            authorities.
(ii) The opinion of the Medical Board should be given
                           primacy in deciding cases of disability pension. In
                           case the Medical Authorities record the specific
                           finding that the disability was neither attributable to
                           nor aggravated by the military service, the court
                           should not ignore such a finding for the reason that
                           Medical Board is specialised authority composed of
                           expert medical doctors and it is a final authority to
                           give opinion regarding attributability and
                           aggravation of the disability due to the military
Page 4 of 31
service and the conditions of service resulting in the
                          disablement of the individual. As such, the opinion
                          of the Medical Board must be given due weight,
                          value and credence.
(iii) When an individual is physically fit at the time of
                          enrolment and no note regarding adverse physical
                          factor is made at the time of entry into service and if
                          the individual is discharged before the completion
                          of full tenure on account of his physical disability,
                          the initial onus of proving that the disability is not
                          attributable to the Military Service shall be on the
                          authority. However, in the cases where it is found
                          on perusal of the available evidence that the
                          individual had withheld relevant information or that
                          the service conditions were not such as could have
                          resulted in physical disability, the onus shall shift to
                          the claimant.
(iv) The disease which has led to the individuals
                         discharge will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen
                         in the course of service if no note of it was made at
                         the time of individual's acceptance for military
                         service. However, the above deeming fiction is not
                         available to the individual if the medical opinion, for
                         the reasons to be recorded, hold the disease could
                         not have been detected on medical examination
                         prior to the claimant's acceptance to the service.
(v)    A person claiming disability pension must establish
                          that the disease or injury suffered by him bears a
                          causal connection with the military service.
(vi) The direct and circumstantial evidence of the case is
                        to be taken into account and the benefit of doubt if
                        any is to be given to the individual.
(vii) A liberal approach is to be adopted in the matter of
                         services rendered in the field areas.
10.   By adopting the aforesaid principles derived from the decisions relied

upon, the Tribunal rejected the claim of the appellant as follows :
Page 5 of 31
“20. As regards the claim for disability pension by
             Rajumon.T.M., (the applicant in OA No.100 of 2011), it is on
             record that the onset of the disease was in August/September
             1993, during which period he was serving at Nasirabad, which is
             a peace station. It is also on record that the applicant had never
             served any operational area, high altitude or snow bound area.
             The Medical Board has opined that the disability of the applicant
             was a constitutional personality disorder. In our considered view,
             the disability did not occur to the applicant due to the conditions
             of the service. Therefore, the opinion of the Medical Board based
             on the applicant's physical and clinical examination, his past
             history and apparent symptoms, is liable to be relied upon, and
             accordingly, it is held that the disability of the applicant was
             neither attributable to nor aggravated by military service.”
11.   We have heard the parties and gone through the records.
12.   We are in agreement with the legal propositions emanating out of the

decisions of this Court as culled out by the Tribunal as reproduced above.

However, while applying the same in the facts of the present case, we find

certain distinguishing features in the present case which persuaded us to arrive

at a different conclusion from that of the Tribunal.
13.   This Court in the aforesaid decisions of
Keshar Singh
(supra);
Surinder Singh Rathore
(supra);
A.V.Damodaran
(supra);
Jujhar Singh
(supra);
Talwinder Singh
(supra) had examined Regulation 173 of the

Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961, which deals with the primary

conditions of grant of disability pension which provide, inter alia, that the

disability pension would be granted if it is attributable to or aggravated by the
Page 6 of 31
military service. The said Regulation 173 is accordingly reproduced herein as

below:
“173. Primary conditions for the grant of disability
                   pension. — Unless otherwise specifically provided a
                   disability pension may be granted to an individual who
                   is invalided from service on account of a disability which
                   is attributable to or aggravated by military service and
                   is assessed at 20 per cent or above.
14.   The question as to whether the disability is attributable to or aggravated

by military service is to be determined as per Appendix II to the said

Regulations.
Relevant portions in Appendix II read as follows:
“2. Disablement or death shall be accepted as due to
                   military service provided it is certified that—
(a) The disablement is due to wound, injury or disease
                   which—
(i) is attributable to military service; or
(ii) existed before or arose during military service and
                   has been and remains aggravated thereby;
(b) the death was due to or hastened by—
(i) a wound, injury or disease which was attributable to
                   military service, or
(ii) the aggravation by military service of a wound,
                   injury or disease which existed before or arose during
                   military service.
Note.—The rule also covers cases of death after
                   discharge/invaliding from service.
3. There must be a causal connection between
                   disablement or death and military service for
                   attributability or aggravation to be conceded.
4. In deciding on the issue of entitlement all the
                   evidence, both direct and circumstantial, will be taken
                   into account and the benefit or reasonable doubt will be
Page 7 of 31
given to the claimant. This benefit will be given more
                  liberally to the claimant in field service case.”
15.   Thus, the aforesaid Regulation 173 read with Appendix II makes it very

clear that disability must be attributable to or aggravated by military service

for purposes of grant of disability pension and what amounts to disability has

been elaborated in Appendix II of the Regulations as quoted above. The

Appendix II clarifies that there must be a casual connection between the

disablement or death and military service for attributability to be considered.
Clause 4 of the aforesaid Appendix II further provides that in deciding

on the issue of entitlement, all the evidence, both direct and circumstantial,

will be taken into account and the benefit or reasonable doubt will be given to

the claimant and this benefit will be given more liberally to the claimant in

field service case.
16.   As to how a disability can be attributed to service has been further

explained clearly in Regulation 423 of the Regulations for Medical Services

for Armed Forces 1983, which has been also referred to by the Tribunal and

by this Court in the above-mentioned cases, which is reproduced herein below

for easy reference:
“423. Attributability to service.—(a) For the purpose of
                  determining whether the cause of a disability or death is
                  or is not attributable to service, it is immaterial whether
                  the cause giving rise to the disability or death occurred
                  in an area declared to be a field service/active service
                  area or under normal peace conditions. It is, however,
Page 8 of 31
essential to establish whether the disability or death
bore a casual connection with the service conditions. All
evidence, both direct and circumstantial, will be taken
into account and benefit of reasonable doubt, if any, will
be given to the individual. The evidence to be accepted
as reasonable doubt, for the purpose of these
instructions, should be of a degree of cogency, which
though not reaching certainty, nevertheless carry the
high degree of probability. In this connection, it will be
remembered that proof beyond reasonable doubt does
not mean proof beyond a shadow of doubt. If the
evidence is so strong against an individual as to leave
only a remote possibility in his favour, which can be
dismissed with the sentence ‘of course it is possible but
not in the least probable’ the case is proved beyond
reasonable doubt. If on the other hand, the evidence be
so evenly balanced as to render impracticable a
determinate conclusion one way or the other, then the
case would be one in which the benefit of doubt could be
given more liberally to the individual, in cases occurring
in field service/active service areas.
(b) The cause of a disability or death resulting from
wound or injury, will be regarded as attributable to
service if the wound/injury was sustained during the
actual performance of ‘duty’ in armed forces. In case of
injuries which were self-inflicted or due to an
individual's own serious negligence or misconduct, the
Board will also comment how far the disability resulted
from self-infliction, negligence or misconduct.
(c) The cause of a disability or death resulting from a
disease will be regarded as attributable to service when
it is established that the disease arose during service and
the conditions and circumstances of duty in the armed
forces determined and contributed to the onset of the
disease. Cases, in which it is established that service
conditions did not determine or contribute to the onset
of the disease but influenced the subsequent course of the
disease, will be regarded as aggravated by the service.
A disease which has led to an individual's discharge or
death will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service
if no note of it was made at the time of the individual's
acceptance for service in the armed forces. However, if
medical opinion holds, for reasons to be stated that the
disease could not have been detected on medical
examination prior to acceptance for service, the disease
will not be deemed to have arisen during service.
Page 9 of 31
(d) The question, whether a disability or death is
                 attributable to or aggravated by service or not, will be
                 decided as regards its medical aspects by a Medical
                 Board or by the medical officer who signs the death
                 certificate. The Medical Board/medical officer will
                 specify reasons for their/his opinion. The opinion of the
                 Medical Board/medical officer, insofar as it relates to
                 the actual cause of the disability or death and the
                 circumstances in which it originated will be regarded as
                 final. The question whether the cause and the attendant
                 circumstances can be attributed to service will, however,
                 be decided by the pension sanctioning authority.
(e) To assist the medical officer who signs the death
                 certificate or the Medical Board in the case of an invalid,
                 the CO unit will furnish a report on:
(i) AFMS F-81 in all cases other than those due to
                           injuries.
(ii) IAFY-2006 in all cases of injuries other than
                           battle injuries.
(f) In cases where award of disability pension or
                 reassessment of disabilities is concerned, a Medical
                 Board is always necessary and the certificate of a single
                 medical officer will not be accepted except in case of
                 stations where it is not possible or feasible to assemble
                 a regular Medical Board for such purposes. The
                 certificate of a single medical officer in the latter case
                 will be furnished on a Medical Board form and
                 countersigned by the ADMS (Army)/DMS (Navy)/DMS
                 (Air).”
17.   A careful examination of Regulation 423 of the Regulation for Medical

Services for Armed Forces would reveal the following aspects:
1.   It is immaterial whether the cause giving rise to the
              disability or death occurred in an area declared to be a
              field service/active service area or under normal peace
              conditions.
Page 10 of 31
2.   It is, however, essential to establish that the disability or
     death bore a casual connection with the service
     conditions.
3.   All evidence, both direct and circumstantial, will be taken
     into account and benefit of reasonable doubt, if any, will
     be given to the individual.
4.   A disease which has led to an individual's discharge or
     death will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service
     if no note of it was made at the time of the individual's
     acceptance for service in the armed forces.
5.   However, if the medical opinion holds, for reasons to be
     stated that the disease could not have been detected on
     medical examination prior to acceptance for service, the
     disease will not be deemed to have arisen during service.
6.   The question, whether a disability or death is attributable
     to or aggravated by service or not, will be decided as
     regards its medical aspects by a Medical Board or by the
     medical officer who signs the certificate. The Medical
     Board/medical officer will specify reasons for their/his
     opinion.
7.   The opinion of the Medical Board/medical officer,
     insofar as it relates to the actual cause of the disability or
     death and the circumstances in which it originated will be
     regarded as final.
Page 11 of 31
8.     The question whether the cause and the attendant
                   circumstances can be attributed to service will, however,
                   be decided by the pension sanctioning authority.
9.     To assist the medical officer who signs the death
                   certificate or the Medical Board in the case of an invalid,
                   the CO unit will furnish a report on:
(i) AFMS F-81 : in all cases other than those due to
                                injuries.
(ii) IAFY     2006 : in all cases of injuries other than
                                     battle injuries.
18.   Having kept the aforesaid aspects in mind, we have examined the

records, more particularly the original records of the Medical Board

Proceedings produced before us, a copy of which is also annexed as Annexure

R-5 to the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents.
A careful perusal of the aforesaid medical proceedings reveals the

following :
(i)        The details of the field/operational service have been
                 mentioned in the said proceedings of the Medical Board (as
                 per Form AFMSF-16) as peace stations as follows:
Field Operational/Overseas service: Giving dates and places

            From                To              Place            Peace           Field

       17 Nov 88            21 May 90       AMC C & S            Peace            --
LKC
Page 12 of 31
22 May 90           01 May 94            MH Nasirabad          Peace          --
05 May 94           10 Dec 96            323 Pa Amb            Peace          --
11 Dec 96             To date             MH Patiala           Peace          --
It is to be noted that under Regulation 423 (a
)
referred to

 above
, it is mentioned that for the purpose of determining whether

 the cause of disability is attributable to the service, it is immaterial

 that the cause giving rise to the disability occurred in an area

 declared to be field service/active service area or under normal

 peace conditions.
(ii)    In para 2 of Part I of the said Form, the particulars of the
         disease from which the appellant was suffering from are
         mentioned as follows:
PART I

Illness, wound,            First Started         Where treated      Approximate
injury                                                              treated dates and
                    Date              Place                         periods treated

SCHIZOPHRE          20.09.93      Nasirabad         Ahmedabad       September 93     to
NIA (295)                                                           January 94
(iii)   In para 3 and para 4 of Part I of the Form, the following
         entries have been made about the negative answers to the
         queries:
Page 13 of 31
3.          Did you suffer from any disability mentioned in question 2 or No
               anything like it before joining the Armed forces? If so, give details
               and date.
4.          Give details of any incidents during your service which you think No
               caused or made your di8sability worse.
(iv)    Coming to para 5 and para 6 of Part I of the Form, the
                following entries have been made:
5.          In case of wound or injury state how they happened and whether or No
               not (a)Medical Board or Court of Injury was held
(b) Injury Reported was submitted
6.          Any other information you wish to give about your health              No

                 The     aforesaid     entries     are,   therefore,      a     clear
         acknowledgement of the fact that the appellant was not suffering
         from the disease of Schizophrenia when he entered the service.
Thus, it would be deemed that this disease arose while in service
         as provided under Regulation 423 (e). In fact, the absence of
         finding that the appellant was suffering from the disease before
         entering service is confirmed by the subsequent entries made in
         Parts II and III of the Form as regards his past medical history.
(v)     Coming to Part II of the Medical Board proceedings of Form
                AFMSF-16, the following entries have been made:
PART II

Disabilities                     Date of Origin               Place and unit where
                                                              serving at the time
Page 14 of 31
Schizophrenia (Old) I                     20.09.93                  MH Nasirabad
         MB
2. Clinical details:
Note: (a) Give the salient facts of: -
(i)       Personal and relevant family history - (Blank)
            (ii)      Specialist report and                  - (Blank)
            (iii)    Treatment                               - (Blank)
   (b) State present condition in detail    - (Blank)
(c) In this statement and in answering question in Part-III the Board will differentiate
   carefully between the individual’s statement and the evidence recorded in the medical
   documents        - (Blank)

                It may be noted that the aforesaid entries in Part II are
               devoid of any details, and these have been left blank in the
               Form, though these are required to be mentioned in the
               Form. It thus clearly shows that the medical history of the
               appellant is not recorded. Hence, it can be said that the
               Medical Board had not considered the medical history of the
               appellant before coming to the conclusion that the disease
               the appellant was suffering from is constitutional and did
               not arise during service.
(vii) Coming to Part III of the Form AFMSF-16, the following
               entries are made:
PARTI III
1.     Did the disability/ies exist before entering service?   (Blank)
Page 15 of 31
2.      (a) In respect of each disability the Medical Board on the evidence before & will
          express its views as to whether:
(i) It is attributable to service during peace or under field service conditions:
(ii) It has been aggravated thereby and remains so: or (i) & - (iii) - Yes, (ii) NO
(i) & (iii) - No it is connected with service
(iii) It is not connected with service (ii) Yes, it is not connected with service

The Board should state fully the reasons in regard to each disability on which
                  its opinion is based. (Emphasis added)




       Disability                  A                       B                       C

Schizophrenia (Old)                No                      No                     Yes
      1 MB
(b) In respect of each disability shown as attributable under NA
   A, the Board should state fully, the specific condition and
   period in service which caused the disability.
(c) in respect of each disability shown as aggravated under NA
   B, the Board should state fully

               i.   The specific condition and period in service
            which aggravated the disability.
ii.       Whether the effects of such aggravation
            still persist

              iii.    If the answer (ii) is the affirmative, whether
effect of aggravation ill persist for a material period.
(d) In the case of a disability under 'C' the Board should state CONSTITUTIONAL
   what exactly in their opinion in the cause thereof.              PERSONALITY
                                                                    DISORDER
Page 16 of 31
3. (a)Was the disability attributable to the individual's own No
   negligence or misconduct? If so, in what way?
(b) If not attributable, was it aggravated by negligence or No
      misconduct? If so, in what way and to what percentage of
      the total disablement?
(c)   Has     the   individual   refused    to   undergo No
      operation/treatment? If so, individual's reasons will be
      recorded.
4. What is present degree of disablement as compared with a healthy person of the same
   age and sex?
Disability  Percentage       Probable    Composite assessment (all disabilities)
       (As              of        duration of
       numbered in disablement    this degree
       question I,                     of
       Part II)                   disablement

       Schizophreni 30%          02    years 30 % (Thirty percent)
       a (Old) 1 MB (Thirty      (Two Years)
                     percent)
19.     Perusal of the aforesaid entries made in Part III of the Form AFMSF-

16 reveals that no reasons have been assigned at all as regards the nature of

disability on which the opinion of the Medical Board is based that the

appellant was suffering from constitutional personality disorder, though it has

been specifically mentioned therein that the Medical Board should state fully

the reasons with regard to the disability on which the opinion of the Medical

Board is based.
20.     In our opinion, the requirement to give reasons by the Medical Board is

crucial, critical, decisive and necessary for the purpose of granting or denying
Page 17 of 31
disability pension and it is not a mere formality, but a necessary material on

the basis of which the pension sanctioning authority has to decide about the

grant or refusal of disability pension.
21.   As noticed above, it has been specifically provided under Clause (d) of

Regulation 423 as quoted that the question as to whether the disability is

attributable to or aggravated by service or not, will be decided as regards its

medical aspects by the Medical Board and the Medical Board will specify

reasons for their opinion and the question whether the cause and attendant

circumstances can be attributed to service will be decided by the pension

sanctioning authority.
22.   Thus, this requirement to give reasons by the Medical Board about their

opinion is in our view absolutely necessary as also required under Regulation

423(d) for the reason that the fate of the future career of the serviceman is

going to be decided by the opinion of the Medical Board, which is to be treated

as final as regards the cause of disability and the circumstances in which the

disability originated. The continuation of the service of the concerned

serviceman and as to whether he will be entitled to disability pension is

dependent on the opinion of the Medical Board which is also to be treated as

the final one.
Page 18 of 31
23.   Hence, the rules mandate giving of reasons by the Medical Board while

rendering its opinion. The reasons given by the Medical Board would

obviously be the basis for determination by the competent authority whether

the serviceman would be discharged from service and whether he would get

disability pension.
24.   Accordingly, in our opinion, if the serviceman is discharged from

service or denied the disability pension on the basis of a medical opinion

which is devoid of reasons, it would strike at the root of the action taken by

the authority and such action cannot be sustained in law.
25.   We, therefore, hold that if any action is taken by the authority for the

discharge of a serviceman and the serviceman is denied disability pension on

the basis of a report of the Medical Board wherein no reasons have been

disclosed for the opinion so given, such an action of the authority will be

unsustainable in law.
26. In the present case, as noticed from the entries made in Part III of Form

 AFSMF-16, no reasons have been given by the Medical Board for their

 opinion that the appellant was suffering from Schizophrenia which is of a

 constitutional personality disorder and all the relevant columns have been

 left blank.
Page 19 of 31
In our view, the finding given in Para 2(d) of Part II by the Medical

Board is merely an opinion or conclusion without assigning any reasons as to

how the Medical Board has come to the aforesaid conclusion that the disability

of the appellant is a constitutional personality disorder. There is a difference

between the “conclusion” or “opinion”, and “reasons” to support such a

conclusion or opinion. The reasons have to be separately mentioned for the

conclusion arrived at by the Medical Board. The bare conclusion arrived by

the Medical Board cannot treated as the reasons for discharge of the

serviceman and denial of invalid pension within the meaning of the

Regulations
referred to above
.
27.   When we refer to the entries made under Part II of Form AFSMF-16, it

is also noticed that said Part II too is devoid of clinical details as regards

personal and relevant family history, specialist report and treatment.

Therefore, we are of the view that in absence of the said particulars which are

required to be recorded or mentioned which would reveal the medical history

of the appellant, the opinion given by the Medical Board in Part III of the

Form AFMSF-16 that the disease is a constitutional personality disorder

cannot be sustained being violative of the mandate contained in Regulation

423 (d) of the Regulation. In legal terms, the opinion of the Medical Board

not being based on any reason or material is to be treated as arbitrary. In

absence of the ground and materials to arrive at a particular conclusion, such
Page 20 of 31
a decision of the Medical Board would be considered as having arrived at

without application of mind.
28.   It is to be noted that it has been provided under Regulation 423(d
)
referred to above
that whether the cause and the attending circumstances can

be attributed to service will be decided by the pension sanction authority. In

the present case, the pension sanction authority has declined to grant the

disability pension based on the opinion of the Medical Board by recording that

the appellant has been invalidated out of the service on account of a

constitutional personality disorder, as also evident from the rejection of appeal

vide order dated 22.05.2000 passed by First Appellate Committee.
29.   We are mindful of the fact that we are dealing with the case of disability

due to Schizophrenia which impairs the cognitive capacity of the person,

which naturally will affect the ability of the appellant to properly advance his

own cause relating to the cause and circumstance of the illness before the

authority. This Court has been cognizant of the debilitating effects of

Schizophrenia in
Veer Pal Singh v. Ministry of Defence
, (2013) 8 SCC 83 in

the following words:
“12. In Merriam Webster Dictionary “schizophrenia” has
             been described as a psychotic disorder characterised by loss
             of contact with the environment, by noticeable deterioration in
             the level of functioning in everyday life, and by disintegration
             of personality expressed as disorder of feeling, thought (as in
             delusions), perception (as in hallucinations), and behaviour —
             called also dementia praecox; schizophrenia is a chronic,
Page 21 of 31
severe, and disabling brain disorder that has affected people
throughout history.
13. The National Institute of Mental Health, USA has
described “schizophrenia” in the following words:
“Schizophrenia is a chronic, severe, and disabling brain
     disorder that has affected people throughout history.
     People with the disorder may hear voices other people
     don't hear. They may believe other people are reading
     their minds, controlling their thoughts, or plotting to
     harm them. This can terrify people with the illness and
     make them withdrawn or extremely agitated. People
     with schizophrenia may not make sense when they talk.
     They may sit for hours without moving or talking.
     Sometimes people with schizophrenia seem perfectly fine
     until they talk about what they are really thinking.
     Families and society are affected by schizophrenia too.
     Many people with schizophrenia have difficulty holding
     a job or caring for themselves, so they rely on others for
     help. Treatment helps relieve many symptoms of
     schizophrenia, but most people who have the disorder
     cope with symptoms throughout their lives. However,
     many people with schizophrenia can lead rewarding and
     meaningful lives in their communities.”
14. Some of the symptoms of schizophrenia are:
14.1.Positive symptoms: Positive symptoms are psychotic
behaviour not seen in healthy people. People with positive
symptoms often “lose touch” with reality. These symptoms can
come and go. Sometimes they are severe and at other times
hardly noticeable, depending on whether the individual is
receiving treatment. They include the following:
Hallucinations.—“Voices” are the most common type of
hallucination in schizophrenia. Hallucinations include seeing
people or objects that are not there, smelling odours that no
one else detects, and feeling things like invisible fingers
touching their bodies when no one is near.
Delusions.—The person believes delusions even after other
people prove that the beliefs are not true or logical. They may
also believe that people on television are directing special
messages to them, or that radio stations are broadcasting their
thoughts aloud to others. Sometimes they believe they are
someone else, such as a famous historical figure. They may
have paranoid delusions and believe that others are trying to
harm them.
Page 22 of 31
Thought disorders.—are unusual or dysfunctional ways of
thinking. One form of thought disorder is called “disorganised
thinking”. This is when a person has trouble organising his or
her thoughts or connecting them logically, a person with a
thought disorder might make up meaningless words, or
“neologisms”.
Movement disorders.—may appear as agitated body
movements. A person with a movement disorder may repeat
certain motions over and over. In the other extreme, a person
may become catatonic. Catatonia is a state in which a person
does not move and does not respond to others. Catatonia is
rare today, but it was more common when treatment for
schizophrenia was not available.
14.2.Negative symptoms: Negative symptoms are associated
with disruptions to normal emotions and behaviours. These
symptoms are harder to recognise as part of the disorder and
can be mistaken for depression or other conditions. These
symptoms include the following:
(i) “Flat effect” (a person's face does not move or he or she
talks in a dull or monotonous voice).
(ii) Lack of pleasure in everyday life.
(iii) Lack of ability to begin and sustain planned activities.
(iv) Speaking little, even when forced to interact.
15. In Modi's Medical Jurisprudence and Toxicology (24th
Edn., 2011) the following varieties of schizophrenia have been
noticed:
Simple Schizophrenia.—The illness begins in early
adolescence. There is a gradual loss of interest in the outside
world, from which the person withdraws. There is an all round
impairment of mental faculties and he emotionally becomes
flat and apathetic. He loses interest in his best friends who are
few in number and gives up his hobbies. He has conflicts about
sex, particularly masturbation. He loses all ambition and drifts
along in life, swelling the rank of chronically unemployed.
Complete disintegration of personality does not occur, but
when it does, it occurs after a number of years.
Hebephrenia.—Hebephrenia occurs at an earlier age than
either the katatonic or the paranoid variety. Disordered
thinking is the outstanding characteristic of this kind of
schizophrenia. There is great incoherence of thought, periods
of wild excitement occur and there are illusions and
Page 23 of 31
hallucinations. Delusions which are bizarre in nature, are
frequently present. Often, there is impulsive and senseless
conduct as though in response to their hallucination or
delusions. Ultimately the whole personality may completely
disintegrate.
Katatonia.—Katatonia is the condition in which the period of
excitement alternates with that of katatonic stupor. The patient
is in a state of wild excitement, is destructive, violent and
abusive. He may impulsively assault anyone without the
slightest provocation. Homicidal or suicidal attempts may be
made. Auditory hallucinations frequently occur, which may be
responsible for their violent behaviour. Sometimes, they
destroy themselves because they hear God's voice
commanding them to destroy themselves. This phase may last
from a few hours to a few days or weeks, followed by stage of
stupor.
The katatonic stupor begins with a lack of interest, lack of
concentration and general apathy. He is negative, refuses to
take food or medicines and to carry out his daily routine
activities like brushing his teeth, taking bath or change his
clothes…. The activities are so very limited that he may confine
himself in one place and assume one posture however
uncomfortable, for hours together without getting fatigued.
His face is expressionless and his gaze vacant…. They may
understand clearly everything that is going on around them,
and sometime without warning and without any apparent
cause, they suddenly attack any person standing nearby.
Paranoid Schizophrenia, paranoia and paraphrenia.—
Paranoia is now regarded as a mild form of paranoid
schizophrenia. The main characteristic of this illness is a well-
elaborated delusional system in a personality that is otherwise
well preserved. The delusions are of a persecutory type. The
true nature of the illness may go unrecognised for a long time
because the personality is well preserved, and some of these
paranoiacs may pass off as social reformers or founders of
queer pseudo-religious sects. The classical picture is rare and
generally takes a chronic course.
Paranoid schizophrenia, in the vast majority of cases, starts in
the fourth decade and develops insidiously. Suspiciousness is
the characteristic symptom of the early stage. Ideas of
reference occur, which gradually develop into delusions of
persecution. Auditory hallucinations follow which in the
beginning, start as sounds or noises in the ears, but become
fixed and definite, to lead the patient to believe that he is
persecuted by some unknown person or some superhuman
Page 24 of 31
agency. He believes that his food is being poisoned, some
noxious gases are blown into his room and people are plotting
against him to ruin him. Disturbances of general sensation
give rise to hallucinations, which are attributed to the effects
of hypnotism, electricity, wireless telegraphy or atomic
agencies. The patient gets very irritated and excited owing to
these painful and disagreeable hallucinations and delusions.
Since so many people are against him and are interested in his
ruin, he comes to believe that he must be a very important man.
The nature of delusions thus, may change from persecutory to
grandiose type. He entertains delusions of grandeur, power
and wealth, and generally conducts himself in a haughty and
overbearing manner. The patient usually retains his money
and orientation and does not show signs of insanity, until the
conversation is directed to the particular type of delusion from
which he is suffering. When delusions affect his behaviour, he
is often a source of danger to himself and others.
The name paraphrenia has been given to those suffering from
paranoid psychosis who, in spite of various hallucinations and
more or less systemised delusions, retain their personality in a
relatively intact state. Generally, paraphrenia begins later in
life than the other paranoid psychosis.
Schizo-affective psychosis.—Schizo-affective psychosis is an
atypical type of schizophrenia, in which there are moods or
affect disturbances unlike other varieties of schizophrenia,
where there is blunting or flattening of affect. Attacks of
elation or depression, unmotivated rage, anxiety and panic
occur in this form of schizophrenic illness.
Pseudo-neurotic schizophrenia.—Schizophrenia may start
with overwhelmingly neurotic symptoms, which are so
prominent that in the early stages, it may be diagnosed as
neurosis. When schizophrenia begins in an obsessional
personality, it may for a long time remain disguised as an
apparently obsessional illness.
16. F.C. Redlich and Daniel X. Freedman in their book titled
The Theory and Practice of Psychiatry (1966 Edn.) observed:
“Some schizophrenic reactions, which we call psychoses, may
be relatively mild and transient; others may not interfere too
seriously with many aspects of everyday living…. (p. 252)

Are the characteristic remissions and relapses expressions of
endogenous processes, or are they responses to psychosocial
variables, or both? Some patients recover, apparently
completely, when such recovery occurs without treatment we
Page 25 of 31
speak of spontaneous remission. The term need not imply an
            independent endogenous process; it is just as likely that the
            spontaneous remission is a response to non-deliberate but
            nonetheless favourable psychosocial stimuli other than
            specific therapeutic activity….” (p. 465)

                                                      (emphasis supplied)
30.   We must appreciate the fact that the provisions for grant of disability

pension are in the nature of a beneficial scheme intended to provide succour

to servicemen in hard times who have been discharged from service after

having served the nation with dedication. Accordingly, a liberal approach

must be adopted while construing such beneficial provisions. This approach

has also been underscored by this Court in Maniben Maganbhai Bhariya v.
Distt. Development Officer, Dahod, (2022) 16 SCC 343, albeit, in the context

of the
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972
as applicable to Anganwadi workers,

the principles of which, in our opinion, are equally applicable in the present

case dealing with disability pension. In the said case it was observed as

follows:
“55. When social security legislations are being interpreted, it
            always has to be interpreted liberally with a beneficial
            interpretation and has to be given the widest possible meaning
            which the language permits, known as beneficial
            interpretation. When a statute is meant for the benefit of a
            particular class and if a word in the statute is capable of two
            meanings i.e. one which would preserve the benefits and one
            which would not, then the former is to be adopted.”
31.   Under these circumstances, a much more liberal view ought to be

adopted while dealing with the cases of discharge of servicemen from service
Page 26 of 31
on account of suffering from Schizophrenia as they may face several

impediments and difficulties in proving the casual connection of the said

disease with the military service.
32.   It is also to be noted that this is not a case where the appellant had

applied for discharge of service on account of suffering from Schizophrenia.
It was the authority themselves who after observing his condition decided to

discharge the appellant from service after obtaining the opinion of the Medical

Board. In such a situation, where the serviceman himself had not applied for

discharge, but has been discharged by the authority, the onus of proving the

disability and grounds of denying disability pension would lie heavily on the

authority. Since it is the statutory requirement that the opinion of the Medical

Board is to be the basis of the discharge, in our view, if the opinion of Medical

Board is devoid of reasons, the act of the authority based on mere opinion sans

reasons can certainly be questioned.
According to us, if the decision of the authority to discharge a

serviceman is based on a medical report which is devoid of reasons, which are

required to be given as also mandated by rules as discussed above, such an act

of the authority specially when it denies any post discharge benefit will be

rendered invalid in the eyes of law.
Page 27 of 31
In such cases, it can be said that the authorities have failed to discharge

the burden of establishing that the employee deserved to be discharged from

service on account of such illness without any benefit of pension and such

action has to be considered arbitrary and liable to be interfered with.
33.   Assigning reasons for the opinion of the Medical Board in the present

case also becomes imperative and salutary for the reason that while the

appellant had pleaded that at the time of entry in the service, this disease was

not detected, but only after about 5 (five) years of service and hence, as per

rules also, it will be deemed that it arose while in service, the Medical Board

gave the opinion that it was a constitutional personality disorder. The opinion

of the Medical Board is, thus, inconsistent with the plea of the appellant.

Hence, it was incumbent upon the Medical Board to assign reasons as to why

the disease is to be treated as a constitutional personality disorder which could

not be detected at the time of entry in service and as the onset of the disease

was only in 1993, which is after about 5 (five) years of entry in service.

Without there being any reasons given by the Medical Board for their opinion

that it was a constitutional personality disorder, we are afraid, it would be

unfair to the appellant that such an opinion of the Medical Board is to be taken

as final and binding to deprive any service benefit to the appellant.
Page 28 of 31
We have also noted that in the entire original record produced before

us, there is no material for coming to the conclusion that the appellant was

suffering from Schizophrenia which is in the nature of constitutional personal

disorder.
34.   Thus, in the facts and circumstances discussed above, we are of the

view that while there cannot be any dispute about the correctness of the legal

principles enunciated by this Court in the above-mentioned cases of
Keshar

Singh
(supra),
Surinder Singh Rathore
(supra),
A.V.Damodaran
(supra);
Jujhar Singh
(supra) and
Talwinder Singh
(supra), we would hasten to add

that the opinion of the Medical Board which is to be treated as final and

binding as per aforesaid Regulations, has to be supported by reasons for

arriving at the conclusion about the nature of medical disability, before the

same can be acted upon for the purpose of discharge of a serviceman and

denial of disability pension as otherwise, a valuable right of a serviceman to

get retiral benefits who has rendered long years of service for the nation

would be unjustly deprived.
35.    It may also be noted that in
A.V. Damodaran
(supra) where this Court

had dealt with the discharge due to Schizophrenia, the Medical Board had

given detailed reasons for their opinion as mentioned in Para 4 of the aforesaid

decision, which is not the case in other cited cases and also in the present case.
Page 29 of 31
The issue of giving reasons for the opinion of the Medical Board has not been

discussed in these cited cases.
36.    Accordingly, we hold that the order of discharge of the appellant and

denial of disability pension to him based on a medical opinion without

providing full reasons to support the opinion cannot be said to be valid.
37.    The question which would arise for consideration now is whether we

should remit the matter to the Medical Board at this stage for reconsideration

in the light of our observations made above. We, however, feel that adopting

the aforesaid course of action at this stage after about 27 (twenty-seven) years

of the appellant being invalided from service on 18.05.1998, would not be in

the interest of justice.
38.    Resultantly, while we do not disturb the order of discharge of the

appellant from service on the ground of medical invalidity due to

Schizophrenia, we direct the respondents that the appellant be granted

disability pension with immediate effect with all attending benefits, as per

rules. However, the appellant will not be entitled to any arrears of invalid

pension, except for the last three years.
39.    For the reasons discussed above, the appeal stands allowed.

Consequently, the impugned order of rejection of disability pension dated

04.01.1999 passed by the Principal Controller of Defence Account (Pension),
Page 30 of 31
Allahabad, order passed by the First Appellate Committee on 22.05.2000, and

order dated 17.01.2013 passed by the Armed Forces Tribunal, Regional

Bench, Kochi, in OA No.100 of 2011 are set aside with the above directions.
……………………………J.
                                               (ABHAY S. OKA)
0
….……………….…………………………J.
                                (NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH)

NEW DELHI;
MAY 07, 2025.
Page 31 of 31