[Cites
14
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Coal India Ltd vs Commr.Of Customs(Port) Kolkata on 1 May, 2025
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
2025 INSC 609


                                                                            REPORTABLE


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8028 OF 2010

                         M/S. COAL INDIA LIMITED                        APPELLANT(S)


                                                   VERSUS


                         COMMISSIONER OF CUSTOMS (PORT),
                         CUSTOMS HOUSE, KOLKATA                         RESPONDENT(S)

                                               JUDGMENT
UJJAL BHUYAN, J.
This is an appeal under
Section 130E
of the

                         Customs Act, 1962 against the order dated 20.04.2010 passed

                         by the Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal,

                         Kolkata in appeal No.CDM-164/2004.
2.        Be it stated that appellant had filed appeal
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ASHISH KONDLE
Date: 2025.05.01
No.CDM-164/2004 before the Customs, Excise and Service
11:42:33 IST
Reason:
Tax   Appellate   Tribunal,       Kolkata   (‘CESTAT’   for   short
1
hereinafter) assailing the order dated 21.06.2004 passed by

the Commissioner of Customs (Appeals), Kolkata confirming

the order of the Assistant Commissioner of Customs and

dismissing the appeal filed by the appellant.
3.         This     Court   by       order    dated   10.09.2010    had

condoned the delay and had issued notice.
4.         Relevant facts may be briefly noted.
5.         Appellant is a Government of India undertaking and

has subsidiaries in the country.
6.         On 26.02.2000, Central Coalfields Limited, which is

a subsidiary of the appellant, had invited sealed tenders for

supply of spare parts for P&H Shovel.
7.         On 28.03.2000, M/s Harnischfeger Corporation,

USA submitted its quotations through its distributor M/s

Voltas   Limited.    In   the    terms       and   conditions,   towards

engineering and technical service fees an amount of 8 percent

of the Free on Board (FOB) amount valued on pro-rata basis

against each shipment, was to be paid to M/s Voltas Limited,
2
Kolkata in Indian rupees. Payment to be made to M/s Voltas

Limited was not to be deducted from the FOB amount.
8.        On 03.04.2000, M/s Voltas Limited submitted

detailed quotation on behalf of its principal M/s Harnischfeger

Corporation, USA (foreign supplier).
9.        Purchase order was placed on 20.12.2000 with the

foreign supplier for supply of spares required for P&H Shovel.

Clause 5 of the purchase order is relevant and reads thus:
5. Terms of payment:
(A) 100% of the FOB value shall be paid in US$ by means
           of a confirmed, divisible and irrevocable letter of credit
           which will be established in your favour through the
           State Bank of India, Corporate Accounts Group Br. 34,
           J.L. Nehru Road, Calcutta- 700071 (India) or their
           branch at USA against presentation of the following
           documents, in three sets as indicated against each:-
(i) Invoice             Original plus three certified copies.
(ii) Packing List       Original plus three certified copies.
(iii)Shipping
              Specification        Original plus three certified copies.
(iv) Certificate
              of Origin            Original plus three certified copies.
3
(v)Warranty
     Certificate                  Original plus three certified copies.
(vi) Bill of Lading               Original plus three certified copies.
(vii) Certificate that “No Commission, Rebate, Discount,
Margin or Egg. & Technical Service Charge etc. from the
net FOB value of the contract or over & above FOB value
of    the     contract       is    payable    by   M/s    Harnischfeger
Corporation, USA to any agent.”
     Note:-
(1) Documents from sl. no.(i) to (vii) form a
            complete set.
(2) One copy of packing list & certificate of
            origin should be inserted inside each package
            for reference & identification purpose of the
            items packed in the particular package.
(3) One copy consisting of a set of documents
            from sl. no. (i) to (vii) should also be sent by
            courier well in advance along with technical
            literatures/pamphlets, dimensional drawings,
            sketch, quality certificate, warranty certificate
            etc. to avoid delay in effecting clearance of
            goods and also their proper receipt at ultimate
            consignee        and      its   accountal    etc.   to   the
            following:
4
(a)   The     Dy.     Chief     Engineering,     C&F
              Department, Coal India Ltd., 6-Lyons Range,
              Calcutta- 700001 (India).
(b) The Chief General Manager (Equipment),
              Central      Coalfields       Limited,   Darbhanga
              House, Ranchi – 834001 (India).
(c) The Dy. Chief Materials Manager (P),
              Central Coalfields Limited, 15, Park Street,
              Calcutta – 700001 (India).
(d) The Dy. Chief Materials Manager (P),
              Purchase Deptt., Central Coalfields Limited,
              Darbhanga House, Ranchi – 834001 (India).
(e) The Finance Manager (HQ), Central
              Coalfields     Limited,        Darbhanga       House,
              Ranchi – 834001 (India).
(f)   Ultimate      Consignee:     The   Dy.    Chief
              Materials Manager (S), Central Coalfields
              Limited, Regional Stores, Rajrappa, Distt.
Hazaribagh (India).
(B) Product support service to be rendered by M/s Voltas
    Ltd., Calcutta on payment of engineering and technical
    service charges.
As confirmed earlier product support services shall be
   rendered by M/s Voltas Ltd. Calcutta in all respect for
   ensuring optimum availability of P&H shovels.
5
Some of the product support services which shall be
    rendered by M/s Voltas Ltd., Calcutta in all respects
    for ensuring optimum availability of P&H Shovels are
    as under:
Regular product support visits by Voltas Service
    Engineers to all the operational mine sites for
    inspection of the shovels., providing technical updates,
    guidance on reports and maintenance at ‘No Cost’ to
    the projects.
Assist Project Engineers identity actual requirement of
    spares for planned procurement, scanning of part nos.
    in the enquiry/tender to ensure that correct parts are
    quoted, scrutiny of orders and L/C to ensure shipment
    of the right parts.
Extend assistance by providing technical write-ups for
    speedy custom clearance.
Assist customer doing insurance survey at docks.
    Coordinate with various agencies in regard to the
    discrepancies in supplies for prompt replacement etc.
    In view of the above, payment of engineering & service
charges at the rate of 8% (eight percent) of the net FOB
value of the order will be made on pro-rata basis to M/s
Voltas, Calcutta in equivalent Indian Rupees at the
exchange rate (BC selling) prevailing on the date of the bill
of lading within 21 days from the date of submission of the
following documents.
1) Pre-receipted & stamped bill: original + 2 copies
2) Full set of non-negotiable shipping documents as
     per (i) to (vii) of clause (5)A.
6
3) Certificate from the banker certifying the exchange
            rate prevailing on the date of bill of lading – original +
            2 copies.
The above documents for payment of engineering &
        technical service charges should be submitted to the
        Finance Manager (HQ), CCL, Ranchi with a copy to this
        office.
M/s Voltas, Calcutta shall submit documentary
        evidence disclosing the particulars of engineering &
        technical service fees as per the agreement between M/s
        Harnischfeger Corporation, USA and M/s Voltas, Calcutta
        within 15 days from the date of receipt of payment to the
        Director of Enforcement, Govt. of India, New Delhi against
        this order.
10.        Foreign supplier supplied the spares on 21.03.2001

which    were   received   by    the   appellant    on   provisional

assessment of bills of entry made by the customs authority.
11.        Assistant Commissioner of Customs passed order-

in-original dated 03.03.2004 finalizing provisional assessment

of bills of entry covering goods imported by the appellant and

its subsidiaries under several purchase orders/contracts.

Assistant Commissioner of Customs held that engineering and

technical service fees/agency commission/charges paid or

payable by the appellant and its subsidiaries to the local agent
7
of the overseas supplier i.e. M/s Voltas Limited as reflected in

the purchase order were includable in the assessable value of

the imported goods (spare parts) under Rule 9(1)(a) and Rule

9(1)(e) of the Customs Valuation (Determination of Price of

Imported Goods) Rules, 1988 read with
Section 14(1)(a)
of the

Customs Act, 1962. Since appellant had failed to include such

service fees/agency commission/charges in the assessable

value of spare parts so imported, this resulted in short levy of

customs duty to the tune of Rs.64,47,244.00. Accordingly, the

Assistant Commissioner of Customs (‘Assistant Commissioner’

for short) directed the appellant to pay Rs.64,47,244.00 within

15 days. He also ordered that in view of the order-in-original,

the provisional assessment stood finalized.
12.       Aggrieved by the aforesaid order dated 03.03.2004

of the Assistant Commissioner, appellant preferred an appeal

before the Commissioner of Customs (Appeals), Kolkata

(‘Commissioner (Appeals)’ hereinafter). By the order dated

21.06.2004, Commissioner (Appeals) held that the present

case is squarely covered within the purview of Rule 9(1)(a) and
8
Rule 9(1)(e) of the Customs Valuation (Determination of Price

of    Imported   Goods)    Rules,   1988   (briefly   ‘the   Customs

Valuation Rules’ hereinafter). Hence, the engineering and

technical     service   fees/charges   were   includable      in   the

assessable value        of the imported    goods. Commissioner

(Appeals) confirmed the order passed by the Assistant

Commissioner and vide the order dated 21.06.2004 dismissed

the appeal.
13.         This order of the Commissioner (Appeals) dated

21.06.2004 came to be challenged by the appellant before the

CESTAT which was registered as appeal No.CDM-164/2004.

CESTAT vide the order dated 20.04.2010 (‘impugned order’

hereinafter) held that payment made by the appellant to M/s

Voltas Limited was only in connection with the sale of goods

because M/s Voltas Limited was an agent/distributor of the

foreign supplier. CESTAT was of the view that payment made

by the appellant to M/s Voltas Limited had no nexus to any

services rendered by M/s Voltas Limited but was a condition

of sale. Holding that payment made to M/s Voltas Limited had
9
a direct nexus to the value of the goods imported, CESTAT

rejected the appeal.
14.       Hence, the present appeal.
15.       Learned counsel for the appellant submits that

engineering and technical service charges paid by the

appellant to M/s Voltas Limited could not be included in the

assessable value of the imported goods (spare parts). All the

authorities below have erroneously held to the contrary.

15.1.     View taken by CESTAT that the present case is

covered by Rule 9(1)(a) and Rule 9(1)(e) of the Customs

Valuation Rules is contradictory. Provision of Rule 9(1)(e) of

the Customs Valuation Rules can be invoked only when the

payment is not covered by clauses (a) to (d) of Rule 9.

15.2.     Learned counsel has referred to the Note to Rule 4

of the Customs Valuation Rules and submits that the same

has statutory force. It clearly says that value of imported

goods shall not include charges for maintenance or technical

assistance undertaken after importation of imported goods.
10
15.3.           CESTAT failed to consider that M/s Voltas Limited

        was an agent of the foreign supplier. It had rendered

        maintenance and engineering services to the appellant and its

        subsidiaries. Such services rendered by it had no direct nexus

        to the value of the goods imported. Stipulation of 8 percent of

        FOB payable to M/s Voltas Limited was only for the services

        rendered by it. He submits that there is no direct nexus of the

        said payment with the goods imported. Therefore, such

        payments could not have been included in the assessable

        value of the imported goods. In support of his submissions,

        learned counsel has placed reliance on the following decisions:
1.
Collector of Customs (Preventive), Ahmedabad Vs.
                     Essar Gujarat Ltd., Surat1
2.
Tata Iron & Steel Co. Ltd. Vs. Commissioner of
                     Central Excise & Customs, Bhubaneswar2
3.
Commissioner of Customs (Ports), Kolkata Vs. J.K.
                     Corpn. Ltd.3
4.
Commissioner of Customs Vs. Ferodo India (P)
                     Ltd.4
1
(1997) 9 SCC 738
2
(2000) 3 SCC 472
3
(2007) 9 SCC 401
11
15.4.        Learned counsel for the appellant therefore submits

          that view taken by CESTAT cannot be sustained. Therefore,

          orders of the Assistant Commissioner dated 03.03.2004,

          Commissioner (Appeals) dated 29.06.2004 and the impugned

          order of CESTAT dated 20.04.2010 are liable to be set aside.
16.          Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent

          supports the impugned order of CESTAT. Adverting to the

          purchase order he submits that payment made to the Indian

          agent was clearly part of the FOB amount payable to the

          foreign supplier.
16.1.        He also adverts to the documents titled as Voltas

          Limited Terms and Conditions and submits therefrom that it

          was clearly mentioned therein that prices quoted were

          exclusive of its engineering and technical service fees.

          Payment of 8 percent of the FOB price to the Indian agent was

          a condition of sale of the imported goods. Such payment was

          made purely as a condition of sale of the imported goods. It

          was based on an understanding between the foreign supplier
4
(2008) 4 SCC 563
12
and M/s Voltas Limited. Various services provided by M/s

Voltas Limited were on behalf of the foreign supplier as its

agent. The services rendered were to identify the requirement

of the spares to be imported and therefore the payments so

made had a direct nexus to the imported goods. As the local

agent, services provided by M/s Voltas Limited were pre-

importation activities and aimed at making the sale of spares

by the foreign supplier effective.
16.2.      He finally submits that there is no merit in the

appeal and the same should be dismissed.
17.        Submissions made by learned counsel for the

parties have received the due consideration of the Court.
18.        We have already extracted Clause 5 of the purchase

order issued by Central Coal Fields Limited, a subsidiary of

the appellant. In so far terms of payment is concerned, 100

percent of FOB value had to be paid in U.S. Dollars. It was

also mentioned therein that product support service would be

rendered by M/s Voltas Limited on payment of engineering
13
and technical service charges. After referring to instances of

product support service, it was stipulated that payment of

engineering and service charges at the rate of 8 percent of the

net FOB value would be made on pro-rata basis to M/s Voltas

Limited in equivalent Indian currency at the exchange rate

prevailing on the date of the bill of lading. Product support

services included determination of actual requirement of

spares, to assist in speedy customs clearance including

insurance        survey,    prompt        replacement     in     case      of

discrepancies in supplies etc.
19.         We may also refer to the relevant extract of the

quotation of the foreign supply which reads as under:
You are to pay an additional eight (8) percent of the
            total FOB amount on a pro-rata against each
            shipment to our Indian distributor M/s. Voltas Ltd.,
            Calcutta in Indian rupees at the exchange rate
            prevalent on the date of the consignment note/bill
            of   lading    within    21   days   from   the    date   of
            submission of their invoice along-with a set of non -
            negotiable copies of the shipping documents. This
            payment is to be made to Voltas and is not to be
14
deducted from the FOB amount payable to us
             against the Letter of Credit.
20.          The foreign supply had made it clear that the

appellant had to pay an additional 8 percent of the total FOB

amount on a pro-rata basis against each shipment to M/s

Voltas Limited in Indian currency. It was clarified that this

payment was to be made to Voltas Limited and was not to be

deducted from the FOB amount payable to the foreign supplier.
21.          All the imported goods were initially cleared on the

basis of provisional assessment. Thereafter, the Assistant

Commissioner passed the order-in-original dated 03.03.2004

finalising    the   provisional      assessment.   On   scrutiny   of

documents, Assistant Commissioner observed that Voltas

Limited was the local agent of the foreign supplier. The

product support services i.e. engineering and technical

services provided by M/s Voltas Limited were primarily related

to the type and quantum of spare parts required to be

supplied by the foreign supplier. Duty of M/s Voltas Limited

was also to assist the appellant during insurance survey at the
15
port after importation of the identified spares. Such services

were related to procurement of spares by the appellant and for

the smooth sale of spares by the foreign supplier.

21.1.     Appellant and its subsidiaries had no contract with

M/s Voltas Limited for providing such services. The charges

amounting to 8 percent of net FOB value were paid to M/s

Voltas Limited as engineering and technical service charges for

smooth importation of the goods.
21.2.     Engineering and technical service charges paid to

the local agent M/s Voltas Limited were 8 to 10 percent of the

transactions of the appellant with the principal i.e. the foreign

supplier. Such charges were paid as a recompense for the

services rendered towards making the sale effective. Hence,

engineering and technical service charges were nothing but

commission.
21.3.     Observing that the sale had become conditional in

view of the conditions posed in quotation by the foreign

supplier, the consequential engineering and technical service
16
charges were fully covered by Rule 9(1)(e) of the Customs

Valuation Rules. Assistant Commissioner referred to the Note

to Rule 4 of the Customs Valuation Rules and observed that

engineering and technical service charges were not being paid

for maintenance of any industrial plant, machinery or

equipment. It was nobody’s case that these charges were being

paid   under     a   contract    for   maintenance,     erection,

commissioning of an industrial plant, equipment or machinery.
22.        From a perusal of the order-in-original, it is seen

that appellant was granted personal hearing in which

representative of the appellant stated that it will pay any short

levy of duty as per law after considering the facts.
23.        On the basis of the above, Assistant Commissioner

vide the order-in-original dated 03.03.2004 held that engineering

and technical service fees/agency commission/charges paid by

the appellant and its subsidiaries to the local agent of the

foreign supplier were includible in the assessment value of the

imported goods. Therefore, there was short levy of customs

duty to the tune of Rs. 64,47,244.00. Accordingly, appellant
17
was directed to pay the said amount within 15 days. This

finalized the provisional assessment.
24.       Commissioner      (Appeals)       vide   the     order    dated

21.06.2004 adverted to Clause 5(B) of the purchase order

which mandated that product support service would be

provided by M/s Voltas Limited in all respects for ensuring

optimum     availability    of      P&H       Shovels.       Thereafter,

Commissioner (Appeals) held as under:
In the present case, quotation by the foreign
          supplier was received by the appellant along with
          offer of M/s. Voltas Ltd., Calcutta. Thus together,
          those formed the basis of contract and set out the
          conditions of sale. In the present case, payment of
          engineering & technical service charges constituted
          an   integral/inseparable       condition   of    sale    of
          imported goods. Since the payment of service
          charges   to   M/s.    Voltas   was dictated      by     the
          condition of sale to satisfy the obligation of the
          seller/foreign supplier, the inclusion of the said
          charges in the assessable value by the lower
          authority under the provisions of Rule 9(1)(e) clearly
          prescribes for inclusion of all other payments
          actually made or to be made as a condition of sale
18
of the imported goods, by the buyer to the seller or
          by the buyer to a third party to satisfy an obligation
          of the seller to the extent that such payments are
          not included in the price actually paid or payable.
          The present case is squarely covered within the
          ambit of Rule 9(1)(e) of CVR'88 and accordingly, the
          aforesaid charges shall be added/includible in the
          transaction under
Section 14
of the Act read with
          provisions of CVR'88.
24.1.     Looking into the nature of imports, Commissioner

(Appeals) held that services provided by the Indian agent was

on behalf of the foreign seller and was directly related to the

sale of imported goods. Provision for such service and payment

of service charges constituted a condition of sale. In such

circumstances, the first appellate authority upholding the view

taken by the Assistant Commissioner held that engineering

and technical service charges were includible in the assessable

value of the imported goods.
25.       When this order was appealed against, CESTAT vide

the impugned order held:
19
6.1 We have carefully considered the submissions
from both sides and closely examined the records
produced.      It    is     apparent     that     there     is
agency/distributor          agreement      entered        into
between Voltas Ltd. and the American based
supplier viz. Harnischfeger Corporation, U.S.A.
The documents such as purchase order of the
appellant, the quotation by the American supplier
and documents of M/s Voltas Ltd. relied upon
clearly referred M/s Harnischfeger Corporation as
the principal and M/s Voltas Ltd. as the agent or
distributor.   We     have     not     been     shown     any
agreement between M/s Voltas Ltd. and the
appellant. The services undertaken by M/s Voltas
Ltd., apparently, are only at the instance of the
US based supplier as the appellant has no choice
in importing the spares without availing the
services of Voltas Ltd., who is the agent of the
American based supplier. It is also seen that the
amounts paid to Voltas Ltd. by the appellant are
not linked to any services specifically rendered by
them.   We     are    not    in   agreement       with    the
submissions of the Ld. Sr. Advocate on behalf of
the appellant that 8 to 10% value of the imported
parts have been adopted only as a measure for
payment for services rendered by M/s Voltas Ltd.
It is clearly a condition for sale of the goods to the
20
appellant. If there are no imports, no payments
            are apparently due to be made to whatever
            services attributed to M/s Voltas. In other words,
            the payments have been made only in connection
            with the sale of goods, apparently due to reason
            that M/s Voltas Ltd., is an agent/distributor of
            the US based supplier.
25.1.      CESTAT     had    carefully   analysed    the    relevant

documents and thereafter came to the conclusion that the

services   rendered   were    such   that   appellant      faced   no

inconvenience at the time of importation. Amounts paid to

Voltas Limited by the appellant were not linked to any services

specifically rendered by it. Payments were made only in

connection with the sale of the goods presumably because M/s

Voltas Limited was an agent of the foreign supplier. Thus,

payments made to M/s Voltas Limited were only as a

condition of sale and not for any services rendered. Therefore,

it had a direct nexus to the value of the goods imported.
21
26.       We may now have a look at
Section 14
of the

Customs Act, 1962 (‘
Customs Act
’ hereinafter) as it stood at

the relevant point of time which is as follows.
14.   Valuation      of   goods   for   purposes    of
          assessment – (1) For the purposes of the
Customs
          Tariff Act, 1975
(51 of 1975), or any other law for
          the time being in force whereunder a duty of
          customs is chargeable on any goods by reference
          to their value, the value of such goods shall be
          deemed to be-
the price at which such or like goods are ordinarily
          sold, or offered for sale, for delivery at the time and
          place of importation or exportation, as the case
          may be, in the course of international trade,
          where-
(a) the seller and the buyer have no interest in the
          business of each other; or
(b) one of them has no interest in the business of the
          other,

          and the price is the sole consideration for the sale
          or offer for sale:
Provided that such price shall be calculated
          with reference to the rate of exchange as in force
          on the date on which a bill of entry is presented
          under
Section 46
, or a shipping bill or bill of
22
export, as the case may be, is presented under
Section 50
;
(1A) Subject to the provisions of sub-section
(1), the price referred to in that sub-section in
respect of imported goods shall be determined in
accordance with the rules made in this behalf.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1) or sub-section (1A) if the Board is
satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do,
it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix
tariff values for any class of imported goods or
export goods, having regard to the trend of value of
such or like goods, and where any such tariff
values are fixed, the duty shall be chargeable with
reference to such tariff value.
(3) For the purposes of this section-
(a) “rate of exchange” means the rate of exchange-
(i) determined by the Board, or
(ii) ascertained in such manner as the Board
   my direct,

   for the conversion of Indian currency into
   foreign currency or foreign currency into Indian
   currency;
23
(b) ‘foreign currency” and “Indian currency”
              have the meanings respectively assigned to
              them in clause (m) and clause (q) of
section 2
of
              the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999
              (42 of 1999).”

26.1.      Thus, what
Section 14(1)(a)
provides for is that for

the purpose of the
Customs Tariff Act, 1975
or any other law

for the time being in force whereunder a duty of customs is

chargeable on any goods by reference to their value, the value

of such goods shall be deemed to be the price at which such or

like goods are ordinarily sold or offered for sale, for delivery at

the time or place of importation or exportation, as the case

may be, in the course of international trade where the seller or

buyer had no interest in the business of each other or one had

no interest in the business of the other. As per sub-section

(1A), subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the price

referred to in that sub-section in respect of the imported goods

shall be determined in accordance with the rules made in this

behalf.
24
27.       In exercise of the powers conferred by
Section 156
of the Customs Act read with
Section 22
of the General

Clauses Act, 1897, the Customs Valuation Rules have been

framed. Rule 4 deals with transaction value. The transaction

value of the imported goods shall be the price actually paid or

payable for the goods when sold for export to India, adjusted

in accordance with the provisions of Rule 9 of the Customs

Valuation Rules.
28.       Rule 9 deals with cost and services. In this case, we

are concerned with sub-rule (a) and sub-rule (e). We extract

Rule 9 as under:
Rule 9. Cost and Services- (1) In determining the
         transaction value, there shall be added to the price
         actually paid or payable for the imported goods,-
(a) the following cost and services, to the extent
            they are incurred by the buyer but are not
            included in the price actually paid or payable for
            the imported goods, namely-
(i) commissions and brokerage, except buying
               commissions;
25
(ii) the cost of containers which are treated as
                  being one for customs purposes with the
                  goods in question;
(iii) the cost of packing whether for labour or
                  materials;
*             *               *              *           *

           (e)    all other payments actually made or to be
                  made as      a        condition   of   sale      of   the
imported goods, by the buyer to the seller, or
                  by the buyer to a third party to satisfy an
                  obligation of the seller to the extent that such
                  payments are not included in the price
                  actually paid or payable.
29.       Rule 12 of the Customs Valuation Rules says that

the interpretative notes specified in the schedule shall apply

for the interpretation of the rules. In the Note to Rule 4, it is

stated:
The value of imported goods shall not include the
           following charges or costs, provided that they are
           distinguished from the price actually paid or
           payable for the imported goods:
(a) Charges        for     construction,         erection,
                     assembly,          maintenance      or       technical
                     assistance, undertaken after importation
26
on imported goods such as industrial plant,
                  machinery or equipment;
(b) The cost of transport after importation;
(c) Duties and taxes in India.
30.
In
J.K. Corporation Limited
(supra), this Court

considered the question as to whether customs duty would be

payable on the purchase price of the goods by adding the

value of the license and technical knowhow to the value of the

imported goods. It was in that context, this Court held as

under:
9.    The basic principle of levy of customs duty,
          in view of the aforementioned provisions, is that
          the value of the imported goods has to be
          determined at the time and place of importation.
The value to be determined for the imported goods
          would be the payment required to be made as a
          condition of sale. Assessment of customs duty
          must have a direct nexus with the value of goods
          which was payable at the time of importation. If
          any amount is to be paid after the importation of
          the goods is complete, inter alia, by way of transfer
          of licence or technical know-how for the purpose of
          setting up of a plant from the machinery imported
          or running thereof, the same would not be
27
computed for the said purpose. Any amount paid
          for post-importation service or activity, would not,
          therefore,   come        within   the   purview   of
          determination of assessable value of the imported
          goods so as to enable the authorities to levy
          customs duty or otherwise. The Rules have been
          framed for the purpose of carrying out the
          provisions of the Act. The wordings of
Sections 14
and
14
(1-A) are clear and explicit. The Rules and
          the Act, therefore, must be construed, having
          regard to the basic principles of interpretation in
          mind.
31.       Note to Rule 4 has been explained by this Court in
J.K. Corporation Limited
(supra). This Court after adverting to

the relevant portion of the Note to Rule 4 held that what would

be excluded for computing the assessable value for the

purpose of levy of customs duty is any amount paid for post-

importation activities including any amount paid for post-

importation technical assistance.
32.       This position was also explained by this Court in
Ferodo India (P) Ltd.
(supra). Relevant portion of the aforesaid

decision reads as follows:
28
7. Under
Section 14
of the Customs Act, 1962, the
    assessable value of imported goods is deemed to
    be the price at which such or like goods are
    ordinarily sold or offered for sale for delivery at
    the time and place of importation or exportation,
    as the case may be, in the course of international
    trade, where the seller and the buyer have no
    interest in the business of each other and the
    price is the sole consideration for the sale or offer
    of sale.
8. The   CVR,       1988    recognises    the     fundamental
    principle of arm's length price while dealing with
    transaction value. The Rules provide for the
    determination of the correct price of goods that
    are imported in the country or exported out of the
    country uninfluenced by relationship between the
    transacting parties.
9. Transaction value, deductive value, computed
    value      and   residual   value     methods       are     the
    methods prescribed in the Rules, to be followed
    sequentially in     that    order     in    the    matter    of
    determination of arm's length pricing.
10. To determine the assessable value for the levy of
    customs duty on imported goods,
Section 14
of
    the 1962 Act has to be read with the provisions of
    the CVR, 1988 because under
Section 14(1)
there
    is    reference    to    a deemed          price   of   goods
29
imported and under
Section 14
(1-A) such deemed
           price is to be determined in accordance with the
           CVR, 1988.
33.       Applying the above ratio to the facts of the present

case, we find that the services rendered by the Indian agent

were not post-importation activities. The services provided

were directly relatable to the import of the goods by way of

product support service which is covered by
Sections 14(1)
and
14(1A)
of the Customs Act read with Rule 9(1)(e) of the

Customs Valuation Rules.
34.       Thus on thorough consideration of all aspects of the

matter, we are of the considered opinion that the view taken

by all the lower authorities is correct and no interference is

warranted. There is no merit in the appeal. Accordingly, the

appeal is dismissed.
………………………………J.
                                           [ABHAY S. OKA]


                                       .……………………………J.
                                           [UJJAL BHUYAN]
NEW DELHI;
MAY 01, 2025.
30