[Cites
27
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Dhanbad Fuels Private Limited vs Union Of India on 15 May, 2025
2025 INSC 696
                                                                  REPORTABLE


                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6846 OF 2025
                             (@SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 4980 OF 2021)



                         M/S DHANBAD FUELS PRIVATE LIMITED         …Appellant(s)



                                                 VERSUS



                         UNION OF INDIA & ANR.                   …Respondent(s)




                                             JUDGMENT
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2025.05.15
13:24:05 IST
Reason:
J. B. PARDIWALA, J.
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the
following parts:
INDEX

A. FACTUAL MATRIX ........................................................................ 2

B. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT ............... 9

C. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE UNION OF INDIA..... 13

D. ANALYSIS ...................................................................................... 19

  i.    Legislative intent behind the enactment of Section 12A of the 2015
        Act ................................................................................................. 20

  ii. Section 12A of the 2015 Act is mandatory in nature .................... 26

  iii. How the expression “urgent interim relief” is to be construed ..... 35

  iv. The effect of according prospectivity to the declaration in Patil
        Automation (supra) on cases like the one at hand ....................... 39

  v.    The equitable maxim lex non cogit ad impossibilia ..................... 41

E. CONCLUSION ............................................................................... 49
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                                                        Page 1 of 52
1.   Leave granted.
2.   This appeal arises from the judgment and order passed by the High

     Court at Calcutta on its appellate side dated 22.02.2021 in C.O. No.

     1678 of 2020 by which the High Court disposed of the revision

     application filed by the appellant herein by directing that the suit

     instituted by the respondent herein, i.e., Union of India, on

     09.08.2019, shall be kept in abeyance for seven months from the date

     of the order or until the receipt of the report of the mediator,

     whichever is earlier. In other words, the High Court proceeded to pass

     an order keeping in mind
Section 12A
of the Commercial Courts Act,

     2015 (for short, “the 2015 Act”), as amended in 2018.
A. FACTUAL MATRIX
3.   The facts giving rise to this appeal may be summarised as under:
a. The respondent Union of India instituted Money Suit No. 28 of

          2019 on 09.08.2019 in the Commercial Court, Alipore against

          the appellant herein for the recovery of a sum of Rs.
8,73,36,976/- (Rupees Eight Crore, Seventy-Three Lakh, Thirty-
Six Thousand, Nine Hundred and Seventy-Six only) towards

          differential freight and penalty. Indisputably, no urgent interim

          relief was prayed for in the said suit.
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                         Page 2 of 52
b. No sooner the suit referred to above came to be instituted than

         the appellant herein, as defendant, raised a preliminary objection

         in its written statement dated 20.12.2019 as regards the

         maintainability of the suit without availing the remedy of pre-
institution mediation under Section 12A of the 2015 Act read

         with Pre-Institution Mediation and Settlement Rules, 2018 (in

         short, “the PIMS Rules”) which came into force with effect

         from 03.07.2018.
c. On 30.09.2020, the appellant herein preferred Interim

         Application No. 190 of 2020 under Order VII Rule 11(d) of the

         Civil Procedure Code, 1908 (for shot, the “
CPC
”) read with

         Section 12A of the 2015 Act seeking rejection of the plaint, inter

         alia, on the ground that the Money Suit No. 28 of 2019 suffered

         from institutional defects and was violative of the mandatory

         provisions of pre-institution mediation.
d. The Order VII Rule 11(d) application, referred to above, came

         to be rejected by the Commercial Court vide order dated

         21.12.2020. While rejecting the I.A. No. 190 of 2020 the

         Commercial Court observed thus:
“13. Since the case has been filed on 09.08.2019 and the
            present application has been filed at a belated stage, I find
            there is no requirement to reject the suit even for
            noncompliance of the mandatory provision of Section 12A
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                         Page 3 of 52
of the
Commercial Courts Act, 2015
, otherwise, instead of
            aid in justice, the justice will be more delayed.
14. Once the plaint has been accepted by this Court, it
            would be presumed that the Court has no reason
            whatsoever to reject the plaint and obviously, the
            Defendant can raise this issue even at the time of filing
            W/S but admittedly, the Defendant no. 1 filed W/S even
            without taking the plea as now he has taken and in that
            case, it would be presumed that they are not also interested
            in the mediation proceedings.
15. This Court has been established on 05.07.2019 and
            within a month or more, the instant suit has been filed and
            at this stage, there is no proper infrastructure for
            conducting pre-litigation mediation and standard
            operating procedure has also not been framed by the
            Hon'ble High Court at Calcutta.
16. In the above circumstances, the plea as taken by the
            Defendant no. 1/Petitioner is liable to be rejected as filed
            at a belated stage.
17. It appears from the instant application that the
            Defendant no. 1 is interested to proceed with the mediation
            proceedings and accordingly, let the dispute be referred to
            mediation and in such case also, the interest of the
            Defendant no.1/Petitioner will not be prejudiced.
18. Let the dispute be referred for mediation and Mr.
            Jayanta Mukherjee, Ld. Member of the Bar is appointed
            as the Mediator.
19. Both sides are directed to attend the mediation
            proceedings on 04.01.2021 at 2 p.m., and thereafter, the
            Ld. Mediator will fix further dates of proceedings and for
            doing so, the Ld. Mediator can obtain proposals for
            settlement from both sides.
20. The Ld. Mediator is further directed to complete his
            proceedings within 11.01.2021 and to submit the report
            alongwith the proposal if any, as submitted by both parties
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                        Page 4 of 52
in a separate sealed envelope for consideration of this
            Court while awarding cost under
Section 35A
of the CPC.
21. Accordingly, the instant I.A. is disposed of as being
            rejected on contest.”


      e. Thus, the Commercial Court while declining to reject the plaint

         directed post-institution mediation by asking the parties to name

         and appoint an advocate as a mediator.
f. The appellant herein, being dissatisfied with the order passed by

         the Commercial Court rejecting the application filed under

         Order VII Rule 11(d)
of the CPC
, challenged the same before

         the High Court by filing a civil revision application.

      g. The High Court disposed of the revision application, inter alia,

         holding as under:
“15. In this case, the defendant filed the application under
            Order VII Rule 11(d)
of the Code of Civil Procedure
for
            rejection of the plaint as being barred by law, the plaintiff
            having failed to initiate the process of mediation under
            Section 12A of the said Act. However, assuming that the
            plaint is rejected on this ground, Order VII rule 13 would
            allow the plaintiff to file another suit on the self same
            cause of action. Thus, in my opinion, rejecting the plaint
            at this stage, would not be in consonance with the
            objectives of the said Act and Rules. The plaintiffs may
            face a non-starter or a non-settlement and would have to
            come back and file a suit once again. This will cause
            unnecessary delay and shall not be cost effective even for
            the defendant. Thus, considering the ultimate object of the
            provision of law, this Court is of the opinion that the suit
            which is at its early stage, be kept in abeyance and the
            plaintiff be directed to comply with the provisions of
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                           Page 5 of 52
Section 12A. This order is further passed keeping in mind
            the time and the situation when the plaint was filed, that
            is, within a month after the commercial division at Alipore
            had been made operative. It is also true that until
            December, 2020, the SOP and the meditation rules to be
            followed by the
Legal Services Authority Act, 1987
in West
            Bengal, for conducting commercial mediations had not
            been notified. The panel of trained mediators for
            commercial suit was also prepared and published
            thereafter. Thus the plaintiffs had sufficient reasons not to
            go for an effective mediation as envisaged under the said
            Rules in the absence of proper infrastructure. The
            situation would have been otherwise, had there been
            proper infrastructure in place.
16. The decision of the Calcutta High Court will not apply
            as the decision was on the point of leave to file the suit
            without exhausting the mediation process. This Court is
            not dispensing with the requirement of Section 12A but
            directing the plaintiff to comply with the provision of law
            by keeping the suit in abeyance.
17. Mediation in India is still in its nascent stage and
            requires more awareness. Prior to the publication of the
            panel of trained mediators for settlement of commercial
            disputes, there was no complete machinery which could be
            availed. Settlement of commercial disputes require special
            technical and commercial knowledge.
18. Mandatory training for mediation of commercial
            disputes is the minimum requirement for any mediator to
            be appointed in terms of the said Rules. Commercial
            disputes are very often technical in nature and may involve
            knowledge in commercial law and business. If such was
            not the case, a separate panel of such mediators would not
            have been prepared.
The Act
and the Rules have been
            framed with an object of improving the “ease of doing
            business”.
19. Section 12A of the Pre-Institution Mediation, is a mere
            tool for reduction of pendency of commercial litigation in
            India. However, the purpose of the said Section 12A and
            the Rules cannot not be to nonsuit a party but only to
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                         Page 6 of 52
encourage the party seeking to file a suit to first explore
            the possibility of settlement of the dispute through
            mediation. Section 12A provides the parties with an
            alternative mechanism to resolve their disputes by
            negotiation in the presence of a mediator. Such mediation
            has been made time bound and the parties also have the
            liberty to move the commercial court for adjudication of
            the dispute, if a mediation results in a non-starter or the
            talks of settlement fail.
20. Thus the plaint should not be rejected at this stage on
            the ground of non-compliance with Section 12A of the said
            Act when the plaintiff can still be directed to comply with
            the provisions of law by keeping the suit in abeyance.
21. The instant case is a suit for recovery of money filed
            by the Union of India for an amount over Rs.8 Crores. The
            alleged claim is for recovery of public money. The
            allegation is illegal claim of concessional rate of freight
            under Rate Circular No.24/2008, 30/2008 and 36/2009.
The suit was filed, summons were issued, the written
            statement was filed, case management hearing was held.
            The defendant did not show any inclination towards
            settlement of the dispute by way of mediation. An
            application under Order VII Rule 11 (a)
of the Code of
            Civil Procedure
was filed by the defendant for rejection of
            the plaint against the defendant No. 2 to 4. Noncompliance
            with Section 12A was not raised by the defendant in the
            said application. Thereafter, once the earlier application
            was rejected, a subsequent application under Order VII
            Rule 11(d) for rejection of the plaint on the ground of
            noncompliance with Section 12A of the said Act was again
            filed. The application was filed on September 30, 2020,
            that is, more than a year since the institution of the suit.
            Thus, the learned court held that the suit should not fail
            for non-compliance of Section 12A of the said Act.
            Rejection of the plaint would result in delay in
            dispensation of justice, instead of the court acting in aid
            of justice. In my opinion, this was a correct approach,
            keeping in mind the objects and reasons for establishing
            Commercial Courts, that is, quick and easy resolution of
            disputes either by settlement or in court. Yet, the obligation
            under the law must be complied with. The learned court
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                          Page 7 of 52
below rightly directed the suit to be kept in abeyance. In
            my opinion, the defendants will not suffer any prejudice.
            The suit has not progressed beyond filing of the written
            statement. Thereafter two consecutive applications were
            filed by the defendant for rejection of the plaint. It is also
            not the case of the defendant that they are interested in
            settlement through mediation.
22. The decisions cited by Mr. Mitra are not applicable in
            the facts of this case. The court can make an order
            adjusting equities for satisfying the ends of justice as it
            may deem fit while interpreting a procedural law even if
            the same is couched with a negative covenant.
23. However, the learned court below erred in naming the
            mediator himself, instead of directing the plaintiffs to
            approach the State Legal Services Authority, West Bengal,
            in terms of the 2018 Rules and the SOP notified by the
            State of West Bengal in this regard.
24. The order impugned is set aside to the extent of
            appointment of Mr. Jayanta Mukharjee learned member of
            the bar as a mediator, and the direction upon the parties
            to attend the mediation on the date fixed by the learned
            court below and also further directing the learned
            mediator to complete the proceeding within January 11,
            2021 and submit a report before the learned court.
25. Hence, it is ordered that the suit be kept in abeyance
            for seven months from date or until receipt of the report of
            the learned mediator, whichever is earlier. The plaintiffs
            are directed to approach the District Legal Services
            Authority, West Bengal in accordance with the Standard
            Operating Procedure (SOP) dated December 11, 2020,
            mandatorily, within two weeks from date. In case of
            default, the learned court below shall be at liberty to pass
            such orders in the suit for non-compliance of the order of
            court. The Authority shall act in accordance with the said
            Rules of 2018 and the SOP. The process is to be completed
            within the period as prescribed by the Rule 3(8) of the
            Rules of 2018. The Mediator shall file the report in such
            Form and manner as prescribed by the Rules, before the
            learned court below within the aforesaid period. The
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                          Page 8 of 52
remuneration/fees etc. of the learned Mediator will be
             fixed as per the SOP.
26. Upon receipt of the report from the Mediator, the
             learned Commercial court will proceed according to law.
             This revisional application is disposed of and there shall
             be no order as to costs.”
4.   In such circumstances referred to above, the appellant-original

     defendant has come up before us with the present appeal.




B.   SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT
5.   Mr. Vikas Singh, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the

     appellant, vehemently submitted that the High Court committed an

     egregious error in declining to reject the plaint having regard to the

     mandatory provision of Section 12A of the 2015 Act. According to

     the learned counsel, the issue is squarely covered by the decision of

     this Court in
Patil Automation Private Limited and Others v.

     Rakheja Engineers Private Limited
reported in (2022) 10 SCC 1,

     wherein this Court has said in so many words that Section 12A of the

     2015 Act is mandatory and any suit instituted violating the mandate

     of Section 12A must be visited with rejection of the plaint under Order

     VII Rule 11.
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                         Page 9 of 52
6.   The learned counsel laid much emphasis on the observations made by

     this Court in
Patil Automation
(supra) as contained in paragraphs 103

     and 114 of the judgment respectively.
He would argue that in
Patil

     Automation
(supra) this Court while holding on one hand that it is

     crystal clear that the procedure provided under Section 12A of the

     2015 Act is mandatory, said on the other hand that in view of the facts

     of
Patil Automation
(supra), where the trial had progressed

     substantially, directed the parties to appear before the Secretary

     District Legal Services Authority, Faridabad for mediation keeping

     the suit alive and in abeyance.
Taking a clue from the observations

     made by this Court in paragraphs 103 and 114 of
Patil Automation
(supra) respectively, the learned counsel submitted that the suit in

     question is still at the initial stage and the same has been kept in

     abeyance and has not progressed beyond filing of the written

     statement. This, according to the learned counsel, would take the suit

     in question out of the purview of the category where there has been

     substantial progress in the suit. In other words, according to the

     learned counsel, since there has been no progress worth the name in

     the suit in question, the mandate of Section 12A will apply with all

     force and the plaint ought to meet with the fate of rejection.
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                         Page 10 of 52
7.   The learned counsel submitted that this Court in
Patil Automation
(supra) applied the principle of prospective overruling more

     particularly for the purpose of issuing directions as contained in

     paragraph 113 and sub-paragraphs respectively thereof.
Relying on

     the decision of the Constitution Bench in I.C. Golaknath and others

     v. State of Panjab and others reported in AIR 1967 SC 1643, more

     particularly the observations made in paragraph 45 therein, the

     learned counsel would submit that even while applying the doctrine

     of prospective overruling the law laid down could be said to have

     been always the same. If a subsequent decision changes the earlier

     one, the later decision would not change the law but would only

     discover and lay down the correct principle of law. According to the

     learned counsel, if the suit is allowed to proceed further the same

     would amount to a fresh litigation as it has not progressed beyond the

     initial stage and has been under subsisting orders of stay since 2021.
8.   In such circumstances referred to above, according to the learned

     counsel there remains no material distinction between a fresh suit if

     filed today and the present suit sought to be revived from the state of

     inception.
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                        Page 11 of 52
9.   The learned counsel laid much stress on his submission that the suit

     in question would be governed by the declaration made by this Court

     in
Patil Automation
(supra).
10. The learned counsel further submitted that while applying the

     doctrine of prospective overruling, the House of Lords in the case of

     Spectrum Plus Ltd., In re: reported in (2005) 3 WLR 58, has held

     that prospective overruling takes several different forms. In its

     simplest form prospective overruling involves a court giving a ruling

     of the character sought by the bank
in that case
. Overruling of this

     simple or “pure” type has the effect that the court’s ruling has an

     exclusively prospective effect. The ruling applies only to transactions

     or happenings occurring after the date of court’s decision. All

     transactions entered into, or events occurring, before that date

     continue to be governed by the law as it was conceived to be before

     the court gave its ruling.
11. It was also argued that even otherwise since the suit has not

     progressed beyond the initial stage the declaration made by this Court

     in paragraph 104 of
Patil Automation
(supra) would apply with all

     force. In paragraph 104 the Court observed, “They would have to

     bring a fresh suit, no doubt after complying with Section 12A, as
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                        Page 12 of 52
permitted under Order VII Rule 13. Moreover, the declaration of law

    by this Court would relate back to the date of the
Amending Act
of

    2018”. The same would be applicable in the present facts and

    circumstances of the case.
12. In the last, the learned counsel submitted that if the suit is withdrawn

    today and filed afresh after exploring the avenue of pre-institution

    mediation, it would not, in any manner, give rise to the question of

    limitation having been exhausted, since the plaintiff is the Central

    Government, and the limitation to file the suit by Central Government

    is 30 years under
Article 112
of the schedule of the
Limitation Act,

    1963
(for short, “the
Limitation Act
”).
13. In such circumstances
referred to above
, the learned counsel prayed

    that there being merit in his appeal the same may be allowed and the

    plaint be ordered to be rejected.
C. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE UNION OF INDIA
14. Ms. Archana Pathak Dave, the learned Additional Solicitor General,

    submitted that no error, not to speak of any error of law, could be said

    to have been committed by the High Court in passing the impugned

    order.
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                        Page 13 of 52
15. The learned ASG laid much emphasis on the fact that the suit

    instituted by the Union of India for recovery of money from the

    appellant herein should not fail in view of the purported non-

    compliance with Section 12A of the 2015 Act, more particularly,

    when the infrastructural requirement for the mediation process was

    not completed and the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) came to

    be framed only on 11.02.2020.
16. The learned ASG submitted that there need not be any debate on the

    point that Section 12A of the 2015 Act is mandatory. In other words,

    Section 12A stipulates compulsory pre-suit mediation. She would

    submit that the issue is no longer res integra in view of the decision

    of this Court in
Patil Automation
(supra).
However, according to the

    learned ASG the law
laid down by
this Court in
Patil Automation
(supra) should be applied prospectively with effect from 20.08.2022

    as made clear in the decision itself.
17. The learned ASG provided us with a table to give a bird’s eye view of

    the timelines for insertion of Section 12A of the 2015 Act followed

    by creation of the necessary infrastructure for implementation of the

    provisions and the filing of the money suit by Union of India.
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                      Page 14 of 52
18. According to the learned ASG, the table would reveal that after the

    establishment of the first Commercial Court in Alipore, the statutory

    framework and corresponding rules were progressively implemented

    till December 2020. According to her, the money suit instituted in

    2019 could not have been referred to pre-suit mediation under Section

    12A due to persisting infrastructural vacuum created by lack of

    appointment of necessary authorities/mediators and delineation of the

    procedural framework for the same. The table provided by the learned

    ASG reads thus:
Date                 Insertion          and Money Suit
                          subsequent
                          implementation       of
                          S.12A
     03.05.2018           S. 12A was introduced
                          by way of amendment
                          to the 2015 Act
                          mandating        pre-suit
                          mediation.
     03.07.2018           Central Government
                          notified the PIMS
                          Rules. Rule 3 requires a
                          party to make an
                          application to the
                          Authority for initiation
                          of mediation process.
                          The Central Govt.
                          further authorised the
                          State Authority and
                          District       Authority
                          constituted under the
Legal           Services
                          Authorities Act, 1987
for the purposes of pre-
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                      Page 15 of 52
institution mediation
                          and settlement.
     12.09.2018           The Central Govt.
                          further authorised the
                          authorities constituted
                          under      the
Legal
                          Services     Authorities
                          Act, 1987
such as the
                          National and District
                          Legal            Services
                          Authorities for the
                          purposes      of     pre-
                          institution mediation
                          and settlement.
09.08.2019                                       Money Suit No. 28
of 2019 filed before
                                                      the      Commercial
                                                      Court       by     the
                                                      respondents seeking
                                                      recovery of a sum of
                                                      INR       8,73,36,976
                                                      against            the
                                                      appellant.
     20.12.2019                                       The appellant filed
                                                      its written statement
                                                      in the suit.
     27.01.2020           A panel of trained
                          mediators           for
                          conducting         pre-
                          litigation mediation in
                          commercial disputes
                          was sent to the State
                          Legal          Services
                          Authority, West Bengal.
     30.09.2020                                       Appellant filed an
                                                      application under
Order 7 Rule 11 of
                                                      the CPC
seeking
                                                      rejection of the
                                                      plaint after more
                                                      than one year of
                                                      filing of the suit,
                                                      evincing that the
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                         Page 16 of 52
same was merely an
                                                     afterthought with
                                                     the purpose of
                                                     negating the suit.
     14.10.2020            The SOP was prepared
                           by the State Legal
                           Services Authority.
     11.12.2020            The SOP was approved
19. The learned ASG submitted that although the first commercial court

    was established at Alipore on 05.07.2019, yet the institutional

    infrastructure for pre-suit mediation was not in place until much later.

    This is because the panel of trained mediators was prepared only on

    27.01.2020 followed by approval of the SOP on 21.12.2020. As such,

    when the Union of India instituted the Money Suit on 09.08.2019, the

    requisite infrastructure for conducting pre-suit mediation was not yet

    established thereby making compliance with Section 12A impossible.
20. The learned ASG tried to fortify her submission by relying on the

    equitable maxim lex non cogit ad impossibilia, i.e., law does not

    compel an impossible performance.
In this regard, the learned ASG

    placed reliance on the decision of this Court in the case of
Raj Kumar

    Dey v. Tarapada Dey
reported in (1987) 4 SCC 398, more

    particularly, the observations made in paragraph 6 therein.
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                        Page 17 of 52
21. The learned ASG submitted that taking advantage of this

    administrative vacuum, the appellant should not be allowed to defeat

    the money suit under the garb of non-compliance. Section 12A, at its

    nascent stage was not a feasible course. If settlement through

    mediation is truly the real objective and intention of the petitioner, the

    same may be fully achieved by the impugned order.
22. It was further submitted that had Union of India awaited the

    establishment of the requisite infrastructure, the same would have

    unduly impeded the recovery process in a money suit involving public

    funds, thereby defeating the very purpose and legislative intent of the

    2015 Act, which aims to ensure expeditious resolution of commercial

    disputes.
23. In the last the learned ASG submitted that if the money suit instituted

    by the Union of India is dismissed on the ground of Section 12A of

    the 2015 Act, the Union of India would still have the opportunity to

    file another suit on the same cause of action under
Order VII Rule 13

    of the CPC
and the process would have to start afresh. The court fees

    would also have to be deposited for the fresh suit. Such delay and

    protraction of the suit proceedings would be contrary to the very
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                          Page 18 of 52
objective of the 2015 Act and the same may lead the public exchequer

    to suffer.
24. In such circumstances
referred to above
, the learned ASG prayed that

    there being no merit in this appeal, the same may be dismissed.




D. ANALYSIS
25. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having

    gone through the materials on record, two questions fall for our

    consideration:
a. Whether the High Court committed any error in passing the

         impugned order; and

      b. Whether, due to non-compliance with
Section 12A
of the

         Commercial Courts Act, 2015, a suit should be dismissed under
Order VII Rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908, or

         whether it should be kept in abeyance, directing the parties to

         first explore the possibility of settlement by instituting

         mediation?
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                      Page 19 of 52
i.   Legislative intent behind the enactment of Section 12A of the
         2015 Act
26. Before adverting to the rival submissions canvassed on either side, we

    must look into few relevant provisions of law.
27. Section 12A of the 2015 Act reads as follows:
“12-A. Pre-institution mediation and settlement.—(1)
           A suit, which does not contemplate any urgent interim
           relief under this Act, shall not be instituted unless the
           plaintiff exhausts the remedy of pre-institution
           mediation in accordance with such manner and
           procedure as may be prescribed by rules made by the
           Central Government.
(2) The Central Government may, by notification,
           authorise the Authorities constituted under the
Legal
           Services Authorities Act, 1987
(39 of 1987), for the
           purposes of pre-institution mediation.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Legal
           Services Authorities Act, 1987
(39 of 1987), the
           Authority authorised by the Central Government under
           sub-section (2) shall complete the process of mediation
           within a period of three months from the date of
           application made by the plaintiff under sub-section (1):
Provided that the period of mediation may be extended
           for a further period of two months with the consent of
           the parties:
Provided further that, the period during which the
           parties remained occupied with the pre-institution
           mediation, such period shall not be computed for the
           purpose of limitation under the
Limitation Act, 1963
(36
           of 1963).
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                       Page 20 of 52
(4) If the parties to the commercial dispute arrive at a
          settlement, the same shall be reduced into writing and
          shall be signed by the parties to the dispute and the
          mediator.
(5) The settlement arrived at under this section shall
          have the same status and effect as if it is an arbitral
          award on agreed terms under sub-section (4) of
Section
          30
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of
          1996).”
28. At the time of enactment of the 2015 Act, the monetary limit for a suit

    liable to be tried by the Commercial Court was fixed at Rs 1 crore.
29. In the course of three years, noticing certain features, the legislature

    decided to amend the 2015 Act. Therefore, in the year 2018, the 2015

    Act came to be amended by the
Commercial Courts, Commercial

    Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts

    (Amendment) Act, 2018
(Act 28 of 2018) (hereinafter referred to as

    “the
Amending Act
”).
30. It is apposite that we notice the Statement of Objects and Reasons of

    the Amending Act:
“Statement of Objects and Reasons.—
The Commercial
          Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial
          Appellate Division of High Courts Act, 2015
was
          enacted for the constitution of Commercial Courts,
          Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate
          Division in the High Courts for adjudicating
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                        Page 21 of 52
commercial disputes of specified value and for matters
         connected therewith or incidental thereto.
2. The global economic environment has since become
         increasingly competitive and to attract business at
         international level, India needs to further improve its
         ranking in the World Bank “Doing Business Report”
         which, inter alia, considers the dispute resolution
         environment in the country as one of the parameters for
         doing business. Further, the tremendous economic
         development has ushered in enormous commercial
         activities in the country including foreign direct
         investments, public private partnership, etc. which has
         prompted initiating legislative measures for speedy
         settlement of commercial disputes, widen the scope of
         the courts to deal with commercial disputes and
         facilitate ease of doing business. Needless to say that
         early resolution of commercial disputes of even lesser
         value creates a positive image amongst the investors
         about the strong and responsive Indian legal system. It
         is, therefore, proposed to amend the
Commercial
         Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial
         Appellate Division of High Courts Act, 2015
.
3. As Parliament was not in session and immediate
         action was required to be taken to make necessary
         amendments in the
Commercial Courts, Commercial
         Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High
         Courts Act, 2015
, to further improve India's ranking in
         the “Doing Business Report”, the President
         promulgated the Commercial Courts, Commercial
         Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High
         Courts (Amendment) Ordinance, 2018 on 3-5-2018.
4. It is proposed to introduce the Commercial Courts,
         Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate
         Division of High Courts (Amendment) Bill, 2018 to
         replace the Commercial Courts, Commercial Division
         and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts
         (Amendment) Ordinance, 2018, which inter alia,
         provides for the following namely— (i) to reduce the
         specified value of commercial disputes from the existing
         one crore rupees to three lakh rupees, and to enable the
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                     Page 22 of 52
parties to approach the lowest level of subordinate
         courts for speedy resolution of commercial disputes;
(ii) to enable the State Governments, with respect to the
         High Courts having ordinary original civil jurisdiction,
         to constitute commercial courts at District Judge level
         and to specify such pecuniary value of commercial
         disputes which shall not be less than three lakh rupees
         and not more than the pecuniary jurisdiction of the
         district courts;
(iii) to enable the State Governments, except the
         territories over which the High Courts have ordinary
         original civil jurisdiction, to designate such number of
         Commercial Appellate Courts at district judge level to
         exercise the appellate jurisdiction over the commercial
         courts below the district judge level;
(iv) to enable the State Governments to specify such
         pecuniary value of a commercial dispute which shall not
         be less than three lakh rupees or such higher value, for
         the whole or part of the State; and
(v) to provide for compulsory mediation before
         institution of a suit, where no urgent interim relief is
         contemplated and for this purpose, to introduce the pre-
         institution mediation and settlement mechanism and to
         enable the Central Government to authorise the
         authorities constituted under the
Legal Services
         Authorities Act, 1987
for this purpose.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.”
31. It is, accordingly, by the
Amending Act
that Section 12A came to be

    inserted. We should also look into the PIMS Rules that came to be

    published in the Gazette and thereby came into force on 03.7.2018.

    Rule 3 reads as follows:
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                        Page 23 of 52
“3. Initiation of mediation process.—(1) A party to a
         commercial dispute may make an application to the
         Authority as per Form 1 specified in Schedule I, either
         online or by post or by hand, for initiation of mediation
         process under the Act along with a fee of one thousand
         rupees payable to the Authority either by way of demand
         draft or through online;
(2) The Authority shall, having regard to the territorial
         and pecuniary jurisdiction and the nature of commercial
         dispute, issue a notice, as per Form 2 specified in
         Schedule I through a registered or speed post and
         electronic means including e-mail and the like to the
         opposite party to appear and give consent to participate
         in the mediation process on such date not beyond a
         period of ten days from the date of issue of the said
         notice.
(3) Where no response is received from the opposite
         party either by post or by e-mail, the Authority shall
         issue a final notice to it in the manner as specified in
         sub-rule (2).
(4) Where the notice issued under sub-rule (3) remains
         unacknowledged or where the opposite party refuses to
         participate in the mediation process, the Authority shall
         treat the mediation process to be a non-starter and make
         a report as per Form 3 specified in the Schedule I and
         endorse the same to the applicant and the opposite
         party.
(5) Where the opposite party, after receiving the notice
         under sub-rule (2) or (3) seeks further time for his
         appearance, the Authority may, if it thinks fit, fix an
         alternate date not later than ten days from the date of
         receipt of such request from the opposite party.
(6) Where the opposite party fails to appear on the date
         fixed under sub-rule (5), the Authority shall treat the
         mediation process to be a non-starter and make a report
         in this behalf as per Form 3 specified in Schedule I and
         endorse the same to the applicant and the opposite
         party.
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                      Page 24 of 52
(7) Where both the parties to the commercial dispute
         appear before the Authority and give consent to
         participate in the mediation process, the Authority shall
         assign the commercial dispute to a mediator and fix a
         date for their appearance before the said mediator.
(8) The Authority shall ensure that the mediation
         process is completed within a period of three months
         from the date of receipt of application for pre-institution
         mediation unless the period is extended for further two
         months with the consent of the applicant and the
         opposite party.”
32. A perusal of Section 12A indicates that the period during which the

    parties remain occupied with the pre-institution mediation shall not

    be computed for the purpose of limitation under the
Limitation Act
.

    Further, if the parties to the commercial dispute arrive at a settlement,

    the same shall be reduced into writing and shall be signed by the

    parties to the dispute and the mediator. The settlement arrived shall

    have the same status and effect as if it is an arbitral award on agreed

    terms under
Section 30(4)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,

    1996. This is another remarkable feature of the mediation regime

    ushered in by the
Amending Act
which, by deeming the mediated

    settlement at par with an arbitral award, provides strong legal backing

    to the mediation process and ensures that the enforceability of the

    same is met with fewer hurdles, thereby increasing the attractiveness

    of mediation as an alternative to litigation.
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                         Page 25 of 52
33. The aim and object of Section 12A is to ensure that before a

    commercial dispute is filed before the court, the alternative means of

    dissolution are adopted so that only genuine cases come before the

    courts. The said procedure has been introduced to decongest the

    regular courts.
ii. Section 12A of the 2015 Act is mandatory in nature
34. We shall now look into the decision of this Court in
Patil Automation
(supra).
In
Patil Automation
(supra), this Court declared Section 12A

    of the 2015 Act to be mandatory in nature. It further held that pre-

    litigation mediation is necessary, unless the suit contemplates an

    urgent interim relief. The decision obviated the prevailing confusion

    as regards the mandatory nature of Section 12A of the 2015 Act as

    well as the legal consequences of non-compliance, which was

    necessary in light of the divergent views adopted by a number of High

    Courts. A few relevant observations from
the said decision
are

    reproduced hereinbelow:
“The regime under Order VII Rule 11
CPC
92.       Order VII Rule 11 declares that the plaint can
          be rejected on 6 grounds. They include failure to
          disclose the cause of action, and where the suit appears
          from the statement in the plaint to be barred. We are
          concerned in these cases with the latter. Order VII Rule
          12 provides that when a plaint is rejected, an order to
          that effect with reasons must be recorded. Order VII
          Rule 13 provides that rejection of the plaint mentioned
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                       Page 26 of 52
in Order VII Rule 11 does not by itself preclude the
         plaintiff from presenting a fresh plaint in respect of the
         same cause of action. Order VII deals with various
         aspects about what is to be pleaded in a plaint, the
         documents that should accompany and other details.
Order IV Rule 1 provides that a suit is instituted by
         presentation of the plaint to the court or such officer as
         the court appoints. By virtue of Order IV Rule 1(3), a
         plaint is to be deemed as duly instituted only when it
         complies with the requirements under Order VI and
         Order VII. Order V Rule 1 declares that when a suit has
         been duly instituted, a summon may be issued to the
         defendant to answer the claim on a date specified
         therein. There are other details in the order with which
         we are not to be detained. We have referred to these rules
         to prepare the stage for considering the question as to
         whether the power under Order VII Rule 11 is to be
         exercised only on an application by the defendant and
         the stage at which it can be exercised.
93.
In
Patasibai v. Ratanlal
reported in (1990) 2
         SCC 42, one of the specific contentions was that there
         was no specific objection for rejecting of the plaint taken
         earlier. In the facts of the case, the Court observed as
         under :
“13. On the admitted facts appearing from the
              record itself, the learned counsel for the
              respondent, was unable to show that all or any of
              these averments in the plaint disclose a cause of
              action giving rise to a triable issue. In fact, Shri
              Salve was unable to dispute the inevitable
              consequence that the plaint was liable to be
              rejected under
Order 7 Rule 11 CPC
on these
              averments. All that Shri Salve contended was that
              the court did not in fact reject the plaint under
              Order 7 Rule 11
CPC
and summons having been
              issued, the trial must proceed. In our opinion, it
              makes no difference that the trial court failed to
              perform its duty and proceeded to issue summons
              without carefully reading the plaint and the High
              Court also overlooked this fatal defect. Since the
              plaint suffers from this fatal defect, the mere
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                        Page 27 of 52
issuance of summons by the trial court does not
              require that the trial should proceed even when no
              triable issue is shown to arise. Permitting the
              continuance of such a suit is tantamount to
              licensing frivolous and vexatious litigation. This
              cannot be done.”
94.      On a consideration of the scheme of Orders IV,
         V and VII
of the CPC
, we arrive at the following
         conclusions:
94.1.    A suit is commenced by presentation of a
         plaint. The date of the presentation in terms of
Section
         3(2)
of the Limitation Act, 1963 is the date of
         presentation for the purpose of the said Act. By virtue of
         Order 4 Rule 1(3), institution of the plaint, however, is
         complete only when the plaint is in conformity with the
         requirement of Order 6 and Order 7.
94.2.    When the court decides the question as to issue
         of summons under Order V Rule 1, what the court must
         consider is whether a suit has been duly instituted.
94.3.     Order VII Rule 11 does not provide that the
         court is to discharge its duty of rejecting the plaint only
         on an application. Order VII Rule 11 is, in fact, silent
         about any such requirement. Since summon is to be
         issued in a duly instituted suit, in a case where the plaint
         is barred under Order VII Rule 11(d), the stage begins
         at that time when the court can reject the plaint under
         Order VII Rule 11. No doubt it would take a clear case
         where the court is satisfied. The Court has to hear the
         plaintiff before it invokes its power besides giving
         reasons under Order VII Rule 12.
In a clear case, where
         on allegations in the suit, it is found that the suit is
         barred by any law, as would be the case, where the
         plaintiff in a suit under the Act does not plead
         circumstances to take his case out of the requirement of
         Section 12A, the plaint should be rejected without
         issuing summons. Undoubtedly, on issuing summons it
         will be always open to the defendant to make an
         application as well under Order VII Rule 11. In other
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                         Page 28 of 52
words, the power under Order VII Rule 11 is available
         to the court to be exercised suo motu. (See in this regard,
         the judgment of this Court in
Madiraju Venkata
         Ramana Raju v. Peddireddigari Ramachandra Reddy
,
         (2018) 14 SCC 1)”
                                             (Emphasis supplied)
35. The Court summed up its reasoning from paragraph 99 onwards as

    follows:
“99.1.
The Act
did not originally contain Section 12-A.
         It is by amendment in the year 2018 that Section 12-A
         was inserted. The Statement of Objects and Reasons are
         explicit that Section 12-A was contemplated as
         compulsory. The object of the
Act and the Amending Act
of 2018, unerringly point to at least partly foisting
         compulsory mediation on a plaintiff who does not
         contemplate urgent interim relief. The provision has
         been contemplated only with reference to plaintiffs who
         do not contemplate urgent interim relief. The legislature
         has taken care to expressly exclude the period
         undergone during mediation for reckoning limitation
         under the
Limitation Act, 1963
. The object is clear.
99.2. It is an undeniable reality that courts in India are
         reeling under an extraordinary docket explosion.
Mediation, as an alternative dispute mechanism, has
         been identified as a workable solution in commercial
         matters. In other words, the cases under the Act lend
         themselves to be resolved through mediation. Nobody
         has an absolute right to file a civil suit. A civil suit can
         be barred absolutely or the bar may operate unless
         certain conditions are fulfilled. Cases in point, which
         amply illustrate this principle, are
Section 80
CPC and
Section 69
of the Partnership Act.
99.3. The language used in Section 12-A, which includes
         the word “shall”, certainly, goes a long way to assist the
         Court to hold that the provision is mandatory. The entire
         procedure for carrying out the mediation, has been spelt
         out in the Rules. The parties are free to engage counsel
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                         Page 29 of 52
during mediation. The expenses, as far as the fee
         payable to the mediator, is concerned, is limited to a
         one-time fee, which appears to be reasonable,
         particularly, having regard to the fact that it is to be
         shared equally. A trained mediator can work wonders.

         99.4. Mediation must be perceived as a new mechanism
         of access to justice. We have already highlighted its
         benefits. Any reluctance on the part of the Court to give
         Section 12-A, a mandatory interpretation, would result
         in defeating the object and intention of Parliament. The
         fact that the mediation can become a non-starter, cannot
         be a reason to hold the provision not mandatory.
Apparently, the value judgment of the lawgiver is to give
         the provision, a modicum of voluntariness for the
         defendant, whereas, the plaintiff, who approaches the
         court, must, necessarily, resort to it. Section 12-A
         elevates the settlement under the Act and the Rules to an
         award within the meaning of
Section 30(4)
of the
         Arbitration Act, giving it meaningful enforceability. The
         period spent in mediation is excluded for the purpose of
         limitation.
The Act
confers power to order costs based
         on conduct of the parties.”
                                             (Emphasis supplied)
36. Touching upon the aspect of what the expression “does not

    contemplate urgent interim relief” appearing in Section 12A of the

    2015 Act entails, the judgment observed that unlike
Section 80(2)
of

    the CPC which allows the filing of a suit after seeking leave of the

    court, Section 12A contains no such stipulation. The Court also

    observed that whether the absence of such stipulation under Section

    12A could be misused by litigants to bypass the mandate of pre-

    litigation mediation was an aspect which may be looked into by the

    legislature. The relevant observations read as follows:
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                       Page 30 of 52
“100. In the cases before us, the suits do not
          contemplate urgent interim relief. As to what should
          happen in suits which do contemplate urgent interim
          relief or rather the meaning of the word “contemplate”
          or urgent interim relief, we need not dwell upon it. The
          other aspect raised about the word “contemplate” is
          that there can be attempts to bypass the statutory
          mediation under Section 12-A by contending that the
          plaintiff is contemplating urgent interim relief, which in
          reality, it is found to be without any basis.
Section 80(2)
CPC permits the suit to be filed where urgent interim
          relief is sought by seeking the leave of the court. The
          proviso to Section 80(2) contemplates that the court
          shall, if, after hearing the parties, is satisfied that no
          urgent or immediate relief need be granted in the suit,
          return the plaint for presentation to the court after
          compliance. Our attention is drawn to the fact that
          Section 12-A does not contemplate such a procedure.
          This is a matter which may engage attention of the
          lawmaker. Again, we reiterate that these are not issues
          which arise for our consideration. In the fact of the
          cases admittedly there is no urgent interim relief
          contemplated in the plaints in question.”
                                                (Emphasis supplied)
37. The Court ultimately disposed of the matters in the following manner:
“113.1. We declare that
Section 12-A
of the Act is
          mandatory and hold that any suit instituted violating the
          mandate of Section 12-A must be visited with rejection
          of the plaint under Order 7 Rule 11. This power can be
          exercised even suo motu by the court as explained
          earlier in the judgment. We, however, make this
          declaration effective from 20-8-2022 so that
          stakeholders concerned become sufficiently informed.
113.2. Still further, we however direct that in case
          plaints have been already rejected and no steps have
          been taken within the period of limitation, the matter
          cannot be reopened on the basis of this declaration. Still
          further, if the order of rejection of the plaint has been
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                         Page 31 of 52
acted upon by filing a fresh suit, the declaration of
          prospective effect will not avail the plaintiff.
113.3. Finally, if the plaint is filed violating
Section 12-
A after the jurisdictional High Court has declared
          Section 12-A mandatory also, the plaintiff will not be
          entitled to the relief.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
38. As discussed aforesaid, the observations in paragraph 100 of
Patil

    Automation
(supra) refer to
Section 80(2)
of the CPC, which permits

    a suit, praying urgent interim relief, to be filed by seeking the leave

    of the court. The proviso to
Section 80(2)
of the CPC states that, if,

    after hearing the parties, the court is satisfied that no urgent or

    immediate relief is required to be granted in the suit, the court may

    return the plaint for presentation to it after compliance with

    requirements of
Section 80(1)
of the CPC.
39. The position of law is well settled that a plaint may be rejected under
Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC
if any of the conditions specified

    therein are fulfilled. The decision in
Patil Automation
(supra)

    recognised this principle and stipulated that beginning 20.08.2022,

    any suit instituted under the 2015 Act without complying with Section

    12A must meet with the fate of rejection of plaint under Order VII

    Rule 11. It is also pertinent to observe that under Order VII Rule 11,
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                          Page 32 of 52
no time period within which the plaint may be rejected has been

    stipulated. The power to reject a plaint, thus, can be exercised at any

    stage of the suit.
This Court in
Madanuri Sri Rama Chandra Murthy

    v. Syed Jalal
reported in (2017) 13 SCC 174 observed that the power

    to reject a plain is exercisable by the court at any stage of the suit. The

    relevant observations read as under:
“7. The plaint can be rejected under Order 7 Rule 11 if
          conditions enumerated in the said provision are fulfilled.
          It is needless to observe that the power under
Order 7
          Rule 11 CPC
can be exercised by the Court at any stage
          of the suit. The relevant facts which need to be looked
          into for deciding the application are the averments of
          the plaint only. If on an entire and meaningful reading
          of the plaint, it is found that the suit is manifestly
          vexatious and meritless in the sense of not disclosing
          any right to sue, the court should exercise power under
Order 7 Rule 11 CPC
. Since the power conferred on the
          Court to terminate civil action at the threshold is
          drastic, the conditions enumerated under
Order 7 Rule
          11 CPC
to the exercise of power of rejection of plaint
          have to be strictly adhered to. The averments of the
          plaint have to be read as a whole to find out whether the
          averments disclose a cause of action or whether the suit
          is barred by any law. It is needless to observe that the
          question as to whether the suit is barred by any law,
          would always depend upon the facts and circumstances
          of each case. The averments in the written statement as
          well as the contentions of the defendant are wholly
          immaterial while considering the prayer of the
          defendant for rejection of the plaint. Even when the
          allegations made in the plaint are taken to be correct as
          a whole on their face value, if they show that the suit is
          barred by any law, or do not disclose cause of action,
          the application for rejection of plaint can be entertained
          and the power under
Order 7 Rule 11 CPC
can be
          exercised. If clever drafting of the plaint has created the
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                           Page 33 of 52
illusion of a cause of action, the court will nip it in the
          bud at the earliest so that bogus litigation will end at the
          earlier stage.”
                                                (Emphasis supplied)
40. Similarly, in
Popat and Kotecha Property v. State Bank of India

    Staff Assn.
, reported in (2005) 7 SCC 510, this Court observed that

    the scheme of Order VII Rule 11 is silent about the stage at which the

    power to reject a plaint may be invoked by the court. However, the

    use of the word “shall” denotes that the courts are under an obligation

    to reject a plaint if the conditions specified therein are satisfied. Thus,

    it could be said that under the scheme of Order VII Rule 11, it is not

    the stage at which the objection is raised which is relevant, but it is

    the merit of the objection raised which has been conferred primacy.

    The relevant observations from
the said decision
read as under:
“23. Rule 11 of Order 7 lays down an independent
          remedy made available to the defendant to challenge the
          maintainability of the suit itself, irrespective of his right
          to contest the same on merits. The law ostensibly does
          not contemplate at any stage when the objections can be
          raised, and also does not say in express terms about the
          filing of a written statement. Instead, the word “shall”
          is used clearly implying thereby that it casts a duty on
          the court to perform its obligations in rejecting the
          plaint when the same is hit by any of the infirmities
          provided in the four clauses of Rule 11, even without
          intervention of the defendant. In any event, rejection of
          the plaint under Rule 11 does not preclude the plaintiffs
          from presenting a fresh plaint in terms of Rule 13.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                           Page 34 of 52
41. At this juncture, we would like to point out that the Trial Court in the

    instant case, while refusing to allow the application of the appellant

    under Order VII Rule 11, observed that the application, having been

    filed at a belated stage of more than an year after the filing of the

    written statement, was liable to be rejected. However, the decision in
Patil Automation
(supra) does not leave any scope for a similar

    approach to be adopted by courts anymore in cases where Section 12A

    has not been duly complied with. The Court in
the said decision
has

    also observed that even if a plea of rejection of plaint is not taken by

    the defendant, the courts must suo motu take note of the non-

    compliance with Section 12A and reject the plaint, and the stage of

    the suit proceedings is not a valid consideration to be looked into

    while rejecting a plaint.
However, as we shall discuss in more detail

    in the subsequent paragraphs, the decision in
Patil Automation
(supra) makes the consequence of rejection of plaint for non-

    compliance prospectively applicable for suits instituted post

    20.08.2022.
iii. How the expression “urgent interim relief” is to be construed
42. Further, it is also pertinent to note that Section 12A of the 2015 Act

    does not contemplate leave of the court for filing a suit which
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                        Page 35 of 52
contemplates an urgent interim relief, as is clear from the language

    and words used in the provision. The provision also does not

    necessarily require an application seeking exemption if a suit is being

    filed without pre-institution mediation. An application seeking waiver

    on account of urgent interim relief setting out grounds and reasons

    may allay a challenge and assist the court, but in the absence of any

    statutory mandate or rules made by the Central Government, an

    application per se is not a condition under Section 12A of the 2015

    Act. Pleadings on record and oral submissions would be sufficient in

    ordinary course.
43. This Court in
Yamini Manohar v. T.K.D. Keerthi
reported in (2024)

    5 SCC 815 while interpreting the import of the expression “a suit

    which does not contemplate any urgent interim relief” used in Section

    12A of the 2015 Act observed that the word “contemplate” connotes

    to deliberate and consider. Further, the legal position that the plaint

    can be rejected and not entertained reflects application of mind by the

    court as regards the requirement of “urgent interim relief”. The Court

    further observed that the prayer of urgent interim relief should not act

    as a disguise to get over the bar contemplated under Section 12A.

    However, at the same time, the Court observed that the mere non-

    grant of the interim relief at the ad-interim stage, when the plaint is
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                        Page 36 of 52
taken up for admission and examination would not justify the

    rejection of the plaint under
Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC
, as interim

    relief is at times also granted after issuance of notice. Further, even if

    after the conclusion of arguments on the aspect of interim relief, the

    same is denied on merits, that would not by itself justify the rejection

    of the plaint under Order VII Rule 11. The relevant observations from
the said decision
are reproduced hereinbelow:
“10. We are of the opinion that when a plaint is filed
          under the
CC Act
, with a prayer for an urgent interim
          relief, the commercial court should examine the nature
          and the subject-matter of the suit, the cause of action,
          and the prayer for interim relief. The prayer for urgent
          interim relief should not be a disguise or mask to
          wriggle out of and get over
Section 12-A
of the CC Act.
          The facts and circumstances of the case have to be
          considered holistically from the standpoint of the
          plaintiff. Non-grant of interim relief at the ad interim
          stage, when the plaint is taken up for
          registration/admission and examination, will not justify
          dismissal of the commercial suit under Order 7 Rule 11
          of the Code; at times, interim relief is granted after
          issuance of notice. Nor can the suit be dismissed under
          Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code, because the interim relief,
          post the arguments, is denied on merits and on
          examination of the three principles, namely : (i) prima
          facie case, (ii) irreparable harm and injury, and (iii)
          balance of convenience. The fact that the court issued
          notice and/or granted interim stay may indicate that the
          court is inclined to entertain the plaint.
11. Having stated so, it is difficult to agree with the
          proposition that the plaintiff has the absolute choice and
          right to paralyse
Section 12-A
of the CC Act by making
          a prayer for urgent interim relief. Camouflage and guise
          to bypass the statutory mandate of pre-litigation
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                          Page 37 of 52
mediation should be checked when deception and falsity
         is apparent or established. The proposition that the
         commercial courts do have a role, albeit a limited one,
         should be accepted, otherwise it would be up to the
         plaintiff alone to decide whether to resort to the
         procedure under
Section 12-A
of the CC Act. An
         “absolute and unfettered right” approach is not justified
         if the pre-institution mediation under
Section 12-A
of the
         CC Act is mandatory, as held by this Court in
Patil
         Automation [Patil Automation (P) Ltd. v. Rakheja
         Engineers (P) Ltd.
, (2022) 10 SCC 1 : (2023) 1 SCC
         (Civ) 545] .
12. The words “contemplate any urgent interim relief”
         in
Section 12-A(1)
of the CC Act, with reference to the
         suit, should be read as conferring power on the court to
         be satisfied. They suggest that the suit must
         “contemplate”, which means the plaint, documents and
         facts should show and indicate the need for an urgent
         interim relief. This is the precise and limited exercise
         that the commercial courts will undertake, the contours
         of which have been explained in the earlier
         paragraph(s). This will be sufficient to keep in check and
         ensure that the legislative object/intent behind the
         enactment of
Section 12-A
of the CC Act is not
         defeated.”
                                              (Emphasis supplied)
44. Thus, it becomes clear from a perusal of the aforesaid decision that

    the test under Section 12A is not whether the prayer for the urgent

    interim relief actually comes to be allowed or not, but whether on an

    examination of the nature and the subject-matter of the suit and the

    cause of action, the prayer of urgent interim relief by the plaintiff

    could be said to be contemplable when the matter is seen from the

    standpoint of the plaintiff. Further, what is also to be kept in mind by
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                        Page 38 of 52
the courts is that the urgent interim relief must not be merely an

    unfounded excuse by the plaintiff to bypass the mandatory

    requirement of Section 12A of the 2015 Act.
45. In the case at hand indisputably, no urgent interim relief was prayed

    for at the time of the institution of the suit by the Union.
iv. The effect of according prospectivity to the declaration in
Patil Automation
(supra) on cases like the one at hand
46.
In
Patil Automation
(supra), this Court held that the language of

    Section 12A is plainly imperative in nature, and any commercial suit

    instituted without adhering to this provision is liable to be rejected

    under
Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC
. However, recognising that the
Amending Act
containing Section 12A is a ‘toddler’, and that the

    “law necessarily would have teething problems at the nascent stage”,

    this Court declared the aforesaid declaration to operate prospectively,

    effective from 20.08.2022, so that the stakeholders may be

    sufficiently informed.
In the instant case, as the money suit was filed

    by the respondents much prior to the decision in
Patil Automation
(supra), it is squarely protected by the prospective ruling of this

    Court.
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                            Page 39 of 52
47. This Court had further held that the protective umbrella of prospective

    overruling in
Patil Automation
(supra) would not apply to plaints

    which were rejected, and no steps had been taken within the period of

    limitation; or such rejection had been acted upon by filing a new suit;

    or if the plaint violating Section 12A had been filed after the

    jurisdictional High Court has declared the provision to be mandatory.

    Indisputably, the Union of India does not fall under any of the other

    aforementioned exceptions.
Thus, we find it difficult to agree with the

    submission canvassed by the appellant that the bar of Section 12A of

    the 2015 Act would continue to apply to the money suit filed by the

    respondents despite there being a prospective declaration in
Patil

    Automation
(supra).
48. While it is correct that any declaration of the correct position of the

    law goes back to the day of the inception of the law itself, as the courts

    merely discover the correct position of law by applying settled legal

    principles and not legislate a new legal position, it is equally well

    recognised that the courts, while declaring an interpretation of the

    law, may declare it to be operative only prospectively so as to prevent

    chaos which may ensue as a result of the unsettling of the transactions

    which may have taken place before such declaration. Taking a clue

    from the decisions of this Court on the aspect of prospective
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                          Page 40 of 52
overruling, it could be said that this Court has been endowed with the

    power to mould the relief to do complete justice in a given situation,

    and to avoid the possibility of chaos and confusion that may be caused

    in the society at large.
v. The equitable maxim lex non cogit ad impossibilia
49. It is settled that law does not compel an impossible performance, and

    the same position has been followed by this Court in a catena of

    judgments. Espousing the aforesaid maxim in
Raj Kumar Dey
(supra) this Court has held as follows:
“6. …. The other maxim is lex non cogit ad impossibilia
          (Broom's Legal Maxims — page 162) — The law does
          not compel a man to do that which he cannot possibly
          perform. The law itself and the administration of it, said
          Sir W. Scott, with reference to an alleged infraction of
          the revenue laws, must yield to that to which everything
          must bend, to necessity; the law, in its most positive and
          peremptory injunctions, is understood to disclaim, as it
          does in its general aphorisms, all intention of
          compelling impossibilities, and the administration of
          laws must adopt that general exception in the
          consideration of all particular cases.”
50. The aforesaid maxim was recognised and reiterated by this Court in
U.P. SRTC v. Imtiaz Hussain
reported in (2006) 1 SCC 380.
51. The materials on record would indicate that after the establishment of

    the first Commercial Court at Alipore, the statutory framework and
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                        Page 41 of 52
corresponding rules were progressively implemented until December

    2020. Therefore, during this intervening period, referring the matter

    to pre-suit mediation under Section 12A was impossible due to a

    persisting vacuum created by lack of appointment of necessary

    authorities and delineation of the procedural framework.
52. The learned ASG is right to some extent in her submission that

    awaiting the establishment of the requisite infrastructure would

    unduly impede the recovery process in a money suit involving public

    funds, thereby defeating the very purpose and legislative intent of the

    2015 Act, which aims to ensure the expeditious resolution of

    commercial disputes.
53. The declaration of the mandatory nature of Section 12A of the 2015

    Act was given prospective effect in
Patil Automation
(supra) keeping

    in mind the fact that Section 12A, being in its stages of infancy, had

    given rise to conflicting views by different High Courts and

    consequently an overall lack of clarity on the nature of the provision.

    Thus, the Court was of the view that in the absence of prospective

    effect being given to the declaration, all such suits which had been

    filed without complying with the provision, owing to the lack of

    clarity on the mandatory nature of the provision, would be susceptible
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                        Page 42 of 52
to being rejected and the court fees submitted at the time of their

    institution being written off. The Court further expressed

    apprehensions as regards the applicability of
Section 14
of the

    Limitation Act to fresh suits filed after the rejection of plaint for non-

    compliance with Section 12A and thus held that it would be in the

    best interest of justice that the declaration of mandatory compliance

    with Section 12A be given prospectivity to avoid the aforesaid

    complexities from cropping up.
54. While giving prospectivity to its finding on the mandatory nature of

    Section 12A and the consequence of rejection of plaint in cases of

    non-compliance, the Court also observed that the prospective

    declaration would not save the situation in certain categories of cases

    which we have discussed in paragraph 47 above. However, it is not

    the case of the appellant that the case at hand falls within the ambit of

    any of the exceptions
laid down in
Patil Automation
(supra).
55. It is interesting to note that the decision impugned before us was

    referred to by this Court in paragraph 54 of
Patil Automation
(supra)

    while it was discussing the divergent views of different High Courts

    on the nature of Section 12A of the 2015 Act. Therein, this Court had

    observed thus:
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                          Page 43 of 52
“54. A learned Single Judge of the High Court of
         Calcutta, in the decision reported in
Dhanbad Fuels Ltd.
         v. Union of India and Others
, 2021 SCC OnLine SC 429,
         took the view that mediation in India is still at a nascent
         stage and requires more awareness. There was a need
         for mandatory training of commercial disputes. It was
         further found that the party cannot be denied the right
         to participate in the justice dispensation system. It
         wasfurther noticed that there was no obligation on the
         part of the defendant to respond to the initiative of the
         plaintiff. Rejecting the plaint under Order VII Rule 11(d)
         in view of Order VII Rule 13, which enables a fresh Suit
         to be filed upon rejection under Order VII Rule 11,
         would show that the power under Order VII Rule 11
         should not be invoked as it would not be in accordance
         with the objectives of the Act and the Rules.”
56. After taking into consideration the view taken by the Calcutta High

    Court in the impugned decision as well as the view of several other

    High Courts, this Court, in
Patil Automation
(supra), arrived at the

    findings as we have discussed in detail in the preceding paragraphs.
Thus, insofar as the interpretation of the nature of Section 12A of the

    2015 Act in the impugned decision is concerned, the same must be

    seen in the context of the decision in
Patil Automation
(supra).
57. However, the pertinent question that falls for us is whether the

    approach adopted by the Trial Court and approved by the High Court

    in the present case, in keeping the suit in abeyance, and sending the

    parties to mediation as per the PIMS Rules and the 2020 SOP, was the

    correct approach.
In other words, while the decision in
Patil
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                        Page 44 of 52
Automation
(supra) is clear that any suit instituted after 20.08.2022

    without complying with Section 12A of the 2015 Act must be visited

    with the rejection of the plaint under Order VII Rule 11, whether in

    suits filed prior to the said date, the courts must keep the suit in

    abeyance and refer the parties to mediation, and proceed with it only

    after the report of the mediator is received.
58. The answer to the aforesaid question requires us to harmoniously

    construe the two observations made by this Court in
Patil Automation
(supra). The Court observed in paragraph 104 of
the said decision
that

    the declaration of the law by the Court would relate back to the date

    of the
Amending Act
. However, keeping in mind practical

    considerations, the Court in paragraph 113.1 observed that the

    consequence of rejection of plaint under Order VII Rule 11 for not

    complying with Section 12A of the 2015 Act would only be operative

    prospectively with effect from 20.08.2022. Thus, what is clear from a

    joint reading of both these observations is that while Section 12A is

    held to be mandatory from the date of the inception of the provision

    itself, the consequence of rejection for non-compliance is only made

    applicable prospectively.
59. Thus, although suits which were instituted before the date of the

    decision in
Patil Automation
(supra) may not be rejected under Order
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                      Page 45 of 52
VII Rule 11 for not complying with Section 12A of the 2015 Act,

    unless they fall within the exceptional categories described in
the said

    decision
itself, yet this would not obviate the requirement of giving

    the parties a chance to attempt to resolve the disputes through

    mediation as envisaged under Section 12A of the 2015 Act. One of

    the ways by which this can be achieved is by keeping the suit in

    abeyance and referring the parties to a time-bound mediation and only

    proceeding with the suit once the report of the mediator is received.

    This approach would ensure that even if not pre-institution, the parties

    at the very least get an opportunity to resolve the disputes through

    mediation post the institution of the suit. This in no way means that

    Section 12A envisages post-institution mediation.
Post-institution

    mediation, while keeping the suit in abeyance, is only envisaged for

    the limited category of cases which are not covered by the prospective

    declaration made in
Patil Automation
(supra) as the rejection of

    plaints under Order VII Rule 11 has been done away with in the

    interest of justice in such category of cases.
This approach also

    received the tacit approval of this Court in
Patil Automation
(supra),

    wherein while disapproving the reasoning adopted in the order

    impugned therein, the Court refused to interfere with the impugned

    order which had referred the parties to mediation while keeping the

    suit in abeyance.
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                        Page 46 of 52
60. However, it is also important to clarify that in cases where a suit

    instituted prior to 20.08.2022 has been decided, it would not be of any

    avail to the parties to revisit the same on the ground of mandatory

    compliance with Section 12A of the 2015 Act. However, wherever

    such a suit is pending before the trial court and an objection is raised

    by the defendant for non-compliance with Section 12A of the 2015

    Act, or any intent to settle the dispute by mediation is exhibited by

    the parties, then it would be permissible for the court to keep the suit

    in abeyance and refer the parties to time-bound mediation in

    accordance with the 2015 Act, the PIMS Rules and the 2020 SOP.
61. Before we part with the matter, we also deem it appropriate to address

    one of the main contentions of the appellant that having regard to the

    fact that the suit is still at the nascent stage of filing of written

    statement and no substantial progress has been made therein, this

    Court must reject the plaint and direct the respondents to institute a

    fresh suit after complying with the mandatory requirement of Section

    12A. However, we do not find any force in the aforesaid submission.

    We do not see how directing the respondents to institute a fresh suit

    would be of any benefit to the appellant. We have discussed in detail

    that this Court in
Patil Automation
(supra) made its decision

    prospectively applicable keeping in mind the predicament of suits like
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                        Page 47 of 52
the one at hand wherein owing to a lack of clarity in law, Section 12A

    of the 2015 could not be complied with in certain cases. Directing the

    institution of a fresh suit would only result into the forfeiture of the

    court fees deposited by the respondents, which would only be an

    unnecessary burden on the public exchequer.
The approach adopted

    by the Trial Court and the High Court in keeping the suit in abeyance

    and directing the parties to approach the competent authority for

    mediation commends more to us as it complies with a harmonious

    reading of the decision in
Patil Automation
(supra) and prevents

    unnecessary delays and burden on the public exchequer.
Further,

    substantial progress in the suit was not the only reason why the Court

    in
Patil Automation
(supra) gave prospective effect to its decision.

    As we have discussed, factors like forfeiture of court fees, ambiguity

    over the applicability of
Section 14
of the Limitation Act, unsettling

    of settled cases, etc. were a few other reasons which weighed with the

    Court in arriving at its decision of according prospectivity to the

    judgment. Thus, we find it difficult to accept the argument advanced

    by the appellant that the plaint must be rejected for the reason that the

    suit has not made substantial progress after its institution.
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                         Page 48 of 52
E.   CONCLUSION
62. In light of the aforesaid discussion, we summarise our findings as

     under:
a. The decision of this Court in
Patil Automation
(supra) lays

         down the correct position of law as regards Section 12A of the

         2015 Act by holding it to be mandatory in nature.
b. As held in paragraph 104 of the decision in
Patil Automation
(supra), the declaration of the mandatory nature of Section 12A

         of the 2015 Act relates back to the date of the
Amending Act
.
c. As held in paragraph 113.1 of the decision in
Patil Automation
(supra), any suit which is instituted under the 2015 Act without

         complying with Section 12A is liable to be rejected under Order

         VII Rule 11. However, this declaration applies prospectively to

         suits instituted on or after 20.08.2022.
d. A suit which contemplates an urgent interim relief may be filed

         under the 2015 Act without first resorting to mediation as

         prescribed under Section 12A of the 2015 Act.
e. Unlike
Section 80(2)
of the CPC, leave of the court is not

         required to be obtained before filing a suit without complying

         with Section 12A of the 2015 Act.
f. The test for “urgent interim relief” is if on an examination of the

         nature and the subject-matter of the suit and the cause of action,
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                        Page 49 of 52
the prayer of urgent interim relief by the plaintiff could be said

         to be contemplable when the matter is seen from the standpoint

         of the plaintiff.
g. Courts must also be wary of the fact that the urgent interim relief

         must not be merely an unfounded excuse by the plaintiff to

         bypass the mandatory requirement of Section 12A of the 2015

         Act.
h. Even if the urgent interim relief ultimately comes to be denied,

         the suit of the plaintiff may be proceeded with without

         compliance with Section 12A if the test for “urgent interim

         relief” is satisfied notwithstanding the actual outcome on merits.

      i. Suits instituted without complying with Section 12A of the 2015

         Act prior to 20.08.2022 cannot be rejected under Order VII Rule

         11 on the ground of non-compliance with Section 12A unless

         they fall within the exceptions stipulated in paragraph 113.2 and

         113.3 of the decision in
Patil Automation
(supra).

      j. In suits instituted without complying with Section 12A of the

         2015 Act prior to 20.08.2022 which are pending adjudication

         before the trial court, the court shall keep the suit in abeyance

         and refer the parties to time-bound mediation in accordance with

         Section 12A of the 2015 Act if an objection is raised by the

         defendant by filing an application under Order VII Rule 11, or
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                        Page 50 of 52
in cases where any of the parties expresses an intent to resolve

         the dispute by mediation.
63. Thus, the answer to the question formulated by us whether a suit filed

    without complying with Section 12A of the 2015 Act must be

    dismissed or be kept in abeyance with a direction to the parties to

    explore mediation is as follows:
a. If the suit is instituted on or after the date of the decision in
Patil

         Automation
(supra), i.e., 20.08.2022, without complying with

         Section 12A of the 2015 Act, then it must meet with rejection

         under Order VII Rule 11, either on an application by the

         defendant or suo motu by the court.
b. If the suit was instituted prior to 20.08.2022 without complying

         with Section 12A of the 2015 Act, and the same does not fall

         within one of the exceptional categories as explained in

         paragraph 47 of this judgment, then it would be open to the court

         to keep the suit in abeyance and direct the parties to explore the

         possibility of mediation in accordance with the 2015 Act, the

         PIMS Rules and the 2020 SOP.
64. Having answered the issues as aforesaid, we find it difficult to accept

    the contention of the appellant that the Trial Court as well as the High

    Court committed an error in refusing to reject the plaint under Order
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                           Page 51 of 52
VII Rule 11. On the contrary, the approach adopted by the High Court

    in the impugned order in keeping the suit in abeyance and referring the

    parties to mediation, strikes a perfect balance between the mandatory

    nature of Section 12A of the 2015 Act as well as the prospective

    applicability of the consequence of non-compliance with Section 12A as

    held in
Patil Automation
(supra).
65. Needless to clarify that the mediation proceedings must be completed

    within the time frame stipulated by Section 12A of the 2015 Act and the

    PIMS Rules, that is, within a period of three months and extendable by

    two more months, if the need so arises.
66. In the result, the present appeal fails and is hereby dismissed.
67. Pending application(s), if any, shall also stand disposed of.
68. We direct the Registry to circulate a copy of this judgment to all High

    Courts.
………………………..J.

                                                     (J.B. Pardiwala)



     New Delhi;                                   ………………………..J.

     May 15th, 2025                                  (R. Mahadevan)
SLP(C) NO. 4980 OF 2021                                             Page 52 of 52