[Cites
15
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Kerala vs The Principal Kmct Medical College on 16 May, 2025
Author:
Surya Kant
Bench:
Surya Kant
2025 INSC 518                                                                   REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       Civil Appeal No. _______ / 2025
                     (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 9885 – 9888 / 2020)


            The State of Kerala and Ors.                                        ….Appellant(s)

                                                      versus

            The Principal, KMCT Medical College and Ors.                      ….Respondent(s)


                                                       WITH

                                           Civil Appeal No. _______ / 2025
                            (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 12984 / 2020)


            The Principal KMCT Medical College & Anr.                           ….Appellant(s)

                                                      versus

            The Admission and Fee Regulatory Committee and Anr.              ….Respondent(s)


                                                       WITH

                                       Civil Appeal No. _______ / 2025
                     (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 4909 – 4910 / 2021)

            Altaf Hussain & Ors.                                                ….Appellant(s)

                                                      versus

            The State of Kerala and Ors.                                      ….Respondent(s)


                                                       WITH

                                     Civil Appeal No. _______ / 2025
                 (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 12957 – 12958 / 2021)
   Signature Not Verified

   Digitally signed by
   SATISH KUMAR YADAV

            Sanchana Pious & Ors.                                               ….Appellant(s)
   Date: 2025.05.16
   16:36:10 IST
   Reason:




                                                      versus


                                                                                   Page 1 of 32
The State of Kerala and Ors.                                ….Respondent(s)

                                JUDGEMENT
SURYA KANT, J.
Leave granted.
2.   The issue that arises for consideration has emanated from a direction

     given by the State of Kerala’s Admission and Fee Regulatory Committee

     that a corpus fund be created to subsidize medical education for Below

     Poverty Line     (BPL) students   admitted to    self­financing   medical

     educational institutions in the State. This corpus fund was to be

     created by remitting to the State Government a part of the fees collected

     from Non­Resident Indian (NRI) students admitted to those colleges.
3.   The Kerala High Court, at Ernakulam (High Court) vide the common

     Impugned Judgement dated 23.07.2020 has: (i) quashed Government

     Order (MS) No. 107/2018/H&FWD dated 06.06.2018 (GO dated

     06.06.2018); (ii) directed that the amounts collected from each NRI

     student to create a corpus fund be transferred to the respective

     institutions and maintained as a separate account to be utilized only

     for the benefit of students belonging to the economically weaker

     sections, who may be admitted to such institutions on the basis of

     allotment; (iii) directed such account to be operated only jointly by a

     nominee of the self­financing institution and a nominee of the State

     Government; (iv) kept it open to the State to promulgate suitable
Page 2 of 32
legislative measures to achieve the object of providing scholarships to

     students belonging to economically weaker sections of society as

     observed by this Court in
P. A. Inamdar and Ors. v. State of

     Maharashtra1
; and has further directed that (v) till suitable legislative

     measures are adopted by the State, no further amounts would be levied

     or collected from NRI students, already admitted to or to be admitted to

     NRI quota seats in that academic year, towards the creation or

     maintenance of the corpus fund.
4.   These directions of the High Court have given rise to three sets of cross­

     appeals preferred by: (i) The State of Kerala, who is aggrieved by the

     quashing of its GO dated 06.06.2018; (ii) The self­financing medical

     colleges, who are challenging the direction that the corpus fund

     amount be utilized only to subsidize education for students from

     economically­weaker sections of society admitted to the respective

     institutions; and finally, (iii) The NRI students, who are dissatisfied

     that the corpus fund amounts have not been refunded to them.


A.   FACTS
5.   Owing to a parallel set of proceedings before the Courts concerning the

     Committee’s overall functioning, it is vital to understand the detailed

     facts before analyzing the legal issues.
1
P. A. Inamdar and Ors. v. State of Maharashtra
, (2005) 6 SCC 537.
Page 3 of 32
5.1
The Kerala Medical Education (Regulation and Control of Admission to

    Private Medical Educational Institutions) Act, 2017
(the 2017 Act)

    came into force on 01.06.2017. It was introduced to, among other

    things, regulate the admission and fixation of fees in private medical

    educational institutions in the State of Kerala.
Sections 3
and
3A
of the

    2017 Act contemplate the constitution of a Committee, described as the

    Admission and Fee Regulatory Committee (Committee). The Committee

    was tasked to determine the fees charged to students admitted to

    private medical educational institutions in Kerala based on the annual

    information and proposals submitted by those colleges.


5.2 KMCT Medical College moved an application and submitted the

    prospectus for Academic Year 2017­2018 before the Committee on

    01.08.2017, requesting it to fix the fees for NRI students at Rs. 20

    lakhs per annum.
5.3 The Committee, on 27.02.2018, approved the fixation of fees for NRI

    students at Rs. 20 lakhs per annum for all medical colleges whose fee

    was to be regulated under the 2017 Act. Notedly, it decided to enhance

    the fees for NRI students from Rs. 15 lakhs per annum in Academic

    Year 2016­2017 to Rs. 20 lakhs per annum in Academic Year 2017­

    2018 and 2018­2019, with the condition that the extra amount of Rs. 5

    lakhs would be kept as a ‘corpus fund’ to provide scholarships to BPL

    students. The Committee further directed that the corpus fund amount

    would be remitted to the State Government, as and when so directed by
Page 4 of 32
the State, the Committee, or a Court of Law. This decision was

    substantiated by quoting paragraph 131 of
P. A. Inamdar
(supra),

    where it was held that the fees collected from NRI students should be

    utilized to benefit students from economically­weaker sections of

    society.
5.4 KMCT       Medical   College,   being   aggrieved,   laid   challenge   to   the

    Committee’s decision before the High Court.
5.5 During the pendency of the writ proceedings before the High Court, the

    Government of Kerala issued the GO dated 06.06.2018, seemingly to

    validate and support the Committee’s decision dated 27.02.2018. It

    emphasized that the mainstay of the corpus fund would be the

    amounts earmarked and collected from NRI students who were

    admitted to self­financing medical educational institutions in the State.

    Much like the Committee’s decision, the GO dated 06.06.2018 was

    statedly issued in pursuance of the directions contained in paragraph

    131 of
P. A. Inamdar
(supra). Compelled by the GO dated 06.06.2018,

    the self­financing medical colleges consequently began collecting Rs. 20

    lakhs per annum as fees from the newly­admitted NRI students, while

    remitting Rs. 5 lakhs to the corpus fund.
5.6 The Committee, meanwhile, continued to assess the fee proposals

    submitted by various colleges. In some instances, it rejected the

    proposals and determined the fees to be charged on its own initiative.

    Viewing this as an overstep of the Committee’s powers and a violation
Page 5 of 32
of the institutions’ autonomy, several medical colleges filed writ

     petitions before the High Court. This resulted in a parallel set of

     proceedings concerning the Committee’s overall powers.


5.7 These     proceedings     culminated      in   a   common      judgment        dated

     19.05.2020, whereby the High Court remanded the matter to the

     Committee to re­examine the proposals afresh and to pass suitable

     orders. The High Court observed that though the Committee had the

     power to fix the fee to be collected from NRI students, there was no

     power vested in it under
Section 8
of the 2017 Act to direct that a

     portion of the fee amount be utilized for any other purpose.


5.8 The aggrieved State approached this Court in Civil Appeal No. 606­

     616/2021, which came to be decided on 25.02.2021,2 holding that the

     fee, as proposed by the colleges, should be considered by the

     Committee.
This Court noted that it was no longer res integra that the

     right conferred on the institutions to fix fees for professional courses

     was subject to regulation. It was reiterated that unaided professional

     institutions had the autonomy to decide on the fees to be charged,

     subject to the condition that such fees do not result in profiteering or

     collection of capitation fees. The Committee was only required to ensure

     that the fee charged was non­exploitative and reasonable. This Court

     thus directed the Committee to reconsider the proposals submitted by

     the colleges, by taking into account the factors mentioned in
Section 11
2
Najiya Neermunda v. Kunhitharuvai Memorial Charitable Trust, (2021) 5 SCC 515.
Page 6 of 32
of the 2017 Act and the law
laid down in
Modern Dental College &

     Research Centre and Ors. v. State of Madhya Pradesh and Ors.3
5.9 While this Court was seized of the above­mentioned matter, various

     self­financing medical colleges and their NRI students initiated a

     second round of litigation before the High Court, this time, challenging

     the amounts collected from NRI students to create the corpus fund to

     benefit BPL students enrolled in the same institutes. The High Court

     clubbed these writ petitions with the earlier petition filed by KMCT

     Medical College, and has decided all these writ petitions through the

     common Impugned Judgment.
5.10 The High Court, being conscious of the fact that the Committee was

     considering the fee proposals afresh, as was directed by it vide the

     judgement dated 19.05.2020, restricted its assessment only qua the

     ‘validity of the creation of the corpus fund.’


5.11 The question that was formulated by the High Court for its

     consideration was whether the creation of the corpus fund through the

     GO dated 06.06.2018 could be sustained in the absence of law in the

     form of plenary legislation or subordinate legislation. The High Court

     opined that, regardless of the nature of the levy, such a fee could be

     imposed only under the authority of law and not merely by an executive

     order. Since there was no provision in the 2017 Act authorizing the


3
Modern Dental College & Research Centre and Ors. v. State of Madhya Pradesh and Ors.
,
(2016) 7 SCC 353.
Page 7 of 32
Committee or the State Government to levy an amount to be credited to

     a corpus fund, the GO dated 06.06.2018 could not be sustained.

     Accordingly, the GO was quashed and the directions, as specified in

     paragraph 3 above, have been issued.
5.12 This is how these cross­appeals have arisen for our consideration.




B.   CONTENTIONS OF THE PARTIES
6.   Mr. Kapil Sibal and Mr. Nikhil Goel, Learned Senior Counsel, appearing

     on behalf of KMCT Medical College and other self­financing medical

     colleges in the State, contended that the High Court has partly erred

     and the Impugned Judgement deserves to be suitably modified in light

     of the following submissions:
(a)   This Court has time and again permitted institutions to charge a

           higher amount of fees from NRI students as the fees paid by them

           enable such institutions to strengthen their level of education and

           enlarge their educational activities. KMCT Medical College has

           always followed this dictum and has been using the enhanced fees

           levied on NRI students to grant scholarships to students from

           economically­weaker sections of society. For instance, in 2014 and

           2015, KMCT Medical College awarded scholarships worth Rs. 1.28

           crores and Rs. 1.55 crores, respectively, to enable its students
Page 8 of 32
from economically­weaker sections of society to pursue their

      education.
(b)   The fee proposed to be charged from the NRI students was only Rs.
20 lakhs per annum, which is one of the lowest fees in the entire

      country. KMCT Medical College charges only Rs. 5.5 lakhs per

      annum as fees for general category students. Thus, if the tuition

      fee for NRI students was further reduced from Rs. 20 lakhs to Rs.

      15 lakhs, by virtue of the corpus fund, the college would be unable

      to continue financing its day­to­day activities. Consequently, the

      failure of the High Court to direct a refund, of the amount charged

      from NRI students towards the corpus fund, to the institutions is

      violative of
Article 19 (1)(g)
and
Article 30
of the Constitution.
(c)   The State or the Executive cannot impose any levy, whatever may

      be the nature of it, through an executive order, except under the

      authority of law. At present, there is no provision in the 2017 Act

      which empowers the State or its machinery to impose any tax or

      levy of any nature on self­financing medical colleges. The only

      power granted to the Committee is to satisfy itself that the fees

      charged by the self­financing medical educational institutions do

      not lead to profiteering or payment of capitation fees. If the

      Committee finds the fees charged to be exploitative, it can propose

      a different fee structure.
Page 9 of 32
(d)   Once the High Court quashed the GO dated 06.06.2018 on the

           ground that the Committee was not authorized under law to create

           a corpus fund, it could not have permitted such unauthorized

           action to continue by directing that the amounts collected for the

           corpus fund be utilized only to subsidize education for other

           students. The denial of a refund of the illegally­collected fees has

           put the self­financing medical colleges under financial strain.
(e)   KMCT Medical College, like other self­financing medical colleges,

           specifically requested the Committee to approve its fixation of fees

           at Rs. 20 lakhs per annum for NRI students, under the expectation

           that if approved, it would be able to utilize the entire amount of Rs.

           20 lakhs for educational purposes and for running the institution.

           It was improper and imprudent of the Committee to approve the

           fees of Rs. 20 lakhs per annum, only to retain Rs. 5 lakhs for the

           creation of the corpus fund.
7.   Mr. Shoeb Alam, Learned Senior Counsel, appearing on behalf of the

     NRI students, supported the quashing of the GO dated 06.06.2018 but

     contended that the High Court erred in disallowing a refund to them. In

     furtherance of this, he adduced the following submissions:
(a)   NRI students are admitted to colleges on a higher fee scale to

           subsidize the fees of students from economically­weaker sections

           of society. When an NRI student is admitted to a particular college,

           the higher fees paid are utilized to subsidize the fees of a BPL
Page 10 of 32
student in that particular college, alone. It is unfair and unjust

           that a higher fee charged from NRI students of a particular college

           be utilized to subsidize the fees charged in another college or

           multiple other colleges in the State.
(b)
Paragraph 67 of P. A. Inamdar
(supra) states that “each NRI

           student would subsidize two other students belonging to the

           economically and socially weaker sections.” Thus, if the fee fixed

           for a general category student for a particular year is only Rs. 5

           lakhs, there is no reason to fix the fees for NRI students above Rs.
15 lakhs as the NRI student would be subsidizing the fees of two

           other students from economically­weaker backgrounds. As a

           result, any amount levied as a corpus fund, without the authority

           of law, is over and above the amount contemplated for an NRI

           student to bear.
(c)   In addition to this, some colleges have forced the NRI students to

           give post­dated cheques of Rs. 5 lakhs, in advance, to create the

           corpus fund. The NRI students are thus either liable to be

           refunded the amounts collected under the guise of setting up the

           corpus fund or the amounts so collected must be set off against

           their future fees.
8.   Per contra, Mr. Jayant Muth Raj, Learned Senior Counsel, appearing on

     behalf of the State of Kerala, put forth the following submissions:
Page 11 of 32
(a)   The GO dated 06.06.2018 was issued in pursuance of paragraph

      131 of
P. A. Inamdar
(supra). The last line of paragraph 131

      specifically permitted the Committee to create a mechanism to

      subsidize education through the fees collected from NRI students,

      in the absence of State Legislation on the subject. The authority to

      create the corpus fund thus, came primarily from the Constitution

      Bench judgement of this Court, which, being the law of the land,

      need not be supplemented or supplanted by any State Legislation

      or Regulations.
(b)   The conduct of the self­financing medical colleges is questionable

      as they have collected the corpus fund amount of Rs. 5 lakhs in

      advance from the NRI students who were admitted in the 2017­

      2018 batch, even in respect of their second, third, fourth, and fifth

      years. They collected Rs. 43.6 crores in total but remitted only Rs.

      4.15 crores to the State for the purpose of the corpus fund. The

      college management did the same for the next 5 successive

      batches of NRI students, i.e. the batches of 2018­2019, 2019­

      2020, 2020­2021, 2021­2022, and 2022­2023. Rs. 145.45 crores

      were collected from these batches for the corpus fund, but only Rs.

      2 crores have been remitted to the corpus fund maintained by the

      Commissioner for Entrance Examinations. Thus, the colleges have

      retained a total of Rs. 182.9 crores from the batches of 2017­2018

      to 2022­2023. As a direct corollary to such action, the State of
Page 12 of 32
Kerala’s larger objective, of subsidizing education for students

           from economically­weaker sections of society, has been frustrated.
9.   Mr. Gaurav Aggarwal, Learned Senior Counsel, appearing on behalf of

     the intervenors, i.e. certain BPL students admitted to various self­

     financing medical colleges across Kerala, supported the GO dated

     06.06.2018 and put forth the following submissions:
(a)   The GO dated 06.06.2018 was adopted as a welfare measure by

           the State of Kerala. The object of the GO dated 06.06.2018 was

           laudable and the observations of this Court in
P. A. Inamdar
(supra) clearly compel the State to adopt such a course of action.
The GO dated 06.06.2018 should not have been quashed merely

           due to the absence of legislative support. The Courts should

           ordinarily not interfere with a policy decision of the Executive

           unless the same is mala fide, unreasonable, arbitrary, or unfair.
(b)   After the High Court directed that no further amount should be

           credited towards the corpus fund, many BPL students have been

           finding it difficult to continue their studies due to financial

           hardships. Not only this, the self­financing medical institutions are

           exerting pressure on BPL students to remit the regular tuition fees.

           These students chose to take admission to the respective colleges,

           with the understanding that they would only have to pay

           subsidized fees. Since they no longer receive BPL scholarships,
Page 13 of 32
they have been unable to pay their tuition and hostel fees and

           many of them will be forced to discontinue their studies.


C.   ISSUES
10. Having given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions at

     length, we find that the following issues arise for our consideration:
i.    Whether the Committee had the power to determine and direct

           that a particular amount of the fees charged to NRI students be

           kept in a corpus fund maintained by the State?
ii.   Whether the NRI students are entitled to a refund of the amount

           so charged or whether it can be set off against fees to be charged

           for later years?
D.   ANALYSIS

D.1 Issue No. 1: Power of the Committee to direct the creation of a
corpus fund for scholarships
11. To understand and deduce the powers of the Committee, we must

     conduct a detailed examination of the two sources from where it is

     stated to have derived its powers: (i) The Constitution Bench

     Judgement of this Court in
P. A. Inamdar
(supra); and (ii) Section 8A

     and
Section 11
of the 2017 Act.
D.1.1 The Constitution Bench Judgement of this Court in
P. A.
Inamdar
(supra)
Page 14 of 32
12. Before we delve into the analysis, it will be useful to reproduce the text

    of paragraph 131 of
P. A. Inamdar
(supra) to appreciate the rival

    submissions raised by the parties. It elucidates that:
“131. Here itself we are inclined to deal with the question
            as to seats allocated for Non­Resident Indians (“NRI” for
            short) or NRI seats. It is common knowledge that some of
            the institutions grant admissions to a certain number of
            students under such quota by charging a higher amount of
            fee. In fact, the term “NRI” in relation to admissions is a
            misnomer. By and large, we have noticed in cases after
            cases coming to this Court, neither the students who get
            admissions under this category nor their parents are NRIs.
In effect and reality, under this category, less meritorious
            students, but who can afford to bring more money, get
            admission. During the course of hearing, it was pointed
            out that a limited number of such seats should be made
            available as the money brought by such students admitted
            against NRI quota enables the educational institutions to
            strengthen their level of education and also to enlarge their
            educational activities. It was also pointed out that people
            of Indian origin, who have migrated to other countries,
            have a desire to bring back their children to their own
            country as they not only get education but also get
            reunited with the Indian cultural ethos by virtue of being
            here. They also wish the money which they would be
            spending elsewhere on education of their children should
            rather reach their own motherland. A limited reservation of
            such seats, not exceeding 15%, in our opinion, may be
            made available to NRIs depending on the discretion of the
            management subject to two conditions. First, such seats
            should be utilised bona fide by NRIs only and for their
            children or wards. Secondly, within this quota, merit
            should not be given a complete go­by. The amount of
            money, in whatever form collected from such NRIs,
            should be utilised for benefiting students such as
            from economically weaker sections of the society,
            whom, on well­defined criteria, the educational
            institution may admit on subsidised payment of
            their fee. To prevent misutilisation of such quota or
            any malpractice referable to NRI quota seats,
            suitable legislation or regulation needs to be
            framed. So long as the State does not do it, it will be
Page 15 of 32
for the Committees constituted pursuant to the
           direction in Islamic Academy [(2003) 6 SCC 697] to
           regulate.”
                                                     [Emphasis supplied]
13. In this regard, the State of Kerala and the intervenor­BPL students

    have vehemently asserted that this Court, in the above­reproduced

    paragraph, has unequivocally obligated each institution to subsidize

    the fees charged to students from economically­weaker sections of

    society through fees paid by NRI students. Until suitable legislation is

    made by the State, the Committee is obliged to regulate such

    subsidization. The Committee, therefore, was justified in creating the

    corpus fund.
14. Per contra, KMCT Medical College, other self­financing medical colleges,

    and some NRI students contend that
P. A. Inamdar
(supra) does not

    grant the Committee the power to create a corpus fund; the power to do

    so resides only with the State. The relevant paragraph only grants the

    Committee the ability to regulate admissions to the NRI quota to

    prevent its misutilization.
15. It is clear that paragraph 131 of
P. A. Inamdar
(supra) validates and

    encourages the idea of charging higher fees to NRI students in order to

    subsidize   education    for   students   from    economically­weaker    or

    backward sections of society, who are admitted to those colleges. This

    aligns with the ideals of a welfare State.
It cannot possibly be contested

    that the Committee, in the instant case, has not been constituted in
Page 16 of 32
line with the directives given by the 5­judge Bench of this Court in
Islamic Academy of Education v. State of Karnataka.4
16. On a thorough reading of the paragraph, it further appears that the

     powers granted to the Committee only concern the rules of allotment of

     seats in the NRI quota, with particular emphasis on preventing

     misutilization of the allotted quota and seats. The Committee is also

     permitted to frame such rules only till the time the State fails to do so.

     From the phrase, “To prevent misutilisation of such quota or any

     malpractice referable to NRI quota seats,” which precedes the State’s

     mandate to enact a suitable Legislation or frame Regulations, it is clear

     that the Committee constituted in
Islamic Academy
(supra) has been

     authorized to regulate NRI admissions. The power conferred on the

     Committee,      in   this    regard,    is   necessarily    meant     to     prevent

     misutilization of the NRI quota or any malpractice referable to that

     quota. Conversely, the above­reproduced paragraph is silent on the

     creation of any mechanism to subsidize fees for other students and

     does not confer any power on the Committee in this regard.
It is

     difficult to accept that the Committee can create a corpus fund on the

     strength of the transitional powers given to it in
P. A. Inamdar
(supra).

     The power to formulate creative solutions, such as a corpus fund, to

     benefit students from economically­weaker sections of society resides

     only with the State, which should be introduced through appropriate

     Legislation or Regulations.
4
Islamic Academy of Education v. State of Karnataka
, (2003) 6 SCC 697, para 7.
Page 17 of 32
17. The last line of paragraph 131, which mentions that the Committee will

    act as per the directions issued in
Islamic Academy
(supra), leaves no

    room to doubt that the powers of the Committee to regulate NRI seats

    are not boundless.
For better appreciation, it will be useful, at this

    stage, to refer to paragraph 7 of
Islamic Academy
(supra), which

    pertains to the constitution and the powers of the Committee. It reads

    as follows:
“7. So far as the first question is concerned, in our view
           the majority judgment is very clear. There can be no fixing
           of a rigid fee structure by the Government. Each institute
           must have the freedom to fix its own fee structure taking
           into consideration the need to generate funds to run the
           institution and to provide facilities necessary for the
           benefit of the students. They must also be able to generate
           surplus which must be used for the betterment and growth
           of that educational institution. In paragraph 56 of the
           judgment it has been categorically laid down that the
           decision on the fees to be charged must necessarily be left
           to the private educational institutions that do not seek and
           which are not dependent upon any funds from the
           Government. Each institute will be entitled to have its own
           fee structure. The fee structure for each institute must be
           fixed keeping in mind the infrastructure and facilities
           available, the investments made, salaries paid to the
           teachers and staff, future plans for expansion and/or
           betterment of the institution etc. Of course there can be no
           profiteering and capitation fees cannot be charged.
It thus
           needs to be emphasized that as per the majority judgment
           imparting of education is essentially charitable in nature.
           Thus the surplus/profit that can be generated must be
           only for the benefit/use of that educational institution.
           Profits/surplus cannot be diverted for any other use or
           purpose and cannot be used for personal gain or for any
           other business or enterprise. As, at present, there are
           statutes/regulations which govern the fixation of fees and
           as this Court has not yet considered the validity of those
           statutes/regulations, we direct that in order to give
           effect to the judgment in
T.M.A. Pai
case [(2002) 8
Page 18 of 32
SCC           481]        the        respective         State
           Governments/concerned authority shall set up, in
           each State, a committee headed by a retired High
           Court Judge who shall be nominated by the Chief
           Justice of that State. The other member, who shall be
           nominated by the Judge, should be a Chartered
           Accountant of repute. A representative of the Medical
           Council of India (in short “MCI”) or the All India Council for
           Technical Education (in short “AICTE”), depending on the
           type of institution, shall also be a member. The Secretary
           of the State Government in charge of Medical Education or
           Technical Education, as the case may be, shall be a
           member and Secretary of the Committee. The Committee
           should be free to nominate/co­opt another independent
           person of repute, so that the total number of members of
           the Committee shall not exceed five. Each educational
           institute must place before this Committee, well in advance
           of the academic year, its proposed fee structure. Along
           with the proposed fee structure all relevant documents
           and books of accounts must also be produced before the
           Committee for their scrutiny. The Committee shall then
           decide whether the fees proposed by that institute
           are justified and are not profiteering or charging
           capitation fee. The Committee will be at liberty to
           approve the fee structure or to propose some other
           fee which can be charged by the institute. The fee
           fixed by the Committee shall be binding for a period of
           three years, at the end of which period the institute would
           be at liberty to apply for revision. Once fees are fixed by
           the Committee, the institute cannot charge either directly
           or indirectly any other amount over and above the amount
           fixed as fees. If any other amount is charged, under any
           other head or guise e.g. donations, the same would
           amount       to    charging     of   capitation    fee.   The
           Governments/appropriate authorities should consider
           framing appropriate regulations, if not already framed,
           whereunder if it is found that an institution is charging
           capitation fees or profiteering that institution can be
           appropriately penalised and also face the prospect of
           losing its recognition/affiliation.”
                                                   [Emphasis supplied]
18. It becomes evident from the above extract that the Committee may only

    decide whether the fees proposed by the institution are exploitative or
Page 19 of 32
not.
Islamic Academy
(supra) makes no mention of the Committee’s

    discretionary power to divert a part of the approved fees for any

    purpose, howsoever noble it may be, including for the purpose of

    creating a corpus fund. Once the colleges submit their proposals to it,

    the Committee must examine all the heads to determine whether such

    proposed fee is reasonable. The Committee is also empowered to

    propose an alternative fee structure in the event of profiteering or

    charging of capitation fee by the college.
19. A conjoint reading of paragraph 131 of
P. A. Inamdar
(supra) and

    paragraph 7 of
Islamic Academy
(supra) amplifies the idea that the

    Committee’s power is not limitless. Such a combined reading leads us

    to the conclusion that: (i) the Committee is competent to prescribe fees

    in respect of the NRI quota in self­financing medical educational

    institutions   until   the   State   enacts   appropriate   Legislation   or

    Regulations; and (ii) the Committee cannot draw unlimited powers

    under the guise of ‘regulation of NRI quota/seats.’ In other words, the

    Committee can only make rules for admission to such seats and can

    review the fees charged to NRI students to ensure that they are not

    exploitative. This is the cumulative power granted to the Committee

    within which it must act. The Committee cannot perforate these

    bounds unless and until its power is expanded through a suitable

    Legislation or upon a direction by this Court.
Page 20 of 32
20.
In light of the above, it is evident that paragraph 131 of
P. A. Inamdar
(supra) does not clothe the Committee with the power to create a

    corpus fund for the benefit of economically­weaker students. It only

    directs the State to come up with a suitable plan to subsidize their

    education through the fees charged from NRI students. The Committee

    cannot usurp the powers vested in the State in this regard.


D.1.2 Section 8A and
Section 11
of the 2017 Act
21. Given that we have established the confines of the directions in
P. A.

    Inamdar
(supra), it is also necessary to ascertain whether the State

    has accounted for the proposed scholarship scheme/corpus fund

    through the aegis of the 2017 Act, which constitutes the Committee

    and regulates its functions.
22. Before we proceed further, we must take a glance at Section 8A and
Section 11
of the 2017 Act. These provisions read as follow:
“8A. Powers and functions of the Fee Regulatory
           Committee: (1) The Committee shall exercise the following
           powers and perform the following functions, namely: (a)
           require a private medical educational institution to furnish,
           within a specified date, information, documents or records
           as may be necessary for enabling the Fee Regulatory
           Committee to determine the fee that may be charged by
           the institution in respect of each medical course;
           [***]
           hear complaints with regard to admission in contravention
           of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder
           either on receipt of a complaint or suo motu and shall:
[***]
Page 21 of 32
(2) The [Fee Regulatory Committee] shall, for the purpose
of making any enquiry under this Act, have all the powers
of a civil court under
the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908
(Central Act 5 of 1908) while trying a suit in respect of the
following matters, namely: (a) summoning and enforcing
the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any
document; (c) receiving evidence on affidavit.

(3) The fee determined by the Fee Regulatory Committee
shall be applicable to a student who is admitted to a
private medical educational institution in that academic
year and shall not be revised till the completion of his
course in the said institution or University. No private
medical educational institution shall collect a fee
amounting to more than one year's fee from a student in
an academic year. Collection of more than one year's fee in
an academic year shall be construed as collecting of
capitation fee and shall be liable to be proceeded against.

(4) The Fee Regulatory Committee may, if it is satisfied
that there has been any violation by such institution of the
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder
regarding [***] fees, it may recommend to the Government
to take the following actions against such institution,
namely:
(a) impose a monetary fine up to ten lakh rupees on the
  institution together with interest thereon at the rate of
  twelve per cent per annum which shall be recovered as
  if it were an arrear of public revenue due on land;
(b) order the institution to refund to the student within
  such time as specified in the order, any amount received
  by the institution in excess of the fees fixed by the Fee
  Regulatory Committee or any amount received by way
  of capitation fee or any amount received for profiteering:
Provided that if the institution fails to refund the amount
  within the specified time to the student, the same shall
  be recoverable along with interest thereon at the rate of
  twelve per cent per annum as if it were an arrear of
  public revenue due on land and paid to the student;
(c) recommend to the University or the appropriate
  authority to withdraw the recognition of the institution;
(d) any other course of action, as it deems fit.
Page 22 of 32
(5) Before recommending to the Government to initiate
           actions under subsection (4) the institutions shall be given
           a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
11. Factors for determination of fee: (1) the Fee
           Regulatory Committee shall determine the fee considering
           the following factors, namely:
(a) the location of the private medical educational
             institution;
(b) the nature of the medical course;
(c) the cost of land and building;
(d) the available infrastructure, teaching and non­
             teaching staff and other equipments;
(e) the expenditure on administration and maintenance
             of the medical educational institution;
(f) a reasonable surplus required for growth and
             development of the medical educational institution;
(g) any other relevant factor.
(2) The Fee Regulatory Committee shall, before fixing any
           fee, give the institution a reasonable opportunity of being
           heard:
Provided that no such fee as may be fixed by the
           Committee     shall    amount    to profiteering or
           commercialization of education.”
23. Relying upon these provisions, the NRI students and the self­financing

    medical colleges support the Impugned Judgement to the extent that

    the GO dated 06.06.2018 was quashed on the premise that the State

    could not levy any amount without statutory backing permitting such

    levy. They contend that, at present, there is no provision in the 2017

    Act which empowers the State or its machinery to impose any fee or

    levy of any nature on self­financing medical educational institutions for

    the purpose of creating a corpus fund.
Page 23 of 32
24. Per contra, the State of Kerala and the intervenor­BPL students contend

    that the GO dated 06.06.2018 did not offend any provision of the 2017

    Act and was issued as a welfare measure by the State; to ensure that

    meritorious students belonging to weaker sections of society receive the

    opportunity to pursue quality education. The GO dated 06.06.2018

    specifically authorized the Committee to levy an amount towards the

    creation of a corpus fund for such laudable purpose. There was thus,

    no need for the insertion of any provision in the Statute.
25. It is well­settled law that a recourse to expropriatory measures cannot

    be sheltered under a piece of subordinate Legislation, save and except

    where the power is drawn from the competent Legislation. The power to

    levy tax or fee cannot be delegated to the Executive unless the principal

    Statute expressly authorizes to do so. Though the Committee indeed

    enjoys vast powers and functions under Section 8A of the 2017 Act, as

    reproduced above, such power is exercisable only for the purpose of

    determining the fee structure of the self­financing medical educational

    institutions. To put it in simpler terms, there is nothing discernible in

    Section 8A of the 2017 Act, based on which the Committee can assert

    its power to divert a part of the fee determined by it or issue a direction

    regarding how such diverted fee is to be utilized. We also find that

    Section 8A of the 2017 Act does not permit the levy of any amount

    which will ultimately be retained by the State, regardless of its purpose.
Similarly,
Section 11
of the 2017 Act does not require the Committee to

    consider the creation of scholarships as a relevant factor to determine
Page 24 of 32
and approve the fee proposal submitted by a particular institution.
Even assuming that the creation of a corpus fund for scholarships can

     be protected under the omnibus clause (g) of
Section 11
, whereunder

     the Committee can take into account “any other relevant factor” while

     determining the fee structure, such power cannot be exercised unless

     the Legislature authorizes the Committee to create a corpus fund or to

     prescribe its utility.
26. For the reasons aforesaid, the High Court was correct in striking down

     the GO dated 06.06.2018 as devoid of any authority of law.
27. At this juncture, it is pertinent to clarify that though we appreciate the

     State’s initiative to implement the welfare measures envisioned in

     paragraph 131 of
P. A. Inamdar
(supra), the same cannot be justified

     when it is implemented without the proper authority of law. Howsoever

     laudable, pious, or noble the objective behind the GO dated 06.06.2018

     may be, it cannot be legitimized unless its genesis is traceable to a

     legislative action.
D.2 Issue No. 2: The NRI students’ entitlement towards a refund or
set­off
28. Since we have firmly set forth that the corpus fund could not have been

     created or maintained by the Committee, we must turn our attention to

     the next pressing issue, i.e. whether the NRI students are entitled to a

     refund of the amount so collected or whether it should be set­off

     against fees charged for later years?
Page 25 of 32
29. The NRI students contend that when the imposition of such an amount

    has been held to be illegal, there is no reasonable justification for the

    State or the self­financing medical colleges to retain it. Further, these

    students claim that paragraph 67 of
P. A. Inamdar
(supra) only

    requires an NRI student to subsidize two other students’ fees.

    Accordingly, it is their specific contention that when the fees for regular

    students are set at Rs. 5 lakhs per annum, the NRI students cannot be

    charged more than Rs. 15 lakhs per annum.
30. Contrarily, the self­financing medical colleges contend that the fees

    charged under the heading of ‘corpus fund’ should be returned to them

    to enable their continued functioning. The amounts collected for the

    corpus fund were unfairly deducted from the proposals submitted,

    leaving the colleges to function with fees much lower than what was

    genuinely projected by them. The fees charged from NRI students are

    utilized not only to subsidize education for students from economically­

    weaker backgrounds but also for various upkeep and continuous

    development expenses to improve the quality of education.
31. The State of Kerala, however, contends that though the self­financing

    medical colleges were required to remit Rs. 5 lakhs received from each

    NRI student to the corpus fund, they have not been doing so. As a

    result, the colleges have retained a total of Rs. 182.9 crores from the

    batches of 2017­2018 to 2022­2023.
Page 26 of 32
32. Two 5­judge Benches of this Court in
Islamic Academy
(supra) and
Modern Dental College
(supra) have unequivocally held that the

    Government     cannot    fix   rigid   fee   structures   for   self­financing

    institutions. Further, each institute must have the freedom to fix its

    own fee structure by taking into consideration the need to generate

    funds to run the institution and to provide facilities necessary for the

    benefit of the students. These institutes are permitted to generate

    surplus, which must be used for the betterment and growth of that

    educational institution. The fee structure for each institute must be

    fixed keeping in mind the infrastructure and facilities available, the

    investments made, salaries paid to the teachers and staff, future plans

    for expansion and/or betterment of the institution, etc. Though the fees

    may differ from one institution to another, owing to the quality of

    education imparted, no institution can be permitted to charge excessive

    or exploitative fees leading to profiteering or charging of capitation fees.
33. The cited judgements have further explained that the fees collected

    from NRI students can be utilized for a variety of purposes, including

    but not limited to subsidizing fees for other students through

    scholarships. Accordingly, the fees for NRI students cannot be

    determined solely considering the factor of subsidization of education;

    all the above­stated factors must be taken into account. Resultantly,

    the NRI students’ contention that their fees should be restricted to only

    subsidize the education of only two students from economically­weaker
Page 27 of 32
sections of society falls flat and cannot be considered a valid reason for

    a refund.
34. When a self­financing medical educational institution presents its fee

    proposal for a particular academic year, it has done so keeping in mind

    its own needs, present and future. It is the responsibility of the

    Committee to consider all the comprehensive requirements and the

    principles enunciated in
Islamic Academy
(supra) and
Modern

    Dental      College
(supra),   when   assessing   those   proposals.   The

    Committee must ascertain that the fees proposed will not exploit the

    students and lead to profiteering by the management of the medical

    colleges. This is why such Committees have been set up, not just in

    Kerala, but in various States across the country.
35. Since the self­financing institutions are the best judge of their own

    needs and expenses, there appears to be no reason why they cannot

    retain the amount that was to be transferred to the corpus fund, when

    those amounts came out of the fee structures already approved by the

    Committee. By approving the proposals at the relevant time, the

    Committee has signified that the fees proposed to be charged were

    reasonable and did not amount to profiteering.
36.
In the same vein, self­financing medical educational institutions that

    were aggrieved by the Committee’s actions and sought reconsideration

    of their proposals from 2017­2018 onwards by virtue of directions
Page 28 of 32
issued by this Court in
Najiya Neermunda v. Kunhitharuvai

     Memorial Charitable Trust,5
are also entitled to retain the amount

     claimed by the State under the heading of ‘corpus fund,’ if any.
37. After allowing the colleges to retain the fees which were to be diverted

     towards the corpus fund, we are of the considered view that the self­

     financing medical educational institutions are under the obligation to

     provide quality education to the BPL students who were admitted to

     those colleges. No additional fees of any nature, therefore, shall be

     charged from the BPL students, over and above the subsidized fee that

     they were required to pay as per the Committee’s approved fee

     structure. To clarify, a substantial part of the amount which we have

     allowed the colleges to retain shall have to be utilized by them for

     subsidizing the education of the BPL students. The Committee or the

     State Government shall, in this regard, be well within their right to

     direct the colleges to furnish their accounts and establish that the

     directions issued hereinabove have been complied with. To this extent,

     the   self­financing    medical     educational     institutions   are    merely

     designated as the trustees of the ‘corpus fund’ amount, without

     permitting it to be utilized by them as per their own free will. Such an

     arrangement shall continue till an appropriate Legislation is enacted by

     the State.
5
Najiya Neermunda v. Kunhitharuvai Memorial Charitable Trust
, (2021) 5 SCC 515.
Page 29 of 32
38. This batch of appeals and their parallel proceedings have caused

     confusion and chaos for medical education in the State of Kerala for

     years. This case seems to be the closing act, which will hopefully

     provide finality and certainty to all the stakeholders.


E.   CONCLUSION AND DIRECTIONS
39. In light of above discussion, we deem it appropriate to allow the appeal

     by the self­financing medical colleges in part; dismiss the appeals filed

     by the State of Kerala and the NRI students; and modify the Impugned

     Judgment of the High Court dated 23.07.2020, with the following

     directions and conclusions:
i.    The High Court was correct in quashing the Government Order

           (MS) No. 107/2018/H&FWD dated 06.06.2018;
ii.   If the State seeks to establish a corpus fund or any other such

           mechanism to subsidize education for students from weaker

           backgrounds, in line with the vision enshrined in
P. A. Inamdar
(supra), it may do so by enacting suitable Legislation to that effect;


     iii. The self­financing medical colleges are entitled to retain the fees

           transferred to the State for the creation of the ‘corpus fund’

           substantially for the purpose of subsidizing the fees charged to

           BPL students admitted to those colleges, as per the directions

           contained in paragraph 37 of this judgement;
Page 30 of 32
iv.   The BPL students, who were admitted on the basis of scholarship

      schemes or who are to be admitted in future, shall not be required

      to pay the full, regular fees. They will continue to pay fees at the

      subsidized rate fixed by the State or the Committee. If they have

      paid any fees, over and above the subsidized amount promised,

      they are entitled to a refund of the amounts so paid. Alternatively,

      those amounts may be set­off against the fees to be charged for

      later years. Such a refund must be made within 3 months;


v.    The State of Kerala is directed to release the fees collected for the

      creation of a corpus fund back to the respective colleges within a

      period   of   3   months   without   prejudice   to   the   right   and

      responsibility assigned in paragraph 37 of this judgement;


vi.   The NRI students are not entitled to a refund of the amount

      transferred to the State for the creation of the ‘corpus fund.’ They

      are directed to pay the entire fees to their respective colleges, as

      approved by the Admission and Fee Regulatory Committee, if not

      already done, within 3 months; and


vii. The State of Kerala or the Admission and Fee Regulatory

      Committee is at liberty to direct the colleges to furnish their

      accounts to establish that the directions given herein have been

      complied with.
Page 31 of 32
40. Ordered accordingly. Pending applications if any, are to be disposed of

    in the above terms.
..............…….........J.
                                                                      (SURYA KANT)




                                 ............................................…….........J.
                                      (NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH)



NEW DELHI;
MAY 16, 2025
Page 32 of 32