[Cites
84
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sarla Gupta vs Directorate Of Enforcement on 7 May, 2025
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
2025 INSC 645                                                             Reportable
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1622 OF 2022

            Sarla Gupta & Another                                      … Appellants


                                                       versus


            Directorate of Enforcement                                … Respondent

                                                        with

                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.730 OF 2024


                                                    J U D G M E N T
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS

            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1622 OF 2022
1.              Criminal Appeal no.1622 of 2022 takes an exception to the

            impugned judgment and order of the High Court of Delhi dated

            22nd July, 2019, in a writ petition filed by the present appellants.

            In July 2017, the Central Bureau of Investigation (for short, ‘the

            CBI’) registered a First Information Report (for short, ‘FIR’) against

            the appellants for the offences punishable under Section 120-B
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
read with
Section 420
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short,
   ANITA MALHOTRA
   Date: 2025.05.08
   13:25:22 IST
   Reason:
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                             Page 1 of 86
‘the
IPC
’) and
Section 13(1)(d)
of the Prevention of Corruption Act,

1988 (for short, ‘the
PC Act
’).             Based on the said FIR, an

Enforcement Case Information Report (for short, ‘the ECIR’) was

registered by the Directorate of Enforcement (for short, ‘the ED’).
A complaint under
Section 44(1)(b)
of the Prevention of Money

Laundering Act, 2002 (for short, ‘the PMLA’) was filed before the

Special Court on 24th August 2018. The appellants were shown as

accused in the complaint. The allegation in the complaint is of the

commission of the offence under
Section 3
of the PMLA, which is

punishable under
Section 4
of the PMLA. The Special Judge took

cognizance of the offence on 17th September 2018. The appellants

were supplied copies of the complaint and some documents relied

upon by the prosecution.                An application was made by the

appellants to the Special Court for the grant of copies of the

following categories of documents: (a) documents relied upon in

the complaint but not supplied; (b) documents supplied which

were not legible; and (c) documents collected during the

investigation which were suppressed.
2.      The ED contested the said application. By the order dated

30th March 2019, the Special Court rejected the said application
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                           Page 2 of 86
by holding that the prosecution is under an obligation to supply

only those documents which are referred to and relied upon in the

complaint/ chargesheet and it is under no obligation to supply the

documents which were collected during the investigation which

were not relied upon.                   The appellants filed a writ petition

challenging the said order, which has been dismissed by the High

Court by the impugned judgment.
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 730 OF 2024
3.      Criminal Appeal no.730 of 2024 takes an exception to the

judgment dated 18th November 2022 in a writ petition filed by the

appellants. Even in this case, a complaint was filed under Section

44 of the PMLA and cognizance was taken by the Special Court on

31st August 2021. The appellants were shown as accused therein.

In this case, a predicate offence was registered under
Section 420
of the IPC. In August 2019, the ED conducted various searches in

the office and residential premises of the appellants. The ED seized

documents/records/ property.                 Applications were moved under
Section 17
of the PMLA seeking a direction to provide a list of the

documents seized by the ED and copies of the documents seized.
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                Page 3 of 86
The      Adjudicating             Authority   under   the   PMLA   allowed    the

applications. An appeal against the said order is pending before

the Appellate Authority.
4.        The second appellant filed an application before the Special

Court seeking a direction to the ED to supply the documents seized

during the raids/searches conducted by it to enable the appellants

to defend their case before the Special Court. The Special Court

rejected the said application by the order dated 22nd March 2022.

Accordingly, the appellants filed a petition under
Section 482
of

the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short ‘the
CrPC
’) before

the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh to challenge

the said order. By the impugned judgment and order, the High

Court dismissed the said writ petition.


SUBMISSIONS

APPELLANTS
5.      Detailed submissions have been made in both appeals. In

support of Criminal Appeal no.1622 of 2022, the learned senior

counsel appearing for the appellants urged that the right under
Section 207
of the CrPC is not restricted to the documents relied

upon by the prosecution.                 The right under Section 207 to get
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                   Page 4 of 86
documents includes all the documents collected during the

investigation. He submitted that
Sections 207
and
208
of the CrPC

must be complied with before the trial commences. He submitted

that the right to get all the documents collected during the

investigation flows from the right to a free and fair trial, which is

guaranteed under
Article 21
of the Constitution of India. He

referred to the provisions of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1898

(for short, ‘the 1898
CrPC
’). He submitted that
Section 207
of the

CrPC has been retained in the Bhartiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita,

2023 (for short, ‘the BNSS’) in the form of Section 230.            He

submitted that in view of Section 46(1) read with Section 65 of the

PMLA, all the provisions of the
CrPC
shall apply to the proceedings

under the PMLA, insofar as the same are not inconsistent with the

provisions of the PMLA. He submitted that no provision of the

PMLA is inconsistent with
Section 207
of the CrPC and Section

230 of the BNSS. He pointed out the provisions of the PMLA which

are inconsistent with the
CrPC
.         He also pointed out the law

prevailing in the United States of America (for short, ‘USA’) and the

United Kingdom (for short, ‘UK’). He relied upon several decisions

of this Court and the Courts in the USA and the UK.
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                        Page 5 of 86
6.      In support of Criminal Appeal no.730 of 2024, the learned

senior counsel appearing for the appellants submitted that

relevant provisions of the
CrPC
mandate that the prosecution must

provide copies of the relied upon documents, documents in its

custody which are not relied upon, as well as the list of documents

to the accused, before framing of a charge.
7.      He submitted that in view of Section 45(1)(ii) of the PMLA,

while deciding the bail application, the burden is on the accused

to show that there are reasonable grounds to believe that he is not

guilty of such an offence. He submitted that this is a standalone

provision not found in other penal statutes. He submitted that,

therefore, at the stage of hearing the bail applications, the accused

is entitled to seek the production of documents that will help him

to discharge the burden. He submitted that in view of Section

44(1)(b) of the PMLA, no committal of an accused to the Sessions

Court is required. He also submitted that in view of Section 65

read with Section 46 of the PMLA, provisions of the
CrPC
apply to

the proceedings under the PMLA.         He also pointed out various

decisions in support of his submissions.
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                        Page 6 of 86
RESPONDENTS
8.      The submission of the learned Additional Solicitor General

(for short, ‘ASG’) appearing for the ED is that all the documents

relied upon by the ED in the complaint have been supplied to the

appellants. He submitted that the accused is entitled to only the

relied upon documents and has no right to seek documents with

the ED which are not relied upon, at the stage of framing of charge.

He submitted that in the offence that is the subject matter of

Criminal Appeal no.730 of 2024, the ED is carrying out further

investigation. Therefore, before completion of the investigation, the

appellants are not entitled to seek copies of the documents not

relied upon by the ED. He submitted that the law is very well

settled and that at the time of framing of the charge, the Court can

only look into the documents that are part of the chargesheet and

no other document. The accused cannot rely upon something that

is not a part of the chargesheet at the time of hearing on framing

of charge. The accused cannot seek production of the documents

that were not relied upon by the ED at the time of framing of the

charge. The learned ASG also referred to
Section 204
of the CrPC.

He submitted that in view of the said provision, the accused is only
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                        Page 7 of 86
entitled to get a copy of the complaint and documents filed along

with the complaint.
9.        Relying upon a decision of this Court in the case of Criminal

Trials Guidelines Regarding Inadequacies and Deficiencies,

In
Re v. State of Andhra Pradesh & Ors1
, he submitted that it

is held by this Court that an accused is entitled to only a list of the

documents not relied upon by the prosecution and not the copies

of the said documents. He submitted that at the trial stage, the

accused can seek production of the said documents. The learned

ASG submitted that
Section 208
of the CrPC is not applicable for

seeking copies of documents not relied upon by the prosecution.

He submitted that Section 208 applies at the stage when the

learned Magistrate has not committed a case to the Court of

Session. He submitted that the question of committal does not

arise in the case of an offence under the PMLA, in view of Section

44(1)(b) of the PMLA. He submitted that the Special Court does

not have inherent powers at par with the High Court under
Section

482
of the CrPC. He submitted that in the absence of any specific

provision empowering the Special Court to direct the supply of
1
(2021) 10 SCC 598 : 2021 SCC OnLine SC 329
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                          Page 8 of 86
documents to the accused and in the absence of any inherent

power vested in the Special Court, a direction to supply documents

not relied upon by the prosecution to the accused cannot be issued

by the Special Court. He submitted that the orders passed by the

Special Court are interlocutory in nature and therefore, the High

Court ought to be slow in interfering with such interlocutory orders

in exercise of its power under
Section 482
of the CrPC.


CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO 730 OF 2024
10. In Criminal Appeal no.730 of 2024, the petitions filed by the

appellants and another accused were disposed of by the common

order dated 18th November 2022. The challenge before the High

Court was to the order dated 22nd March 2022. In this case, the

ED had conducted raids/searches at different premises of the

accused and seized various documents under the seizure memo

drawn. The second appellant and the co-accused (Ashok Solomon)

filed separate applications seeking a direction to the ED to supply

copies of the documents seized under the seizure memo.           The

learned Special Judge under the PMLA rejected the applications by

holding that the investigation was in progress and the charges
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                       Page 9 of 86
were yet to be framed. The Special Court relied upon a decision of

this Court in the case of
State of Orissa v. Debendra Nath

Padhi2
.
11. The Special Court held that the appellants had no right to

place any document on record which was not a part of the

complaint at the time of framing of the charge. Before the High

Court, reliance was placed on the decision of this Court in the case

of Criminal Trials Guidelines Regarding Inadequacies and

Deficiencies, In Re1. The High Court held that the documents

relied upon were already supplied by the ED. However, the

appellants were entitled to seek only a list of documents which

were not relied upon by the ED. The High Court held that at the

time of framing of charges, reliance can be placed only on the

documents filed by the prosecution.            Therefore, the appellants

were not entitled to the copies of the documents which were not

relied upon by the prosecution. However, the High Court observed

that in case the appellants so require, they can always file an




2 (2005) 1 SCC 568 : 2004 SCC OnLine SC 1491
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                           Page 10 of 86
appropriate application before the learned Special Judge for a

direction to the prosecution to supply the list of such documents.


RIGHT TO GET COPIES OF THE RECORD/DOCUMENTS
SEIZED AS PER SECTIONS 17 AND 18 OF THE PMLA
12.      Under
Section 17
of the PMLA, a power is vested in the

Director or other authorised officers to conduct a search and

seizure of record or property.
Section 17
of the PMLA reads thus:
“17. Search and seizure.— (1) Where the
                        Director or any other officer not below the
                        rank of Deputy Director authorised by him
                        for the purposes of this section, on the basis
                        of information in his possession, has reason
                        to believe (the reason for such belief to be
                        recorded in writing) that any person—
(i) has committed any act which
                               constitutes money-laundering, or
(ii) is in possession of any proceeds of
                               crime involved in money-laundering, or
(iii) is in possession of any records
                               relating to money-laundering, or
(iv) is in possession of any property
                               related to crime,

                        then, subject to the rules made in this
                        behalf, he may authorise any officer
                        subordinate to him to—
(a) enter and search any building, place,
                               vessel, vehicle or aircraft where he has
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                      Page 11 of 86
reason to suspect that such records or
                               proceeds of crime are kept;
(b) break open the lock of any door, box,
                               locker, safe, almirah or other receptacle
                               for exercising the powers conferred by
                               clause (a) where the keys thereof are not
                               available;
(c) seize any record or property found
                               as a result of such search;
(d) place marks of identification on such
                               record or property, if required or make
                               or cause to be made extracts or copies
                               therefrom;
(e) make a note or an inventory of such
                               record or property;
(f) examine on oath any person, who is
                               found to be in possession or control of
                               any record or property, in respect of all
                               matters relevant for the purposes of any
                               investigation under this Act.
(1A) Where it is not practicable to seize such
                        record or property, the officer authorised
                        under sub-section (1), may make an order
                        to freeze such property whereupon the
                        property shall not be transferred or
                        otherwise dealt with, except with the prior
                        permission of the officer making such order,
                        and a copy of such order shall be served on
                        the person concerned:
Provided that if, at any time before its
                        confiscation under sub-section (5) or sub-
                        section (7) of
section 8
or section 58B or
                        sub-section (2A) of section 60, it becomes
                        practical to seize a frozen property, the
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                      Page 12 of 86
officer authorised under sub-section (1)
                        may seize such property.
(2) The authority, who has been authorised
                        under sub-section (1) shall, immediately
                        after search and seizure or upon issuance
                        of a freezing order], forward a copy of the
                        reasons so recorded along with material in
                        his possession, referred to in that sub-
section, to the Adjudicating Authority in a
                        sealed envelope, in the manner, as may be
                        prescribed and such Adjudicating Authority
                        shall keep such reasons and material for
                        such period, as may be prescribed.
(3) Where an authority, upon information
                        obtained during survey under
section 16
, is
                        satisfied that any evidence shall be or is
                        likely to be concealed or tampered with, he
                        may, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
                        enter and search the building or place
                        where such evidence is located and seize
                        that     evidence:    Provided   that     no
                        authorisation referred to in sub-section (1)
                        shall be required for search under this sub-
                        section.
(4) The authority seizing any record or
                        property under sub-section (1) or freezing
                        any record or property under sub-section
                        (1A) shall, within a period of thirty days
                        from such seizure or freezing, as the case
                        may be, file an application, requesting for
                        retention of such record or property seized
                        under sub-section (1) or for continuation of
                        the order of freezing served under sub-
                        section (1A), before the Adjudicating
                        Authority.”

                                                  (emphasis added)
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                  Page 13 of 86
13.
Section 18
deals with the power to search persons and seize

records or property in their possession.
Section 18
reads thus:
“18. Search of persons.—(1) If an
                        authority, authorised in this behalf by
                        the Central Government by general or
                        special order, has reason to believe (the
                        reason for such belief to be recorded in
                        writing) that any person has secreted
                        about his person or in anything under his
                        possession, ownership or control, any
                        record or proceeds of crime which may
                        be useful for or relevant to any
                        proceedings under this Act, he may
                        search that person and seize such record
                        or property which may be useful for or
                        relevant to any proceedings under this
                        Act:
(2) The authority, who has been authorised
                        under sub-section (1), shall, immediately
                        after search and seizure, forward a copy of
                        the reasons so recorded along with material
                        in his possession, referred to in that sub-
section, to the Adjudicating Authority, in a
                        sealed envelope, in the manner, as may be
                        prescribed and such Adjudicating Authority
                        shall keep such reasons and material for
                        such period, as may be prescribed.
(3) Where an authority is about to search
                        any person, he shall, if such person so
                        requires, take such person within twenty-
                        four hours to the nearest Gazetted Officer,
                        superior in rank to him, or a Magistrate:
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                  Page 14 of 86
Provided that the period of twenty-four
                        hours shall exclude the time necessary for
                        the journey undertaken to take such person
                        to the nearest Gazetted Officer, superior in
                        rank to him, or Magistrate's Court.
                        (4) If the requisition under sub-section (3) is
                        made, the authority shall not detain the
                        person for more than twenty-four hours
                        prior to taking him before the Gazetted
                        Officer, superior in rank to him, or the
                        Magistrate referred to in that sub-section:
Provided that the period of twenty-four
                        hours shall exclude the time necessary for
                        the journey from the place of detention to
                        the office of the Gazetted Officer superior in
                        rank to him, or the Magistrate's Court.
                        (5) The Gazetted Officer or the Magistrate
                        before whom any such person is brought
                        shall, if he sees no reasonable ground for
                        search, forthwith discharge such person
                        but otherwise shall direct that search be
                        made.
(6) Before making the search under sub-
section (1) or sub-section (5), the authority
                        shall call upon two or more persons to
                        attend and witness the search, and the
                        search shall be made in the presence of
                        such persons.
(7) The authority shall prepare a list of
                        record or property seized in the course of
                        the search and obtain the signatures of
                        the witnesses on the list.
(8) No female shall be searched by anyone
                        except a female.
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                     Page 15 of 86
(9) The authority shall record the statement
                        of the person searched under sub-section
                        (1) or sub-section (5) in respect of the
                        records or proceeds of crime found or seized
                        in the course of the search:
(10) The authority, seizing any record or
                        property under sub-section (1) shall, within
                        a period of thirty days from such seizure, file
                        an application requesting for retention of
                        such record or property, before the
                        Adjudicating Authority.”
                                                    (emphasis added)

Thus,
Section 17
confers a power to search a building, place,

vessel, vehicle, etc. and to seize any record or property found

during the search.
Section 18
confers a power on the authority to

search persons and seize record or property from them.
14.
Section 2(w)
of the PMLA defines ‘records’, which include

records maintained in the form of books or stored in a computer

or such other form as may be prescribed. ‘Property’ is defined

under
Section 2(v)
, meaning any property or assets of every

description, whether corporeal or incorporeal, moveable or

immoveable, tangible or intangible and includes deeds and

instruments evidencing title to, or interest in, such property or

assets wherever located. Thus, deeds and instruments of title are
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                     Page 16 of 86
included in the definition of property and books or records stored

in a computer become records within the meaning of
Section 2(w)
.
15.
Section 20
deals with retention of the property seized under
Section 17
or
Section 18
or frozen under sub-section (1A) of
Section 17
of the PMLA.
Section 21
deals with the retention of

records.
Sections 20
and
21
read thus:
“20.Retention of property.—(1) Where
                        any property has been seized under
section
                        17
or
section 18
or frozen under sub-section
                        (1A) of
section 17
and the officer authorised
                        by the Director in this behalf has, on the
                        basis of material in his possession, reason
                        to believe (the reason for such belief to be
                        recorded by him in writing) that such
                        property is required to be retained for the
                        purposes of adjudication under
section 8
,
                        such property may, if seized, be retained or
                        if frozen, may continue to remain frozen, for
                        a period not exceeding one hundred and
                        eighty days from the day on which such
                        property was seized or frozen, as the case
                        may be.
(2) The officer authorised by the Director
                        shall, immediately after he has passed an
                        order for retention or continuation of
                        freezing of the property for purposes of
                        adjudication under
section 8
, forward a
                        copy of the order along with the material in
                        his possession, referred to in sub-section
                        (1), to the Adjudicating Authority, in a
                        sealed envelope, in the manner as may be
                        prescribed and such Adjudicating Authority
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                   Page 17 of 86
shall keep such order and material for such
                        period as may be prescribed.
(3) On the expiry of the period specified in
                        sub-section (1), the property shall be
                        returned to the person from whom such
                        property was seized or whose property was
                        ordered to be frozen unless the Adjudicating
                        Authority permits retention or continuation
                        of freezing of such property beyond the said
                        period.
(4) The Adjudicating Authority, before
                        authorising the retention or continuation of
                        freezing of such property beyond the period
                        specified in sub-section (1), shall satisfy
                        himself that the property is prima facie
                        involved in money-laundering and the
                        property is required for the purposes of
                        adjudication under
section 8
.
(5) After passing the order of confiscation
                        under sub-section (5) or sub-section (7) of
section 8
, Special Court, shall direct the
                        release of all property other than the
                        property involved in money-laundering to
                        the person from whom such property was
                        seized or the persons entitled to receive it.

                        (6) Where an order releasing the property
                        has been made by the Special Court under
                        sub-section (6) of
section 8
or by the
                        Adjudicating Authority under section 58B
                        or sub-section (2A) of section 60, the
                        Director or any officer authorised by him in
                        this behalf may withhold the release of any
                        such property for a period of ninety days
                        from the date of receipt of such order, if he
                        is of the opinion that such property is
                        relevant for the appeal proceedings under
                        this Act.
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                   Page 18 of 86
21. Retention of records.—(1) Where any
                        records have been seized, under
section 17
or
section 18
or frozen under sub-section
                        (1A) of
section 17
and the Investigating
                        Officer or any other officer authorised by the
                        Director in this behalf has reason to believe
                        that any of such records are required to be
                        retained for any inquiry under this Act,
                        such records may if seized, be retained or if
                        frozen, may continue to remain frozen, for a
                        period not exceeding one hundred and
                        eighty days from the day on which such
                        records were seized or frozen, as the case
                        may be.
(2) The person, from whom records
                        seized or frozen, shall be entitled to
                        obtain copies of records.
(3) On the expiry of the period specified
                        under sub-section (1), the records shall be
                        returned to the person from whom such
                        records were seized or whose records were
                        ordered to be frozen unless the Adjudicating
                        Authority permits retention or continuation
                        of freezing of such records beyond the said
                        period.
(4) The Adjudicating Authority, before
                        authorising the retention or continuation of
                        freezing of such records beyond the period
                        specified in sub-section (1), shall satisfy
                        himself that the records are required for the
                        purposes of adjudication under
section 8
.

                        (5) After passing of an order of confiscation
                        or release under sub-section (5) or sub-
                        section (6) or sub-section (7) of
section 8
or
                        section 58B or sub-section (2A) of section
                        60, the Adjudicating Authority shall direct
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                    Page 19 of 86
the release of the records to the person from
                        whom such records were seized.
(6) Where an order releasing the records has
                        been made by the Court Adjudicating
                        Authority under sub-section (5) of
section
                        21
, the Director or any other officer
                        authorised by him in this behalf may
                        withhold the release of any such record for
                        a period of ninety days from the date of
                        receipt of such order, if he is of the opinion
                        that such record is relevant for the appeal
                        proceedings under this Act.”

                                                   (emphasis added)
16. Sub-rule (2) of Rule 4 of the Prevention of Money Laundering

(Forms, Search and Seizure or Freezing and the Manner of

Forwarding the Reasons and Material to the Adjudicating

Authority, Impounding and Custody of Records and the Period of

Retention) Rules, 2005 (for short, ‘the 2005 Rules’) mandates the

authority exercising the power of seizure to prepare seizure memo

(inventory of items) in Form-II appended to the 2005 Rules. Sub-

rule (4) of Rule 4 provides that a copy of the list of seized property

prepared shall be delivered to the occupant of the building or place

searched or to any person on his behalf. Thus, the person from

whose premises the properties are seized is entitled to receive a

copy of the list of the seized properties.
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                    Page 20 of 86
17. Under sub-section (2) of
Section 21
of the PMLA, the person

from whom the records are seized is entitled to a copy of the

records, which include the record in the form of books or records

stored in a computer. Therefore, the person from whom the record

is seized is entitled to the copies thereof as a matter of right.
18.      As stated earlier, the definition of ‘property’ under
Section

2(b)
includes deeds and instruments evidencing title or interest in

such property or asset. The order of retention of the property under
Section 20
does not amount to forfeiture of the property. The seized

property does not vest in the ED. There is no prohibition on

providing copies of the deeds or instruments evidencing title to the

person from whom or from whose premises the deeds or

instruments are seized.                 If the provision is interpreted to mean

that the person from whom such deeds or instruments are seized

is not entitled to receive even copies of the same, the provision will

be rendered arbitrary and violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution.

Therefore, as far as the seized documents and records are

concerned, the person from whom or from whose premises the

seizure has been made is entitled to get the true copies thereof. As

far as the other property seized is concerned, the person from
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                  Page 21 of 86
whom the property is seized is entitled to a copy of the seizure

memo and the list of the properties seized.
19. In this case, we are called upon to decide only the issue of the

supply of seized documents and records.        To that extent, the

Special Court and the High Court have committed an error. They

rejected the prayers made for providing copies of the seized

documents. When the records are seized from the custody of the

accused, there is no reason why the true copies of the seized

documents should not be provided on an application being made

by the accused. The same is the case with the instruments or

documents of title forming part of the property seized. If the

documents are bulky, even soft copies thereof can be provided.

Even if the seized record or documents are not relied upon in the

complaint, copies must be supplied, though the accused will not

be entitled to rely upon them at the time of framing the charge.

Hence, the impugned orders deserve to be set aside.


CRIMINAL APPEAL NO 1622 OF 2022


RIGHT OF AN ACCUSED TO GET COPIES OF THE DOCUMENTS
RELIED UPON IN THE COMPLAINT UNDER SECTION 44(1)(b)
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                      Page 22 of 86
OF THE PMLA AND THE DOCUMENTS PRODUCED ALONG
WITH THE COMPLAINT
20. In Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, writ petitions were filed

to challenge the common order dated 30th March 2019 passed by

the learned Special Judge (under the
PC Act
) who was also a

Special Judge under the PMLA.           There were two applications

decided by the said common order. The first application was made

on 11th February 2019. It is stated in the said application that the

documents provided by the ED have been arranged in eight

volumes containing a total of 3535 pages. It is mentioned in the

application that about 45 relied upon documents mentioned in the

application were not supplied to the appellants. The application

contains a list of eight illegible documents. A prayer was made to

issue a direction to the ED to provide copies of these documents.

Another application was made by the appellant on 27th March

2019, stating that on inspection of the file of the Court in the

presence of the investigating officer, eight documents mentioned

therein were found to be illegible. It was also stated that pages

1323, 1770 to 1779 and 2000 were not available in the Court

record and pages 1367 and 1368 have been numbered twice on
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                      Page 23 of 86
different documents. It was also pointed out in paragraph 4 that

certain pages mentioned in the application were legible in the

Court file but illegible in the documents supplied to the appellant.

By the order dated 30th March 2019, the said applications were

dismissed.
21. The Special Court referred to a decision of the Delhi High

Court in the case of
Dharambir v. Central Bureau of

Investigation3
. The learned Special Judge held that:
(a) The appellants have not stated that the prosecution was

         relying upon the documents, but the copies were not given to

         them;
(b) It is not the case of the appellants that these documents

         which the prosecution has withheld, were of sterling quality,

         and if the same were produced, the appellants may be

         discharged;
(c) In economic offences, the investigation is conducted at

         length and a large number of documents are collected, but

         not every document is relevant. The Investigating Officer files

3   2008 SCC OnLine Del 336 : ILR (2008) 2 Delhi 842
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                          Page 24 of 86
only those documents which are relevant for proving the case;
and
(d) In the relied upon documents, there is a reference to

        innumerable other documents which are not relied upon. A

        direction cannot be issued to the prosecution to supply such

        documents.
22. In the impugned judgment, the High Court also relied upon

the decision of the Delhi High Court in the case of Dharambir2. It

was further held that neither Section 207 nor
Section 208
of the

CrPC          can          be           applied   mutatis   mutandis   to     the

proceedings/complaint under the PMLA. It was further observed

that as the charge has not been framed, the trial has not

commenced. Therefore, the High Court proceeded to dismiss the

writ petitions.
23. The offences under the PMLA, as provided under Section

44(1)(a), are triable by the Special Court. Under Section 43(1),

there is a power vested in the Central Government, in consultation

with the Chief Justice of the High Court, to designate one or more

courts of session as Special Courts. Thus, the Special Court under
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                  Page 25 of 86
the PMLA is presided over by a Session Judge. Under Section

44(1)(b), the Special Court is empowered to take cognizance of the

offence under
Section 3
of the PMLA only upon a complaint. Clause
(b) provides that cognizance of the offence under
Section 3
can be

taken by the Special Court without the accused being committed

to it for trial. Under Section 44(1)(b), it is provided that a Special

Court, while trying the offence of money laundering, shall proceed

with the trial in accordance with the provisions of the
CrPC
as it

applies to a trial before the Court of Session.            Therefore, the

provisions of Chapter XVIII of the
CrPC
will apply to the

proceedings of a complaint under Section 44(1)(b) (Chapter XIX of

the BNSS). Therefore, in view of
Section 228
of the CrPC (Section

251 of the BNSS), a charge is required to be framed in the

complaint.
24.
In the case of
Yash Tuteja & Anr. v. Union of India &

Ors4
, in paragraph 6, this Court held thus:
“6. The only mode by which the cognizance
                        of the offence under
Section 3
, punishable
                        under
Section 4
PMLA, can be taken by the
                        Special Court is upon a complaint filed by
                        the Authority authorised on this behalf.
                        Section 46 PMLA provides that the
4   (2024) 8 SCC 465 : 2024 SCC OnLine SC 533
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                Page 26 of 86
provisions of
CrPC
(including the provisions
                        as to bails or bonds) shall apply to
                        proceedings before a Special Court and for
                        the purposes of
CrPC
provisions, the
                        Special Court shall be deemed to be a Court
                        of Sessions. However, sub-section (1) of
                        Section 46 starts with the words “save as
                        otherwise provided in this Act”.
Considering the provisions of Section
                        46(1) PMLA, save as otherwise provided
                        in PMLA, the provisions of the
Code of
                        Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (for short
                        “
CrPC
”) shall apply to the proceedings
                        before a Special Court. Therefore, once a
                        complaint is filed before the Special
                        Court, the provisions of
Sections 200
to
204
CrPC will apply to the complaint.
There is no provision in PMLA which
                        overrides the provisions of Sections 200
                        to
Sections 204
CrPC. Hence, the Special
                        Court will have to apply its mind to the
                        question of whether a prima facie case of a
                        commission of an offence under
Section 3
PMLA is made out in a complaint under
                        Section 44(1)(b) PMLA. If the Special Court
                        is of the view that no prima facie case of an
                        offence under
Section 3
PMLA is made out,
                        it must exercise the power under
Section
                        203
CrPC to dismiss the complaint. If a
                        prima facie case is made out, the Special
                        Court can take recourse to
Section 204
CrPC.”

                                                  (emphasis added)

Hence, the provisions of
Sections 200
to
204
of the CrPC (Sections

223 to 227 of the BNSS) will apply to a complaint under Section

44(1)(b) of the PMLA.
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                   Page 27 of 86
25. As held by this Court,
Section 204
of the CrPC (Section 227

of the BNSS) is applicable to a complaint under Section 44(1)(b) of

the PMLA. Sub-section (3) of
Section 204
of the CrPC (sub-section

(3) of Section 227 of the BNSS) reads thus:
“204. Issue of Process –
                        .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .
                        (3) In a proceeding instituted upon a
                        complaint made in writing, every summons
                        or warrant issued under sub-section (1)
                        shall be accompanied by a copy of such
                        complaint.”

Thus, after taking cognizance, the process issued on the complaint

under Section 44(1)(b) of the PMLA to the accused must be

accompanied by a copy of the complaint. If any documents are

annexed or produced along with the complaint on the basis of

which cognizance is taken, it follows that even the copies of those

documents must be supplied to the accused. The copies of the

documents annexed to the complaint or produced in the complaint

cannot be separated from the complaint, as they form a part of the

complaint. These are the documents on the basis of which

cognizance is taken by the Special Court. Therefore, the accused

is entitled to receive copies of the same as a matter of right. The

same principle will apply to the documents annexed to or produced
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                                         Page 28 of 86
with supplementary complaints. If the Special Court has recorded

the statements of the complainant and witnesses, if any, in

accordance with
Section 200
of the CrPC (Section 223 of the

BNNS), the accused must get copies thereof as the order of

cognizance is passed based on the said statements.
26. There are two important provisions under the
CrPC
which

deal with the supply of documents. The same are
Sections 207
and
208
of the CrPC (Section 230 and 231 of the BNSS

respectively), which read thus:
“207. Supply to the accused of copy of
                        police report and other documents.— In
                        any case where the proceeding has been
                        instituted on a police report, the Magistrate
                        shall without delay furnish to the accused,
                        free of cost, a copy of each of the following:—
(i) the police report;
(ii) the first information report recorded
                               under section 154;
(iii) the statements recorded under sub-
section (3) of section 161 of all persons
                               whom the prosecution proposes to
                               examine as its witnesses, excluding
                               therefrom any part in regard to which a
                               request for such exclusion has been
                               made by the police officer under sub-
section (6) of section 173;
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                       Page 29 of 86
(iv) the confessions and statements, if
                               any, recorded under section 164;
(v) any other document or relevant
                               extract thereof forwarded to the
                               Magistrate with the police report under
                               sub-section (5) of section 173:
Provided that the Magistrate may, after
                        perusing any such part of a statement as is
                        referred to in clause (iii) and considering the
                        reasons given by the police officer for the
                        request, direct that a copy of that part of the
                        statement or of such portion thereof as the
                        Magistrate thinks proper, shall be furnished
                        to the accused:
Provided further that if the Magistrate is
                        satisfied that any document referred to in
                        clause (v) is voluminous, he shall, instead of
                        furnishing the accused with a copy thereof,
                        direct that he will only be allowed to inspect
                        it either personally or through pleader in
                        Court.
208. Supply of copies of statements and
                        documents to accused in other cases
                        triable by Court of Session.— Where, in a
                        case instituted otherwise than on a police
                        report, it appears to the Magistrate issuing
                        process under section 204 that the offence
                        is triable exclusively by the Court of
                        Session, the Magistrate shall without delay
                        furnish to the accused, free of cost, a copy
                        of each of the following:—
(i) the statements recorded under
                               section 200 or section 202, of all
                               persons examined by the Magistrate;
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                     Page 30 of 86
(ii) the statements and confessions, if
                               any, recorded under section 161 or
                               section 164;
(iii) any documents produced before the
                               Magistrate on which the prosecution
                               proposes to rely:
Provided that if the Magistrate is satisfied
                        that any such document is voluminous, he
                        shall, instead of furnishing the accused
                        with a copy thereof, direct that he will only
                        be allowed to inspect it either personally or
                        through pleader in Court.”
Section 207
of the CrPC applies when the proceedings have been

instituted on a police report. Section 208 applies to a case that is

instituted otherwise than on a police report, and the learned

Magistrate is of the view that the case is exclusively triable by the

Court of Sessions.
27.
Section 207
of CrPC applies when the chargesheet is filed.

Thus, after the charge sheet is filed, the accused is entitled to

copies of the police report, FIR, confessions, statements, if any,

recorded under
Section 164
of the CrPC, and statements recorded

under sub-section (3) of
Section 161
of the CrPC of all the persons

whom the prosecution proposes to examine as witnesses. There is

an exception to the rule as regards the supply of statements under
Section 161(3)
of the CrPC. Sub-section (6) of Section 173 (sub-
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                    Page 31 of 86
section (7) of Section 193 of the BNSS) provides that if the police

officer is of the opinion that any part of such statement is not

relevant to the subject matter of the proceeding or that its

disclosure to the accused is not essential in the interest of justice

and is inexpedient in public interest, he shall indicate that part of

the statement and append a note requesting the learned

Magistrate to exclude that part of the statement from the copies to

be provided to the accused. The police officer is required to state

reasons for making such a request. As can be seen from the first

proviso to
Section 207
of the CrPC, after considering the request

of the police officer and the reasons given by him, it is open for the

learned Magistrate to direct a copy of that part of the statement or

such portion thereof as the learned Magistrate thinks proper, to be

furnished to the accused. However, the learned Magistrate is not

bound by the request made by the police officer. After considering

the request, the learned Magistrate is empowered to reject the

request of the police officer and supply the complete copies of such

statements. It is pertinent to note that the Police have the power

to apply for the exclusion of parts of only the statements. This
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                        Page 32 of 86
power does not extend to the documents covered by clause (v) of

Section 207.
28. Now, we come to
Section 208
of the CrPC. When a case is

instituted by way of a complaint under
Section 200
of the CrPC, if

it appears to the learned Magistrate issuing process that the

offence is triable by a Court of Session, the learned Magistrate is

duty bound to supply the copies of the statements recorded under

Section 200 or Section 202 of all the persons examined by the

learned Magistrate to the accused. He is also duty bound to supply

to the accused the statements and confessions, if any, recorded

under Section 161 or Section 164, and any document produced

before the learned Magistrate on which the prosecution proposes

to rely.        Even Section 208 does not permit withholding of any

documents from the accused. If a document is bulky, it allows the

accused to inspect it.
29. If we peruse
Sections 209
and
238
of the CrPC ( Sections 232

and 261 of the BNNS), these provisions reiterate the mandatory

requirement of providing the documents referred to in
Sections

207
and
208
of the CrPC.
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                      Page 33 of 86
30. Both Sections 207 and 208, on the face of it, do not

specifically apply to a complaint under Section 44(1)(b) of the

PMLA. But, there is no reason why the principles laid down under

Sections 207 and 208 should not be applied to a complaint under

Section 44(1)(b) of the PMLA. The provisions are consistent with

the principles of fair play. The object of the provisions is to protect

the rights of accused persons. An accused is entitled to a fair trial

as he has the right to defend himself. That is the essence of
Article

21
of the Constitution. Therefore, once cognizance is taken on the

basis of a complaint under Section 44(1)(b) of the PMLA, the

learned Special Judge must direct that along with the process, a

copy of the complaint and the following documents must be

provided to the accused:
a. Statements recorded by the learned Special Judge of the

                 complainant and the witnesses, if any, before taking

                 cognizance;
b. The documents including the copies of the Statements

                 under Section 50 of the PMLA produced before the

                 Special Court, along with the complaint, and the
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                          Page 34 of 86
documents produced subsequently by the ED till the

                 date of taking cognizance; and


             c. Copies of the supplementary complaints and the

                 documents, if any, produced with supplementary

                 complaints.
After cognizance is taken on the basis of the complaint, the ED

cannot be heard to say that a document has been produced with

the complaint or in the proceedings of the complaint, but it is not

a relied upon document.                 The copies of documents must be

supplied along with a copy of the complaint as required by sub-
section (3) of
Section 204
of the CrPC (sub-section (3) of Section

227 of the BNSS).
THE RIGHT OF AN ACCUSED TO SEEK PRODUCTION OF THE
DOCUMENTS NOT RELIED UPON BY THE PROSECUTION
31.      Now, we come to the decision of this Court in the case of

Criminal Trials Guidelines Regarding Inadequacies and

Deficiencies, In Re1. This Court, in paragraph 11 of
the said

decision
, held thus:
“11. The Amici Curiae pointed out that at
                        the commencement of trial, accused are
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                               Page 35 of 86
only furnished with list of documents and
                        statements which the prosecution relies on
                        and are kept in the dark about other
                        material, which the police or the
                        prosecution may have in their possession,
                        which may be exculpatory in nature, or
                        absolve or help the accused. This Court is
                        of the opinion that while furnishing the
                        list of statements, documents and
                        material objects under
Sections 207
/
208
CrPC, the Magistrate should also ensure
                        that a list of other materials, (such as
                        statements,      or    objects/documents
                        seized, but not relied on) should be
                        furnished to the accused. This is to
                        ensure that in case the accused is of the
                        view that such materials are necessary to
                        be produced for a proper and just trial,
                        she or he may seek appropriate orders,
                        under
CrPC
for their production during
                        the trial, in the interests of justice. It is
                        directed accordingly; the Draft Rules
                        have been accordingly modified. [Rule
                        4(i)]”

                                                  (emphasis added)

Accordingly, Rule 4(i) of the Draft Criminal Rules of Practice, 2021

was formulated, which reads thus:
“4. Supply of documents under
Sections
                        173
,
207
and
208
CrPC.—
(i) Every accused shall be supplied with
                        statements of witness recorded under
Sections 161
and
164
CrPC and a list of
                        documents, material objects and exhibits
                        seized during investigation and relied upon
                        by the investigating officer (IO) in
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                   Page 36 of 86
accordance with
Sections 207
and
208
CrPC.”

                        Explanation: The list of statements,
                        documents, material objects and exhibits
                        shall specify statements, documents,
                        material objects and exhibits that are not
                        relied upon by the investigating officer”
                                                (emphasis added)

Therefore, it is held that a copy of the list of statements,

documents, material objects and exhibits that are not relied upon

by the investigating officer must also be furnished to the accused.
As held by this Court, the object is to ensure that the accused has

knowledge of the documents, objects, etc. in the custody of the

investigating officer which are not relied upon so that at the

appropriate stage, the accused can apply by invoking the

provisions of
Section 91
of the CrPC (Section 94 of the BNSS) for

providing copies of the documents which are not relied upon by

the prosecution. This decision upholds the right of the accused to

apply for the supply of copies of the documents which are not relied

upon by the prosecution at an appropriate stage by making an

application to the Court.
32. This requirement was again quoted with approval in a

decision of the Coordinate Bench of this court in the case of
Manoj
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                Page 37 of 86
& Ors. v. State of Madhya Pradesh5
. Paragraphs 208 and 209

of
the said decision
read thus:
“208. This view was endorsed in a recent
                        three-Judge Bench decision of this Court
                        in Criminal Trials Guidelines Regarding
                        Inadequacies & Deficiencies, In re v. State
                        of    A.P. [Criminal     Trials    Guidelines
                        Regarding Inadequacies & Deficiencies, In
                        re v. State of A.P., (2021) 10 SCC 598 :
(2022) 1 SCC (Cri) 100] This Court has
                        highlighted the inadequacy mentioned
                        above, which would impede a fair trial, and
                        inter alia, required the framing of rules by
                        all States and High Courts, in this regard,
                        compelling disclosure of a list containing
                        mention of all materials seized and taken in,
                        during investigation—to the accused. The
                        relevant draft guideline, approved by this
                        Court, for adoption by all States is as
                        follows : (SCC p. 608, para 21)
                        “21. … ‘… 4. Supply of documents under
                        Sections 173, 207 and 208CrPC.—(1) Every
                        accused shall be supplied with statements
                        of witness recorded under Sections 161 and
                        164CrPC and a list of documents, material
                        objects and exhibits seized during
                        investigation and relied upon by the
                        investigating officer (IO) in accordance with
                        Sections 207 and 208CrPC.
Explanation : The list of statements,
                        documents, material objects and exhibits
                        shall specify statements, documents,


5   (2023) 2 SCC 353
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                   Page 38 of 86
material objects and exhibits that are not
                        relied upon by the investigating officer.”
                        This extract is taken from
Manoj v. State of
                        M.P.
, (2023) 2 SCC 353 : 2022 SCC OnLine
                        SC 677 at page 452
209. In view of the above discussion, this
                        Court holds that the prosecution, in the
                        interests of fairness, should as a matter
                        of rule, in all criminal trials, comply with
                        the above rule, and furnish the list of
                        statements, documents, material objects
                        and exhibits which are not relied upon by
                        the investigating officer. The presiding
                        officers of courts in criminal trials shall
                        ensure compliance with such rules.”
                                                  (emphasis applied)

Therefore, what can be deduced from the above decisions is that

the accused has the right to ask for the supply of documents not

relied upon by the prosecution by making an application to the

Court. The question is at what stage the accused can demand

copies of the documents.
WHETHER AN ACCUSED IS ENTITLED TO SEEK COPIES OF
THE DOCUMENTS NOT RELIED UPON BY THE PROSECUTION
AT THE STAGE OF FRAMING OF CHARGE
33. At this stage, we may make a reference to the decision of this

Court in the case of Debendra Nath Padhi3.                 This Court was
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                  Page 39 of 86
considering the provision of discharge under
Section 227
of the

CrPC, which reads thus:
“227. Discharge.— If, upon consideration
                        of the record of the case and the documents
                        submitted therewith, and after hearing the
                        submissions of the accused and the
                        prosecution in this behalf, the Judge
                        considers that there is not sufficient ground
                        for proceeding against the accused, he shall
                        discharge the accused and record his
                        reasons for so doing.”

The issue before this Court was what is the meaning of ‘the record

of the case’ which is required to be considered for the purposes of

framing of charge. Paragraph 8 of
the said decision
reads thus:
“8. What is the meaning of the expression
                        “the record of the case” as used in Section
                        227 of the Code. Though the word “case” is
                        not defined in the Code but Section 209
                        throws light on the interpretation to be
                        placed on the said word. Section 209 which
                        deals with the commitment of case to the
                        Court of Session when offence is triable
                        exclusively by it, inter alia, provides that
                        when it appears to the Magistrate that the
                        offence is triable exclusively by the Court of
                        Session, he shall commit “the case” to the
                        Court of Session and send to that court “the
                        record of the case” and the document and
                        articles, if any, which are to be produced in
                        evidence and notify the Public Prosecutor of
                        the commitment of the case to the Court of
                        Session. It is evident that the record of the
                        case and documents submitted therewith
                        as postulated in Section 227 relate to the
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                    Page 40 of 86
case and the documents referred in Section
209. That is the plain meaning of Section
                        227 read with Section 209 of the Code. No
                        provision in the Code grants to the accused
                        any right to file any material or document at
                        the stage of framing of charge. That right is
                        granted only at the stage of the trial.”

In paragraph 25 of
the said decision
, this Court held thus:
“25. Any document or other thing
                        envisaged under the aforesaid provision can
                        be ordered to be produced on finding that
                        the same is “necessary or desirable for the
                        purpose of investigation, inquiry, trial or
                        other proceedings under the Code”. The first
                        and foremost requirement of the section is
                        about the document being necessary or
                        desirable. The necessity or desirability
                        would have to be seen with reference to the
                        stage when a prayer is made for the
                        production. If any document is necessary or
                        desirable for the defence of the accused, the
                        question of invoking Section 91 at the initial
                        stage of framing of a charge would not arise
                        since defence of the accused is not relevant
                        at that stage. When the section refers to
                        investigation, inquiry, trial or other
                        proceedings, it is to be borne in mind that
                        under the section a police officer may move
                        the court for summoning and production of
                        a document as may be necessary at any of
                        the stages mentioned in the section. Insofar
                        as the accused is concerned, his
                        entitlement to seek order under Section
                        91 would ordinarily not come till the
                        stage of defence. When the section talks of
                        the document being necessary and
                        desirable, it is implicit that necessity and
                        desirability is to be examined considering
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                    Page 41 of 86
the stage when such a prayer for
                        summoning and production is made and
                        the party who makes it, whether police or
                        accused. If under Section 227, what is
                        necessary and relevant is only the record
                        produced in terms of Section 173 of the
                        Code, the accused cannot at that stage
                        invoke Section 91 to seek production of
                        any document to show his innocence.
Under Section 91 summons for production
                        of document can be issued by court and
                        under a written order an officer in charge of
                        a police station can also direct production
                        thereof. Section 91 does not confer any right
                        on the accused to produce document in his
                        possession to prove his defence. Section 91
                        presupposes that when the document is not
                        produced process may be initiated to
                        compel production thereof.”

                                                  (emphasis added)

Thus, this Court observed that the entitlement of the accused to

seek an order under
Section 91
of the CrPC for the production of

the documents that are not relied upon would ordinarily not come

till the stage of defence. These observations are in the context of

what constitutes ‘the record of the case’ for the purposes of
Section

227
of the CrPC. Even this judgment recognizes the right of the

accused to seek documents at the time of leading defence evidence

by invoking
Section 91
of the CrPC. We may note here that what

is observed by this Court is that there is no absolute prohibition
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                   Page 42 of 86
on an accused making an application under
Section 91
of CrPC,

before the stage of entering upon defence. It is held that ordinarily,

the entitlement of the accused to apply under Section 91 will not

arise till the stage of defence.
34. As far as the supply of documents is concerned, we may refer

to the decision of the Constitution Bench in the case of
Assistant

Collector of Customs, Bombay & Anr. v. L.R. Melwani & Anr6
.

Paragraphs 11 to 14 of
the said decision
read thus:
“11. We also see no merit in the contention
                    that the accused in this case are entitled to
                    the benefit of
Section 173(4)
, Criminal
                    Procedure Code which provides that before
                    the commencement of the enquiry or trial the
                    officer-in-charge of the police station who
                    forwards a report under
Section 173
, Criminal
                    Procedure Code, should furnish or cause to be
                    furnished to the accused, free of cost, a copy
                    of the report forwarded under
Section 173(1)
,
                    Criminal Procedure Code of the first
                    information report recorded under
Section
                    154
, Criminal Procedure Code and all other
                    documents or relevant extracts thereof on
                    which the prosecution proposes to rely,
                    including the statements and confessions, if
                    any, recorded under
Section 164
, Criminal
                    Procedure Code and the statements recorded
                    under
Section 161
, Criminal Procedure Code


6   (1969) 2 SCR 438 : 1968 SCC OnLine SC 161
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                Page 43 of 86
of all the persons whom the prosecution
                    proposes to examine as its witnesses.
12. On a plain reading of
Section 173
,
                    Criminal Procedure Code, it is clear that the
                    same is wholly inapplicable to the facts of the
                    present case. In the instant case no report had
                    been sent under
Section 173
, Criminal
                    Procedure Code. Therefore that provision is
                    not attracted. That provision is attracted only
                    in a case investigated by a police officer under
                    Chapter XIV of the
Criminal Procedure Code
,
                    followed up by a final report under
Section
                    173
, Criminal Procedure Code. It may be
                    remembered that sub-section (4) of Section
                    173, was incorporated into the
Criminal
                    Procedure Code
for the first time by Central
                    Act 26 of 1955, presumably because of the
                    changes effected in the mode of trials in cases
                    instituted on police reports. Before the
Criminal Procedure Code
was amended by Act
                    26 of 1955, there was no difference in the
                    procedure to be adopted in the cases
                    instituted on police reports and in other
                    cases. Till then in all cases irrespective of the
                    fact whether they were instituted on police
                    reports or on private complaints, the
                    procedure regarding enquiries or trials was
                    identical. In both type of cases, there were two
                    distinct stages i.e. the enquiry stage and the
                    trial stage. When the prosecution witnesses
                    were examined in a case before a charge is
                    framed, it was open to the accused to cross-
examine them. Hence there was no need for
                    making available to the accused the
                    documents mentioned in sub Section (4) of
Section 173
, Criminal Procedure Code. The
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                   Page 44 of 86
right given to him under
Section 162
,
                    Criminal Procedure Code was thought to be
                    sufficient to safeguard his interest.
But Act
26
                    of 1955 as mentioned earlier made
                    substantial changes in the procedure to be
                    adopted in the matter of enquiry in cases
                    instituted on police reports. That procedure is
                    now set out in
Section 251(a)
, Criminal
                    Procedure Code. This new procedure
                    truncated the enquiry stage.
Section 251(a)
,
                    Criminal Procedure Code says that the
                    Magistrate, if upon consideration of all the
                    documents referred to in Section 173 and
                    making such examination if any, of the
                    accused as he thinks necessary and after
                    giving the prosecution and the accused an
                    opportunity of being heard considers the
                    charge against the accused to be groundless
                    he shall discharge him but if he is of opinion
                    that there is ground for presuming that the
                    accused has committed an offence triable as a
                    warrant case which he is competent to try and
                    which in his opinion could be adequately
                    punished by him, he shall frame in writing a
                    charge against him. Under the procedure
                    prescribed in
Section 251(a)
, Criminal
                    Procedure Code but for the facility provided to
                    him under Section 173(4) of that Code an
                    accused person would have been greatly
                    handicapped in his defence. But in a case
                    instituted on a complaint, like the one before
                    us and governed by
Sections 252
to
259
of the
                    Criminal Procedure Code, no such difficulty
                    arises. Therein the position is as it was before
                    the amendment of the
Criminal Procedure
                    Code
in 1955.
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                  Page 45 of 86
13. We are unable to agree with the learned
                    fudges of the High Court that the legislature
                    did not make available the benefit of
Section
                    173(4)
, Criminal Procedure Code in cases
                    instituted otherwise than on police reports by
                    oversight. The observations of the learned
                    Judges in the course of their judgment that
                    “Even the great Homer occasionally nods.
                    There is nothing to show that the legislature
                    has applied its mind to the question of the
                    amendment of the procedure so far as the
                    investigation of an offence under the Sea
                    Customs Act is concerned at the time when it
                    was considering amendments to the
Criminal
                    Procedure Code
” is without any basis. In the
                    first place, it is not proper to assume except
                    on very good grounds that there is any lacuna
                    in any statute or that the legislature has not
                    done its duty properly. Secondly from the
                    history of the legislation to which reference
                    has been made earlier, the reason for
                    introducing Section 173(4) is clear. The
                    learned judges of the High Court were
                    constrained to hold that
Section 173(4)
,
                    Criminal Procedure Code in terms does not
                    apply to the present case. But strangely
                    enough that even after coming to the
                    conclusion that provision is inapplicable to
                    the facts of the present case, they have
                    directed the learned Magistrate to require the
                    prosecution to make available to the accused,
                    the copies of the statements recorded from the
                    prosecution witnesses during the enquiry
                    under the
Customs Act
. They have purported
                    to make that order under Section 94(1),
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                Page 46 of 86
Criminal Procedure Code
which to the extent
                    material for our present purpose reads:
“Whenever any Court … considers that
                        production of any document or other
                        thing is necessary or desirable for the
                        purposes of any … enquiry, trial or
                        other proceeding under this Code by or
                        before such Court … such Court may
                        issue a summons … to the person in
                        whose possession and power such
                        document or thing is believed to be,
                        requiring him to attend and produce it,
                        or to produce it, at the time and place
                        stated in the summons or order.”
                    This section does not empower a Magistrate to
                    direct the prosecution to give copies of any
                    documents to an accused person. That much
                    appears to be plain from the language of that
                    section. It was impermissible for the High
                    Court to read into
Section 94
, Criminal
                    Procedure Code the requirements of
Section
                    173(4)
, Criminal Procedure Code. The High
                    Court was not justified, in indirectly applying
                    to cases instituted on private complaints the
                    requirements of
Section 173(4)
, Criminal
                    Procedure Code.
14. That apart we do not think that the High
                    Court was justified in interfering with the
                    discretion of the learned Magistrate. Whether
                    a particular document should be summoned
                    or not is essentially in the discretion of the
                    trial court. In the instant case the Special
                    Public Prosecutor had assured the learned
                    trial Magistrate that he would keep in
                    readiness the statements of witnesses
                    recorded by the Customs Authorities and
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                 Page 47 of 86
shall make available to the defence Counsel
                    the statement of the concerned witness as and
                    when he is examined. In view of that
                    assurance, the learned Magistrate observed in
                    his order:
“The recording of the prosecution
                       evidence is yet commence in this case
                       and at present there are no materials
                       before me to decide whether or not the
                       production of any of the statements and
                       documents named by the accused in
                       his application is desirable or necessary
                       for the purpose of the enquiry or trial.
                       As stated at the outset, the learned
                       Special Prosecutor has given an
                       undertaking that he would produce all
                       the relevant statements and documents
                       at the proper time in the course of the
                       hearing of the case. The request made
                       for the issue of the summons under
Section 94
, Criminal Procedure Code is
                       also omnibus.”
                    The reasons given by the learned Magistrate
                    in support of his order are good reasons. The
                    High Court has not come to the conclusion
                    that the documents in question, if not
                    produced in court are likely to be destroyed or
                    tampered with or the same are not likely to be
                    made available when required. It has
                    proceeded on the erroneous basis that the
                    accused will not have a fair trial unless they
                    are supplied with the copies of those
                    statements     even    before    the    enquiry
                    commences. Except for very good reasons, the
                    High Court should not interfere with the
                    discretion conferred on the trial courts in the
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                 Page 48 of 86
matter of summoning documents. Such
                    interferences would unnecessarily impede the
                    progress of cases and result in waste of public
                    money and time as has happened in this
                    case.”
35. This Court was considering the issue whether the benefit of

Section 173(4) of the 1898
CrPC
was available in cases instituted

otherwise than on a police report. Section 173(4) of the 1898
CrPC
required the officer in charge of a police station to forward

documents mentioned therein along with the report. It is in that

context that this Court observed that the requirement of Section

173(4) cannot be read into Section 94 of the 1898
CrPC
(equivalent

to
Section 91
of the CrPC). This Court has not considered what is

provided under
Sections 207
and
208
of the CrPC. In any case,

this Court was not considering the right of the accused to apply

under
Section 91
of the CrPC at the time of leading defence

evidence.
36. The right of the accused to apply under
Section 91
of the

CrPC for production of the documents not relied upon by the

prosecution at the stage of leading defence evidence has been

recognised by the decisions of this Court including the decisions
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                 Page 49 of 86
in     the     cases        of     Criminal     Trials   Guidelines   Regarding

Inadequacies and Deficiencies, In Re1 and Manoj & Ors5.
37.
In the case of
Om Prakash Sharma v. CBI, Delhi7
, this

Court dealt with the issue whether an application under
Section

91
of the CrPC can be made by the accused at a stage before

framing of a charge. In paragraph 6 of the decision in the case of

Om Prakash Sharma7, this Court held thus:
“6. The powers conferred under Section 91
                        are enabling in nature aimed at arming the
                        court or any officer in charge of a police
                        station concerned to enforce and to ensure
                        the production of any document or other
                        things “necessary or desirable” for the
                        purposes of any investigation, inquiry, trial
                        or other proceeding under the Code, by
                        issuing a summons or a written order to
                        those in possession of such material. The
                        language of Section 91 would, no doubt,
                        indicate the width of the powers to be
                        unlimited but the inbuilt limitation inherent
                        therein takes its colour and shape from the
                        stage or point of time of its exercise,
                        commensurately with the nature of
                        proceedings as also the compulsions of
                        necessity and desirability, to fulfil the task
                        or achieve the object. The question, at the
                        present stage of the proceedings before the
                        trial court would be to address itself to find
                        whether there is sufficient ground for
                        proceeding to the next stage against the
                        accused. If the accused could produce any
7   (2000) 5 SCC 679 : 2000 SCC OnLine SC 776
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                    Page 50 of 86
reliable material even at that stage which
                        might totally affect even the very
                        sustainability of the case, a refusal to even
                        look into the materials so produced may
                        result in injustice, apart from averting an
                        exercise in futility at the expense of valuable
                        judicial/public time. It is trite law that the
                        standard of proof normally adhered to at the
                        final stage is not to be insisted upon at the
                        stage where the consideration is to be
                        confined to find out a prima facie case and
                        decide whether it is necessary to proceed to
                        the next stage of framing the charges and
                        making the accused to stand trial for the
                        same. This Court has already cautioned
                        against undertaking a roving inquiry into
                        the pros and cons of the case by weighing
                        the evidence or collecting materials, as if
                        during the course or after trial vide
Union of
                        India v. Prafulla Kumar Samal
[(1979) 3
                        SCC 4 : 1979 SCC (Cri) 609] . Ultimately,
                        this would always depend upon the facts of
                        each case and it would be difficult to lay
                        down a rule of universal application and for
                        all times. The fact that in one case the court
                        thought fit to exercise such powers is no
                        compelling circumstance to do so in all and
                        every case before it, as a matter of course
                        and for the mere asking. The court
                        concerned must be allowed a large latitude
                        in the matter of exercise of discretion and
                        unless in a given case the court was found
                        to have conducted itself in so demonstrably
                        an unreasonable manner unbecoming of a
                        judicial authority, the court superior to that
                        court cannot intervene very lightly or in a
                        routine fashion to interpose or impose itself
                        even at that stage. The reason being, at that
                        stage, the question is one of mere
                        proprieties involved in the exercise of
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                     Page 51 of 86
judicial discretion by the court and not of
                        any rights concretised in favour of the
                        accused.”

Thus, this decision will have no application when it comes to the

right of the accused to apply for the production of documents by

invoking
Section 91
of the CrPC at the stage of entering defence.
The decision means that the said right is ordinarily not available

at the time of framing of the charge. The reason is that while

framing a charge, the Court can consider only that material which

forms part of the chargesheet.
38. In the case of a complaint under Section 44(1)(b) of the PMLA,

while framing charge, the Court can look into only the complaint

and the documents produced along with the complaint.
In the

case of
Nitya Dharmananda & Anr. v. Gopal Sheelum Reddy

& Anr.8
, the same view was taken by this Court while addressing

the issue of the right of the accused to invoke
Section 91
of the

CrPC at the time of framing of charge.
In the case of
Anjun

Panditrao Khotkar v. Kailash Kushanrao Gorantyal & Ors.9
,

the issue was whether the evidence in the form of a document not
8
2017 INSC 1201 : (2018) 2 SCC 93
9   2020 INSC 453 : (2020) 7 SCC 1
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                 Page 52 of 86
produced           along        with    the   chargesheet   can   be    produced

subsequently in any circumstances. In paragraph 56, this Court

held thus:
“56. Therefore, in terms of general
                        procedure, the prosecution is obligated to
                        supply all documents upon which reliance
                        may be placed to an accused before
                        commencement of the trial. Thus, the
                        exercise of power by the courts in criminal
                        trials in permitting evidence to be filed at a
                        later stage should not result in serious or
                        irreversible prejudice to the accused. A
                        balancing exercise in respect of the rights of
                        parties has to be carried out by the court, in
                        examining       any    application     by      the
                        prosecution under Sections 91 or 311
CrPC
or
Section 165
of the Evidence Act.
                        Depending on the facts of each case, and
                        the court exercising discretion after seeing
                        that the accused is not prejudiced by want
                        of a fair trial, the court may in appropriate
                        cases allow the prosecution to produce such
                        certificate at a later point in time. If it is the
                        accused who desires to produce the
                        requisite certificate as part of his defence,
                        this again will depend upon the justice of
                        the case — discretion to be exercised by the
                        court in accordance with law.”
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                        Page 53 of 86
This Court, in this case, considered the issue in the context of the

prosecution producing new documents after the commencement of

the trial.
39. Now, we come to the decision of this Court in the case of
Abhishek Banerjee & Anr. v. Directorate of Enforcement10
.
The issue before this Court was whether the provisions of the
CrPC
and especially the safeguards under Sections 160 and 161 are

applicable while summoning a person under the provisions of the

PMLA. This Court considered the issue of the power of the ED to

issue summons for the production of documents and not the power

of the Court. This decision has no relevance to the issue of the

right of the accused to apply for the production of documents that

are not relied upon during the trial.
40. This Court in the case of
V.K. Sasikala v. State11
considered

the right of the accused to seek copies of certain unmarked and

unexhibited documents at a belated stage after cross-examination

of the prosecution witnesses had progressed.
In this case, this

Court relied upon its earlier decision in the case of Sidharth
10
2024 INSC 668 : 2024 SCC OnLine SC 2454
11
(2012) 9 SCC 771 : 2012 SCC OnLine SC 799
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                      Page 54 of 86
Vashisht alias
Manu Sharma v. State (NCT of Delhi
)12.
In

paragraphs 18 to 21 of the decision in the case of
V.K. Sasikala

v. State11
it was held thus:
“18.
In a recent pronouncement in
Manu
                        Sharma v. State (NCT of Delhi
) [(2010) 6
                        SCC 1 : (2010) 2 SCC (Cri) 1385] to which
                        one of us (Sathasivam, J.) was a party, the
                        role of a Public Prosecutor and his duties of
                        disclosure have received a wide and in-
                        depth consideration of this Court. This
                        Court has held that though the primary
                        duty of a Public Prosecutor is to ensure that
                        an accused is punished, his duties extend
                        to ensuring fairness in the proceedings and
                        also to ensure that all relevant facts and
                        circumstances are brought to the notice of
                        the Court for a just determination of the
                        truth so that due justice prevails. The
                        fairness of the investigative process so as to
                        maintain the citizens' rights under
Articles
                        19
and
21
and also the active role of the
                        court in a criminal trial have been
                        exhaustively dealt with by this Court.
Finally, it was held that it is the
                        responsibility of the investigating agency as
                        well as that of the courts to ensure that
                        every investigation is fair and does not erode
                        the freedom of an individual except in
                        accordance with law. It was also held that
                        one of the established facets of a just, fair
                        and transparent investigation is the right of
12
(2010) 6 SCC 1
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                    Page 55 of 86
an accused to ask for all such documents
                        that he may be entitled to under the scheme
                        contemplated by the
Code of Criminal
                        Procedure
. The said scheme was duly
                        considered by this Court in different
                        paragraphs of the report.
19. The views expressed would certainly be
                        useful for reiteration in the context of the
                        facts of the present case: (
Manu Sharma
case [(2010) 6 SCC 1 : (2010) 2 SCC (Cri)
                        1385] , SCC pp. 84-86, paras 216-21)
                             “216. Under Section 170, the
                             documents during investigation are
                             required to be forwarded to the
                             Magistrate, while in terms of Section
                             173(5) all documents or relevant
                             extracts and the statement recorded
                             under Section 161 have to be
                             forwarded to the Magistrate. The
                             investigating officer is entitled to
                             collect all the material, which in his
                             wisdom is required for proving the
                             guilt of the offender. He can record the
                             statement in terms of Section 161 and
                             his power to investigate the matter is a
                             very wide one, which is regulated by
                             the provisions of the Code. The
                             statement recorded under Section 161
                             is not evidence per se under Section
                             162 of the Code. The right of the
                             accused         to      receive      the
                             documents/statements          submitted
                             before the court is absolute and it
                             must be adhered to by the prosecution
                             and the court must ensure supply of
                             documents/statements to the accused
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                   Page 56 of 86
in accordance with law. Under the
                             proviso to Section 162(1) the accused
                             has a statutory right of confronting the
                             witnesses    with     the    statements
                             recorded under Section 161 of the
                             Code thus indivisible.
217. Further, Section 91 empowers
                             the court to summon production of
                             any document or thing which the court
                             considers necessary or desirable for
                             the purposes of any investigation,
                             inquiry, trial or another proceeding
                             under the provisions of the Code.
Where Section 91 read with Section
                             243 says that if the accused is called
                             upon to enter his defence and produce
                             his evidence there he has also been
                             given the right to apply to the court for
                             issuance of process for compelling the
                             attendance of any witness for the
                             purpose     of   examination,     cross-
examination or the production of any
                             document or other thing for which the
                             court has to pass a reasoned order.
218. The liberty of an accused cannot
                             be interfered with except under due
                             process of law. The expression ‘due
                             process of law’ shall deem to include
                             fairness in trial. The court (sic Code)
                             gives a right to the accused to receive
                             all documents and statements as well
                             as to move an application for
                             production of any record or witness in
                             support of his case. This constitutional
                             mandate and statutory rights given to
                             the accused place an implied
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                    Page 57 of 86
obligation upon the prosecution
                             (prosecution and the Prosecutor) to
                             make fair disclosure. The concept of
                             fair disclosure would take in its ambit
                             furnishing of a document which the
                             prosecution relies upon whether filed
                             in court or not. That document should
                             essentially be furnished to the accused
                             and even in the cases where during
                             investigation a document is bona fide
                             obtained by the investigating agency
                             and in the opinion of the Prosecutor is
                             relevant and would help in arriving at
                             the truth, that document should also
                             be disclosed to the accused.
219. The role and obligation of the
                             Prosecutor particularly in relation to
                             disclosure cannot be equated under
                             our law to that prevalent under the
                             English system as aforereferred to. But
                             at the same time, the demand for a fair
                             trial cannot be ignored. It may be of
                             different consequences where a
                             document which has been obtained
                             suspiciously, fraudulently or by
                             causing undue advantage to the
                             accused during investigation such
                             document could be denied in the
                             discretion of the Prosecutor to the
                             accused whether the prosecution
                             relies or not upon such documents,
                             however in other cases the obligation
                             to disclose would be more certain. As
                             already noticed the provisions of
                             Section 207 have a material bearing on
                             this subject and make an interesting
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                  Page 58 of 86
reading. This provision not only
                             require or mandate that the court
                             without delay and free of cost should
                             furnish to the accused copies of the
                             police report, first information report,
                             statements, confessional statements
                             of the persons recorded under Section
                             161 whom the prosecution wishes to
                             examine as witnesses, of course,
                             excluding any part of a statement or
                             document as contemplated under
                             Section 173(6) of the Code, any other
                             document or relevant extract thereof
                             which has been submitted to the
                             Magistrate by the police under sub-
section (5) of Section 173. In
                             contradistinction to the provisions of
                             Section 173, where the legislature has
                             used the expression ‘documents on
                             which the prosecution relies’ are not
                             used under Section 207 of the Code.
Therefore, the provisions of Section
                             207 of the Code will have to be given a
                             liberal and relevant meaning so as to
                             achieve its object. Not only this, the
                             documents       submitted      to   the
                             Magistrate along with the report under
                             Section 173(5) would deem to include
                             the documents which have to be sent
                             to the Magistrate during the course of
                             investigation as per the requirement of
                             Section 170(2) of the Code.
220. The right of the accused with
                             regard to disclosure of documents is a
                             limited right but is codified and is the
                             very foundation of a fair investigation
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                   Page 59 of 86
and trial. On such matters, the
                             accused cannot claim an indefeasible
                             legal right to claim every document of
                             the police file or even the portions
                             which are permitted to be excluded
                             from the documents annexed to the
                             report under Section 173(2) as per
                             orders of the court. But certain rights
                             of the accused flow both from the
                             codified law as well as from equitable
                             concepts      of   the    constitutional
                             jurisdiction, as substantial variation
                             to such procedure would frustrate the
                             very basis of a fair trial. To claim
                             documents within the purview of scope
                             of Sections 207, 243 read with the
                             provisions of Section 173 in its entirety
                             and power of the court under Section
                             91 of the Code to summon documents
                             signifies and provides precepts which
                             will govern the right of the accused to
                             claim copies of the statement and
                             documents which the prosecution has
                             collected during investigation and
                             upon which they rely.
221. It will be difficult for the court
                             to say that the accused has no right
                             to claim copies of the documents or
                             request the court for production of
                             a document which is part of the
                             general diary subject to satisfying
                             the basic ingredients of law stated
                             therein. A document which has
                             been obtained bona fide and has
                             bearing on the case of the
                             prosecution and in the opinion of
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                    Page 60 of 86
the Public Prosecutor, the same
                             should be disclosed to the accused
                             in the interest of justice and fair
                             investigation and trial should be
                             furnished to the accused. Then that
                             document should be disclosed to
                             the accused giving him chance of
                             fair defence, particularly when non-
production or disclosure of such a
                             document       would    affect   the
                             administration of criminal justice
                             and the defence of the accused
                             prejudicially.”
                                               (emphasis supplied)
20. The declaration of the law in Manu
                        Sharma [(2010) 6 SCC 1 : (2010) 2 SCC (Cri)
                        1385] may have touched upon the outer
                        fringe of the issues arising in the present
                        case. However, the positive advancement
                        that has been achieved cannot, in our
                        view, be allowed to take a roundabout turn
                        and the march has only to be carried
                        forward. If the claim of the appellant is
                        viewed in the context and perspective
                        outlined above, according to us, a
                        perception of possible prejudice, if the
                        documents or at least an inspection
                        thereof is denied, looms large. The
                        absence of any claim on the part of the
                        accused to the said documents at any
                        earlier point of time cannot have the
                        effect of foreclosing such a right of the
                        accused. Absence of such a claim, till the
                        time when raised, can be understood and
                        explained in several reasonable and
                        acceptable ways. Suffice it would be to say
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                Page 61 of 86
that individual notion of prejudice,
                        difficulty or handicap in putting forward a
                        defence would vary from person to person
                        and there can be no uniform yardstick to
                        measure such perceptions. If the present
                        appellant      has     perceived      certain
                        difficulties in answering or explaining
                        some part of the evidence brought by the
                        prosecution on the basis of specific
                        documents and seeks to ascertain if the
                        allegedly incriminating documents can be
                        better explained by reference to some
                        other documents which are in the court's
                        custody, an opportunity must be given to
                        the accused to satisfy herself in this
                        regard. It is not for the prosecution or for
                        the court to comprehend the prejudice
                        that is likely to be caused to the accused.
                        The perception of prejudice is for the
                        accused to develop and if the same is
                        founded on a reasonable basis it is the
                        duty of the court as well as the
                        prosecution to ensure that the accused
                        should not be made to labour under any
                        such perception and the same must be put
                        to rest at the earliest. Such a view,
                        according to us, is an inalienable attribute
                        of the process of a fair trial that
Article 21
guarantees to every accused.
21. The issue that has emerged before us is,
                        therefore, somewhat larger than what has
                        been projected by the State and what has
                        been dealt with by the High Court. The
                        question arising would no longer be one of
                        compliance or non-compliance with the
                        provisions of
Section 207
CrPC and would
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                               Page 62 of 86
travel beyond the confines of the strict
                        language of the provisions of
CrPC
and touch
                        upon the larger doctrine of a free and fair
                        trial that has been painstakingly built up by
                        the courts on a purposive interpretation of
Article 21
of the Constitution. It is not the
                        stage of making of the request; the efflux of
                        time that has occurred or the prior conduct
                        of the accused that is material. What is of
                        significance is if in a given situation the
                        accused comes to the court contending that
                        some papers forwarded to the court by the
                        investigating agency have not been exhibited
                        by the prosecution as the same favours the
                        accused the court must concede a right to
                        the accused to have an access to the said
                        documents, if so claimed. This, according to
                        us, is the core issue in the case which must
                        be answered affirmatively. In this regard, we
                        would like to be specific in saying that we
                        find it difficult to agree with the view taken
                        by the High Court that the accused must be
                        made to await the conclusion of the trial to
                        test the plea of prejudice that he may have
                        raised. Such a plea must be answered at the
                        earliest and certainly before the conclusion
                        of the trial, even though it may be raised by
                        the accused belatedly. This is how the scales
                        of justice in our criminal jurisprudence have
                        to be balanced.”
                                                  (emphasis added)
41. Thus, we conclude that at the time of hearing for framing of

charge, reliance can be placed only on the documents forming part

of the chargesheet. In case of the PMLA, at the time of framing
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                Page 63 of 86
charge, reliance can be placed only on those documents which are

produced along with the complaint or supplementary complaint.

Though the accused will be entitled to the list of documents,

objects, exhibits etc. that are not relied upon by the ED at the stage

of framing of charge, in ordinary course, the accused is not entitled

to seek copies of the said documents at the stage of framing of

charge.
RIGHT OF THE ACCUSED TO SEEK DOCUMENTS NOT RELIED
UPON BY PROSECUTION AT THE STAGE OF ENTERING UPON
DEFENCE
42. In Chapter XVIII of the
CrPC
containing the provisions

regarding trial before a Court of Session, under Section 233, the

accused has the right to lead evidence.
Section 233
of the CrPC

(Section 256 of BNSS) reads thus:
“233. Entering upon defence
                        (1) Where the accused is not acquitted
                        under Section 232, he shall be called upon
                        to enter on his defence and adduce any
                        evidence he may have in support thereof.
                        (2) If the accused puts in any written
                        statement, the Judge shall file it with the
                        record.
(3) If the accused applies for the issue of
                        any      process  for    compelling    the
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                 Page 64 of 86
attendance of any witness or the
                        production of any document or thing, the
                        Judge shall issue such process unless he
                        considers, for reasons to be recorded,
                        that such application should be refused
                        on the ground that it is made for the
                        purpose of vexation or delay or for
                        defeating the ends of justice.”
                                                  (emphasis added)
43. There is a similar provision in Chapter XIX of the
CrPC
, which

deals with the trial of warrant cases by Magistrates. Section 243

(Section 266 of BNSS) is the provision which reads thus:
“243. Evidence for defence.
(1) The accused shall then be called upon to
                        enter upon his defence and produce his
                        evidence; and if the accused puts in any
                        written statement, the Magistrate shall file
                        it with the record.
(2) If the accused, after he has entered
                        upon his defence, applies to the
                        Magistrate to issue any process for
                        compelling the attendance of any
                        witness for the purpose of examination
                        or cross-examination, or the production
                        of any document or other thing, the
                        Magistrate shall issue such process
                        unless he considers that such application
                        should be refused on the ground that it
                        is made for the purpose of vexation or
                        delay or for defeating the ends of justice
                        and such ground shall be recorded by him
                        in writing:
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                  Page 65 of 86
Provided that, when the accused has cross-
examined or had the opportunity of cross-
                        examining any witness before entering on
                        his defence, the attendance of such witness
                        shall not be compelled under this section,
                        unless the Magistrate is satisfied that it is
                        necessary for the ends of justice.
                        (3) The Magistrate may, before summoning
                        any witness on an application under sub-
section (2), require that the reasonable
                        expenses incurred by the witness in
                        attending for the purposes of the trial be
                        deposited in Court.”
                                                 (emphasis added)
44. At this stage, we may note the difference between the

provisions of
Section 91
of CrPC and
Sections 233
and
243
of

CrPC.
Section 91
of CrPC read thus:
91. Summons to produce document or other
                    thing.—(1) Whenever any Court or any
                    officer in charge of a police station
                    considers that the production of any
                    document or other thing is necessary or
                    desirable for the purposes of any
                    investigation, inquiry, trial or other
                    proceeding under this Code by or before
                    such Court or officer, such Court may issue
                    a summons, or such officer a written order,
                    to the person in whose possession or power
                    such document or thing is believed to be,
                    requiring him to attend and produce it, or
                    to produce it, at the time and place stated in
                    the summons or order.
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                   Page 66 of 86
(2) Any person required under this section
                    merely to produce a document or other thing
                    shall be deemed to have complied with the
                    requisition if he causes such document or
                    thing to be produced instead of attending
                    personally to produce the same.
(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed—
(a) to affect
Sections 123
and
124
of
                    the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), or
                    the
Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891
(13 of
                    1891), or
(b) to apply to a letter, postcard, telegram
                    or other document or any parcel or thing in
                    the custody of the postal or telegraph
                    authority.
(emphasis added)


On plain reading of sub-section (1) of Section 91, the power of the

court is discretionary. The word ‘may’ appears in sub-section (1) of

Section 91. However, if we peruse sub-section (3) of Section 233

and sub-section (2) of Section 243, the word ‘shall’ has been used.

The reason is that these two provisions apply at the stage of the

accused leading defence evidence. Therefore, it is provided that if

the accused applies for the issue of any process for compelling the

attendance of any witness or the production of any document or

thing, the court must issue such process. The prayer for issue of

such process cannot be denied unless the court, for reasons to be
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                 Page 67 of 86
recorded, holds that the application is made for the purposes of

vexation or delay or for defeating the ends of justice. Therefore, the

prayer for issuing process for production of documents can be

denied by the court only on the limited grounds specified in sub-

section (3) of Section 233 and sub-section (2) of Section 243. This

right conferred on the accused is on a much higher pedestal than

what is provided in
Section 91
of the CrPC. Therefore, in case of a

trial or trial by Court of Session, the accused under the PMLA can

invoke
Section 233
of CrPC (Section 256 of BNSS).
45. Therefore, at the stage of entering upon defence, an accused

can apply for the issue of process for the production of any

document or thing. At this stage, he can also apply for the

production of a document or a thing that is in the custody of the

prosecution but has not been produced. A fair trial is a part of the

right guaranteed to an accused under
Article 21
of the

Constitution. The right to a fair trial of the accused includes the

right to defend. The right to defend consists of the right to lead the

defence evidence by examining the witnesses and producing the

documents. Therefore, the accused is entitled to exercise his right

at the stage of entering upon defence by compelling the
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                        Page 68 of 86
prosecution or a third party to produce a document or a thing in

their possession or custody. The Court can decline the request of

the accused for issuing process for the production of documents

only on the limited grounds set out in sub-section (3) of
section

233
of the CrPC.
46. If, according to the case of the accused, the prosecution or

any of the witnesses examined by the prosecution is withholding a

document, in his cross-examination, the accused can always ask

questions to the concerned prosecution witnesses whether they

were willing to produce the said document.      On the witnesses’

refusal or failure, an argument is always available to the accused

during the final hearing that an adverse inference should be drawn

against the prosecution for non-production of the document. The

accused can always invoke the presumption under clause (g) of
Section 114
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (clause (g) of
Section

119
of the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023).
47. When at the stage of defence of the accused, documents are

produced on the prayer of the accused and the accused desires to

cross-examine any of the prosecution witnesses based on the said

documents, it is always open for the accused to apply under
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                      Page 69 of 86
Section 311
of the CrPC (Section 348 of the BNSS) to recall a

prosecution            witness          already   examined   for   further      cross-

examination. The reason is that the right to effectively cross-

examine the prosecution witnesses is also a part of the right to

have a fair trial. The accused can exercise this right even if

evidence of both sides is closed.
48. In this case, we are dealing with complaints under the PMLA.

As far as the applicability of provisions of the
CrPC
(the BNSS) to

the provisions of the PMLA is concerned, the issue is no longer res

integra.
In paragraphs 22 to 25 of the decision of this Court in the

case of
Directorate of Enforcement v. Bibhu Prasad Acharya

& Ors.13
, this Court held thus:
“22. As far as the applicability of Section
                        197CrPC to PMLA is concerned, there are
                        two relevant provisions in the form of
Sections 65
and
71
PMLA which read thus:
“65.
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973
                               to apply.—The provisions of the
Code of
                               Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974)
                               shall apply, insofar as they are not
                               inconsistent with the provisions of this
                               Act, to arrest, search and seizure,
                               attachment, confiscation, investigation,
                               prosecution and all other proceedings
                               under this Act.
13
(2025) 1 SCC 404 : 2024 SCC OnLine SC 3181
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                        Page 70 of 86
***
71. Act to have overriding effect.—The
                               provisions of this Act shall have effect
                               notwithstanding anything inconsistent
                               therewith contained in any other law for
                               the time being in force.”
23.
Section 65
makes the provisions of
CrPC
applicable to all proceedings under
                        PMLA, provided the same are not
                        inconsistent with the provisions contained
                        in PMLA. The words “all other proceedings”
                        include a complaint under
Section 44(1)(b)
PMLA. We have carefully perused the
                        provisions of PMLA. We do not find that
                        there is any provision therein which is
                        inconsistent with the provisions of
Section
                        197(1)
CrPC. Considering the object of
Section 197(1)
CrPC, its applicability cannot
                        be excluded unless there is any provision in
                        PMLA which is inconsistent with Section
                        197(1). No such provision has been pointed
                        out to us. Therefore, we hold that the
                        provisions of
Section 197(1)
CrPC are
                        applicable to a complaint under
Section
                        44(1)(b)
PMLA.
24.
Section 71
gives an overriding effect
                        to    the     provisions      of    PMLA
                        notwithstanding anything inconsistent
                        therewith contained in any other law for
                        the time being in force.
Section 65
is a
                        prior section which specifically makes
                        the provisions of
CrPC
applicable to
                        PMLA, subject to the condition that only
                        those provisions of
CrPC
will apply which
                        are not inconsistent with the provisions
                        of PMLA. Therefore, when a particular
                        provision of
CrPC
applies to proceedings
                        under PMLA by virtue of
Section 65
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                     Page 71 of 86
PMLA,
Section 71(1)
cannot override the
                        provision of
CrPC
which applies to PMLA.
25. Once we hold that in view of
Section 65
PMLA, Section 197(1) will apply to the
                        provisions of PMLA,
Section 71
cannot be
                        invoked to say that the provision of
Section
                        197(1)
CrPC will not apply to PMLA. A
                        provision of
CrPC
, made applicable to PMLA
                        by
Section 65
, will not be overridden by
Section 71
. Those provisions of
CrPC
which
                        apply to PMLA by virtue of
Section 65
will
                        continue to apply to PMLA, notwithstanding
Section 71
. If
Section 71
is held applicable
                        to such provisions of
CrPC
, which apply to
                        PMLA by virtue of
Section 65
, such
                        interpretation will render
Section 65
otiose.
No law can be interpreted in a manner
                        which will render any of its provisions
                        redundant.”

                                                  (emphasis added)
49. After carefully perusing the provisions of the PMLA, we did

not find any provision of the PMLA which is inconsistent with
Section 91
of the CrPC. The power under sub-section (1) of
Section

91
can be exercised by a Court when the production of any

document or any other thing is necessary or desirable for the

purposes of any investigation, inquiry, trial or other proceedings

under the
CrPC
. The consistent line of judgments of this Court

hold that at the stage of framing of charge, the accused is

ordinarily not entitled to apply under
Section 91
of the CrPC for
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                   Page 72 of 86
producing the documents which are not relied upon by the

complainant. For the purposes of his defence, the accused has a

right to seek production of a document or a thing at the stage of

leading defence evidence as
Section 233
of CrPC will apply to the

trial of an offence under the PMLA, due to the fact that Chapter

XVIII of the
CrPC
is made applicable to such trial in view of clause
(d) of
Section 44(1)
of the PMLA. We find that there is no provision

under the PMLA which is inconsistent with
Section 233
of the

CrPC.
50.
Section 24
of the PMLA is material. It reads thus:
“24. Burden of Proof.—In any proceeding
                        relating to proceeds of crime under this
                        Act,—
(a) in the case of a person charged with the
                        offence of money-laundering under
Section
                        3
, the Authority or Court shall, unless the
                        contrary is proved, presume that such
                        proceeds of crime are involved in money-
                        laundering; and
(b) in the case of any other person the
                        Authority or Court, may presume that such
                        proceeds of crime are involved in money-
laundering.”

This drastic provision was incorporated w.e.f. 15th February, 2013.
In the case of
Vijay Madanlal Choudhary & Ors. v. Union of
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                  Page 73 of 86
India & Ors.14
, this Court upheld the constitutional validity of

this provision, which puts a negative burden on the accused.
51. Thus, as compared to traditional penal statutes, at the time

of trial of the offence under the PMLA, there is a huge negative

burden put on the accused. Therefore, it is all the more necessary

that sub-section (3) of
Section 233
of CrPC (Sub-section (3) of

Section 256 of the BNSS) should be liberally construed in favour

of the accused. The reason is that the constitutional validity of
Section 24
has been upheld on the ground that the accused has a

full opportunity to show that he has not violated the provisions of

the PMLA. He is entitled to rebut the presumption. Therefore, if the

Special Court refuses the prayer made by the accused in terms of

Sub-section (3) of Section 233 for compelling the attendance of any

witness or for production of a document in custody of ED or a third

party, the accused will not be in a position to discharge the

onerous burden on him under
Section 24
of the PMLA. Hence, the

valuable right of the accused under
Section 233(3)
of the CrPC

needs to be protected.
14
2022 INSC 757; (2023) 12 SCC 1
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                      Page 74 of 86
THE RIGHT TO SEEK PRODUCTION OF DOCUMENTS FOR THE
PURPOSES OF BAIL APPLICATIONS GOVERNED BY SECTION
45(1)(ii)
52. In the context of the PMLA, another issue arises.
Section 45
of the PMLA reads thus:
“45. Offences to be cognizable and non-
                        bailable.— (1) Notwithstanding anything
                        contained in the
Code of Criminal
                        Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974), no person
                        accused of an offence under this Act shall
                        be released on bail or on his own bond
                        unless—
(i) the Public Prosecutor has been given
                               a opportunity to oppose the application
                               for such release; and
(ii) where the Public Prosecutor
                               opposes the application, the court is
                               satisfied that there are reasonable
                               grounds for believing that he is not
                               guilty of such offence and that he is
                               not likely to commit any offence
                               while on bail:
Provided that a person, who, is under the
                        age of sixteen years, or is a woman or is sick
                        or infirm, or is accused either on his own or
                        along with other co-accused of money-
                        laundering a sum of less than one crore
                        rupees may be released on bail, if the
                        Special Court so directs:
Provided further that the Special Court
                        shall not take cognizance of any offence
                        punishable under
section 4
except upon a
                        complaint in writing made by—
(i) the Director; or
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                     Page 75 of 86
(ii) any officer of the Central
                               Government or a State Government
                               authorised in writing in this behalf by
                               the Central Government by a general or
                               special order made in this behalf by
                               that Government.
(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in
                        the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (2 of
                        1974), or any other provision of this Act, no
                        police officer shall investigate into an
                        offence under this Act unless specifically
                        authorised, by the Central Government by a
                        general or special order, and, subject to
                        such conditions as may be prescribed.
                        (2) The limitation on granting of bail
                        specified in sub-section (1) is in addition to
                        the limitations under the
Code of Criminal
                        Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974) or any other law
                        for the time being in force on granting of
                        bail.”

                                                    (emphasis added)

The accused can be released on bail only when the Special Court

is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that he

is not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to commit any

offence while on bail. Therefore, at the time of hearing of a bail

application, there is a burden on the accused to satisfy the Special

Court that there are reasonable grounds for believing that he may

not be guilty of the offence under
Section 3
of the PMLA. This is

an extraordinary and standalone provision which puts the burden

on the accused at the stage of seeking bail. Therefore, the question
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                    Page 76 of 86
is whether, at the stage of considering the prayer for bail, the

accused, by invoking
Section 91
of the CrPC (
Section 94
of the

BNSS), can apply to get the documents produced. If a narrow view

is taken, by denying this opportunity to the accused, he will not be

in a position to discharge the burden on him, and therefore, it will

affect his right to liberty as he may be denied bail. This denial will

amount to a violation of his rights guaranteed under
Article 21.
Therefore, at the stage of hearing of a bail application to which

stringent provisions of
Section 45(1)(ii)
of the PMLA are applicable,

the accused must be allowed to invoke the provision of
Section 91
of the CrPC for seeking production of the documents not relied

upon by the ED. But, when the investigation is pending, while

permitting the accused to seek production of documents that are

not relied upon by invoking
Section 91
of the CrPC, care has to be

taken to ensure that the investigation is not prejudiced. Therefore,

when such an application is made, the ED is entitled to resist the

production of documents that are not relied upon on the ground

that if the said documents are disclosed at that stage to the

accused, it may prejudice the investigation. Though the ED is

entitled to raise the said plea, it will have to show the documents
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                        Page 77 of 86
to the Court. The Court can, for reasons recorded, deny production

of documents only if it is satisfied that the disclosure of the

documents may prejudice the ongoing investigation. Needless to

add that the ED cannot raise such an objection after the

investigation is complete.
53. Provisions like
Section 45(1)(ii)
or
Section 24
of the PMLA are

very drastic provisions. Very few penal statutes contain such

provisions. Under the said provisions, the accused has a very

heavy burden to discharge. Perhaps, the enactment of PMLA was

due to the drastic changes in the world we have seen in the 21st

century. The presence of modern technology has brought about

new categories of crimes. This law has been enacted taking into

consideration the changing needs. A Constitution Bench of this

Court in the case of
Central Board of Dawoodi Bohra

Community and Anr. v. State of Maharashtra and Anr.15
in

paragraph 29 held thus:
“29. The Constitution Bench in
Navtej Singh
                        Johar [Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India
,
                        (2018) 10 SCC 1 : (2019) 1 SCC (Cri) 1]
                        emphasised     that   the    principle    of
                        transforming constitutionalism also places
15
(2023) 4 SCC 541
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                  Page 78 of 86
upon the judicial arm a duty to ensure that
                    a sense of transformation is ushered
                    consistently in the society by interpreting
                    and enforcing the constitutional as well as
                    other provisions of law. Constitutional law
                    has developed a great deal during the last few
                    decades. The interpretation of various
                    provisions of the Constitution made by this
                    Court decades back has undergone a drastic
                    change.     For    example,      the    narrow
                    interpretation given to
Article 21
in the “A.K.
                    Gopalan” era is no longer valid. The concept
                    of freedom has undergone changes. In the
                    21st Century, society looks completely
                    different from what it looked in the last
                    century. We see a change in the socio-cultural
                    ethos of society. Thus, the interpretation of
                    law must keep pace with changing needs of
                    society.”
54. We have seen a major shift in the interpretation of rights

conferred by
Article 21
of the Constitution after A.K.Gopalan’ s

case. When the Legislature has felt a need to bring out a

legislation like the PMLA, it is the duty of the Court to interpret
Article 21
in such a way that the right of a fair trial available to

the accused is not affected. The object of the provisions of
Section

24
or 45(1)(ii) is not to take away the fundamental right of fair trial

conferred on the accused. These provisions are different in the

sense that they put a burden on the accused. When such a burden

is put on the accused, it is all the more necessary that the right
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                 Page 79 of 86
of fair trial guaranteed under
Article 21
to the accused is protected

by permitting the accused to lead defence evidence by seeking the

production of witnesses and documents not relied upon by the

prosecution. Similarly, for discharging the burden under
Section

45(1)(ii)
, the accused has the right to invoke
Section 91
of CrPC

(
Section 94
of the BNSS) for seeking production of documents at

the stage of hearing of bail application.


CONCLUSION
55. Hence, some of our important conclusions are as under:
(a) When records, instruments or documents of title of the

        property are seized along with the property under
Sections 17
and
18
of the PMLA, the accused from whom the same are

        seized is entitled to true copies thereof;
(b) Once cognizance is taken on the basis of a complaint under
Section 44(1)(b)
of the PMLA, the learned Special Judge must

        direct that along with the process, a copy of the complaint

        and the following documents be provided to the accused;
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                        Page 80 of 86
(i)    Statements recorded by the learned Special Judge of the

                 complainant and the witnesses, if any, before taking

                 cognizance;
(ii) The documents including the copies of the Statements

                 under
Section 50
of the PMLA produced before the

                 Special Court, along with the complaint, and the

                 documents produced subsequently by the ED till the

                 date of taking cognizance; and
(iii) Copies of the supplementary complaints and the

                 documents, if any, produced with supplementary

                 complaints.
(c) We hold that a copy of the list of statements, documents,

        material objects and exhibits that are not relied upon by the

        investigating officer must also be furnished to the accused.
As held by this Court, the object is to ensure that the accused

        has knowledge of the documents, objects, etc. in the custody

        of the investigating officer which are not relied upon so that

        at the appropriate stage, the accused can apply by invoking

        the provisions of
Section 91
of the CrPC (
Section 94
of the
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                           Page 81 of 86
BNSS) for providing copies of the documents which are not

        relied upon by the prosecution.
(d) At the time of hearing for framing of charge, reliance can be

        placed only on the documents forming part of the

        chargesheet. In case of the PMLA, at the time of framing

        charge, reliance can be placed only on those documents

        which          are      produced   along   with   the   complaint     or

        supplementary complaints. Though the accused will be

        entitled to a list of documents, objects, exhibits etc. that are

        not relied upon by the ED at the stage of framing of charge,

        in ordinary course, the accused is not entitled to seek copies

        of the said documents at the stage of framing of charge.
(e) At the stage of entering upon defence, an accused can apply

        for the issue of process for the production of any document

        or thing in accordance with
Section 233(3)
of the CrPC

        (Section 256(3) of the BNSS). At this stage, he can also apply

        for the production of a document or a thing that is in the

        custody of the prosecution but has not been produced. A fair

        trial is a part of the right guaranteed to an accused under
Article 21
of the Constitution. The right to a fair trial of the
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                                Page 82 of 86
accused includes the right to defend. The right to defend

        consists of the right to lead the defence evidence by

        examining the witnesses and producing the documents.

        Therefore, the accused is entitled to exercise his right at the

        stage of entering upon defence by compelling the prosecution

        or a third party to produce a document or a thing in their

        possession or custody. The Court can decline the request of

        the accused for issuing process for the production of

        documents only on the limited grounds set out in sub-section

        (3) of
section 233
of the CrPC.
(f)    When at the stage of defence evidence of the accused,

        documents are produced on the prayer of the accused and

        the accused desires to cross-examine any of the prosecution

        witnesses based on the said documents, it is always open for

        the accused to apply under
Section 311
of the CrPC (Section

        348 of the BNSS) to recall a prosecution witness already

        examined for further cross-examination. The reason is that

        the right to effectively cross-examine the prosecution

        witnesses is also a part of the right to have a fair trial. The
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                         Page 83 of 86
accused can exercise this right even if evidence of both sides

        is closed.
(g) As compared to traditional penal statutes, at the time of trial

        of the offence under the PMLA, there is a huge negative

        burden put on the accused. Therefore, it is all the more

        necessary that sub-section (3) of
Section 233
of CrPC (Sub-

        section (3) of Section 256 of the BNSS) should be liberally

        construed in favour of the accused. The reason is that the

        constitutional validity of
Section 24
has been upheld on the

        ground that the accused has a full opportunity to show that

        he has not violated the provisions of the PMLA. He is entitled

        to rebut the presumption. Therefore, if the Special Court

        refuses the prayer made by the accused in terms of Sub-

        section (3) of Section 233 for compelling the attendance of

        any witness or for production of a document in custody of ED

        or a third party, the accused will not be in a position to

        discharge the onerous burden on him under
Section 24
of the

        PMLA. Hence, the valuable right of the accused under
Section

        233(3)
of the CrPC needs to be protected.
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                        Page 84 of 86
(h) At the time of hearing of an application for bail governed by
Section 45(1)(ii)
in connection with the offences under
Section

          3
of the PMLA, an accused is entitled to invoke
Section 91
of

          the CrPC (
Section 94
of the BNSS) seeking production of

          unrelied        upon documents.   If   investigation or    further

          investigation in progress, the ED is entitled to raise objection

          to production of documents sought by the accused on the

          ground that if the documents are disclosed at this stage to

          the accused, it may prejudice the investigation. Only if the

          Court after perusing the documents is satisfied that the

          disclosure of the documents at that stage may prejudice the

          ongoing investigation, it can deny the prayer for the

          production of such documents.
56. Hence, we pass following orders:
(i)      In Criminal Appeal No. 1622 of 2022, the impugned

             judgment and order dated 22nd July, 2019 is hereby

             quashed and set aside. It is held that the appellants are

             entitled to copies of the documents produced along with

             the complaint under
Section 44(1)(b)
. The ED is directed to

             provide soft or legible copies of all the documents produced
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                               Page 85 of 86
along with the complaint, which have not been supplied

             till today within a period of one month from today.
(ii)     In Criminal Appeal 730 of 2024, the impugned order is

             hereby quashed and set aside. We direct the ED to supply

             true copies of the documents seized from the premises of

             the accused within a period of one month from today. It

             will be open for the ED to provide soft copies of the said

             documents.
57. The appeals are allowed in the above terms.
.…………………………….J.
                                              (Abhay S. Oka)



                                              …………………………….J.
                                             (Ahsanuddin Amanullah)



                                              …………………………….J.
                                             (Augustine George Masih)

New Delhi;
May 07, 2025
Criminal Appeal No.1622 of 2022, etc.                          Page 86 of 86