[Cites
47
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Kasireddy Upender Reddy vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh on 23 May, 2025
2025 INSC 768                                                                          REPORTABLE
                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2808 OF 2025
                                              (@ SLP (CRL.) No. 7746 OF 2025)


                            KASIREDDY UPENDER REDDY                                 ...APPELLANT


                                                              Versus

                            STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH AND ORS.                     ...RESPONDENT(S)


                                                           WITH

                                                SLP (CRL.) No. 5691 OF 2025


                                                        JUDGMENT
J.B. PARDIWALA, J.
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2808 OF 2025
                                           (@ SLP (CRIMINAL) No. 7746 OF 2025)
1.    Leave granted.
2.    This appeal arises from the judgment and order passed by the High

                            Court of Andhra Pradesh at Amaravati dated 8.05.2025 in W.P. No. 10858 of

                            2025 by which the writ petition filed by the appellant herein seeking a writ
Signature Not Verified   of habeas corpus on the ground that his son viz. Kessireddy Raja Shekhar
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2025.05.23
15:56:47 IST
Reason:                  Reddy came to be illegally arrested by the CID and is in unlawful detention,

                            came to be dismissed.
1
3.    The facts giving rise to this appeal may be summarised as under:
a. The son of the appellant herein, namely, Kessireddy Raja Shekhar Reddy

came to be arrested on 21.04.2025 in connection with Crime No. 21 of 2024

dated 23.09.2025 registered with CID Police Station, Mangalagiri for the

offence punishable under Sections 420, 409 read with
Section 120-B
of the

Indian Penal Code respectively (for short, the “
IPC
”) (Now
Sections 318
,
316(5)
read with
Section 61(2)
of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023

respectively (for short, the “BNS”)).
b.    It appears from the materials on record that on 19.04.2025 the son of

the appellant herein was arrayed as accused no. 1 by way of an entry in the

case diary.
c.    The son of the appellant was arrested at around 6 P.M. from the

Hyderabad Airport. At the time of arrest, the grounds of arrest were supplied

to him and later were also served on his father i.e. the appellant herein.
d.    Pursuant to the arrest, the son of the appellant was brought to

Vijayawada and was produced before the jurisdictional magistrate i.e. the

Special Judge for SPE and ACB cases, Vijayawada at 5.15 P.M. on

22.04.2025 i.e. within 24 hours of the arrest.
2
d.    It appears that police remand was prayed for and the same came to be

granted vide order dated 22.04.2025 passed by the Special Judge for SPE

and ACB cases.
e.    The operative part of the remand order reads thus:
“12. Remand report further reveals that, police have to examine
          several witnesses and has to apprehend several Government and
          non Government officials and investigation is only at preliminary
          stage and police requires time to conduct thorough investigation
          in this case. Therefore, request for remand of Al is accepted, hence,
          Al is remanded to judicial custody under
Section 187
of BNSS till
          6.5.025, for the offences under
Sections 420
,
409
,
120 B
IPC and
Sections 7
, 7A and
8
,
13(1)(b)
,
13 (2)
of P.C.Act, Al is hereby
          ordered to be kept in District Jail, Vijayawada under proper
          escort.
Sd/-P.Bhaskara Rao
          SPL. JUDGE FOR SPE AND ACB
          CASES-CUM-III ADJ. VIJAYAWADA”

f.    The appellant preferred a writ petition under
Article 226
of the

Constitution before the High Court and prayed for a writ of habeas corpus

on the ground that the arrest of his son was per se illegal and therefore, his

continued detention in jail could be said to be unlawful and thereby, violative

of
Article 21
of the Constitution.
g.    The writ of habeas corpus was prayed for essentially on the ground

that although the grounds of arrest were served upon the appellant’s son at

the time of his arrest, yet such grounds were not meaningful and were just

an eyewash. The grounds of arrest lacked in material particulars.
h.    It was argued before the High Court that if appropriate grounds for

arrest are not furnished at the time of arrest then the arrest would be violative
3
of
Article 22
of the Constitution read with
Sections 47
and
48
respectively

of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 respectively (for short, the

“BNSS”).
i.    The High Court adjudicated the writ petition filed by the appellant

herein and ultimately vide the impugned judgment and order dismissed the

same holding as under:
“11. In the present case, both the provisions of law as well as the
     grounds for arrest, can be made out, on a conjoint reading of the notice
     under
Section 47
, the grounds of arrest, 48 of BNSS and the remand
     report which were all served on the detenue prior to the hearing of his
     remand application. The learned Special Judge, had specifically
     recorded that even the remand report had been served on the detenue
     prior to the commencement of the hearing before the Special Judge.
     The copy of the remand report, filed by the respondents, show that the
     detenue had signed a copy of the remand report as service of the said
     grounds of arrest on him. In view of the earlier judgment of this Court,
     it must be held that the requirements of
Article 22
of the Constitution of
     India as well as the provisions of BNSS have been complied.
xxx                  xxx                xxx
13. In Vihaan Kumar vs. State of Haryana and Another’s case, neither
     the detenue nor his relatives or family members had been served with
     any document. In such circumstances, as can be seen from the same
     passage, the Hon’ble Supreme Court had held that in the absence of
     service of the remand report, mere inclusion of grounds of arrest in the
     remand report would not be sufficient compliance of
Article 22
of the
     Constitution of India or
Section 47
of BNSS. In the present case, the
     Special Judge had recorded that the remand report had been served on
     the detenue and the copy of the remand report, containing the signature
     of the detenue, produced by the respondents would also fortify this
     position. Sri P. Sudhakar Reddy contends that papers were served on
     the detenu after the hearing in the remand application and as such,
     there is no compliance of
Article 22
of the Constitution of India. This
     contention does not appear to be correct inasmuch as the Special Judge
     had recorded, in the remand order, that the remand report had been
4
served on the detenue. In these circumstances, this Court does not find
     any reason to interfere with the order of remand.
14. Accordingly, this Writ Petition is dismissed. However, this would
     not preclude the detenue from availing of his remedies under law for
     being set at liberty. There shall be no order as to costs.”
4.    In such circumstances referred to above, the appellant is here before

this Court with the present appeal.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT
5.    Mr. Mahesh Jethmalani, the learned Senior Counsel, made oral

submissions and has also filed his written submissions. The written

submissions read thus:
“A) That since 25.03.2025, the Respondent State has issued
          notices under
Section 179
of the BNSS to appear before them. The
          accused has challenged these notices and the said challenge is a
          subject matter of Petition tagged along with the instant case. On
          21.04.2025 at 5 PM, the Petitioner sent a WhatsApp message to
          the Investigating Officer that he would appear before him on
          22.04.2025 at 10 AM. Pursuant to the said
Section 179
notices,
          the accused travelled from Goa to Hyderabad, Telangana en route
          to Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh and reached Hyderabad Airport
          at 6 PM. On his disembarking the accused was arrested and taken
          to Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh. The Petitioner’s son was never
          cited as an Accused in the FIR, was in the eyes of the Respondent
          State a witness as disclosed by the
Section 179
Notices sent to him
          and was always of the impression that he was wanted as a witness
          to which he even acceded on 21.04.2025. The Petitioner’s son was
          not an accused person at the time of his arrest on 21.04.2025 and
          there was no evidence of his complicity in any crime. The
          Respondent’s case (see para 6 of the Impugned Judgment of the
          High Court) is that the Petitioner’s son was made an accused on
          19.04.2025 by way of an entry in the Case Diary. The Case Diary
          is not a public document like an FIR and so there was no public
          document disclosing that the Petitioner’s son was an accused
5
person in the case. Admittedly, in the same Paragraph 6 of the
Impugned Order, the intimation of such inclusion as filed with a
Special Judge for SPE and ACB Cases, Vijayawada, Andhra
Pradesh on 22.04.2025, i.e., after his arrest on the previous day.
The Petitioner’s son’s arrest was without any basis and illegal.
B) Further, events post the arrest of the Petitioner’s son clearly
discloses the groundless basis of his arrest as also the mala fide
intent behind it. In the course of his investigation post his arrest,
the Petitioner’s son was informed that he should make a Statement
implicating the then Chief Minister of the State of Andhra Pradesh
– Shri Y. S. Jagan Mohan Reddy, for alleged illegalities in the
liquor excise policy that was being investigated. Shockingly,
present during his investigation were 2 ‘mediators’. The case of
the Respondent has disclosed in the Remand Application of the
next day (Second paragraph @ Page 88 of the SLP) was that the
accused refused to sign on an alleged confession. It is clear from
the said averments in the Remand Application that the ‘mediators’
were introduced to pressurize the Petitioner’s son into making a
‘confession’ implicating the Former Chief Minister of the State of
Andhra Pradesh – Shri Y. S. Jagan Mohan Reddy. The entire
conspectus of facts that transpired during interrogation discloses
glaring illegalities, including the presence of the ‘mediators’. The
fact that the Petitioner’s son refused to sign the alleged
‘confession’ is clear proof that he was being forced to make a
confession, which he refused. In sum, the events that transpired
from the evening of 21.04.2025 till 22.04.2025, establishes that the
Petitioner was not an accused until the time he refused to comply
with the pressure of the ‘mediators’ and the police. It is reiterated
that the arrest of the Petitioner’s son as an Accused was baseless
and mala fide.
“During the course of interrogation, the above noted accused
  admitted the facts and his guilt about the commission of
  offences. The entire confession got drafted in the presence of
  mediators Chavalam Gopala Krishna S/o Narasimha Rao, 40
  Years, VRO 2, Nunna and Mohd Sirajuddin, S/o Kutubiddin, 40
  Yrs, VRO-1, Kundavari Kandrika under a cover of mahazar
  and seized a mobile phone 14 Funtouch OS vivo Y18t having
  IMEI number 869933078319375 (Slot 1), 869933078319367
  (Slot 2) and SIM card of number +917559260506 and for
  investigation purpose duly signed by the mediators. However,
6
the accused refused to sign on the above confessional
  statement. The mediators endorsed the same.”

C) That the grounds of arrest served on the Petitioner on
21.04.2025 were in total non compliance of
Article 22
of the
Constitution of India and
Section 47
of the BNSS for the following
reasons:
i. It has been laid down in a number of decisions of this Hon’ble
Court that the grounds of arrest are not an empty formality.
This
principle has been enunciated with greater rigour in recent
judgments (see:
Prabir Purkayastha v. State (NCT of Delhi
),
(2024) 8 SCC 254 and Vihaan Kumar v. State of Haryana & Anr.,
2025 SCC OnLine SC 269 : SLP(Crl) 13320 of 2024) that the
whole rational behind communicating the grounds of arrest is to
enable the Petitioner’s son’s counsel to meet the Police case in
remand proceedings and for bail. In the grounds of arrest served
on the Petitioner on 21.04.2025, the substantive offences were
Sections 409
and
420
IPC. While the Section numbers were
mentioned, the ingredients of the offence find no mention in the
furnished grounds. Thus, in so far as
Section 409
IPC is
concerned, there is not a whisper about the ingredient of
entrustment, the property entrusted and the manner of
misappropriation or conversion to the accused’s use. Similarly, as
far as
Section 420
IPC is concerned, the ingredients of deception,
fraudulent or dishonest inducement and the property delivered
pursuant to such inducement are all significantly absent. The
grounds of arrest therefore did not even remotely disclose how the
offences alleged were made out. It is submitted that this was the
case because there was no ground to arrest the Petitioner’s son
and his arrest was illegal and mala fide.
ii.
Article 22
of the Constitution requires that the grounds of arrest
shall be informed to the person arrested “as soon as may be”. In
Paragraph 5 of the Impugned Judgment of the High Court, it is
recorded that, “The learned Advocate General would submit that
the grounds of arrest as well as the provisions of the law were
made known to the detenue, in writing, by virtue of service of the
notice of arrest under
Section 47
, the grounds of arrest under
Section 48
and the remand report.” It is submitted that a remand
report cannot in law be grounds of arrest contemplated under
Article 22
or
Section 47
of the BNSS, save perhaps when the
Accused is produced in Court for remand and furnished with a
7
Remand Application immediately on his production. Else a
remand report can never comply with the requirement of the
obligation to furnish grounds as soon as may be in
Article 22
or
‘forthwith’ communication of such grounds prescribed by
Section
47
BNSS. In admitting that the remand report was part of the
grounds of arrest and that it was served on the accused on
22.04.2025, the Respondent State has violated the mandate of “as
soon as may be” in
Article 22
and ‘forthwith’ in
Section 47
BNSS.
It is important to emphasize that
Article 22
mandates that “no
person who is arrested shall be detained in custody without being
informed as soon as may be of the grounds of such arrest…”. The
Constitutional mandate was thus violated because the Petitioner’s
son was detained in custody post arrest without being informed
“as soon as may be” of the complete grounds for arrest. Further,
what he was provided with at the time of his arrest was grounds of
arrest which did not spell out the particulars of the offences
alleged.
iii. In addition,
Section 47
of the BNSS mandates that what should
be ‘forthwith’ communicated to an arrested person is the full
particulars of the offence. Fully cognizant of the fact that the
grounds of arrest served on the Petitioner’s son on 21.04.2025 did
not disclose the offence under
Section 409
and
420
IPC, the
remand report of 22.04.2025 added the substantive offences of
Sections 7
, 7A,
8
and
13(1)(b)
read with 13(2)
Prevention
Corruption Act, 1988
. Thus the ‘full particulars of the offence’ for
which the Petitioner’s son was arrested was not furnished to him
‘forthwith’.
iv. That the invocation of offences under the
Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988
in the remand report as grounds for arrest
of the Petitioner’s son is vitiated by patent illegality. The
Petitioner could not have been arrested for offences under the
Prevention of Corruption Act
, in view of the provisions of
Section
17A
of the said Act It is the Respondent State’s case that they could
only invoke the offences under the
Prevention of Corruption Act
on 22.04.2025 as they had not received the requisite sanction
under
Section 17A
at the time of the Petitioner’s son’s arrest. The
sanction order under
Section 17A
(Pages 66 – 67 of the SLP) is
dated 21.04.2025. Moreover, the sanction sought and granted on
21.04.2025 was only in respect of a public servant by the name
Shri Dodda Venkat Satya Prasad. There was no sanction granted
for investigation for the offences under the Prevention of
8
Corruption Act
for the Petitioner’s son. Granting of Sanction is
not akin to taking of cognizance by a Court where cognizance is
taken of offences and not of offenders.
Section 17A
of the
Prevention of Corruption Act prohibits any enquiry, inquiry or
investigation into any offence alleged to have been committed by
a public servant under this act where the alleged offence is
relatable to any recommendation made or decision taken by such
public servant in discharge of his official functions or duty. Thus
under
Section 17A
, the sanctioning authority has to examine the
case of every public servant separately to determine whether the
provisions of that Section apply to him so that sanction may be
granted or refused. The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances
and pensions (Department of Personnel and training) has on
17.09.2021 issued SOPs for the processing of cases under
Section
17A
of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (Annexure P – 10
@ Page 5 in Vol 2). Clause 4.6 of the SOP mandates as under:
“4.6. Separate proposals shall be made in respect of each
         public servant, where a composite offence is alleged
         against more than one public servant.”

Thus, where a composite offence is alleged against more than one
public servants, a separate proposal shall be made in respect of
each public servant. There is neither a sanction proposal nor grant
of such sanction in respect of the Petitioner’s son. The invocation
of offences under the
PC Act
against him and the contention that
the remand report which contains these offences constituted the
grounds of arrest within the meaning of
Article 22
of the
Constitution and Section 47 of the BNSS is manifestly untenable.
In invoking offences against the
Prevention of Corruption Act
as
part of the grounds of arrest, the Respondent State has committed
a manifest illegality, as in the absence of the requisite sanction,
under
Section 17A
of the Prevention of Corruption Act, read with
Clause 4.6 of the SOP of the Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and pensions (Department of Personnel and training)
dated 03.09.2021, the grounds of arrest were untenable and
consequently the arrest and detention in custody of the Petitioner’s
son was patently illegal.”
9
6.    In such circumstances referred to above, the learned counsel prayed

that there being merit in his appeal, the same may be allowed and the arrest

of the accused may be declared as illegal thereby, rendering his continued

detention unlawful.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE STATE
7.    Mr. Siddharth Luthra, the learned Senior Counsel made oral

submissions on behalf of the State while opposing this appeal and has also

filed his written submissions. The written submissions read thus:
“1. Crime No. 21 of 2024 dated 23.09.2025 was registered in CID
          P.S., Mangalagiri under Sections 420,409 r/w 120-B
I.P.C
.
          (FIR@Pg39-49 of SLP). On 19.04.2025,the son of the present
          Petitioner being Kessireddy Raja Shekhar Reddy(hereinafter
          referred to as A1) was arrayed as Accused A1 by way of an entry
          in the Case Diary Refer- Para 6 of the impugned order & Para 9
          of the Counter Affidavit filed by the State before the High Court
          (Ann P13 @ Pg 23, relevant at Pg 26 of IA No.128534/2025 for
          Addl. Documents).
2. On 21.04.2025 at 6 PM, Accused No 1 was arrested from the
          Hyderabad Airport. At the time of arrest, Grounds of Arrest were
          supplied to him and served on his father as well (Grounds of
          Arrest @ Pg13-14 of IA No.128534/2025 for Addl. Documents).
A perusal of the said Grounds of Arrest would show complete
          compliance with the directions in Vihaan Kumar v. State of
          Haryana; 2025 SCCOnLine SC 269 @ Para21, wherein this
          Hon’ble Court directed that information of grounds of arrest must
          be provided “in such a manner that sufficient knowledge of the
          basic facts constituting the grounds is imparted and
          communicated to the arrested person…”
3.Pursuant to arrest, A1 was brought to Vijayawada and produced
          before the jurisdictional magistrate i.e. the Ld. Special Judge for
10
SPE & ACB Cases Vijayawada at 5.15 PM on 22.04.2025 i.e.
within 24 hours of arrest, thereby complying with all requirements
as well as
Article 22(2)
of the Constitution. In the Remand Order
dated …, the Ld. Magistrate inter alia noted in para 2, that A1
stated that he had not been ill-treated in custody and that he had
received the Remand Report with enclosures (Pg 106 of SLP).
After considering all aspects, including the nature of the
allegations, the Ld. Magistrate ordered for A1 to be remanded
(Remand Order @ Pg106-113 of SLP), and the same was upheld
by way of the impugned order. It is humbly submitted that the
arrest and remand of A1 do not suffer from any infirmity.
4.In pursuance of
Article 22(2)
, the procedural aspects are set out
in the BNSS/
Cr.P.C
. Section 57 & 58 of the BNSS (formerly
Section
56
and
57
, Cr.P.C.) deals with the procedure to be followed upon
arrest. Section 187 BNSS (
Section167
, Cr.P.C.) provides the
procedure when investigation can’t be completed in 24hours. S. 57
These provisions i.e. S. 57/58/187 BNSS have to be read together
&the requirement of law is to produce the arrestee before the
jurisdictional magistrate within 24 hours. If the period of 24 hours
is expiring and the detenu cannot be produced before the
jurisdictional Magistrate, then he/she must be produced before the
nearest Magistrate. Indisputably the detenu was produced before
the jurisdictional Magistrate within 24 hours.
5.This exposition of law has been time and again reinforced by this
Hon’ble Court; notably in
State of U.P. v. Abdul Samad
; AIR
1962 SC 1506 @ Para 14, Chaganti Satyarayana v. State of A.P.
(1986) 3 SCC 141 @ Para12 and more recently reiterated in
Gautam Navlakha v. NIA
; (2022) 13 SCC 542 @ Para 102.
6.The Calcutta High Court in In Re: Nagendranath Chakravarti;
1923 ILR Vol. LI 402, interpreting
S. 61
&
167
CrPC 1898
(equivalent to S. 58 BNSS) observed that,
     “…the intention of the Legislature, having regard to sections
     61 and 167 and to the requirements of justice generally, is
     that an accused person should be brought before a
     Magistrate competent to try, or commit with as little delay as
     possible….”
7.In this regard, any reliance on
Priya Indoria v. State of
Karnataka
; (2024) 8 SCC254 by the Petitioner is entirely
misplaced. That case dealt with issues relating to anticipatory
bail, and observations in this regard was in the passing and are
11
obiter. That judgment doesn’t consider the law
laid down by
earlier judgments of this Hon’ble Court including in Re:
Nagendranath Chakravarti supra and
Gautam Navlakha
supra
          (2JJ), and is therefore per incuriam in this regard.
Section 17A
of the Prevention of Corruption Act
8.On 21.04.2025, in Vijayawada, the IO had made a request for
          the addition of
sections 7
,
7A
,
8
,
13(1)(b)
and
13(2)
of the
          Prevention of Corruption Act and made a request for approval
          under sec 17
A of the Act
with respect to co-accused D.Venkata
          Satya Prasad. Approval under
Section 17-A
was granted on
          21.04.2025 in Vijayawada. Upon reaching Vijayawada, on
          22.04.2025, A1 was served with the Arrest Memo containing the
          above mentioned sections of the
Prevention of Corruption Act
and
          the same was received by A1 and is in case diary.
9.A1 was only an “IT Advisor” to the Government of Andhra
          Pradesh who was running his business in Hyderabad at the
          relevant time. The scope of the Petitioner’s duties as an “IT
          Advisor” had no relation at all to the excise/liquor policy, as has
          been repeatedly averred by the Petitioner himself (Pg G & Pg
          123of SLP). Earlier, in his Reply to a Notice u/sec 179 BNSS, A1
          himself clearly stated that “..based on publicly available
          information, I understand that the case pertains to an excise-
          related matter in Andhra Pradesh. However, I am unable to
          ascertain any direct or indirect link in the case from my end…”
10.It is submitted that the approval under
Section 17A
is person-
          specific (as admitted by the Petitioner himself, Ground F @
          Pg123 of the SLP), required when the alleged offence is
          “relatable to any recommendation made or decision taken by such
          public servant in discharge of his official functions or duties.” In
          the present case, the allegations against A1 with respect to the
          perpetration of the liquor scam are in no way relatable to his
          function as an IT Advisor, therefore there is no requirement for
          approval under
Section 17A
of the Prevention of Corruption Act.”


ANALYSIS
8.    Since the entire case revolves around the question whether the arrest

of the appellant’s son could be said to be per se illegal for want of supply of
12
appropriate and meaningful grounds of arrest, we should look into few

provisions of the Constitution as well as the BNSS.
9.
Article 21
of the Constitution reads thus:
“21. Protection of life and personal liberty-
No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except
          according to procedure established by law.”
10.
Article 22
of the Constitution reads thus:
“22. Protection against arrest and detention in certain cases. -(1)
          No person who is arrested shall be detained in custody without
          being informed, as soon as may be, of the grounds for such arrest
          nor shall he be denied the right to consult, and to be defended by,
          a legal practitioner of his choice.
(2) Every person who is arrested and detained in custody shall be
          produced before the nearest magistrate within a period of twenty-
four hours of such arrest excluding the time necessary for the
          journey from the place of arrest to the court of the magistrate and
          no such person shall be detained in custody beyond the said period
          without the authority of a magistrate.
(3) Nothing in clauses (1) and (2) shall apply— (a) to any person
          who for the time being is an enemy alien; or (b) to any person who
          is arrested or detained under any law providing for preventive
          detention.
**(4) No law providing for preventive detention shall authorise
          the detention of a person for a longer period than three months
          unless— (a) an Advisory Board consisting of persons who are, or
          have been, or are qualified to be appointed as, Judges of a High
          Court has reported before the expiration of the said period of three
          months that there is in its opinion sufficient cause for such
          detention:
13
Provided that nothing in this sub-clause shall authorise the
          detention of any person beyond the maximum period prescribed
          by any law made by Parliament under sub-clause (b) of clause (7);
          or (b) such person is detained in accordance with the provisions
          of any law made by Parliament under subclauses (a) and (b) of
          clause (7).
(5) When any person is detained in pursuance of an order made
          under any law providing for preventive detention, the authority
          making the order shall, as soon as may be, communicate to such
          person the grounds on which the order has been made and shall
          afford him the earliest opportunity of making a representation
          against the order.
(6) Nothing in clause (5) shall require the authority making any
          such order as is referred to in that clause to disclose facts which
          such authority considers to be against the public interest to
          disclose.
(7) Parliament may by law prescribe—
          *(a) the circumstances under which, and the class or classes of
          cases in which, a person may be detained for a period longer than
          three months under any law providing for preventive detention
          without obtaining the opinion of an Advisory Board in accordance
          with the provisions of sub-clause (a) of clause (4);
**(b) the maximum period for which any person may in any class
          or classes of cases be detained under any law providing for
          preventive detention; and
(c) the procedure to be followed by an Advisory Board in an
          inquiry under ***[sub-clause (a) of clause (4)].”
11. Sub-section (1) of
Section 41
of Code of Criminal Procedure (for short

the “
Cr.P.C
.”) lists cases where the police may arrest a person without a

warrant. The corresponding provision in the BNSS is Section 35.
Section 41
of the Cr.P.C. reads thus:
14
“41. When police may arrest without warrant.—(1) Any police
officer may without an order from a Magistrate and without a
warrant, arrest any person—
(a) who commits, in the presence of a police officer, a cognizable
offence;
(b) against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or
credible information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion
exists that he has committed a cognizable offence punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may be less than seven years or
which may extend to seven years whether with or without fine, if
the following conditions are satisfied, namely:—
(i) the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of such
complaint, information, or suspicion that such person has
committed the said offence;
(ii) the police office is satisfied that such arrest is necessary—
(a) to prevent such person from committing any further offence; or
(b) for proper investigation of the offence; or
(c) to prevent such person from causing the evidence of the offence
to disappear or tampering with such evidence in any manner; or
(d) to prevent such person from making any inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as
to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court or to the
police officer; or
(e) as unless such person is arrested, his presence in the Court
whenever required cannot be ensured,
and the police officer shall record while making such arrest, his
reasons in writing.
Provided that a police officer shall, in all cases where the arrest
of a person is not required under the provisions of this subsection,
record the reasons in writing for not making the arrest.
(ba) against whom credible information has been received that
he has committed a cognizable offence punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to more than seven
years whether with or without fine or with death sentence and
the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of that
information that such person has committed the said offence;
15
(c) who has been proclaimed as an offender either under this Code
         or by order of the State Government; or
(d) in whose possession anything is found which may reasonably
         be suspected to be stolen property and who may reasonably be
         suspected of having committed an offence with reference to such
         thing; or
(e) who obstructs a police officer while in the execution of his duty,
         or who has escaped, or attempts to escape, from lawful custody;
         or
(f) who is reasonably suspected of being a deserter from any of the
         Armed Forces of the Union; or
(g) who has been concerned in, or against whom a reasonable
         complaint has been made, or credible information has been
         received, or a reasonable suspicion exists, of his having been
         concerned in, any act committed at any place out of India which,
         if committed in India, would have been punishable as an offence,
         and for which he is, under any law relating to extradition, or
         otherwise, liable to be apprehended or detained in custody in
         India; or
(h) who, being a released convict, commits a breach of any rule
         made under sub-section (5) of Section 356; or
(i) for whose arrest any requisition, whether written or oral, has
         been received from another police officer, provided that the
         requisition specifies the person to be arrested and the offence or
         other cause for which the arrest is to be made and it appears
         therefrom that the person might lawfully be arrested without a
         warrant by the officer who issued the requisition.
         (2) Subject to the provisions of Section 42, no person concerned
         in a non-cognizable offence or against whom a complaint has been
         made or credible information has been received or reasonable
         suspicion exists of his having so concerned, shall be arrested
         except under a warrant or order of a Magistrate.”
                                                            (emphasis added)
12.   Section 47 of the BNSS reads thus:
16
“47. Person arrested to be informed of grounds of arrest and of
          right to bail. –
          (1) Every police officer or other person arresting any person
          without warrant shall forthwith communicate to him full
          particulars of the offence for which he is arrested or other grounds
          for such arrest.
(2) Where a police officer arrests without warrant any person
          other than a person accused of a non-bailable offence, he shall
          inform the person arrested that he is entitled to be released on bail
          and that he may arrange for sureties on his behalf.”
13.   Section 48 of the BNSS reads thus:
“48. Obligation of person making arrest to inform about the
          arrest, etc., to relative or friend. –
          (1) Every police officer or other person making any arrest under
          this Sanhita shall forthwith give the information regarding such
          arrest and place where the arrested person is being held to any of
          his relatives, friends or such other persons as may be disclosed or
          mentioned by the arrested person for the purpose of giving such
          information and also to the designated police officer in the district.
          (2) The police officer shall inform the arrested person of his rights
          under sub-section (1) as soon as he is brought to the police station.
          (3) An entry of the fact as to who has been informed of the arrest
          of such person shall be made in a book to be kept in the police
          station in such form as the State Government may, by rules,
          provide.
(4) It shall be the duty of the Magistrate before whom such
          arrested person is produced, to satisfy himself that the
          requirements of sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) have been
          complied with in respect of such arrested person.”
14.   We shall now look into the grounds of arrest which were provided to

the appellant’s son in writing at the time of his arrest and also to the appellant

as the father of the person arrested. The same reads thus:
17
“GROUNDS OF ARREST IN RESPECT OF SRI KESSIREDDY
 RAJA SHEKHAR REDDY (A1) IN CR. NO. 21/2024 U/S 420,
       409, 120(B)
IPC
OF CID P.S. MANGALAGIRI
This is a case of Conspiracy, Cheating, Criminal breach of trust,
Corruption and Money Laundering which caused huge wrongful loss
to the state exchequer/Distilleries and wrongful gain to influential
individuals/ Few Distilleries/ Few Suppliers to a tune of more than
Rs. 3200 Crores, that occurred between October 2019 and March
2024 in AP State Beverages Corporation Limited, Vijayawada and
reported to CID PS on 23-09-2024 at 22-00 hrs. The complainant Sri
Mukesh Kumar Meena, I.A.S., Principal Secretary Government of
Andhra Pradesh vide Memo No. Rev-01/CPE/20/2024-VIG-IV,
Dated: 20.09.2024, lodged a complaint based on the enquiry report
with title "Report on Liquor Procurement and Market
Manipulation (2019-2024)" submitted by a five member committee
of APSBCL. The committee found the following manipulations,
1.⁠ ⁠Suppression of the established popular brands and unfair
discrimination in allocation of OFS over a period of time leading to
almost disappearance of some popular brands from the market.
2.⁠ ⁠Favorable/Preferential allocation of orders to certain new brands
in violation of the existing norms giving them undue market share
and competitive advantage over the existing brands in the market.
3.⁠ ⁠The procurement system was shifted to manual process giving
scope for manipulation of OFS against the previous system of
automated OFS issuance compromising the integrity of the process
in order to implement the two manipulations mentioned above.
On which a case in Cr.No.21/2021 U/s 409,420, 120(B)
IPC
of CID
PS, AP, Mangalagiri was registered by the SHO (Y.Srinivasa Rao,
DSP, AP, Mangalagiri)/CID PS, AP, Mangalagiri on 23.09.2024 at
22.00 hrs and submitted the copies of FIRs to all the concerned.
Grounds of Arrest:
Investigation done so far reveals prima facie case of
Conspiracy, Cheating, Criminal breach of trust and Corruption
1.⁠ ⁠You are the key person in organizing the kickback driven liquor
trade in AP during 2019-2024. You along with Vasudeva Reddy,
Satya Prasad, Midhun Reddy, Vijaya Sai Reddy, Sajjala Sridhar
Reddy and others hatched conspiracy, suppressed popular brands,
promoted blue-eyed brands and caused wrongful gain about Rs.
18
3200 Crores towards kickbacks to the liquor syndicate through
public servants by corrupt practices.
2.⁠ ⁠In pursuance of the conspiracy, you have controlled issuance of
OFSs to suppliers based on kickbacks received. You used to get sales
data, calculate the kickback amounts, and used to collect kickbacks
through Booneti Chanakya and others regularly.
3.⁠ ⁠You have threatened SPY Agro Industries Pvt. Ltd., and took over
the control of SPY accounts and managed their accounts without
their consent. You are further responsible for transfer of money from
the bank accounts of SPY Agro Industries Pvt. Ltd., to lot of shell
companies.
4.⁠ ⁠You are responsible for floating of Adan Distillery Pvt Ltd and
manufacture of brands like Supreme Blend etc., in some bottling units
as a part of the conspiracy.
5.⁠ ⁠After collecting kickbacks, you used to send the same to P.V.Mithun
Reddy and others.
6.⁠ ⁠Further, you have organized entire business of Leela brand in AP
by appointing your henchman Varun as head of operations as a part
of the conspiracy.
7.⁠ ⁠You invested the crime proceeds in various real estate, Infra,
Entertainment, chemical and mobility companies.
8.⁠ ⁠As a part of the conspiracy, you caused lot of wrongful loss to the
APSBCL and to the State Exchequer.
9. You have been absconding and not appearing before the
Investigation officer in response to notices U/s 179 BNSS.
On the above grounds and as the investigation is not yet
completed, your arrest is necessary for further investigation of the
case. You are hereby arrested.
Sd/-
21/4/25
                                              I/c Investigating Officer,
                                                   Dy. Supdt. Of Police
                                                      SIT, Vijaywada.”
19
15.   The pathbreaking judgment of this Court in the case of Vihaan Kumar

v. State of Haryana and another reported in 2025 SCC OnLine SC 269

serves as a pivotal reference point in Indian jurisprudence regarding the

rights of individuals upon arrest. The judgment in Vihan Kumar (supra) has

profound implications for the enforcement of
Article 22
of the Constitution

across the country. It underscores the judiciary’s commitment to upholding

constitutional protections against arbitrary arrest and detention. This

decision sets a clear precedent that the investigating agency/ police officer/

authorities effecting arrest of any person in connection with any cognizable

offence without a warrant must provide specific, actionable reasons for an

individual’s arrest, beyond citing broad provisions of law. A clear dictum has

been laid in Vihaan Kumar (supra) that the law enforcement agencies must

exercise greater diligence in communicating the precise grounds of arrest in

order to avoid unlawful detention claims. The decision further reinforces the

right to legal recourse through habeas corpus petitions, empowering

individuals to challenge the legality of their detention effectively.
16.   In Vihaan Kumar (supra), this Court eruditely speaking through

Justice Abhay S. Oka made some very important observations which we

must reproduce as under:
“Therefore, as far as
Article 22(1)
is concerned, compliance can
          be made by communicating sufficient knowledge of the basic facts
          constituting the grounds of arrest to the person arrested. The
          grounds should be effectively and fully communicated to the
20
arrestee in the manner in which he will fully understand the same.
Therefore, it follows that the grounds of arrest must be informed
in a language which the arrestee understands. That is how, in the
case of
Pankaj Bansal v. Union of India
reported in (2024) 7 SCC
576, this Court held that the mode of conveying the grounds of
arrest must necessarily be meaningful so as to serve the intended
purpose. However, under
Article 22(1)
, there is no requirement of
communicating the grounds of arrest in writing.
Article 22(1)
also
incorporates the right of every person arrested to consult an
advocate of his choice and the right to be defended by an advocate.
If the grounds of arrest are not communicated to the arrestee, as
soon as may be, he will not be able to effectively exercise the right
to consult an advocate. This requirement incorporated in
Article
22(1)
also ensures that the grounds for arresting the person
without a warrant exist. Once a person is arrested, his right to
liberty under
Article 21
is curtailed. When such an important
fundamental right is curtailed, it is necessary that the person
concerned must understand on what grounds he has been arrested.
That is why the mode of conveying information of the grounds
must be meaningful so as to serve the objects stated above.
14.Thus, the requirement of informing the person arrested of the
grounds of arrest is not a formality but a mandatory constitutional
requirement.
Article 22
is included in Part III of
the Constitution under the heading of Fundamental Rights. Thus,
it is the fundamental right of every person arrested and detained
in custody to be informed of the grounds of arrest as soon as
possible. If the grounds of arrest are not informed as soon as may
be after the arrest, it would amount to a violation of the
fundamental right of the arrestee guaranteed under
Article 22(1).
It will also amount to depriving the arrestee of his liberty. The
reason is that, as provided in
Article 21
, no person can be deprived
of his liberty except in accordance with the procedure established
by law. The procedure established by law also includes what is
provided in
Article 22(1).
Therefore, when a person is arrested
without a warrant, and the grounds of arrest are not informed to
him, as soon as may be, after the arrest, it will amount to a
violation of his fundamental right guaranteed under
Article 21
as
well. In a given case, if the mandate of
Article 22
is not followed
while arresting a person or after arresting a person, it will also
violate fundamental right to liberty guaranteed under
Article 21
,
and the arrest will be rendered illegal. On the failure to comply
with the requirement of informing grounds of arrest as soon as
21
may be after the arrest, the arrest is vitiated. Once the arrest is
held to be vitiated, the person arrested cannot remain in custody
even for a second.
15.We have already referred to what is held in paragraphs 42 and
43 of the decision in the case of
Pankaj Bansal
(supra). This Court
has suggested that the proper and ideal course of communicating
the grounds of arrest is to provide grounds of arrest in writing.
Obviously, before a police officer communicates the grounds of
arrest, the grounds of arrest have to be formulated. Therefore,
there is no harm if the grounds of arrest are communicated in
writing. Although there is no requirement to communicate the
grounds of arrest in writing, what is stated in paragraphs 42 and
43 of the decision in the case of Pankaj Bansal1 are suggestions
that merit consideration. We are aware that in every case, it may
not be practicable to implement what is suggested. If the course,
as suggested, is followed, the controversy about the non-
compliance will not arise at all. The police have to balance the
rights of a person arrested with the interests of the society.
Therefore, the police should always scrupulously comply with the
requirements of
Article 22.
16.An attempt was made by learned Senior counsel appearing for
1st respondent to argue that after his arrest, the appellant was
repeatedly remanded to custody, and now a chargesheet has been
filed. His submission is that now, the custody of the appellant is
pursuant to the order taking cognizance passed on the charge
sheet. Accepting such arguments, with great respect to the learned
senior counsel, will amount to completely nullifying
Articles 21
and
22(1)
of the Constitution. Once it is held that
arrest is unconstitutional due to violation of
Article 22(1)
, the
arrest itself is vitiated. Therefore, continued custody of such a
person based on orders of remand is also vitiated. Filing a charge
sheet and order of cognizance will not validate an arrest which
is per       se unconstitutional,      being      violative     of
Articles 21
and
22(1)
of the Constitution of India. We cannot
tinker with the most important safeguards provided under Article
22.
17.Another argument canvassed on behalf of the respondents is
that even if the appellant is released on the grounds of violating
Article 22
, the first respondent can arrest him again. At this stage,
it is not necessary to decide the issue.
22
18. In the present case, 1st respondent relied upon an entry in the
case diary allegedly made at 6.10 p.m. on 10th June 2024, which
records that the appellant was arrested after informing him of the
grounds of arrest. For the reasons which will follow hereafter, we
are rejecting the argument made by the 1st respondent. If the police
want to prove communication of the grounds of arrest only based
on a diary entry, it is necessary to incorporate those grounds of
arrest in the diary entry or any other document. The grounds of
arrest must exist before the same are informed. Therefore, in a
given case, even assuming that the case of the police regarding
requirements of
Article 22(1)
of the Constitution is to be accepted
based on an entry in the case diary, there must be a
contemporaneous record, which records what the grounds of
arrest were. When an arrestee pleads before a Court that grounds
of arrest were not communicated, the burden to prove the
compliance of
Article 22(1)
is on the police.
19. An argument was sought to be canvassed that in view of sub-
Section (1) of
Section 50
of CrPC, there is an option to
communicate to the person arrested full particulars of the offence
for which he is arrested or the other grounds for the arrest. Section
50 cannot have the effect of diluting the requirement of
Article
22(1).
If held so, Section 50 will attract the vice of
unconstitutionality. Section 50 lays down the requirement of
communicating the full particulars of the offence for which a
person is arrested to him. The ‘other grounds for such arrest’
referred to in Section 50(1) have nothing to do with the grounds of
arrest referred to in
Article 22(1).
The requirement of Section 50
is in addition to what is provided in
Article 22(1).
Section 47 of
the BNSS is the corresponding provision. Therefore, what we have
held about Section 50 will apply to Section 47 of the BNSS.
20. When an arrested person is produced before a Judicial
Magistrate for remand, it is the duty of the Magistrate to ascertain
whether compliance with
Article 22(1)
has been made. The reason
is that due to non-compliance, the arrest is rendered illegal;
therefore, the arrestee cannot be remanded after the arrest is
rendered illegal. It is the obligation of all the Courts to uphold the
fundamental rights.
CONCLUSIONS
21. Therefore, we conclude:
23
a) The requirement of informing a person arrested of grounds of
         arrest is a mandatory requirement of
Article 22(1);
b) The information of the grounds of arrest must be provided to
         the arrested person in such a manner that sufficient knowledge of
         the basic facts constituting the grounds is imparted and
         communicated to the arrested person effectively in the language
         which he understands. The mode and method of communication
         must be such that the object of the constitutional safeguard is
         achieved;
c) When arrested accused alleges non-compliance with the
         requirements of
Article 22(1)
, the burden will always be on the
         Investigating Officer/Agency to prove compliance with the
         requirements of
Article 22(1);
d) Non-compliance with
Article 22(1)
will be a violation of the
         fundamental rights of the accused guaranteed by the said Article.
Moreover, it will amount to a violation of the right to personal
         liberty guaranteed by
Article 21
of the Constitution. Therefore,
         non-compliance with the requirements of
Article 22(1)
vitiates the
         arrest of the accused. Hence, further orders passed by a criminal
         court of remand are also vitiated. Needless to add that it will not
         vitiate the investigation, charge sheet and trial. But, at the same
         time, filing of chargesheet will not validate a breach of
         constitutional mandate under
Article 22(1);
e) When an arrested person is produced before a Judicial
         Magistrate for remand, it is the duty of the Magistrate to ascertain
         whether compliance with
Article 22(1)
and other mandatory
         safeguards has been made; and
f) When a violation of
Article 22(1)
is established, it is the duty of
         the court to forthwith order the release of the accused. That will
         be a ground to grant bail even if statutory restrictions on the grant
         of bail exist. The statutory restrictions do not affect the power of
         the court to grant bail when the violation of
Articles 21
and
22
of
         the Constitution is established.”
                                                    (Emphasis supplied)
17.   Justice N. Kotiswar Singh while fully concurring with the views

expressed by Justice Abhay S. Oka added a few lines of his own as under:
24
“2. The issue on the requirement of communication of grounds of
arrest to the person arrested, as mandated under
Article 22(1)
of
the Constitution of India, which has also been incorporated in the
Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002
under
Section 19
thereof has been succinctly reiterated in this judgment. The
constitutional mandate of informing the grounds of arrest to the
person arrested in writing has been explained in the case
of
Pankaj Bansal
(supra) so as to be meaningful to serve the
intended purpose which has been reiterated in
Prabir
Purkayastha
(supra). The said constitutional mandate has been
incorporated in the statute under
Section 50
of the CrPC (Section
47 of BNSS). It may also be noted that the aforesaid provision of
requirement for communicating the grounds of arrest, to be
purposeful, is also required to be communicated to the friends,
relatives or such other persons of the accused as may be disclosed
or nominated by the arrested person for the purpose of giving such
information as provided under
Section 50A
of the CrPC. As may
be noted, this is in the addition of the requirement as provided
under
Section 50(1)
of the CrPC.
3. The purpose of inserting
Section 50A
of the CrPC, making it
obligatory on the person making arrest to inform about the arrest
to the friends, relatives or persons nominated by the arrested
person, is to ensure that they would able to take immediate and
prompt actions to secure the release of the arrested person as
permissible under the law. The arrested person, because of his
detention, may not have immediate and easy access to the legal
process for securing his release, which would otherwise be
available to the friends, relatives and such nominated persons by
way of engaging lawyers, briefing them to secure release of the
detained person on bail at the earliest. Therefore, the purpose of
communicating the grounds of arrest to the detenue, and in
addition to his relatives as mentioned above is not merely a
formality but to enable the detained person to know the reasons
for his arrest but also to provide the necessary opportunity to him
through his relatives, friends or nominated persons to secure his
release at the earliest possible opportunity for actualising the
fundamental right to liberty and life as guaranteed under
Article 21
of the Constitution. Hence, the requirement of
communicating the grounds of arrest in writing is not only to the
arrested person, but also to the friends, relatives or such other
person as may be disclosed or nominated by the arrested person,
so as to make the mandate of
Article 22(1)
of
25
the Constitution meaningful and effective failing which, such
         arrest may be rendered illegal.”
                                                          (Emphasis supplied)
18. Thus, the following principles of law could be said to have been laid

down, rather very well explained, in Vihaan Kumar (supra):
a) The requirement of informing the person arrested of the grounds of

      arrest is not a formality but a mandatory constitutional condition.
b) Once a person is arrested, his right to liberty under
Article 21
is

      curtailed. When such an important fundamental right is curtailed, it is

      necessary that the person concerned must understand on what grounds

      he has been arrested.
c) The mode of conveying the information of the grounds of arrest

      must be meaningful so as to serve the true object underlying
Article

      22(1).
d) If the grounds of arrest are not informed as soon as may be after the

      arrest, it would amount to a violation of the fundamental right of the

      arrestee guaranteed under
Article 22(1).
e) On the failure to comply with the requirement of informing the

      grounds of arrest as soon as may be after the arrest, the arrest would

      stand vitiated. Once the arrest is held to be vitiated, the person arrested

      cannot remain in custody even for a second.
26
f) If the police want to prove communication of the grounds of arrest

      only based on a diary entry, it is necessary to incorporate those

      grounds of arrest in the diary entry or any other document. The

      grounds of arrest must exist before the same are informed.
g) When an arrestee pleads before a court that the grounds of arrest

      were not communicated, the burden to prove the compliance of
Article

      22(1)
is on the police authorities.
h) The grounds of arrest should not only be provided to the arrestee

      but also to his family members and relatives so that necessary

      arrangements are made to secure the release of the person arrested at

      the earliest possible opportunity so as to make the mandate of
Article

      22(1)
meaningful and effective, failing which, such arrest may be

      rendered illegal.
19. We must clarify one important aspect of Vihaan Kumar (supra). In

Vihaan Kumar (supra) the case was that there was an absolute failure on the

part of the police to provide the grounds of arrest. In Vihaan Kumar (supra)

reliance was placed upon the entry in the case diary which recorded that the

appellant therein was arrested after informing him of the grounds of arrest.
In the case at hand, it is not in dispute that the grounds of arrest were supplied

to the arrestee, however, the case put up is that those grounds are not

meaningful and are bereft of necessary essential information.
27
20.   In this appeal our endeavor would be to consider whether the grounds

of arrest supplied to the appellant’s son at the time of his arrest could be said

to be meaningful and sufficient enough to give a broad idea to the person

arrested of the accusations levelled and as to why he was being taken into

custody.
21.   Having looked into the grounds of arrest which were supplied to the

son of the appellant at the time of his arrest, it is difficult for us to take the

view that the grounds do not make any sense or are not meaningful or are

just an eyewash.
22.
In the case of
State of Bombay v. Atma Ram
reported in 1951 SCC

43 : AIR 1951 SC 157 (C), it was held by this Court that, the test is whether

the communication of the grounds of arrest is sufficient to enable the

detained person to make a representation at the earliest opportunity.
23.   Similarly in the case of Magan Lal Jivabhai, in re, AIR 1951 Bom

33(D), it was held that, the only possible and reasonable construction that

can be put upon the language of
Article 22(6)
is that the detaining authority,

while furnishing grounds of detention, is required to state the facts on

account of which he is satisfied that the detention is necessary in the interest

of the security of the State, maintenance, of public order, etc.
24.   The only privilege a detaining authority can claim against the

disclosure of facts is on the grounds of public interest. If no facts at all
28
leading to the detention of a detenu are to be mentioned in the grounds which

are to be furnished to him, then obviously the intention underlying the

enactment of
Article 22(6)
would be frustrated.
25.   In both the cases
referred to above
, the persons had been detained

under the provisions of
Preventive Detention Act
. The information to be

supplied to such a person is governed by Clause (5) of
Article 22.
In the

present case, the son of the appellant has been arrested for specific offences

as mentioned in the grounds of arrest. His case is governed by Clause (1)

and not by Clause (5) of
Article 22.
However, under both the clauses, certain

information has to be supplied to the person arrested and detained.
26.   Under Clause (1), the ground for arrest has to be communicated to the

person arrested. Under Clause (5) the grounds on which the order of

detention has been made has to be communicated to the person detained.
27.   The object underlying the provision that the grounds of arrest should

be communicated to the person arrested has been very succinctly explained

in Vihaan Kumar (supra). On learning about the grounds for arrest, the

person concerned will be in a position to make an application before the

appropriate Court for bail, or move the High Court for a writ of habeas

corpus. Further, the information will enable the arrested person to prepare

his defence in time for the purposes of his trial. For these reasons, it has been
29
provided by the Constitution that, the ground for the arrest must be

communicated to the person arrested as soon as possible.
28.   For the purposes of Clause (1) of
Article 22
, it is not necessary for the

authorities to furnish full details of the offence. However, the information

should be sufficient to enable the arrested person to understand why he has

been arrested. The grounds to be communicated to the arrested person should

be somewhat similar to the charge framed by the Court for the trial of a case.
29.   The rule in
Article 22(1)
that a person upon being arrested must be

informed of the grounds of arrest is similar to, though not exactly identical

with, the rules prevailing in England and in United States of America. The

rule prevailing in England is that

          “in normal circumstances an arrest without warrant either by a
          policeman or by a private person can be justified only if it is an
          arrest on a charge made known to the person arrested”; (per
          Viscount Simon L.C. in — ‘Christie v. Leachinsky (1947 AC 573 at
          p. 586(F).”
30.   It is a rule of common law and is described in different languages by

different authorities, but the meaning is the same; the arrested person must

be told for what he is arrested or be informed of the cause of his arrest. In

the United States the accused has the constitutional right “to be informed of

the nature and cause of the accusation”; see 6th Amendment to the American

Constitution. In Hooper v. Lane, (1857) 6 HLC 443 : 10 ER 1368 (G), one
30
of the reasons for the rule was said to be that the person arrested should know

whether he is or is not bound to submit to the arrest. In Christie v.
Leachinsky reported in (1947) AC 573 Lord Simonds observed at page 591

as thus:
“Putting first things first, I would say that it is the right of every
           citizen to be free from arrest unless there is in some other citizen,
           whether a constable or not, the right to arrest him. And I would
           say next that it is the corollary of the right of every citizen to be
           thus free from arrest that he should be entitled to resist arrest
           unless that arrest is lawful. How can these rights be reconciled
           with the proposition that he may be arrested without knowing why
           he is arrested? ……. Blind, unquestioning obedience is the law of
           tyrants and of slaves: it does not yet flourish on English soil”.
31.   Professor Glanvile L. Williams in his article “Requisites of a Valid

Arrest” in (1954) Criminal Law Review, at page 16, criticised the reason

given by Lord Simonds as “somewhat legalistic” because very few people

know the law of arrest in such a way that they can decide on the spot whether

the arrest to which they are being subjected to is legal. In his opinion, the

true reason is a different one, e.g., the reason given by Viscount 11th Simon

L.C. in the same case at page 588 in the following words:
“If the charge on suspicion of which the man if arrested is then
           and there made known to him, he has the opportunity of giving an
           explanation of any misunderstanding or of calling attention to
           other persons for whom he may have been mistaken with the result
           that further inquiries may save him from the consequences of false
           accusation.”
31
32.   Another reason given by Lord Simonds at page 592 is that the arrested

person may without a moment's delay take such steps as will enable him to

regain freedom. One more reason is that it acts as a safeguard against

despotism and over-zeal. As remarked by Professor Glanville L. Williams

(supra), at page 17:
“the rule has the effect of preventing the police from arresting on
          vague general suspicion, not knowing the precise crime suspected
          but hoping to obtain evidence of the commission of some crime for
          which they have power to arrest”.
33.    In McNabb v. United States of America reported in (1943) 318 US

332 (H), Frankfurter, J. observed at page 343:
“Experience has therefore counselled that safeguards must be
          provided against the dangers of the overzealous as well as the
          despotic ……………. Legislation such as this, requiring that the
          police must with reasonable promptness show legal cause for
          detaining arrested persons, constitutes an important safeguard”.
34.   In United States v. Cruikshank reported in (1876) 92 US 542, it was

observed by Waite C.J. that the accused is given the right to have a

specification of the charge against him in order that he may decide whether

he should present his defence by motion to quash, demurrer or plea.
35.   The debates of the Constituent Assembly which framed the

Constitution are relevant for the purpose of ascertaining the reason behind

the insertion of a certain Article in the Constitution. In the Draft of the
32
Constitution, the Article corresponding to the Article under consideration

was Article 15A. The reason given for the inclusion of the said Article was

that it contained safeguards against illegal or arbitrary arrests (9 Constituent

Assembly Debates, p. 1497).(See:
Vimal Kishore Mehrotra v. State of Uttar

Pradesh
, AIR 1956 All 56)
36.    If a person is arrested on a warrant, the grounds for reasons for the

arrest is the warrant itself; if the warrant is read over to him, that is sufficient

compliance with the requirement that he should be informed of the grounds

for his arrest. If he is arrested without a warrant, he must be told why he has

been arrested. If he is arrested for committing an offence, he must be told

that he has committed a certain offence for which he would be placed on

trial. In order to inform him that he has committed a certain offence, he must

be told of the acts done by him which amounts to the offence. He must be

informed of the precise acts done by him for which he would be tried;
informing him merely of the law applicable to such acts would not be

enough. (See:
Vimal Kishore Mehrotra
(supra))
37.    In the overall view of the matter more particularly having gone

through the grounds of arrest we have reached the conclusion that the

requirement in terms of para 21(b) as
laid down in
Vihaan Kumar (supra)

could be said to have been fulfilled.
33
38.   In view of the aforesaid, we do not find any merit in this appeal. The

same is accordingly dismissed.
39.   It is needless to clarify that it shall be open for the person arrested viz.
Kessireddy Raja Shekhar Reddy and in judicial custody as on date to apply

for regular bail before the competent court. If any regular bail application is

pending as on date, the same shall be taken up for hearing at the earliest and

be decided in accordance with law keeping in mind the well-settled

principles governing the grant of regular bail.
40.   Pending application, if any, also stands disposed of.
SLP (CRL.) No. 5691 OF 2025
1.    In view of the judgment and order pronounced in Criminal Appeal

@ SLP (CRL.) No. 7746 of 2025, it is needless for us to now go into legal

issues raised in the present petition. We believe that it would be just an

academic exercise for us. However, the question of law is kept open. The

petition is disposed of accordingly.
………………………….J.
                                                    (J.B. PARDIWALA)



                                                   …………………………J.
                                                     (R. MAHADEVAN)

New Delhi,
May 23, 2025.
34