[Cites
18
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Vanashakti vs Union Of India on 16 May, 2025
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
2025 INSC 718

                                                                              REPORTABLE

                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                             CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                              WRIT PETITION (C) NO.1394 OF 2023

                            VANASHAKTI                                       …PETITIONER


                                                                       Vs.

                            UNION OF INDIA                                   …RESPONDENT

                                                        WITH
                                           WRIT PETITION (C) NO.118 OF 2019
                                           WRIT PETITION (C) NO.115 OF 2024
                                                        AND
                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO.381-382 OF 2025


                                                            JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
1.      Part IV-A of the Constitution of India containing
                            fundamental duties as set out in
Article 51A
was
                            incorporated in the Constitution by the 42 nd Amendment
                            Act with effect from 3 rd January 1977. Clause (g) of
Article 51A
provides that it shall be the duty of every
                            citizen of India to protect and improve the natural
Signature Not Verified
environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wildlife,
                            and to have compassion for living creatures. This Court
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2025.05.16
17:50:25 IST
Reason:
in several decisions has held that the right to live in a
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                       Page 1 of 41
pollution free atmosphere is a part of the fundamental
right guaranteed under
Article 21
of the Constitution of
India.
2.      The world changed rapidly after World War II. From
the late 1960s and early 1970s, slowly there was a
realisation         about       the        drastic   consequences   of   the
destruction of environment and pollution of various
kinds. In June 1972, at Stockholm, the United Nations
Conference on Human Environment was held. In the said
conference, several decisions were taken by the world
community to protect the environment.
3.      In our country, it took fourteen years thereafter for
the legislature to come out with a law for protection and
improvement of the environment.
The Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986
(for short, ‘the 1986 Act’) was
brought into force with effect from 19 th November 1986.
As can be noticed from several orders of this Court and
the High Courts, the progress of implementation of the
1986 Act has been very slow.
4.      The        1970s          and         1980s     saw   growth      of
industrialisation in our country. The activities such as
mining, gas exploration, thermal power plants, petroleum
refining industries, various other industries, building and
construction projects, such as, highways started growing.
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                                       Page 2 of 41
5.      Again, it took twenty years after the 1986 Act came
into force to exercise the power under sub-section (1) and
clause (v) of sub-section (2) of
Section 3
of the 1986 Act
read with clause (d) of sub-rule (3) of Rule 5 of the
Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986 (for short, ‘1986
Rules’) for coming out with the Environment Impact
Assessment            Notification,        2006   (for   short,   ‘the   EIA
notification’). The EIA notification was issued on 14th
September 2006. It provided that the projects or activities
mentioned in clause (2) thereof shall require prior
Environmental Clearance (for short, ‘the EC’) from the
concerned regulatory authority. The concerned regulatory
authority in the Central Government is the Ministry of
Environment Forests and Climate Change (for short, ‘the
MoEFCC’) for matters falling under Category ‘A’ in the
Schedule, and at the State level, the State Environment
Impact Assessment Authority (for short, ‘the SEIAA’) for
the matters falling in Category ‘B’. In the Schedule,
Categories ‘A’ and ‘B’ were incorporated setting out
industries and other development work. The entire
controversy in this group of petitions is about ex post
facto grant of EC.
6.      On 14th March 2017, a notification was issued by
the MoEFCC. The said notification is hereafter referred
to as ‘the 2017 notification’. The said notification was
made applicable to the projects or activities that have
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                                       Page 3 of 41
started the work on site, expanded the production beyond
the limit of the EC, or changed the production mix
without obtaining EC. The 2017 notification provided
that in case of such works, ex post facto EC can be
granted. It provided that the projects or activities which
are in violation of the EIA notification as on 14th March
2017 were eligible to apply under the 2017 notification
for ex post facto EC within a period of six months from
14th March 2017.
7.      The National Green Tribunal (for short, ‘the NGT’)
vide order dated 24th May 2021 directed the MoEFCC to
prepare a Standard Operating Procedure (for short, ‘the
SOP’) for grant of EC in the cases of violation so as to
address the gap in the binding law and practice being
currently followed. In purported compliance with the said
direction, Office Memorandum dated 7th July 2021 (for
short, ‘the 2021 OM’) was issued.
8.
In     the     meanwhile,          the   2017   notification   was
challenged by way of a writ petition before the High Court
of Madras in the case of
Puducherry Environment
Protection Association v. Union of India1
, which was
decided by order dated 13th October 2017. During the
course of hearing of the case before the Madras High
Court, when it was pointed out that the outer limit for
making applications for grant of ex post facto EC have

1 2017 SCC OnLine Mad 7056
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                                     Page 4 of 41
been repeatedly extended, the Union of India gave a
categorical undertaking that the 2017 notification was
only      a    one-time          measure.   By   recording   the   said
submission made on behalf of the Union of India that the
2017 notification was certainly and clearly only a one
time measure, the High Court disposed of the petition.
Later on, by order dated 14th March 2018 passed by the
High Court of Madras in another case, the time period
under the 2017 notification for submission of proposals
by project proponents was extended by a further period of
thirty days.
9.      In Writ Petition (C) No.1394 of 2023, the first prayer
is for quashing the 2021 OM on the ground that it was
arbitrary, illegal and ultra vires the provisions of the
1986 Act. The second prayer is for issuing a writ of
mandamus directing the MoEFCC and SEIAA/SEACs not
to process and entertain any application for ex-post facto
EC after 13th May 2018. As stated earlier, the time
granted under the 2017 notification to apply was lastly
extended till 13th April 2018.
10. In Writ Petition (C) No.118 of 2019, the challenge is
to the 2017 notification issued by the MoEFCC. A prayer
was made seeking directions to the respondents to
produce a list of real estate projects and project
proponents who have undertaken real estate development
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                                  Page 5 of 41
projects        without          obtaining     EC      under   the    2006
notification.
11. In Writ Petition (C) No.115 of 2024, the challenge is
to the 2017 notification and the 2021 OM. A prayer for
writ of prohibition is made for restraining the MoEFCC
from issuing any notification or office memorandum
permitting ex-post facto EC.
12. The High Court of Madras by judgment and order
dated 30th August 2024 quashed the 2021 OM and
another OM dated 19th February 2021. The challenge in
Civil Appeal No.381-382 of 2025 is to this decision of the
High Court of Madras. In the judgment and order dated
30th August 2024, the Madras High Court declared that
its order will operate only prospectively and applications
under        consideration             will   remain    unaffected.    The
challenge in this appeal is only to the extent of giving
prospective effect to the impugned judgment.
THE EIA NOTIFICATION
13. Firstly, we come to the EIA notification. It has been
issued in exercise of powers under sub-Section (1) and
clause (v) of sub-Section (2) of
Section 3
of the 1986 Act
read with clause (d) of sub-Rule (3) of Rule 5 of the 1986
Rules.
Section 3
of the 1986 Act reads thus:
“3. Power of Central Government to take
             measures    to   protect   and    improve
             environment.—(1) Subject to the provisions
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                                     Page 6 of 41
of this Act, the Central Government shall
             have the power to take all such measures
             as it deems necessary or expedient for
             the purpose of protecting and improving
             the quality of the environment and
             preventing,     controlling and  abating
             environmental pollution.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
             the generality of the provisions of sub-
section (1), such measures may include
             measures with respect to all or any of the
             following matters, namely:—
(i) co-ordination of actions by the State
             Governments, officers and other authorities
             —
(a) under this Act, or the rules made
                     thereunder; or
(b) under any other law for the time
                     being in force which is relatable to the
                     objects of this Act;
(ii) planning and execution of a nation-
             wide programme for the prevention, control
             and abatement of environmental pollution;
(iii) laying down standards for the quality
             of environment in its various aspects;
(iv) laying down standards for emission or
             discharge of environmental pollutants from
             various sources whatsoever:
Provided that different standards for
             emission or discharge may be laid down
             under this clause from different sources
             having regard to the quality or composition
             of   the   emission    or    discharge    of
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                        Page 7 of 41
environmental             pollutants   from   such
             sources;
(v) restriction of areas in which any
             industries, operations or processes or
             class   of   industries,   operations   or
             processes shall not be carried out or shall
             be carried out subject to certain
             safeguards;
(vi)  laying   down    procedures    and
             safeguards for the prevention of accidents
             which may cause environmental pollution
             and remedial measures for such accidents;
(vii)  laying  down   procedures   and
             safeguards for the handling of hazardous
             substances;
(viii) examination of such manufacturing
             processes, materials and substances as are
             likely to cause environmental pollution;
(ix)   carrying  out   and     sponsoring
             investigations and research relating to
             problems of environmental pollution;
(x) inspection of any premises, plant,
             equipment, machinery, manufacturing or
             other processes, materials or substances
             and giving, by order, of such directions to
             such authorities, officers or persons as it
             may consider necessary to take steps for the
             prevention, control and abatement of
             environmental pollution;
(xi) establishment or recognition of
             environmental laboratories and institutes to
             carry out the functions entrusted to such
             environmental laboratories and institutes
             under this Act;
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                          Page 8 of 41
(xii) collection and dissemination of
             information in respect of matters relating to
             environmental pollution;
(xiii) preparation of manuals, codes or
             guides relating to the prevention control and
             abatement of environmental pollution;
(xiv) such other matters as the Central
             Government deems necessary or expedient
             for the purpose of securing the effective
             implementation of the provisions of this Act.
             (3) The Central Government may, if it
             considers it necessary or expedient so to do
             for the purposes of this Act, by order,
             published in the Official Gazette, constitute
             an authority or authorities by such name or
             names as may be specified in the order for
             the purpose of exercising and performing
             such of the powers and functions (including
             the power to issue directions under Section
5) of the Central Government under this Act
             and for taking measures with respect to
             such of the matters referred to in sub-
section (2) as may be mentioned in the order
             and subject to the supervision and control
             of the Central Government and the
             provisions of such order, such authority or
             authorities may exercise the powers or
             perform the functions or take the measures
             so mentioned in the order as if such
             authority     or   authorities   had    been
             empowered by this Act to exercise those
             powers or perform those functions or take
             such measures.”
                                           (emphasis added)
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                      Page 9 of 41
13.1 Sub-section (1) of
Section 3
sums up the very
object of the 1986 Act. Therefore, the EIA notification has
been issued not only for the purposes of protecting and
improving the quality of the environment but also for
preventing and abating environmental pollution. Sub-
section (1) of
Section 3
confers general power of taking
measures on the Central Government. Sub-section (2)
confers specific power for taking measures in the matters
set out in clauses (i) to (ix) thereof.             Clause (v) of sub-
section        (2)     of
Section      3
empowers   the   Central
Government to take measures for putting restrictions of
areas in which any industries, operations or processes
shall not be carried out or shall be carried out subject to
safeguards.
14. Rule 5 of the 1986 Rules reads thus:
“5. Prohibition and restriction on the
             location of industries and the carrying on
             of processes and operations in different
             areas.—(1) The Central Government may
             take into consideration the following factors
             while prohibiting or restricting the location
             of industries and carrying on of processes
             and operations in different areas:
(i) Standards for quality of environment in
             its various aspects laid down for an area.
(ii) The maximum allowable limits of
             concentration of various environmental
             pollutants (including noise) for an area.
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                              Page 10 of 41
(iii) The likely emission or discharge of
             environmental pollutants from an industry,
             process or operation proposed to be
             prohibited or restricted.
(iv) The topographic and climatic features
             of an area.
(v) The biological diversity of the area
             which, in the opinion of the Central
             Government needs to be preserved.
(vi) Environmentally compatible land use.
(vii) Net adverse environmental impact
             likely to be caused by an industry, process
             or operation proposed to be prohibited or
             restricted.
(viii) Proximity to a protected area under
             the
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
             Sites and Remains Act, 1958
or a sanctuary,
             National Park, game reserve or closed area
             notified as such under the
Wild Life
             (Protection) Act, 1972
or places protected
             under any treaty, agreement or convention
             with any other country or countries or in
             pursuance of any decision made in any
             international conference, association or
             other body.
(ix) Proximity to human settlements.
(x) Any other factor as may be considered
             by the Central Government to be relevant to
             the protection of the environment in an area.
             (2) While prohibiting or restricting the
             location of industries and carrying on of
             processes and operations in an area, the
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                     Page 11 of 41
Central Government shall follow            the
             procedure hereinafter laid down.
             (3) (a) Whenever it appears to the Central
             Government that it is expedient to impose
             prohibition or restrictions on the location of
             an industry or the carrying on of processes
             and operations in an area, it may, by
             notification in the Official Gazette and in
             such other manner as the Central
             Government may deem necessary from time
             to time, give notice of its intention to do so.
(b) Every notification under clause (a) shall
             give a brief description of the area, the
             industries, operations, processes in that
             area about which such notification pertains
             and also specify the reasons for the
             imposition of prohibition or restrictions on
             the location of the industries and carrying
             on of processes or operations in that area.
(c) Any person interested in filing an
             objection    against    the   imposition    of
             prohibition or restrictions on carrying on of
             processes or operations as notified under
             clause (a) may do so in writing to the
             Central Government within sixty days from
             the date of publication in the notification in
             the Official Gazette.
(d) The Central Government shall within a
             period of one hundred and twenty days from
             the date of publication of the notification in
             the Official Gazette consider all the
             objections received against such notification
             and may [within [seven hundred and
             twenty-five days [,and in respect of the
             States of Assam, Meghalaya, Arunachal
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                       Page 12 of 41
Pradesh, Mizoram, Manipur, Nagaland,
             Tripura, Sikkim and Jammu and Kashmir
             in exceptional circumstance and for
             sufficient reasons within a further period of
             one hundred and eighty days,]] from such
             date of publication] impose prohibition or
             restrictions on location of such industries
             and the carrying on of any process or
             operation in an area:
[Provided that on account of COVID-19
             pandemic, for the purpose of this clause, the
             period of validity of the notification expiring
             in the financial year 2020-2021 and 2021-
             2022 shall be extended up to [30th June,
             2022] or six months from the end of the
             month when the relevant notification would
             have expired without any extension,
             whichever is later.]
              [(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in
             sub-rule (3), whenever it appears to the
             Central Government that it is in public
             interest to do so, it may dispense with the
             requirement of notice under clause (a) of
             sub-rule (3).]”

14.1 For issuing the EIA notification, power has been
exercised under clause (d) of sub-rule (3) of Rule 5 which
empowers the Central Government to impose prohibition
or restrictions on location of such industries and the
carrying on any process or operation in an area. There is
a power to impose complete prohibition on carrying on
any process or operation in an area. Clause (2) of the EIA
notification reads thus:
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                       Page 13 of 41
“2. Requirements of prior Environmental
             Clearance (EC):- The following projects or
             activities shall require prior environmental
             clearance from the concerned regulatory
             authority, which shall hereinafter referred to
             be as the Central Government in the
             Ministry of Environment and Forests for
             matters falling under Category 'A' in the
             Schedule and at State level the State
             Environment Impact Assessment Authority
             (SEIAA) for matters falling under Category
             'B' in the said Schedule and at District level,
             the      District     Environment       Impact
             Assessment Authority (DEIAA) for matters
             falling under Category ‘B2’ for mining
             minerals in the said Schedule, before any
             construction work, or preparation of land by
             the project management except for securing
             the land, is started on the project or activity:
(i) All new projects or activities listed in the
                 Schedule to this notification;
(ii) Expansion, modernization or any change
                  in the product mix or raw material mix in
                  existing projects or activities listed in the
                  Schedule to this notification with
                  addition of capacity beyond the limits
                  specified for the concerned sector in the
                  said Schedule, subject to conditions and
                  procedure provided in the sub-paragraph
(ii) of paragraph 7.”

14.2 Therefore, without prior EC, construction of new
projects or activities, expansion or modernisation of
existing projects or activities listed in the Schedule
entailing capacity addition with change in process or
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                          Page 14 of 41
technology, cannot be undertaken. Entire procedure for
grant of prior EC is
laid down in
the EIA notification.
LEGALITY OF THE 2017 NOTIFICATION
15. The 2017 notification refers to the OMs dated 12 th
December 2012 and 27th June 2013 by which a process
was sought to be established for grant of EC in the cases
of violation of the EIA notification. It also refers to the
judgment of the High Court of Jharkhand holding these
two OMs as illegal. The same OMs were also quashed by
the NGT as mentioned in the said notification. There are
three recitals in the said notification which are relevant.
Recital Nos.9 to 11 read thus:
“9. And whereas, the Ministry of
             Environment, Forest and Climate Change
             and      State    Environment     Impact
             Assessment     Authorities   have   been
             receiving certain proposals under the
             Environment       Impact     Assessment
             Notification, 2006 for grant of Terms of
             References and Environmental Clearance
             for projects which have started the work
             on site, expanded the production beyond
             the limit of environmental clearance or
             changed the product mix without
             obtaining prior environmental clearance;
10.   Whereas,   the   Ministry  of
             Environment, Forest and Climate
             Change deems it necessary for the
             purpose of protecting and improving
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                  Page 15 of 41
the quality of the environment and
             abating environmental pollution that
             all entities not complying with
             environmental     regulation    under
             Environment     Impact     Assessment
             Notification, 2006 be brought under
             compliance with in the environmental
             laws in expedient manner;
11. And whereas, the Ministry of
             Environment, Forest and Climate Change
             deems it necessary to bring such projects
             and activities in compliance with the
             environmental laws at the earliest point
             of time, rather than leaving them
             unregulated and unchecked, which will
             be more damaging to the environment
             and in furtherance of this objective, the
             Government of India deems it essential to
             establish a process for appraisal of such
             cases of violation for prescribing
             adequate environmental safeguards to
             entities and the process should be such
             that it deters violation of provisions of
             Environment       Impact     Assessment
             Notification, 2006 and the pecuniary
             benefit of violation and damage to
             environment is adequately compensated
             for;”
15.1 Thus, what was sought to be done was to protect
the project proponents who committed gross illegality by
commencing construction or commencing operation or
process without obtaining prior EC as provided in the
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                 Page 16 of 41
EIA notification.            The 2017 notification was a one-time
measure. Moreover, this Court in the case of
Common
Cause v Union of India & Ors.2
, held in no uncertain
terms that the concept of ex post facto or retrospective EC
is    completely          alien      to    environmental   jurisprudence
including the EIA notification. The decision in the case of
Common Cause2 was delivered on 2nd August 2017.
Notwithstanding the clear declaration of law which was
made on 2nd August 2017, the Central Government did
not withdraw the 2017 notification.
16. We may note here that this is not the first time that
the concept of prior EC was brought into force. For this
purpose, useful reference can be made to a decision of
this Court in the case of
Alembic Pharmaceuticals v.
Rohit Prajapati3
. It records that there was a notification
of 27th January 1994 mandating prior EC for setting up
and expansion of industrial projects falling within thirty
categories. The issue before this Court was about the
legality and validity of the circular dated 14th May 2002,
which permitted obtaining of ex post facto EC. This Court
specifically dealt with the challenge to the circular dated
14th May 2002. In paragraph 12, this Court noted the
issue to be decided:
“12. The issue to be adjudicated is whether
             in view of the requirement of a prior EC

2 2017 (9) SCC 499
3 2020 (17) SCC 157
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                               Page 17 of 41
under the EIA Notification of 1994, a
             provision for an ex post facto EC to
             industrial units could be validly made by
             means of the Circular dated 14-5-2002.”

16.1 Thereafter, this Court considered
Section 3(1)
of the
1986 Act. In paragraph 21 this Court held thus:
“21. The omission in the appeal to make
             any attempt to sustain the Circular dated
             14-5-2002 with reference to the provisions
             of
Section 3
of the Environment (Protection)
             Act, 1986 is significant. For an action of the
             Central Government to be treated as a
             measure referable to
Section 3
it must
             satisfy the statutory requirement of being
             necessary or expedient “for the purpose of
             protecting and improving the quality of the
             environment and preventing, controlling and
             abating     environment     pollution”.   The
             Circular dated 14-5-2002 in fact does quite
             the contrary. It purported to allow an
             extension of time for industrial units to
             comply with the requirement of an EC. The
             EIA Notification dated 27-1-1994 mandated
             that an EC has to be obtained before
             embarking on a new project or expanding or
             modernising an existing one. The EIA
             Notification of 1994 has been issued under
             the    provisions    of   the
Environment
             (Protection) Act, 1986
and the Environment
             Protection Rules, 1986, with the object of
             imposing restrictions and prohibitions on
             setting up of new projects or expansion or
             modernisation of existing project. The
             measures are based on the precautionary
             principle and aim to protect the interests of
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                      Page 18 of 41
the environment. The Circular dated 14-5-
             2002 allowed defaulting industrial units
             which had commenced activities without an
             EC to cure the default by an ex post facto
             clearance. Being an administrative decision,
             it is beyond the scope of
Section 3
and
             cannot be said to be a measure for the
             purpose of protecting and improving the
             quality of the environment. The circular
             notes that there were defaulting units which
             had failed to comply with the requirement of
             obtaining an EC as mandated. The circular
             provided for an extension of time and
             inexplicably introduced the notion of an ex
             post facto clearance. In effect, it impacted
             the obligation of the industrial units to be in
             compliance with the law. The concept of ex
             post facto clearance is fundamentally at
             odds with the EIA Notification dated 27-
             1-1994. The EIA Notification of 1994
             contained      a    stipulation   that     any
             expansion or modernisation of an activity
             or setting up of a new project listed in
             Schedule I “shall not be undertaken in
             any part of India unless it has been
             accorded environmental clearance”. The
             language of the notification is as clear as
             it can be to indicate that the requirement
             is of a prior EC. A mandatory provision
             requires complete compliance. The words
             “shall not be undertaken” read in
             conjunction with the expression “unless”
             can only have one meaning : before
             undertaking a new project or expanding
             or modernising an existing one, an EC
             must be obtained. When the EIA
             Notification of 1994 mandates a prior EC, it
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                       Page 19 of 41
proscribes a post activity approval or an ex
             post facto permission. What is sought to be
             achieved by the administrative Circular
             dated 14-5-2002 is contrary to the statutory
             Notification dated 27-1-1994. The Circular
             dated 14-5-2002 does not stipulate how the
             detrimental effects on the environment
             would be taken care of if the project
             proponent is granted an ex post facto EC.
             The EIA Notification of 1994 mandates a
             prior environmental clearance. The circular
             substantially   amends      or   alters  the
             application of the EIA Notification of 1994.
             The mandate of not commencing a new
             project or expanding or modernising an
             existing one unless an environmental
             clearance has been obtained stands diluted
             and is rendered ineffective by the issuance
             of the administrative Circular dated 14-5-
             2002. This discussion leads us to the
             conclusion that the administrative circular
             is not a measure protected by
Section 3
.
             Hence there was no jurisdictional bar on
             NGT to enquire into its legitimacy or vires.
             Moreover, the administrative circular is
             contrary to the EIA Notification 1994 which
             has a statutory character. The circular is
             unsustainable in law.”
                                         (emphasis added)


16.2 Ultimately, in paragraph 23, this Court held thus:
The concept of an ex post facto EC is in
             derogation of the fundamental principles
             of environmental jurisprudence and is an
             anathema to the EIA Notification dated
             27-1-1994. It is, as the judgment
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                    Page 20 of 41
in
Common                   Cause [Common
             Cause v. Union of India
, (2017) 9 SCC
             499]     holds,    detrimental       to    the
             environment       and     could     lead    to
             irreparable degradation. The reason why a
             retrospective EC or an ex post facto
             clearance is alien to environmental
             jurisprudence is that before the issuance
             of an EC, the statutory notification
             warrants a careful application of mind,
             besides a study into the likely consequences
             of a proposed activity on the environment.
             An EC can be issued only after various
             stages of the decision-making process have
             been completed. Requirements such as
             conducting a public hearing, screening,
             scoping and appraisal are components of the
             decision-making process which ensure that
             the likely impacts of the industrial activity
             or the expansion of an existing industrial
             activity are considered in the decision-
             making calculus. Allowing for an ex post
             facto clearance would essentially condone
             the operation of industrial activities without
             the grant of an EC. In the absence of an EC,
             there would be no conditions that would
             safeguard the environment. Moreover, if the
             EC was to be ultimately refused, irreparable
             harm would have been caused to the
             environment. In either view of the matter,
             environment law cannot countenance the
             notion of an ex post facto clearance. This
             would be contrary to both the precautionary
             principle as well as the need for sustainable
             development.”
                                         (emphasis added)
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                      Page 21 of 41
16.3 In fact, as noted in paragraph 22.1, the word ‘prior’
was not used in the EIA notification dated 27 th January
1994. However, the words ‘shall not be undertaken’ were
used. In the 2006 EIA notification, the word ‘prior’
appears at multiple places.
17. The issue of ex post facto EC was dealt with in the
case      of     Common            Cause2,   In   paragraph   108,   a
submission was recorded that the possibility of getting ex
post facto EC was a signal to the mining leaseholders that
obtaining an EC was not mandatory or that if it was not
obtained, the default was retrospectively condonable. In
paragraph 125, this Court held thus:
“125. We are not in agreement with the
             learned counsel for the mining leaseholders.
             There is no doubt that the grant of an EC
             cannot be taken as a mechanical exercise.
             It can only be granted after due diligence
             and reasonable care since damage to the
             environment can have a long-term
             impact. EIA 1994 is therefore very clear
             that if expansion or modernisation of any
             mining activity exceeds the existing
             pollution load, a prior EC is necessary
             and as already held by this Court in
M.C.
             Mehta [M.C. Mehta v. Union of India
,
             (2004) 12 SCC 118] even for the renewal
             of a mining lease where there is no
             expansion or modernisation of any
             activity, a prior EC is necessary. Such
             importance having been given to an EC,
             the    grant   of    an  ex    post   facto
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                             Page 22 of 41
environmental     clearance     would    be
             detrimental to the environment and
             could lead to irreparable degradation of
             the environment. The concept of an ex
             post facto or a retrospective EC is
             completely    alien    to    environmental
             jurisprudence including EIA 1994 and
             EIA 2006. We make it clear that an EC will
             come into force not earlier than the date of
             its grant.”
                                                     (emphasis added)
18. Therefore, there is already a concluded finding of
this     Court        that     the         concept    of   ex post   facto   or
retrospective EC is completely alien to environmental
jurisprudence and the EIA notification. This view was
reiterated by this Court in the case of
Electrosteel Steels
Ltd. v. Union of India and Ors.
4,. In paragraph 72, this
Court held thus:
“72. There can be no doubt that the need
             to comply with the requirement to obtain
             environment clearance is non-negotiable.
             A project can be set up or allowed to expand
             subject to compliance of the requisite norms.
             Environmental clearance is granted on
             condition of the suitability of the site to set
             up the project from the environmental angle,
             and existence of necessary infrastructural
             facilities and equipment for compliance of
             environmental norms. To protect future
             generations, it is imperative that pollution
             laws be strictly enforced. Under no
             circumstances, can industries which pollute

4 (2023) 6 SCC 615
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                                      Page 23 of 41
be allowed to operate unchecked                   and
             degrade the environment.”
                                                  (emphasis added)

18.1 In this case, as well as in the case of Alembic
Pharmaceuticals3, this Court exercised its jurisdiction
under
Article 142
of the Constitution and permitted ex
post facto EC in particular cases considering the peculiar
factual situation.
19. It is in this context that the legality and validity of
the 2017 notification will have to be tested. Interestingly,
in paragraph 10 of the notification, it is recorded that the
MoEFCC deems it necessary for the purpose of protecting
and improving the quality of environment and abating
environmental             pollution        that   all   the   entities   not
complying with the environmental regulation under EIA
notification be brought under compliance within the
environmental laws in an expeditious manner. The object
of    protecting         and       improving      the   environment      and
preventing and abating environmental pollution was
achieved by the EIA notification. The object of the 2017
notification appears to be to protect the industries and
entities which violated the EIA notification. In fact,
paragraph 14 of the 2017 notification is material which
reads thus:
“14. The projects or activities which are in
             violation as on date of this notification only
             will be eligible to apply for environmental
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                                   Page 24 of 41
clearance under this notification and the
             project    proponents       can  apply    for
             environmental       clearance   under   this
             notification only within six months from the
             date of this notification.”
20. Moreover, the 2017 notification is completely in
violation of the law
laid down by
this court in the case of
Common Cause2 and Alembic Pharmaceuticals3. From
the recitals of the 2017 notification, it is apparent that it
was a one-time measure to protect those who were in
violation as on the date of the 2017 notification. In view
of the settled law, even a ‘one-time measure’ or ‘one-time
relaxation’ was illegal. The 2021 OM encourages the
entities who contributed to pollution by not obtaining
prior      EC.      Whenever           EC   is   granted,   it   is   always
conditional. Certain conditions are imposed to abate or
reduce the pollution. Such one-time measures add to air
and/or water pollution. Such measures infringe the right
to live in a pollution free environment guaranteed by
Article 21.
Thus, the 2017 notification was completely
illegal.
21. The Division bench of Madras High Court by
judgment dated 13th October 2017, in the case of
Puducherry             Environment           Protection     Association1
dealt with the issue regarding the legality of the 2017
notification which was subject matter of challenge in a
Public Interest Litigation. A very specific submission was
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                                   Page 25 of 41
made before the Madras High Court on behalf of the
Central Government by the learned Additional Solicitor
General, which is recorded in paragraph 4(i) of the
judgment. Relevant portion of paragraph 4(i) reads thus:
“4(i)   With     regard   to   precautionary
             principle, faced with the situation that ex
             post facto clearance and regularization dates
             have been repeatedly extended time and
             again by series of notifications, learned
             Additional Solicitor General at the bar, on
             instructions, submits that this impugned
             notification shall clearly and certainly be
             only a one time measure. We record this
             submission also.
………………………………………………………”
                                         (emphasis added)

21.1 This statement was treated as an undertaking of the
Central Government, which is clear from paragraph 4(n)
of
the said judgment
:
“4(n)   We are convinced that paragraphs
             3,4 and 5 of the impugned notification
             alluded to supra coupled with the two
             undertakings made on instructions by
             learned Additional Solicitor General that (a)
             public hearing can be read into paragraph 5
             of the impugned notification and (b) this
             shall certainly and clearly be a one time
             measure, this writ petition can be closed
             and disposed of recording the above
             submissions. We do so.”
                                         (emphasis added)
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                     Page 26 of 41
21.2 It is in view of this undertaking that the High Court
did not interfere. The Central Government is bound by
this undertaking.                   It is the duty of the Central
Government to comply with the undertaking in its true
letter and spirit.
22. The period provided in the 2017 notification to
apply for ex-post facto EC ended on 13th September 2017.
In the case of Appaswamy Real Estates Limited v.
Puducherry Environment Protection Association5, the
request of the MoEFCC for extending the time provided in
the 2017 notification was accepted. As a result, the OM
dated 16th March 2018 was issued which permitted the
project proponents to apply under the 2017 notification
within thirty days from the date of the High Court order.
What is pertinent to note is that notwithstanding the
grant of extension of time to apply, there was no
modification           made        to      paragraph   14   of   the   2017
notification which clarified that it is applicable only to
those projects and activities which were in violation on
the date of the said notification. Therefore, any project or
activity or process which required EC under the EIA
notification commenced after 14th March 2017 was not
protected by the 2017 notification.
23. Apart from the fact that the very concept of grant of
ex-post facto EC is illegal, it is not possible to understand

5 2018 SCC OnLine Mad 1283
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                                  Page 27 of 41
why the Central Government made efforts to protect
those who committed illegality by not obtaining prior EC
in terms of the EIA notification. As the EIA notification
was eleven years old when the 2017 notification was
issued, there was no equity in favour of those who
committed such gross illegality of not obtaining prior EC.
The persons who acted without prior EC were not
illiterate persons. They were companies, real estate
developers,            public         sector   undertakings,   mining
industries, etc. They were the persons who knowingly
committed illegality. We, therefore, make it clear that
hereafter, the Central Government shall not come out
with a new version of the 2017 notification which
provides for the grant of ex-post facto EC in any manner.
LEGALITY AND VALIDITY OF THE 2021 OM
SUBMISSIONS
24. The learned senior counsel appearing for the
Petitioner submitted that post a series of judgments of
this Court in Alembic3 and Common Cause2, it is not
permissible to grant ex post facto EC. He further submits
that the 2021 OM is in violation of the 1986 Act and the
EIA notification. He submits that EC must be prior and
cannot be granted ex post facto. While the 2021 OM does
not expressly extend the timeline under the 2017
notification or mention ex post facto, the 2021 OM and its
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                            Page 28 of 41
application has effectively allowed grant of ex post facto
EC.
25. The main submission of the learned Additional
Solicitor General is that the 2021 OM does not seek to
grant ex-post facto EC. It is only an SOP. The learned
ASG invited our attention to the contents of the SOP. Her
submission is that it provides for the demolition of
projects not allowable or permissible for want of EC. It
also        provides           for         the    closure       of      projects
allowable/permissible, if prior EC has not been taken as
per the EIA notification. She submitted that even if EC is
granted, it will be effective from the date of the issue, and
therefore, it is not ex post facto. She submitted that before
such EC is granted, the project proponent will have to
pay certain amounts as provided therein based on
Polluter Pays Principle. Moreover, the project proponents
will have to undertake activities relating to remedial plan
and community accommodation plan. She also pointed
out that the projects which are not allowable or
permissible, shall be demolished. She also pointed out
provisions           regarding             penalty,   project        proponents
furnishing bank guarantee, etc. Thus, in short, her
submission is that the object of the 2021 OM is to protect
those projects and industries which could have been
granted an EC under EIA notification before the date of
commencement of activities, but proceeded to commence
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                                       Page 29 of 41
activities without EC. Her submission is that this
measure has been taken to ensure that the huge
spending on constructions is not lost and wasted.
OUR VIEW
26. The basic submission by learned ASG is based on a
premise that what is provided under the 2021 OM is not
grant of ex-post facto EC. The relevant part of the 2021
OM is in paragraph 10 and 11, which read thus:
“10.Standard Operating Procedure-Guiding
             Principles:
i.  Without     prejudice to any   other
             consequences, action has to be initiated
             under
section 15
read with
section 19
of
             The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986
             against all violations.
ii. Projects not allowable/permissible, for
             grant of EC, as per extant regulations: To be
             demolished.
iii. Projects allowable/permissible, if prior EC
             had been taken as per extant regulations: To
             be closed until EC is granted (if no prior
             EC has been taken) or to revert to
             permitted production level (in case prior
             EC has been granted).
iv. Polluter pays: Violators to pay for violation
             period proportionate to the scale of project
             and extent of commercial transaction.
             v. Setting up a mechanism for reporting of
             violation to the regulatory authority(ies).
11. SOP for dealing with the violation
             cases:
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                         Page 30 of 41
Step 1: Closure or Revision

Sl no. Status of                     Actions
       EC
1      If no prior EC has            Order to close its
       been taken                    operation
2        If prior EC is              Order to revert the
         available       for         activity /production
         existing/old unit           to        permissible
                                     limits.
3        If prior EC was             Restrict          the
         not required for            activity /production
         earlier production          to the extent to
         level but is now            which prior EC was
         required                    not required


             Step 2: Action under                    Environment
             (Projection) Act, 1986
Action under
section 15
read with
section 19
of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986
             shall be initiated against the violators.
Step: 3: Appraisal under EIA Notification,
2006
The permissibility of the project shall be
             examined from the perspective of whether
             such activity/project was at all eligible for the
             grant of prior EC.
A. If not permissible:
i. The project shall be ordered for the
             demolition/closure after issuing show
             cause notice and providing an opportunity
             of hearing.
Ex. If a red industry is functioning in a CRZ-I
             area which means that the activity was, in the
             first place, not permitted at the time of
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                           Page 31 of 41
commencement of project. Therefore, the
             activity is not permissible and therefore it shall
             be closed & demolished.
ii. Respective regulatory authorities shall
             issue directions under
section 5
of the
             Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 for such
             closure & demolition of the project/activity.
B. If permissible:
i. As per extant regulations at the time of
             scoping, if it is viewed that the project activity
             is otherwise permissible, Terms of Reference
             (TOR) shall be issued with directions to
             complete the impact assessment studies &
             submit Environmental Impact Assessment
             (EIA) report & Environmental Management
             Plan (EMP) in a time bound manner.
ii. Such cases of violation shall be subject to
             appropriate
(a) Damage Assessment
(b) Remedial Plan and
(c) Community Augmentation Plan by
             the Central Level Sectoral Expert Appraisal
             Committees or State/Union Territory Level
             Expert Appraisal Committees, as the case
             may be.
iii. The Competent Authority shall issue
             directions to the project proponent, under
section 5
of the Environment (Protection) Act,
             1986 on case to case basis mandating
             payment of such amount (as may be
             determined based on Polluter Pays principle)
             and undertaking activities relating to
             Remedial Plan and Community Augmentation
             Plan (to restore environmental damage
             caused including its social aspects).
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                          Page 32 of 41
iv. Upon submission of the EIA & EMP report,
             the project shall be appraised by the Central
             Sectoral Expert Appraisal Committees or the
             State/Union Territory Level Expert Appraisal
             Committees, as the case may be, as if it was a
             new proposal. If, on examination of the
             EIA/EMP report, the project is considered
             permissible for operation as per extant
             regulations, the requisite Environmental
             Clearance shall be issued which shall be
             effective from the date of issue.
v.   However,     during    appraisal  after
             examination if it is found that even though
             the project may be permissible but not
             environmentally sustainable in its present
             form/configuration/features      then    the
             project shall be directed to be modified so
             that the project would be environmentally
             sustainable.
vi. If, however, it is not considered
             appropriate to issue EC, the project shall be
             directed to be demolished/ closed. If such
             proposal is a case of expansion, the project
             shall be directed to revert back to the
             extent of activity for which EC had been
             granted earlier or to revert back to the
             extent of activity for which EC was not
             required (as the case may be).
vii. Central Sectoral Expert Appraisal
             Committees or the State/Union Territory
             Level Expert Appraisal Committees, as the
             case may be, may insist upon public hearing
             to be conducted for such categories of
             projects for which the EIA Notification 2006,
             as amended from time to time, requires the
             public hearing to be conducted.
viii. The project proponent will be required to
             submit a bank guarantee equivalent to the
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                       Page 33 of 41
amount of Remediation Plan and Natural &
             Community Resource Augmentation Plan
             with Central / the State Pollution Control
             Board (depending on whether it is
             appraised at Ministry or by SEIAA). The
             quantification of such liability will be
             recommended by Expert Appraisal Committee
             and finalized by Regulatory Authority. The
             bank guarantee shall be deposited prior to
             the grant of environmental clearance and will
             be       released      after      successful
             implementation of the Remediation Plan
             and Natural & Community Resource
             Augmentation Plan.”
27. In short, it provides for grant of EC to category of
‘allowable/permissible’ projects. We must remember that
the 2021 OM is applicable even to the completed projects.
The 2021 OM says that grant of EC to such projects shall
be effective from the date of issue. If the project
proponent goes ahead with construction which requires
EC under the EIA notification, it will amount to violation
of the provisions of 1986 Act and 1986 Rules. It will
attract penalty under
Section 15
of the 1986 Act. Perusal
of the provisions of
Section 15
shows that even if the
penalty is paid by the project proponent, it will not
regularise the project. Therefore, even after the payment
of penalty, if the project is under construction, the same
has to be stopped and demolished and even if operation
has already commenced, the same has to be stopped and
demolished. Therefore, the construction work has to be
demolished.
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                     Page 34 of 41
28. Now, we will consider what is the meaning of “ex
post      facto”.      Various         dictionary     meanings        can    be
summarised as under:
a) Having retrospective effect or force;
b) From a thing done afterwards;
c) Retroactive or affecting something that has already
        happened.
29. Now, we will take a case of ex post facto EC provided
under the 2017 notification. The effect of grant of ex post
facto      clearance         is     that   if    without    obtaining       EC,
construction is in progress, the same is allowed to
continue. If the construction is complete and operation
and processes are going on, the same can go on after ex
post facto EC is granted. Effect of grant of EC under
clause (11) of 2021 OM will be grant of permission to
complete         the      construction          of   the   project,   though
construction had commenced without prior EC. Where
the construction is already complete which is being used
for processes etc., by grant of EC, the process/activities
can continue. Thus, in effect, the EC granted under
clause (11) of 2021 OM regularises something which was
illegal with retrospective effect. In effect, the EC granted
under clause (11) of 2021 OM will regularise the illegality
done by commencing the construction or commencing
the project without prior EC. Therefore, in substance,
what is provided is grant of ex post facto EC. In other
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                                      Page 35 of 41
words what is granted is EC with retrospective effect as it
regularises illegality committed earlier. The grant of EC
under the 2021 OM, no doubt, is subject to making
payment of compensation determined based on Polluter
Pays Principle and undertaking activities relating to
remedial plan. Once there is a violation of the EIA
notification, the project proponent has to compensate
following the Polluter Pays Principle. Even if, EC is not
granted to him he has to pay for remedial plan to remedy
the damage done to the environment. He has to also pay
the penalty under
Section 15
of the 1986 Act. Therefore,
what is done by the 2021 OM is something which was
completely prohibited by this Court in the cases of
Common Cause2 and Alembic Pharmaceuticals3. It is
an attempt to bring in an ex-post facto or retrospective
regime by craftily drafting the SOP.                The grant of EC
under the 2021 OM in substance and in effect amounts
to ex post facto grant of EC. The Court must come down
very heavily on the attempt of the Central Government to
do something which is completely prohibited under the
law. Cleverly, the words ex post facto have not been used,
but without using those words, there is a provision to
effectively grant ex post facto EC. The 2021 OM has been
issued in violation of the decisions of this Court in the
cases          of        Common            Cause2   and    Alembic
Pharmaceuticals3. Therefore, we have no manner of
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                          Page 36 of 41
doubt that the 2021 OM which permits grant of EC is
completely arbitrary and illegal. Moreover, the 2021 OM
does not refer to exercise of any power under the 1986
Act or the 1986 Rules.
30. There is one more aspect which is required to be
noted. As per paragraph 14 of the 2017 notification,
provision for grant of ex post facto EC was made only in
relation to projects or activities which were in violation as
of 14th March 2017. Therefore, grant of ex post facto
clearance was not permitted under 2017 notification for
the projects and activities which were commenced or
continued after 14th March 2017. The window which was
initially for a period of six months was eventually
extended till completion of 30 days from 14 th March 2018.
Therefore, the 2021 OM is brought in to do something
which was not permissible under the 2017 notification,
the law laid down by this Court, and the solemn
undertaking given by the Central Government to the
Madras High Court. We must deprecate such effort on the
part of the Central Government.
31. The EIA notification is of 14 th September 2006.
When the 2021 OM was issued, it was nearly 15 years
old. Therefore, all project proponents were fully aware of
the stringent requirements under the EIA notification.
The 2021 OM seeks to protect the violations of the EIA
notification which have taken place or continue to take
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                    Page 37 of 41
place 15 years after the EIA notification came into force.
Thus, the 2021 OM seeks to protect violators who have
acted with full knowledge of consequences of violating the
EIA notification. Those who violate the law regarding
obtaining prior EC are not only committing gross
illegality, but they are acting against the society at large.
The violation of the condition of obtaining prior EC must
be dealt with heavy hands.                 In environmental matters,
the Courts must take a very strict view of the violations
of the laws relating to the environment. It is the duty of
the Constitutional Courts to do so.
32. Under
Article 21
of the Constitution of India, the
right to live in a pollution free environment is guaranteed.
In fact, the 1986 Act has been enacted to give effect to
this fundamental right. In 1977, fundamental duties of
all citizens were incorporated in the Constitution which
enjoined every citizen of India to protect and improve the
environment as provided in clause (g) of
Article 51A.
Therefore, even the Central Government has a duty to
protect and improve the natural environment.
33. Today, in the year 2025, we have been experiencing
the drastic consequences of large-scale destruction of
environment on human lives in the capital city of our
country and in many other cities. At least for a span of
two months every year, the residents of Delhi suffocate
due to air pollution. The AQI level is either dangerous or
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                           Page 38 of 41
very dangerous. They suffer in their health. The other
leading cities are not far behind. The air and water
pollution in the cities is ever increasing. Therefore,
coming out with measures such as the 2021 OM is
violative of fundamental rights of all persons guaranteed
under
Article 21
to live in a pollution free environment. It
also infringes the right to health guaranteed under
Article 21
of the Constitution.
34. The           2021        OM       talks    about   the   concept   of
development. Can there be development at the cost of
environment?             Conservation          of   environment   and   its
improvement is an essential part of the concept of
development. Therefore, going out of the way by issuing
such OMs to protect those who have caused harm to the
environment has to be deprecated by the Courts which
are under a constitutional and statutory mandate to
uphold the fundamental right under
Article 21
and to
protect the environment. In fact, the Courts should come
down heavily on such attempts. As stated earlier, the
2021 OM deals with project proponents who were fully
aware of the EIA notification and who have taken
conscious risk to flout the EIA notification and go ahead
with        the        construction/continuation/expansion              of
projects. They have shown scant respect to the law and
their duty to protect the environment. Apart from
violation of
Article 21
, such action is completely arbitrary
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                                  Page 39 of 41
which is violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India
besides being violative of the 1986 Act and the EIA
notification.
35. We are, however, conscious of the fact that ex post
facto EC may have been granted in certain cases both
under the 2017 notification and the 2021 OM. ECs
already granted under 2017 notification and the 2021
OM, at this stage, should not be disturbed.
36. Hence, we pass the following order:
a) We hold that the 2017 notification and the 2021
          OM                  as           well   as        all
          circulars/orders/OMs/notifications       issued   for
          giving effect to these notifications are illegal and
          are hereby struck down;
b) We restrain the Central Government from issuing
          circulars/orders/OMs/notifications providing      for
          grant of ex post facto EC in any form or manner or
          for regularising the acts done in contravention of
          the EIA notification;
c)   We clarify that the ECs already granted till date
          under the 2017 notification and the 2021 OM
          shall, however, remain unaffected.
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                      Page 40 of 41
37. The writ petitions and civil appeals are accordingly
allowed on the above terms.
………………………..J.
                                              (Abhay S. Oka)



                                           ………………………..J.
                                              (Ujjal Bhuyan)

New Delhi;
May 16, 2025
Writ Petition (C) No. 1394 of 2023, etc.                   Page 41 of 41