[Cites
12
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Lokayuktha Police vs C B Nagaraj on 19 May, 2025
Author:
Pankaj Mithal
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 736
                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1157 OF 2015



                  STATE OF LOKAYUKTHA POLICE, DAVANAGERE1 ...APPELLANT

                                                     VERSUS

                  C B NAGARAJ                                          ...RESPONDENT



                                             J U D G M E N T
AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH, J.
This appeal assails the Final Judgment and Order of a learned

                    Single Judge of the High Court of Karnataka (hereinafter referred to

                    as the ‘High Court’) dated 09.07.2013 rendered in Criminal Appeal

                    No.12/2012 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Impugned Judgment’)

                    [2013 SCC OnLine Kar 5293], whereby the High Court set aside the

                    Judgment and Order of conviction dated 23.12.2011 passed by the

                    learned Special Judge, Davanagere (hereinafter referred to as the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SAPNA BISHT
Date: 2025.05.20
16:46:51 IST
Reason:
1
Be read as ‘State by Lokayuktha Police’.
1 of 15
‘Trial Court’) in Spl. C. (Lokayuktha) No.8/2007. Vide this Order, the

Trial Court convicted the sole Respondent under Sections 7, 13(1)(d)

read with 13(2) of the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
(hereinafter

referred to as the ‘Act’). The Respondent was sentenced to undergo

simple imprisonment for a period of six months and to pay fine of Rs.

2,000/- (Rupees Two Thousand) for the offence punishable under
Section 7
of the Act, and simple imprisonment for a period of 2 years

and pay a fine of Rs. 3,000/- (Rupees Three Thousand) for the

offence punishable under
Sections 13(1)(d)
read with 13(2) of the Act.



BRIEF FACTS:
2.     The Respondent was working as an Extension Officer, in the

office of the Taluka Panchayath, Davanagere. The Complainant, one

Mr. E R Krishnamurthy (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Complainant’)

was appointed to the post of Primary School Teacher in Yadgir

Academic District, under Category-II A. A letter was sent to the BCM

Office, Davanagere from the DDPI Office, Yadgir for the certified copy

of Validity Certificate of the Complainant’s claim under Category-II A.

This file was put up to the Respondent to enquire and report. The

Complainant alleged that the Respondent on 07.02.2007 at about


                                                                2 of 15
12:30 PM demanded illegal gratification of Rs.1,500/- (Rupees One

Thousand Five Hundred) from him to submit the spot inspection report

prepared by the Respondent.
3.     On this allegation, a complaint was registered against the

Respondent by the Davanagere Lokayuktha Police Station under
Sections 7
,
13(1)(d)
read with 13(2) of the Act.
4.     It is further alleged that on the same day between 5:30 PM and

5:45 PM, the Respondent received said illegal gratification from the

Complainant.
5.     Pursuant thereto, a trap was conducted by the Lokayuktha

Police team on 07.02.2007. Through this trap, phenolphthalein-

smeared currency notes amounting to Rs.1,500/- (Rupees One

Thousand Five Hundred) received by the Respondent, were seized by

the trap team. Thereafter, the Respondent’s fingers were dipped in

sodium carbonate solution which turned pink due to the presence of

phenolphthalein on the fingers of the respondent as they had come in

contact with the currency notes smeared with phenolphthalein.
3 of 15
6.       In this backdrop, the Trial Court framed two questions:
Whether     on   07.02.2007,   the    Respondent    demanded        illegal

gratification of a sum of Rs.1,500/- (Rupees One Thousand Five

Hundred) from the Complainant as motive or reward for performing

the   above-mentioned     official   act/favour?   And,   whether      the

Respondent, on the same date between 5:30 PM and 5:45 PM in his

office, obtained the said sum from the Complainant for showing the

above-mentioned act/favour, and thereby committed misconduct in

the discharge of his duties?
7.       Answering both questions in the affirmative, the Trial Court

convicted the Respondent under the charged provisions of the Act.

The High Court, vide the Impugned Judgment, allowed the

Respondent’s appeal and set aside the order of conviction by the Trial

Court.
8.       Against the Impugned Judgment of the High Court, the State

through the Lokayuktha Police is in appeal before this Court.



APPELLANT’S SUBMISSIONS:
4 of 15
9.     The learned counsel for the Appellant contended that the

presumption under
Section 20
of the Act, comes into play once

demand and acceptance of a sum of money is proved. Learned

counsel submitted that, this presumption, though being rebuttable at

the option of the accused, the Respondent herein did not adduce any

material evidence, and also did not cross-examine the prosecution

witness on this point. Further, it was submitted that the prosecution on

the other hand, had proved beyond all reasonable doubt that the

recovery of the tainted currency notes amounting to Rs.1,500/-

(Rupees One Thousand Five Hundred) from the possession of the

Respondent, was a bribe.
10.    To support this contention, learned counsel placed reliance on

the decision of this Court in
State of Karnataka v Chandrasha
, 2024

SCC OnLine SC 3469 wherein it has been held that ‘…
Section 20
gets attracted when it is proved that the public servant has accepted

or agreed to accept any gratification other than legal remuneration

and
in that case
, presumption is that it is the motive or reward for any

of the acts covered under
Section 7
,
11
, or 13(1)(b) of the Act. …’
The Court also held that
the presumption under
Section 20
of the Act

is similar to the presumption under Section 118 of the Negotiable


                                                                 5 of 15
Instruments Act, 1881
, where the onus is on the accused to prove

that he is not guilty of the offences charged.
11.    Thus, learned counsel for the Appellant submitted that once

the recovery of bribe amount from the Respondent is proved, the

explanation offered by the Respondent – that the money received by

him was repayment of money lent by the Respondent to the

Complainant on an earlier occasion, is clearly not worthy of being

accepted. Therefore, upon the aspects of ‘demand’ and ‘acceptance’

of the bribe amount being established beyond doubt, no two views are

possible in the matter. It was urged that the appeal should be allowed.




RESPONDENT’S SUBMISSIONS:
12.    Per contra, learned counsel for the Respondent based his

submissions on three points. Firstly, learned counsel submitted that

the evidence of the Complainant is not credible and shows mala fide

conduct. Learned counsel submitted that the Complainant with

oblique intentions denied the spot inspection report though he had

signed it. However, when he was confronted with the said spot




                                                                6 of 15
inspection report, he conceded thereto, stating that it was signed by

him and his father.
13.    Secondly, it was urged that the Complainant was aware that

the spot inspection report had already been sent to the concerned

department, and there was no work pending with the Respondent, at

the time of the alleged demand.
14.    Thirdly, learned counsel contended that the Respondent has

been consistently stating, right from the time of seizure, without any

afterthought, that the alleged bribe recovered from the Respondent,

was only repayment of amount that was given to the Complainant at

the time of the spot inspection.
15.    Learned counsel summing up his arguments submitted that the

Respondent is a 67-year-old, award-receiving serviceman with an

impeccable service record, and suffers from permanent visual

disability and old age ailments. It was urged that the appeal be

dismissed in the interest of justice.
ANALYSIS, REASONING, AND CONCLUSION:
7 of 15
16.    We have gone through the pleadings, materials on record and

considered the submissions made on behalf of the parties.
17.    The admitted facts are that the Respondent, at the relevant

point in time, was holding the post of Extension Officer in the Office of

Taluka Panchayath, Davanagere. The Complainant had applied for a

Validity Certificate with regard to claim under Category-II A and for the

grant of the same, the matter had to be placed before Caste Scrutiny

Committee along with a spot inspection report, to be prepared by the

Respondent.
18.    In this connection, the Respondent visited the village of the

Complainant on 05.02.2007 and thereafter the Complainant went to

his office on 07.02.2007 at about 12:30 PM and again visited him at

5:30 PM on the same day.
19.    The entire episode hinges around the aforesaid factual narrow

compass.    As   per   the   Complainant’s/prosecution     version,   the

Respondent, to favour the Complainant demanded Rs.1,500/-

(Rupees One Thousand Five Hundred) as illegal gratification from the


                                                                 8 of 15
Complainant when the Complainant came to his office at 12:30 PM on

07.02.2007. It is further alleged that to satisfy such demand, the

Complainant again went to the office of the Respondent on the same

day at 5:30 PM alongwith an amount of Rs.1,500/- (Rupees One

Thousand Five Hundred), which was allegedly accepted by the

Respondent in the presence of the trap witnesses/panchas.
20.   On behalf of the prosecution, nine witnesses have been

examined, whereas on behalf of the defence, one witness was

produced.
21.   From the evidence recorded of the prosecution witnesses,

PW2 stated that the Respondent asked about the alleged bribe, when

the Complainant asked about the report. However, in his cross-

examination, initially PW2 stated that he had not heard the

conversation between the Respondent and the Complainant which

occurred inside the chamber of the Respondent, as he was standing

near the entrance door. However, PW2 later stated that when the

Respondent and the Complainant came down, he followed them, and

the Respondent demanded the bribe amount from the Complainant,

and thereafter, when they walked down the stairs, he had seen the


                                                            9 of 15
Complainant give the bribe amount to the Respondent from a distance

of 2 to 3 feet. Yet, PW2 further stated that he did not know whether

the Respondent had asked the Complainant for the amount he had

given to him. Except for this reference, coming in the deposition of

PW2 apart from that of the Complainant himself i.e., PW1, no other

witness has testified to being privy of such demand. Even in the initial

complaint of the Complainant, he has stated that he had gone to

enquire about the certified copy of the Validity Certificate from the

Respondent, whom he met on 07.02.2007 in the afternoon at about

12:30 PM, who is alleged to have told him that though the spot

inspection report, that had to be sent to the BCM Office, Davanagere

was ready, he would only forward it on payment of Rs.1,500/-

(Rupees One Thousand Five Hundred). The Complainant, taking the

plea that he did not have the money with him, told the Respondent

that he would return in the evening with the money. Thereafter, the

Complainant moved the Lokayukhta’s Office and the trap came to be

organized.
22.    From the aforesaid, as per the version of the Complainant, the

demand was made for the first time on 07.02.2007 at about 12:30 PM

by the Respondent and later on as per the deposition of the


                                                               10 of 15
witnesses, the Respondent is said to have informed the Complainant

that he had already forwarded the file and after that also asked for the

money, which was paid and recovered from the Respondent.
23.     In such background, it is clear that, basically, it is only the

version of the Complainant himself which can be said to have some

basis with regard to the demand of the amount of Rs. 1,500/- (Rupees

One Thousand Five Hundred) as bribe, allegedly made by the

Respondent. The reference in PW2’s deposition being not very

coherent and slightly self-contradictory, the benefit thereof has to flow

to the Respondent, in the absence of PW2’s testimony being clear on

this point.
24.     Coming to the deposition of the Complainant himself read with

his complaint – for it to be taken as fully reliable and made the sole

basis to convict the Respondent, the same would require greater

scrutiny apropos its veracity and reliability. A glaring pointer in this

regard is the fact that the Complainant categorically stated in his

deposition that he was not aware of any spot inspection report by the

accused on 05.02.2007, however the moment he was confronted with

the document viz. Exhibit D8, he, without demur, accepted the same.
11 of 15
Not stopping at acceptance, the Complainant also admitted to have

signed on the document and identified both his and his father’s

signature as also of the witness.
25.    It is pertinent to note that till 05.02.2007, when the Respondent

had conducted the physical/spot inspection, there is not even a

whisper of there being any demand of bribe. Moreover, when the

Complainant went back to the Respondent’s office at 5:30 PM with the

money, the prosecution case itself as per the deposition of its

witnesses makes it clear that the Respondent had informed the

Complainant that he had already forwarded the concerned file. Thus,

if the same is accepted, there was no occasion for the Complainant to

go ahead with paying the amount, which he claims to be in the nature

of bribe demanded by the Respondent, after the work for which the

bribe was purportedly sought, had already been done. The

observation of the High Court to this extent is correct that just

because money changed hands, in cases like the present, it cannot

be ipso facto presumed that the same was pursuant to a demand, for

the law requires that for conviction under the Act, an entire chain –

beginning from demand, acceptance, and recovery has to be

completed. In the case at hand, when the initial demand itself is


                                                               12 of 15
suspicious, even if the two other components – of payment and

recovery can be held to have been proved, the chain would not be

complete. A penal law has to be strictly construed [
Md. Rahim Ali v

State of Assam
, 2024 SCC OnLine SC 1695 @ Paragraph 45 and

Jay Kishan v State of U.P., 2025 SCC OnLine SC 296 @ Paragraph

24]. While we will advert to the presumption under
Section 20
of the

Act hereinafter, there is no cavil that while a reverse onus under

specific statute can be placed on an accused, even then, there cannot

be a presumption which casts an uncalled for onus on the accused.
Chandrasha
(supra) would not apply as demand has not been

proven.
In
Paritala Sudhakar v State of Telangana
, 2025 SCC

OnLine SC 1072, it was stated thus:
‘21. As far as the submission of the State is that the
    presumption under
Section 20
of the Act, as it then was,
    would operate against the Appellant is concerned, our
    analysis supra would indicate that the factum of demand , in
    the backdrop of an element of animus between the
    Appellant and complainant, is not proved.
In such
    circumstances, the presumption under
Section 20
of the Act
    would not militate against the Appellant, in terms of the
    pronouncement in
Om Parkash v. State of Haryana
, (2006)
    2 SCC 250:
‘22. In view of the aforementioned discrepancies in
         the prosecution case, we are of the opinion that the
         defence story set up by the appellant cannot be said
         to be wholly improbable. Furthermore, it is not a
         case where the burden of proof was on the accused
         in terms of
Section 20
of the Act. Even otherwise,
         where demand has not been proved,
Section 20
will also have no application. (Union of
13 of 15
India v. Purnandu Biswas
[(2005) 12 SCC 576:
(
2005) 8 Scale 246] and T. Subramanian v. State of
         T.N.
[(2006) 1 SCC 401: (2006) 1 Scale 116])’
                                             (emphasis supplied)’
                      (emphasis in bold is original, underlining is ours)
26.    Moreover, the testimony of the Complainant, as discussed

supra, does not inspire confidence, inasmuch as, for reasons best

known to him alone, he completely denied the visit of the Respondent

for spot inspection, that too, just two days prior to the date of the trap

and immediately changed such stance by accepting such visit and

admitting the spot report as also identifying his own, his father’s and

the witness’s signatures. In the considered opinion of this Court, such

conduct is sufficient to render his testimony unreliable.
27.    Though it can be commented that the High Court was required

to give detailed factual reasoning, which has not been done, as to why

it was overturning an order of conviction by that of acquittal, yet since

the factum of demand itself has not been proved beyond reasonable

doubt, the acquittal of the Respondent by the Impugned Judgment

cannot be termed perverse or unwarranted, in the factual matrix of the

present lis. In Yadwinder Singh v Lakhi, 2025 SCC OnLine SC 686,

this Court opined that ‘The Trial Court could have better worded its
14 of 15
order through clearer reasoning.’ However, upon examination of all

relevant factors, the Court chose to restore the order of the Trial Court

therein and set aside the order impugned therein, upon examining all

factors of the matter itself. In the instant case, needless to add, we

have applied our mind independently to all material aspects and find

ourselves ad idem with the conclusion of the High Court.
28.    Thus, on an overall conspectus of the facts and circumstances

of the case and the discussions made hereinabove, we do not find

any ground made out by the Appellant requiring interference by this

Court. The Impugned Judgment is, hence, upheld.
29.    Accordingly, the appeal stands dismissed.
30.    No order as to costs.
..………………..................…..J.
                                               [PANKAJ MITHAL]




                                       .………………....................…..J.
                                        [AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]
NEW DELHI
MAY 19, 2025


                                                                15 of 15