[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
In Re : T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad vs Union Of India on 15 May, 2025
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
B.R. Gavai
2025 INSC 701                                                          REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                            IN RE: CONSTRUCTION OF MULTI STOREYED BUILDINGS
                                      IN FOREST LAND MAHARASHTRA

                                             I.A.NO. 2079 OF 2007
                                 [Application for Impleadment and Directions]
                                                     WITH
                                         I.A. NOS.2301-2302 OF 2008
                                 [Applications for Impleadment and Directions
                                           in I.A. No. 2079 OF 2007]
                                                     WITH
                                         I.A. NOS.3044-3045 OF 2011
                                 [Application for Impleadment and Directions
                                           in I.A. No. 2079 OF 2007]
                                                     WITH
                                            I.A. NO.254946 OF 2023
                              [Application for Directions in I.A. Nos. 2301-2302 of
                                         2008 in I.A. No. 2079 OF 2007]
                                                     WITH
                                              I.A. NO.39711 OF 2024
                            [Application for permission to file Additional Documents
                                            in I.A. No.254946 of 2023]
                                                       IN
                                     WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 202 OF 1995

                            IN RE: T.N. GODAVARMAN
                            THIRUMALPAD                               ….PETITIONER

                                                    VERSUS
   Signature Not Verified

   Digitally signed by
                            UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                  ….RESPONDENTS
   DEEPAK SINGH
   Date: 2025.05.15
   16:12:03 IST
   Reason:




                                                     WITH

                                                        1
                      WRIT PETITION (C) NO.301 OF 2008
                                               WITH
 I.A. No. 9108 OF 2024 in WRIT PETITION (C) NO.301 OF
                          2008

I.        INTRODUCTION ....................................................................... 3
II.          FACTUAL POSITION ............................................................. 3
     a.      Background .......................................................................... 3
     b.      Actions of the State Government ......................................... 6
     c.      Acquisition and Construction by RRCHS .............................. 9
     d.      Proceedings before this Court............................................. 10
III.         SUBMISSIONS .................................................................... 15
IV.          ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION ............................................ 19
V.           DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS ............................................... 20
     a.      As to whether the subject land is a Forest Land.................. 20
     b. As to whether the Divisional Commissioner was justified in
     recommending the allotment of subject land in favour of the
     ‘Chavan Family’ and as to whether the State Government was
     justified in accepting the said recommendation. ...................... 25
     c. As to whether the doctrine of desuetude would be applicable
     to the facts of the present case. ............................................... 38
     d. As to whether the RRCHS could be said to be a bona fide
     purchaser of the subject land. .................................................. 42
     e. As to whether the RRCHS would be entitled to allotment of
     alternate piece of land in view of the order passed by this Court in
     In Re: “Construction of Multi Storeyed Buildings in Forest Land
     Maharashtra”. .......................................................................... 52
     f. As to whether the doctrine of public trust would be applicable
     in the facts and circumstances of the present case. .................. 57
VI.          CONCLUSION ..................................................................... 85




                                                   2
                        JUDGMENT


B.R. GAVAI, CJI

I.      INTRODUCTION

1.      The present matter is a classic example as to how the

nexus between the Politicians, Bureaucrats and the Builders

can result in the conversion of precious Forest Land for

commercial purposes under the garb of resettlement of people

belonging to the backward class from whose ancestors,

agricultural land was acquired for public purpose.

II.     FACTUAL POSITION

2.      The facts in brief, shorn of unnecessary details, giving

rise to present proceedings are as under:

      a. Background

2.1 An area admeasuring 32 Acres 35 Gunthas at Survey No.

20 of Village Kondhwa Budruk in Pune District was notified as

a Reserved Forest under the provisions of Section 34 of the

Indian Forest Act, 1878 (hereinafter referred to as “the 1878

Act”) vide Notification dated 1st March 1879.




                                 3
2.2 A portion of the land admeasuring 3 Acres 20 Gunthas

was de-reserved by the State Government vide Notification

dated 5th January 1934.

2.3 It is pertinent to note that no further orders for de-

reservation were passed post 1934. As a result of which the

remaining area of 29 Acres and 15 Gunthas, which was

numbered as Survey No.20-A and subsequently renumbered

as Survey No.21 of Village Kondhwa Budruk remained to be a

Forest Land (hereinafter referred to as “the subject land”).

2.4 During the 1960s, a different parcel of land in Survey

No.37 of Kondhwa Budruk belonging to one ‘Chavan Family’

was acquired by the State Government for the purposes of

construction of “Dr. Bandorwala Leprosy Hospital”.

2.5 It appears from the record that no compensation was

paid to the ‘Chavan Family’. As such, a request was made by

them for allotment of the subject land as an alternative for

their resettlement.

2.6 It further appears from the record that in response to the

request made by the ‘Chavan Family’, the Tehsildar, Haveli

vide his communication dated 13th May 1968, released the

subject land to the ‘Chavan Family’ for cultivation for a period
                               4
of one year. The subject land was allotted on “Eksali” (yearly)

basis for the year 1968-69.

2.7 The said allotment was accepted by the ‘Chavan Family’.

The members of the ‘Chavan Family’ had also given an

undertaking to the Mamlatdar, Taluka-Haveli, District Pune.

The relevant part of the said undertaking reads thus:

     “I accept and agree that the said assessment is
     allotted to me under the provision of Bombay Land
     Revenue Code 1879 and rules thereunder and shall
     be subjected to following terms and conditions.
     1.   That, no part of the said land shall be leased
     out, mortgaged, sold, excavated or no lien shall be
     created by me (the term includes self, heirs,
     executers, assignees, administrators) without prior
     written approval of the Collector.
     2.   That, I will handover the possession of the land
     to any person nominated by the Collector without
     any hassle on or before 15/12/1967.
     3.  That, I will not use the said assessment for any
     purpose other than cultivation.
     4.   That, I do not have any right of the trees
     standing on the land and I will behave as per the
     rules annexed herewith.”

2.8 It is pertinent to note that a perusal of the record would

reveal that the said Eksali (yearly) lease was never renewed

thereafter.

2.9 It further appears from the record that on 22 nd March

1969, the State Government took a decision that the Forest

                               5
Land given on lease for cultivation on Eksali basis should be

permanently released for cultivation to the Eksali leaseholders

after de-reservation.

2.10 It appears that in pursuance of this resolution, the

‘Chavan Family’ made an application for permanent release of

the subject land in the year 1988.

2.11 It is relevant to note that in the meanwhile, the
Forest

(Conservation) Act, 1980
(hereinafter referred to as, “the 1980
FC Act
”) came into force with effect from 25th October 1980.

Under the provisions of
Section 2
of the 1980
FC Act
, no Forest

Land could be de-reserved or used for any non-forest purposes

without the permission of the Central Government.

  b. Actions of the State Government

2.12 A perusal of the record would reveal that there was a lot

of inter-departmental correspondence between the different

authorities. It appears that the District Collector vide his letter

dated 19th June 1991 found that the members of the ‘Chavan

Family’ were cultivating only 3 Acres and 20 Gunthas and,

therefore, recommended that the said area which was under

actual cultivation be allotted to them in view of the

Government Resolution dated 22nd March 1969.           He further
                                 6
recommended that the possession of the remaining land be

handed over to the Forest Department.

2.13 However, surprisingly, the Divisional Commissioner vide

his recommendation to the State Government dated 30th

November 1994, though, specifically recorded that as per the

Collector’s report, the members of the ‘Chavan Family’ were in

cultivation only in 3 Acres and 20 Gunthas, recommended

allotment of the entire subject land to the ‘Chavan Family’. It

is further surprising to note that the Divisional Commissioner

also observed that there is no necessity to obtain the prior

approval of the Central Government for allotment of the said

land.     It is also surprising to note that the Divisional

Commissioner also noted that the subject land was a Reserved

Forest.

2.14 It appears that thereafter the file was pending before the

State Government.     At that stage, the then Minister for

Revenue opined that the said land was granted by the

Government for Agricultural purpose and that the applicants

(the ‘Chavan Family’) were using the said land continuously

for such purpose and, therefore, the provisions of the 1980
FC

Act
were not applicable in the said case. He therefore sought

                               7
legal advice on the point from the Law and Judiciary

Department of the Government of Maharashtra. This could be

gathered from the reply given by the Deputy Secretary to the

Government, Revenue and Forest Department dated 8th April

2008 to the Central Empowered Committee (“CEC” for short)

in response to certain queries.

2.15 It would further appear that thereafter on 27th July 1998,

the Deputy Secretary to Government, Law and Judiciary

Department, gave his opinion that there is no necessity for

obtaining prior sanction of the Government of India if the

Forest Land is already broken up and acquired before coming

into force of the 1980
FC Act
. Accordingly, the Minister for

Revenue, the Government of Maharashtra sanctioned the

allotment of the subject land and an order came to be issued

by the Government of Maharashtra vide Memorandum dated

4th August 1998 to that effect.

2.16 In pursuance to the order passed by the State

Government, the Collector issued an order of allotment of land

on 28th August 1998.      The said allotment, however, was

subject to certain conditions. It will be relevant to refer to



                                  8
Condition Nos. 2, 4, 5 and 7 of the said allotment order dated

28th August 1998, which read thus:

     “2)   The allottee shall not be entitled to mortgage,
           donate, sell, partition or exchange in any other
           manner without the prior permission of the
           District Collector, Pune. Similarly, shall not sell
           or transfer the said land or any part thereof.
                           xxx xxx xxx
     4)    The allotee shall not lease the aforesaid land
           granted to him to any other person.
     5)    It is necessary for the allottee to bring the said
           land under cultivation within a period of two
           years from the date of this order.
                           xxx xxx xxx
     7)    The said land shall be used for agricultural
           purposes. Except agriculture, it shall not be
           used for any other purpose.”



  c. Acquisition and Construction by RRCHS

2.17 It would further appear from the record that immediately

after the land was allotted, the Divisional Commissioner vide

order dated 30th October 1999 granted permission to the

‘Chavan Family’ to sell the land in question to one Mr.

Aniruddha P. Deshpande, the Chief Promotor of Richie Rich

Cooperative Housing Society Limited (“RRCHS” for short) for

residential purposes.




                                9
2.18 However, a perusal of the material on record would reveal

that much prior to the said permission or even much prior to

the actual allotment of the subject land to the ‘Chavan Family’,

the transactions were entered into by the members of the

‘Chavan Family’ with Mr. Aniruddha P. Deshpande, Chief

Promoter, RRCHS. We will be referring to those documents

when we discuss the rival submissions.

2.19 The District Collector, Pune thereafter vide order dated

8th July 2005 granted permission for use of the subject land

for Non-Agricultural purposes i.e. for construction of the

residential buildings.

2.20 On 27th February 2006, the Pune Municipal Corporation

issued a Commencement Certificate and sanctioned the

Building Plan.

2.21 Thereafter, on 3rd July 2007, the Ministry of Environment

and Forest (MoEF) granted environmental clearance for

construction of “Raheja Richmond Park”, a Residential,

Shopping and IT Complex.

  d. Proceedings before this Court

2.22 After noticing the aforesaid aspects, one Nagrik Chetna

Manch filed I.A. No. 2079-2080 of 2007 in Writ Petition (Civil)
                               10
No. 202 of 1995 before this Court challenging the allotment of

Reserved Forest Land to private persons and its use for

construction of multi-storeyed buildings in violation of the

1980
FC Act
.

2.23 In the said proceedings, this Court vide order dated 23rd

November 2007, directed the CEC to enquire into the matter

and submit its report.

2.24 In pursuance to the orders passed by this Court, the CEC

started conducting enquiries into the matter and held various

meetings.   When the CEC started conducting enquiries,

various queries were made to the State Government.        The

Revenue and Forest Department of the State of Maharashtra

issued a notice dated 2nd July 2008 to the RRCHS and one of

the members of the ‘Chavan Family’ thereby informing them

about the Government’s decision to review the Government

Order dated 4th August 1998 vide which the land was allotted

to the ‘Chavan Family’.

2.25 It would further appear that the Forest Department

issued a notice to the RRCHS dated 4th July 2008, notifying

the RRCHS that the possession of the subject land was

required to be taken back. Aggrieved thereby, the RRCHS filed
                              11
I.A. No.2301-2302 of 2008 in I.A. No.2079 of 2007 praying for

impleadment as well as challenging the aforementioned

notices dated 2nd July 2008 and 4th July 2008.

2.26 The said RRCHS also filed a writ petition being Writ

Petition (Civil) No.301 of 2008, praying for the following reliefs:

     “(a) Issue a writ of certiorari or any other
          appropriate writ order or direction under
Article
          32
of the Constitution of India for quashing the
          notice dated 2.7.2008 bearing no. Land-
          3408/1025/PKP 935/Part 2/J-5, issued by the
          State Government; and/or
     (b)   Issue a writ of certiorari or any other
           appropriate writ order or direction under
Article
           32
of the Constitution of India for quashing the
           notice dated 4.7.2008 bearing no. 57 of 2008-
           09, issued by the Forest Department,
           Government of Maharashtra; and/or
     (c)   Pass such other of further orders as this
           Hon’ble Court may deem fit and proper in the
           facts and circumstances of the case.”


2.27 After an elaborate enquiry, the CEC submitted its report

dated 27th November 2008 and recommended thus:

     i)    the allotment of 11.89 ha of Reserve Forest land
           in Survey No.21 (old Survey No.20A) Kondhwa
           Bk in District Pune for agriculture purposes
           and subsequent permission given for its sale in
           favour of M/s Richie Rich Co-operative Housing
           Society Ltd. and construction of buildings
           should be cancelled.
     ii)   the area should be restored back as forest;


                                12
iii)   the senior functionaries and officers of the
       Government of Maharashtra responsible for the
       allotment/use of the said Reserve Forest land in
       violation of the provision of the
FC Act
and this
       Hon’ble Court’s order dated 12.12.1996 should
       be prosecuted for criminal breach of trust and
       other provisions of the
Indian Penal Code
. It is
       imperative that amongst others the then
       Revenue Minister, Maharashtra, who approved
       the land allotment along with the then
       Divisional Commissioner, Pune who granted the
       permission for the sale of the land in favour of
       private person for the construction of buildings,
       Mr. Ashok Khadse, the then Deputy
       Conservator of Forests, Pune who has issued
       “No Objection Certificate” not only in this case
       but in many other cases facilitating illegal use
       of the forest land for private gains and Mr.
       Aniruddha P. Deshpande, Developer, who
       entered into various Development Agreements
       for purchase and use of the Reserve Forest for
       construction of buildings are prosecuted.
iv)    Mr. Khadse who is presently under suspension
       should not be reinstated without obtaining
       permission of this Hon’ble Court;
v)     the Chairman, Central Empowered Committee
       may be authorized to constitute a multi
       disciplinary “Special Investigation Team” to
       examine the details of all the Reserve Forest
       under the administrative control of the Revenue
       Department in Pune and which have been
       allotted/allowed to be used in the past without
       obtaining approval under the
FC Act
. All such
       allotment/uses should be treated as null and
       void and the Government of Maharashtra
       should be directed to cancel all such orders.
       State functionaries/officers who are found to be
       responsible for allotment/use of the forest land
       in all such cases, should be prosecuted for
       criminal breach of trust; and


                           13
     vi)   the    Chief      Secretary,    Government    of
           Maharashtra should be directed to ensure
           immediate compliance of this Hon’ble Court’s
           order dated 22.9.2006 in IA No.1483 regarding
           transfer of forest land in charge of the Revenue
           Department to the Forest Department. Till the
           entire exercise is completed, he should be
           directed to file fortnightly Action Taken Report
           before the Hon’ble Court as well as the CEC.”


2.28 Subsequent reports have been filed by the CEC on 1st

November 2010 and 14th August 2013.

2.29 I.A. Nos. 3044-45 of 2011 are filed by one Greenfield

Cooperative Housing Society (“GCHS” for short) praying for

impleadment in the matter and for quashing of the order dated

29th September 2008 by which the Divisional Commissioner,

Pune had cancelled the permission to sell by virtue of which

the GCHS had purchased the land from the original

leaseholder.

2.30 I.A. No.254946 of 2023 for directions has been filed by

RRCHS contending that the Gazette Notification dated 9th

March 1944 did not show the subject land as the Forest Land

and, therefore, prayed for disposal of the present proceedings

in view of the said Gazette Notification.




                               14
2.31 I.A. No.39711 of 2024 has been filed by the State to place

on record the original Gazette Notification dated 9th March

1944.      It was contended by the State that the Gazette

Notification dated 9th March 1944 placed by RRCHS was a

fabricated document.

2.32 This Court, therefore, vide order dated 9th May 2024,

directed enquiry to be conducted by the Additional Director

General of State CID, Pune. The Additional Director General

of State CID, Pune conducted an enquiry and submitted his

report on 16th August 2024 pointing out therein that the

Gazette Notification dated 9th March 1944 placed by the

RRCHS was a forged one and not genuine one.

2.33 That is how the present proceedings have reached this

stage.

III.   SUBMISSIONS

3.     We have heard Shri K. Parameshwar, learned Senior

Counsel (Amicus Curiae) ably assisted by Mr. M.V. Mukunda,

Ms. Kanti, Ms. Raji Gururaj and Mr. Shreenivas Patil, learned

counsel.    We have also heard Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi,

learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the RRCHS and

Shri Shekhar Naphade, learned Senior Counsel appearing on
                              15
behalf of the GCHS and Shri Aniruddha Joshi, learned Senior

Counsel appearing on behalf of the State.

4.   Shri K. Parameshwar submitted that the allotment of the

Forest Land to the ‘Chavan Family’ was in flagrant breach of

the orders of this Court and the provisions of the 1980
FC Act
.

He submits that though the record would clearly reveal that

the subject land was recorded as a Forest Land, the land was

allotted to the ‘Chavan Family’ in flagrant violation of the law.

He submits that the record would reveal that the ‘Chavan

Family’ was only a front, while, in fact, the allotment was made

by the State Government in favour of a Builder. He submits

that the record would reveal that much prior to 1998 when the

land was actually allotted in favour of the ‘Chavan Family’, the

‘Chavan Family’ had already entered into a deal with Mr.

Aniruddha P. Deshpande, the Chief Promoter of RRCHS.

5.   The learned Amicus submits that in the present case it

would clearly reveal that the then Revenue Minister and the

then Divisional Commissioner of Pune had acted in total

breach of the doctrine of public trust and misused their power

to aid the illegal activities of the Builder. The learned Amicus

further submits that, considering for a moment that the

                               16
allotment of the subject land in favour of the ‘Chavan Family’

was legal, it is clear that the subsequent allocation thereof in

favour of RRCHS was totally in contravention of the conditions

on which the land was allotted to the ‘Chavan Family’. He

further submits that the record would reveal that the subject

land was in fact used for the purposes of plantation.

6.   The learned Amicus, therefore, would submit that this

Court should accept the report of the CEC and set aside the

allotment in favour of the ‘Chavan Family’.

7.   Shri Abhishek Manu Singhvi, learned Senior Counsel

submitted that the subject land was not used as a Forest Land

for a long period. It is submitted that the land in question was

allotted to the ‘Chavan Family’ in lieu of compensation for

acquisition of their land. It is submitted that the subject land

lost its character as a Forest Land on account of non-use of it

for a long time for the said purpose. It is therefore submitted

that in view of the doctrine of desuetude, the subject land no

longer remained a Forest Land and, therefore, the allotment of

the subject land in favour of the ‘Chavan Family’ was totally

valid in law. In this respect, he relied on the judgment of this



                               17
Court in the case of Municipal Corporation for City of Pune

and another v. Bharat Forge Co. Ltd. and others1

8.    The learned Senior Counsel further contended that the

RRCHS is the bona fide purchaser of the subject land from the

‘Chavan Family’.        It is submitted that the records viz., the

revenue records as well as the Final Regional Plan of Pune

Region would show that the land in question was shown in a

Public/Semi Public Zone which could be used for residential

purposes. It is submitted that the Final Regional Plan of Pune

Region was published in accordance with the provisions of the
Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966
, which is

a complete code in itself. It is submitted that since the subject

land was not shown in a green zone, the RRCHS was the bona

fide purchaser and, therefore, it cannot be penalized for

purchasing the said land.

9.    An alternative submission made by the learned Senior

Counsel is that, as held by this Court in In Re: “Construction

of    Multi       Storeyed        Buildings        in       Forest   Land

Maharashtra2”, the RRCHS should be allotted an alternate



1 (1995) 3 SCC 434 : 1995 INSC 181
2 I.A. No.2771-2772 of 2009 etc. dated 9th September 2024


                                      18
piece of land inasmuch as the land allotted to the ‘Chavan

Family’ was in lieu of their land acquired by the Government.

10. Shri K. Parameshwar, learned Amicus, in rejoinder,

submitted that the doctrine of desuetude would not be

applicable to the facts of the present case. He relied on the

following judgments of this Court in this regard:

      (i)     State of Maharashtra v. Narayan Shamrao
              Puranik and Others3;

      (ii)    Cantonment Board, MHOW and Another v. M.P.
              State Road Transport Corpn.4; and

      (iii)   Monnet Ispat and Energy Limited v. Union of
              India and Others5

IV.   ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION

11. In the background of these submissions, the following

points arise for consideration:

      a.      As to whether the subject land is a Forest Land;

      b.      As to whether the Divisional Commissioner was

              justified in recommending the allotment of subject

              land in favour of the ‘Chavan Family’ and as to




3 (1982) 3 SCC 519 : 1982 INSC 78
4 (1997) 9 SCC 450 : 1997 INSC 401
5 (2012) 11 SCC 1 : 2012 INSC 305


                                     19
             whether the State Government was justified in

             accepting the said recommendation;

       c.    As to whether the doctrine of desuetude would be

             applicable to the facts of the present case;

       d.    As to whether the RRCHS could be said to be bona

             fide purchaser of the subject land;

       e.    As to whether the RRCHS would be entitled to

             allotment of alternate piece of land in view of the

             order passed by this Court in In Re: “Construction

             of Multi Storeyed Buildings in Forest Land

             Maharashtra”6;

       f.    As to whether the doctrine of public trust would be

             applicable in the facts and circumstances of the

             present case.

V.     DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS

     a. As to whether the subject land is a Forest Land.

12. A perusal of the Gazette Notification dated 1st March

1879 would reveal that it declares the lands described in the

Schedule annexed thereto to be Reserved Forest in the Poona


6 I.A. No.2771-2772   of 2009 in WP(C) No.202 of 1995 etc. dated 9th September
2024
                                       20
Collectorate. The said Notification has been issued in exercise

of the powers conferred by Section 34 of the 1878 Act.       A

perusal of the Schedule thereto would reveal that the land in

Village Kondhwa Budruk having survey No. 20, admeasuring

an area of 32 Acres and 35 Gunthas (13.27 ha) has been

included in the said Schedule.      Subsequently, by way of

Notification issued on 5th January 1934, it was declared that

out of the said area in Survey No.20, an area admeasuring 3

Acres and 20 Gunthas would cease to be a Reserved Forest.

As such, after deforestation of 3 Acres and 20 Gunthas, the

balance area of 29 Acres and 15 Gunthas (11.89 ha) continued

to be notified as a Reserved Forest. The said area of 29 Acres

and 15 Gunthas was numbered as Survey No.20-A, which was

subsequently renumbered as Survey No.21 Kondhwa Budruk.

13. A perusal of the records of the Forest Department would

reveal that the said area continued to be shown as notified

‘Reserved Forest’.

14. However, in the records maintained by the Revenue

Department, the said area of Survey No.21 Kondhwa Budruk

has been recorded as “Government Grazing Ground”.



                              21
15. It will be relevant to note that in order to clear this

anomaly, the officers of the Forest Department have addressed

number of letters to the Collector, Pune for rectification of the

revenue records, which are as under:

      (i)     Letter    dated    18.3.1991   from     Deputy
              Conservator of     Forests, Pune to     District
              Collector, Pune.
      (ii)    Letter dated 5.1.1994 from the Deputy
              Conservator of Forests to the Tahsildar, Haveli.
      (iii)   Letter dated 9.7.1998 from the Range Forest
              Office to the Tahsildar, Haveli
      (iv)    Letter dated 29.7.1998 from the Deputy
              Conservator of Forests to the Collector, Pune
      (v)     Letter dated 10.9.1998 from the Range Forest
              Officer to the Tahsildar, Haveli
      (vi)    Letter dated September, 1998 from the Deputy
              Conservator of Forests to the Collector, Pune.
      (vii) Letter dated 11.9.1998 from the Deputy
            Conservator of Forests to the Collector, Pune.
      (viii) Letter dated 17.12.1998 from the Deputy
             Conservator of Forests to the Collector, Pune


16.   Not only this, but the perusal of the communication

dated 26th August 1994, addressed by the District Collector,

Pune to the Executive Engineer (Estd.), Maharashtra State

Electricity Board (“MSEB” for short) would reveal that it is

reserved as a “Forest Land”. It is to be noted that the MSEB

had sought allotment of this land for construction of High-


                                 22
Tension Sub-Station.     While refusing the said request, the

Collector, Pune informed the MSEB vide letter dated 26th

August 1994 as under:

     “In reference to your above letter please note that the
     land referred by you is reserved as “Forest Land” as
     per the Indian Forest Rules, 1897 vide circular No.
     24F dt. 1st March, 1879 and amended in 1890.
     Hence same cannot be allotted to you.              The
     application is therefore filed.”

17. It is further relevant to note that the Collector, Pune while

forwarding the request of the ‘Chavan Family’ to the State

Government vide communication dated 19th June 1991,

referred to the said land as “Government Forest Land”.

However, noting that the ‘Chavan Family’ was in cultivation of

the land admeasuring 3 Acres and 20 Gunthas, he

recommended allotment of the said land to the ‘Chavan

Family’.   He also recommended that the possession of the

remaining land be handed over to the Forest Department. In

the said letter, the Collector noted thus:

     “S.No.20 is reserved for afforestation. As per the
     Govt. notification No. AS/36/13//14032 dt
     5.01.1934 (Pg 175) the rights for cultivation of the
     area admeasuring 3 Acres 20 Gunthas out of
     S.No.20A have been allotted to Shri Chauhan family
     for which the Forest Dept has given their consent.
     The Forest Department has requested for the
     possession of the remaining land i.e. 29 Acres 15
     Gunthas since reserved for Forest only.”
                               23
18. It could thus be seen that the though the Collector

recorded that Survey No. 20 was reserved for afforestation, he

recommended the allotment of the land admeasuring 3 Acres

20 Gunthas to ‘Chavan Family’. While doing so, he recorded

“No Objection” of the Forest Department. We will be referring

to the said aspect subsequently inasmuch as the said “No

Objection   given   by   one   of   the   Forest   Officers,   was

subsequently cancelled by the Forest Authorities.

19. Surprisingly, the Divisional Commissioner vide his

communication dated 30th November 1994, addressed to the

Secretary, Revenue and Forest Department, noticing the stand

taken by the Collector, Pune, recommended the entire land be

allotted to the ‘Chavan Family’. It is further to be noted that

in the said communication, the Divisional Commissioner also

specifically recorded that the ‘Chavan Family’ was in illegal

possession of the land after 1969.

20. After the 1980
FC Act
came into effect, no Forest Land

could have been de-reserved without the permission of the

Central Government. It is to be noted that though the reliance

is placed by the RRCHS on the Gazette Notification dated 9th

March 1944 to contend that the said subject land was de-

                               24
reserved, on an enquiry conducted by the Additional

Superintendent of Police State CID under the orders of this

Court, the said Gazette Notification is found to be fabricated.

21. It would thus be amply clear from the record that the said

land was notified as early as in 1879 as Reserved Forest and

which reservation continues to be so till date.

  b. As to whether the Divisional Commissioner was
     justified in recommending the allotment of subject
     land in favour of the ‘Chavan Family’ and as to
     whether the State Government was justified in
     accepting the said recommendation.

22. Having held that the subject land is a reserved Forest

Land, the next question that would be required to be

considered is as to whether the said land could have been

allotted to the ‘Chavan Family’.

23. It will be relevant to refer to
Section 2
of the 1980
FC Act
(as it originally exists, without amendment), which reads thus:

     “2. Restriction on the de-reservation of forests or
     use of forest land for non-forest purpose.—
     Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
     for the time being in force in a State, no State
     Government or other authority shall make, except
     with the prior approval of the Central Government,
     any order directing—
     (i)   that any reserved forest (within the
           meaning of the expression “reserved
           forest” in any law for the time being in

                               25
            force in that State) or any portion thereof,
            shall cease to be reserved;
    (ii)    that any forest land or any portion thereof
            may be used for any non-forest purpose;
    (iii)   that any forest land or any portion thereof
            may be assigned by way of lease or
            otherwise to any private person or to any
            authority, corporation, agency or any
            other organization not owned, managed or
            controlled by Government.
    (iv)    that any forest land or any portion thereof
            may be cleared of trees which have grown
            naturally in that land or portion, for the
            purpose of using it for reafforestation].
            Explanation.—For the purposes of this
            section “non-forest purpose” means the
            breaking up or clearing of any forest land
            or portion thereof for—
    (a)     the cultivation of tea, coffee, spices,
            rubber,    palms,    oil-bearing   plants,
            horticulture crops or medicinal plants;
    (b)     any purpose other than reafforestation,
            but does not include any work relating to
            or ancillary to conservation, development
            and management of forests and wildlife,
            namely, the establishment of check-posts,
            fire lines, wireless communications and
            Construction of fencing, bridges and
            culverts, dams, waterholes, trench marks,
            boundary marks, pipelines or other like
            purposes.”


24. It would thus be clear that after the 1980
FC Act
was

brought into effect, no State Government or any other

authority, unless there is prior approval by the Central


                                26
Government, could have directed any Reserved Forest or any

portion thereof to cease to be under the status of “reserved” or

any forest land or any portion thereof to be used for any non-

forest purposes. Nor could it have assigned any forest land or

any portion thereof, by way of lease or otherwise to any private

person or to any authority, corporation, agency or any other

organization.

25. Reliance is placed by the RRCHS on the judgment of this

Court in the case of State of Bihar v. Banshi Ram Modi and

Others7. The legal opinion given by the Deputy Secretary, Law

and Judiciary Department, Government of Maharashtra also

relies on the said judgment.

26. No doubt that in the case of Banshi Ram Modi (supra),

this Court held that if an area had already been dug up and

mining operations were carried on prior to coming into force of

the 1980
FC Act
, the State Government, for continuing the

said lease for the purposes of mining, shall not need prior

approval of the Central Government. It has been held that

though it would be necessary to seek prior approval of the

Central Government for starting mining operations on a virgin


7 (1985) 3 SCC 643 : 1985 INSC 126


                                     27
area, it would not be necessary to seek such approval for the

purposes of carrying out mining operations in a forest area

which is broken up or cleared before the commencement of the

1980
FC Act
.

27. We find that even on facts, the said judgment would not

be applicable. There is no order permitting the subject land to

be used for non-forest purposes by any of the competent

authorities. A reliance is sought to be placed on the letter

issued by the Tehsildar, Taluka Haveli dated 13th May 1968,

thereby informing the ‘Chavan Family’ about its decision to

lease the subject land on “Eksali” basis for the year 1968-69.

However, it is to be noted that the said lease was only for a

period of one year.      It is further to be noted that while

accepting the said yearly lease, the ‘Chavan Family’ has given

an undertaking that they will hand over the vacant and

peaceful possession on 15.12.1967 (sic) i.e. prior to 1980.

28. In any case, nothing is placed on record to show that the

land was permitted to be used by the State for any non-forest

purposes prior to 1980. In any event, since the lease deed was

valid only for one year, after the 1980
FC Act
came into effect,

in view of the restrictions imposed in clause (iii) of
Section 2
of

                                28
the 1980
FC Act
, the forest land could not have been assigned

either by way of lease or any other mode to any private person

unless there was prior approval of the Central Government.

29. In the case of Ambica Quarry Works v. State of

Gujarat and Others8, this Court while distinguishing the

judgment in the case of Banshi Ram Modi (supra) observed

thus:

        “15. The rules dealt with a situation prior to the
        coming into operation of 1980 Act. The “1980 Act”
        was an Act in recognition of the awareness that
        deforestation and ecological imbalances as a
        result of deforestation have become social
        menaces     and    further   deforestation    and
        ecological imbalances should be prevented. That
        was the primary purpose writ large in the Act of
        1980. Therefore the concept that power coupled
        with the duty enjoined upon the respondents to
        renew the lease stands eroded by the mandate of
        the legislation as manifest in 1980 Act in the
        facts and circumstances of these cases. The
        primary duty was to the community and that
        duty took precedence, in our opinion, in these
        cases. The obligation to the society must
        predominate over the obligation to the
        individuals.
                               ***   ***   ***
        18. The aforesaid observations have been set out in
        detail in order to understand the true ratio of the said
        decision in the background of the facts of that case.
        It is true that this Court held that if the permission
        had been granted before the coming into operation of
        the 1980 Act and the forest land has been broken up

8 (1987) 1 SCC 213 : 1986 INSC 267


                                     29
or cleared, clause (ii) of
Section 2
of 1980 Act would
not apply in such a case. But that decision was
rendered in the background of the facts of that case.
The ratio of any decision must be understood in the
background of the facts of that case. It has been said
long time ago that a case is only an authority for what
it actually decides, and not what logically follows
from it. (See Lord Halsbury in Quinn v. Leathem)
[(1901) AC 495] . But in view of the mandate of
Article
141
that the ratio of the decision of this Court is a
law of the land, Shri Gobind Das submitted that the
ratio of a decision must be found out from finding out
if the converse was not correct. But this Court,
however, was cautious in expressing the reasons
for the said decision in State of Bihar v. Banshi
Ram Modi [(1985) 3 SCC 643]. This Court observed
in that decision that the result of taking the contrary
view would be (SCC p. 648, para 10) that while the
digging for purposes of winning mica can go on, the
lessee would be deprived of collecting felspar or
quartz which he may come across while he is
carrying on mining operations for winning mica. That
would lead to an unreasonable result which would
not in any way subserve the object of the Act. There
was an existing lease where mining operation
was being carried on and what was due by
incorporation of a new term was that while
mining operations were being carried on some
other minerals were available, he was giving
right to collect those. The new lease only
permitted utilisation or collection of the said
other minerals.
19. In the instant appeals the situation is entirely
different. The appellants are asking for a renewal of
the quarry leases. It will lead to further deforestation
or at least it will not help reclaiming back the areas
where deforestations have taken place. In that view
of the matter, in the facts and circumstances of the
case, in our opinion, the ratio of the said decision
cannot be made applicable to support the appellants'
demands in these cases because the facts are entirely
different here. The primary purpose of the Act
                          30
     which must subserve the interpretation in order
     to implement the Act is to prevent further
     deforestation. The Central Government has not
     granted approval. If the State Government is of
     the opinion that it is not a case where the State
     Government should seek approval of the Central
     Government, the State Government cannot
     apparently seek such approval in a matter in
     respect of which, in our opinion, it has come to
     the conclusion that no renewal should be
     granted.”
                                    [Emphasis supplied]

30. It could thus be seen that this Court in unequivocal

terms held that the obligation to society must predominate

over the obligation to the individuals. This Court held that in

the case of Banshi Ram Modi (supra), there was an existing

lease where mining operations were being carried on and what

was due by incorporation of a new term was that while mining

operations were being carried on some other minerals were

available, he was given right to collect those. This Court

observed that, however, in Ambica Quarry Works (supra), the

situation is entirely different.     The appellants therein were

asking for a renewal of the quarry leases. It would lead to

further deforestation or at least it will not help reclaiming back

the areas where deforestations have taken place. The Court,

therefore, observed thus:



                                31
     “20. In that view of the matter and the scheme of the
     Act, in our opinion, the respondents were right and
     the appellants were wrong. All interpretations
     must subserve and help implementation of the
     intention of the Act. This interpretation, in our
     opinion, will subserve the predominant purpose of
     the Act.”
                                      [Emphasis supplied]

31. It is thus clear that this Court in unequivocal terms held

that taking into consideration the Scheme of the Act, all

interpretations which subserve and help implementation of

the intention of the Act i.e. the protection of the forests must

be accepted.

32. It would further be apposite to note that this Court in the

present proceedings had an occasion to consider the

judgments in the cases of Banshi Ram Modi (supra) and

Ambica Quarry Works (supra). In the order dated 12th

December 1996, this Court observed thus:

     “4.
The Forest Conservation Act, 1980
was enacted
     with a view to check further deforestation which
     ultimately results in ecological imbalance; and
     therefore, the provisions made therein for the
     conservation of forests and for matters connected
     therewith, must apply to all forests irrespective of the
     nature of ownership or classification thereof. The
     word “forest” must be understood according to its
     dictionary meaning. This description covers all
     statutorily recognised forests, whether designated as
     reserved, protected or otherwise for the purpose of
Section 2(i)
of the Forest Conservation Act. The term
     “forest land”, occurring in
Section 2
, will not only
                               32
include “forest” as understood in the dictionary
sense, but also any area recorded as forest in the
Government record irrespective of the ownership.
This is how it has to be understood for the purpose
of
Section 2
of the Act. The provisions enacted in the
Forest Conservation Act, 1980
for the conservation of
forests and the matters connected therewith must
apply clearly to all forests so understood irrespective
of the ownership or classification thereof. This aspect
has been made abundantly clear in the decisions of
this Court in Ambica Quarry Works v. State of
Gujarat [(1987) 1 SCC 213] , Rural Litigation and
Entitlement Kendra v. State of U.P. [1989 Supp (1)
SCC 504] and recently in the order dated 29-11-1996
(Supreme Court Monitoring Committee v. Mussoorie
Dehradun Development Authority [ WP (C) No 749 of
1995 decided on 29-11-1996] ). The earlier decision
of this Court in State of Bihar v. Banshi Ram
Modi [(1985) 3 SCC 643] has, therefore, to be
understood in the light of these subsequent
decisions. We consider it necessary to reiterate this
settled position emerging from the decisions of this
Court to dispel the doubt, if any, in the perception of
any State Government or authority. This has become
necessary also because of the stand taken on behalf
of the State of Rajasthan, even at this late stage,
relating to permissions granted for mining in such
area which is clearly contrary to the decisions of this
Court. It is reasonable to assume that any State
Government which has failed to appreciate the
correct position in law so far, will forthwith correct its
stance and take the necessary remedial measures
without any further delay.

5. We further direct as under:
                     I. General
     1. In view of the meaning of the word
    “forest” in the Act, it is obvious that
    prior     approval      of  the Central
    Government is required for any non-
    forest activity within the area of any
    “forest”. In accordance with
Section 2
33
of the Act, all on-going activity within
           any forest in any State throughout the
           country, without the prior approval of
           the Central Government, must cease
           forthwith. It is, therefore, clear that the
           running of saw mills of any kind including
           veneer or plywood mills, and mining of any
           mineral are non-forest purposes and are,
           therefore, not permissible without prior
           approval of the Central Government.
           Accordingly, any such activity is prima
           facie violation of the provisions of the
Forest Conservation Act, 1980
. Every
           State Government must promptly ensure
           total cessation of all such activities
           forthwith.”
                                       [Emphasis supplied]


33. A perusal of the aforesaid observation of this Court in the

present proceedings would reveal that this Court after

considering the judgment in Banshi Ram Modi (supra) has in

unequivocal terms held that in accordance with
Section 2
of

the Act, all on-going activity within any forest in any State

throughout the country, without the prior approval of the

Central Government, must be ceased immediately. It can thus

clearly be seen that this Court has in unequivocal terms

overruled what was held in Banshi Ram Modi (supra).

34. It is thus amply clear that for permitting any non-forest

activity within the area of any “forest”, it was necessary to have

prior   approval   of   the   Central   Government.       It   has
                                34
unequivocally been directed that all on-going activity within

any forest in any State throughout the country, without the

prior approval of the Central Government, must cease

forthwith. This Court specifically directed that running of saw

mills of any kind including veneer or plywood mills, and

mining of any mineral are non-forest purposes and they are

not permissible without prior approval of the Central

Government.

35. It is further to be noted that this court in the case of

Nature Lovers Movement v. State of Kerala9 has observed

thus:

        “52. In the result, the appeal is disposed of in the
        following terms:
             (1) ………………………………………………...
             (2) After the enforcement of the 1980
             Act, neither the State Government nor
             any other authority can make an order
             or issue direction for dereservation of
             reserved forest or any portion thereof
             or permit use of any forest land or any
             portion thereof for any non-forest
             purpose or assign any forest land or
             any portion thereof by way of lease or
             otherwise to any private person or to
             any authority, corporation, agency or
             organisation not owned, managed or
             controlled by the Government except
             after obtaining prior approval of the

9 (2009) 5 SCC 373 : 2009 INSC 371


                                     35
          Central Government.
          (3) Conclusion D recorded by the High
          Court in para 103 of the impugned
          judgment is legally unsustainable and is
          set aside.
          (4) As and when the State Government
          decides to assign 10,000 ha of forest land
          to unauthorised occupants/encroachers,
          it shall do so only after obtaining prior
          approval of the Central Government and
          the latter shall take appropriate decision
          keeping in view the object of the 1980 Act
          and     the    guidelines    framed     for
          regularisation of encroachments on forest
          land.”
                                     [Emphasis supplied]


36. The legal position, therefore, has been clarified by this

Court in the case of Nature Lovers Movement (supra) after

considering the earlier judgments reiterating the position that

neither the State Government nor any other authority can

make an order or issue a direction for de-reservation of

reserved forest or any portion thereof or permit use of any

forest land or any portion thereof for any non-forest purpose.

Neither is it permissible to assign any forest land or any

portion thereof by way of lease or otherwise to any private

person or to any authority, corporation, agency or organization

not owned, managed or controlled by the Government except

after obtaining prior approval of the Central Government.

                              36
37. It is further to be noted that in the present case, the

opinion given by the Deputy Secretary to the Government, Law

and Judiciary Department was on 27th July 1998. The order

approving allotment of land in favour of the ‘Chavan Family’

was issued by the Government of Maharashtra on 4th August

1998 and the order of allotment by the Collector was passed

on 28th August 1998. It is thus clear that all these events have

taken place well after the directions were issued by this Court

on 12th December 1996 in the present proceedings.

38. It is thus clear that the Deputy Secretary to the

Government of Maharashtra had totally erred in relying on the

judgment of this Court in the case of Banshi Ram Modi

(supra) by ignoring the observations made by this Court in the

case of Ambica Quarry Works (supra) and specific directions

issued by this Court in the present proceedings. For that very

said reason, the decision of the State Government of allotting

the land and implementing the same by the Collector is not at

all sustainable in law. In that view of the matter, we have no

hesitation in holding that the allotment of the land in favour

of the ‘Chavan Family’ vide orders dated 4th August 1998 and

28th August 1998 is not sustainable in law.

                               37
  c. As to whether the doctrine of desuetude would be
     applicable to the facts of the present case.

39. An argument is sought to be raised on behalf of the

RRCHS that the doctrine of desuetude would be applicable to

the facts of the present case. Let us test the correctness of the

said argument.

40. Reliance in this respect is sought to be placed on behalf

of the RRCHS on the judgment of this Court in the case of

Bharat Forge Co. Ltd. (supra). In the said case, the liability

of the respondents therein to pay octroi to the Municipal

Corporation was under consideration. It was sought to be

argued that since the 1918 Notifications had not been

implemented, they stood repealed ‘quasily’ by the time new

Octroi Rules came to be framed in 1963 and, in fact, they were

applied to realize octroi from the respondents.          In this

background, this Court observed thus:

     “34. Though in India the doctrine of desuetude does
     not appear to have been used so far to hold that any
     statute has stood repealed because of this process,
     we find no objection in principle to apply this doctrine
     to our statutes as well. This is for the reason that a
     citizen should know whether, despite a statute
     having been in disuse for long duration and instead
     a contrary practice being in use, he is still required
     to act as per the “dead letter”. We would think it
     would advance the cause of justice to accept the
     application of doctrine of desuetude in our country
                               38
     also. Our soil is ready to accept this principle; indeed,
     there is need for its implantation, because persons
     residing     in free India,    who      have     assured
     fundamental rights including what has been stated
     in
Article 21
, must be protected from their being, say,
     prosecuted and punished for violation of a law which
     has become “dead letter”. A new path is, therefore,
     required to be laid and trodden.
     35. In written submissions filed on behalf of
     respondents, it has been stated that the theory of
     desuetude can have no application to the facts of the
     present case, since the challenge by the respondents
     is to the levy and calculation under the 1963
     Schedule, and not to the rates enforced since 1918.
     This submission has been characterised as “most
     important”. As to this we would observe that if
     Notification of 1818 were to prevail despite 1918
     Notifications, the fact that some changes were made
     in the Schedule in 1963 has no legal bearing on the
     question under examination. The theory of
     desuetude has been pressed into service by the
     appellant only to take care of relevant 1918
     Notifications. If those notifications can be said to
     stand eclipsed, the fact that changes were made in
     the rates etc. in 1963 cannot stand in the way of
     application of the theory of desuetude.”


41. It could thus be seen that the Court observed that the

doctrine of desuetude would apply to our statutes as well for

the reason that a citizen should know whether, despite a

statute having been in disuse for long duration and instead a

contrary practice being in use, he is still required to act as per

the “dead letter”. It has been observed that it would advance

the cause of justice to accept the application of doctrine of

                                39
desuetude in our country as well. The Court observed that in

view of the fundamental rights enshrined in
Article 21
of the

Constitution of India, a citizen must be protected from being

prosecuted and punished for violation of a law which has

become “dead letter”.

42. However, it is clear from the aforesaid observations that

for applicability of the doctrine of desuetude, the statute must

not only be required to be in disuse for long duration but

instead a contrary practice must also be prevalent.

43. We fail to understand as to how the said doctrine of

desuetude would be applicable in the facts of the present case.

44. It is sought to be contended on behalf of the RRCHS that

though the subject land was shown as Reserved Forest Land,

as far back as in 1879, it was not used as a Forest Land for a

long period and therefore it ceased to be Reserved Forest Land.

We fail to appreciate such a submission. The subject land has

continuously been recorded as ‘Reserved Forest’ in the Forest

Records. Not only that, as we have already reproduced

hereinabove, the Forest Authorities through a number of

communications had requested the Revenue Authorities to

correct the revenue entries and transfer the land to the Forest
                               40
Department. In any case, this Court in the case of Monnet

Ispat and Energy Limited (supra) has correctly laid down the

legal position as under:

     “201. From the above, the essentials of the doctrine
     of desuetude may be summarised as follows:
          (i)  The doctrine of desuetude denotes a
          principle of quasi-repeal but this doctrine
          is ordinarily seen with disfavour.
          (ii) Although the doctrine of desuetude has
          been made applicable in India on few
          occasions but for its applicability, two
          factors, namely, (i) that the statute or
          legislation has not been in operation
          for a very considerable period, and (ii)
          the contrary practice has been
          followed over a period of time must be
          clearly satisfied. Both ingredients are
          essential and want of any one of them
          would not attract the doctrine of
          desuetude. In other words, a mere neglect
          of a statute or legislation over a period of
          time is not sufficient but it must be firmly
          established that not only the statute or
          legislation was completely neglected but
          also the practice contrary to such statute
          or legislation has been followed for a
          considerably long period.”
                                      [Emphasis supplied]

45. It could thus be seen that this Court has held that the

doctrine of desuetude is ordinarily seen with disfavour. It has

also been held that although this doctrine has been made

applicable in India on a few occasions, however, for its

applicability, two factors are necessary, namely, (i) that the
                              41
statute or legislation has not been in operation for a very

considerable period, and (ii) the contrary practice has been

followed over a period of time. It has been held that, not one

but, both the conditions must be available to attract the

applicability of the said doctrine of desuetude.

46. In the present case, the legislative history would clearly

show that, right from 1878, when the 1878 Act was enacted,

under Section 34 of the said Act, the law with regard to

protection and conservation of forest has been consistently

evolving more and more in favour of protection of forests.

47. We do not find any substance in the argument that the

Notification dated 1st March 1879 issued under Section 34 of

the 1878 Act has been put to disuse for a long time. In any

case, nothing has been brought on record to show that a

practice contrary to the provisions of the said Act was being

applied. In that view of the matter, such an argument has to

be heard only to be rejected.

  d. As to whether the RRCHS could be said to be a bona
     fide purchaser of the subject land.

48. It is sought to be urged on behalf of the RRCHS that they

are the bona fide purchaser of the subject land in question. It

                                42
is submitted on behalf of the RRCHS that the land in question

was reflected as revenue land. It is submitted that the Final

Regional Plan of Pune Region, which has statutory force, had

shown the subject land as municipal land. It is further

submitted that even prior to that in the Pune Regional Plan

implemented on 17th May 1976, the land in question was

included in the agricultural zone. As such, by no stretch of

imagination, the RRCHS could have known that the subject

land was Forest Land and not Revenue Land. It is further

stated that even the revenue record pertaining to the subject

land had shown the possession of the ‘Chavan Family’ over the

said land. It is, therefore, submitted that the RRCHS, which

is a bona fide purchaser of the land in question, could not be

faulted with and penalized for no fault of theirs.

49. As already stated herein above, the subject land was

allotted to the ‘Chavan Family’ by the Tehsildar, Haveli on 13th

May 1968 on Eksali (yearly) lease for the year 1968-69. Not

only that, the ‘Chavan Family’ had given an undertaking to the

Mamlatdar, Haveli to surrender the said land prior to

completion of one year. The ‘Chavan Family’ had further given

an undertaking that the said land would not be put to any

                               43
other use except for the agricultural purposes. It is further

pertinent to note that after the grant of lease for one year, there

has been no renewal of the said lease, although the names of

the ‘Chavan Family’ do appear in the 7/12 extracts of revenue

records.

50. This Court in the case of Suraj Bhan and others v.

Financial Commissioner and Others10 has held as follows:

      “9. ….. It is well settled that an entry in revenue
      records does not confer title on a person whose name
      appears in record-of-rights. It is settled law that
      entries in the revenue records or jamabandi have
      only “fiscal purpose” i.e. payment of land revenue,
      and no ownership is conferred on the basis of such
      entries. So far as title to the property is concerned, it
      can only be decided by a competent civil court
      (vide Jattu Ram v. Hakam Singh [(1993) 4 SCC 403 :
      AIR 1994 SC 1653] ). As already noted earlier, civil
      proceedings in regard to genuineness of will are
      pending with the High Court of Delhi. In the
      circumstances, we see no reason to interfere with the
      order passed by the High Court in the writ petition.”


51. Recently, this Court in the case of P. Kishor Kumar v.

Vittal K. Patkar11 has also observed thus:

      “13. …. mutation in revenue records neither creates
      nor extinguishes title, nor does it have any
      presumptive value on title. All it does is entitle the
      person in whose favour mutation is done to pay the
      land revenue in question.”

10 (2007) 6 SCC 186 : 2007 INSC 424
11 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1483


                                      44
52. It is well-settled law that the entries in the revenue record

do not confer a title to the property.

53. It would further appear from the record that after the

lease was not renewed in 1969, for a period of about 20 years,

the members of the ‘Chavan Family’ kept silent. It appears

that only in the year 1988, they started moving the authorities

for allotment of land in lieu of compensation. However, much

prior to the actual allotment of land in their favour, they had

already entered into transactions with the Builders. A perusal

of the record would reveal that one Mr. Rajesh Shah had filed

a civil suit, being Civil Suit No. 1023 of 1998 for permanent

injunction against Mr. Raghunath Shripati Chavan and

others. In the said suit, Mr. Aniruddha P. Deshpande, Chief

Promoter of the RRCHS, was also made a party respondent.

The other members of the ‘Chavan Family’ were also made

respondents. In the said suit, Mr. Rajesh Shah had claimed

that he had purchased 75% share of the subject land from

some of the co-owners of the said land. The said co-owners

had executed the Development Agreement dated 16th February

1995 and had granted development rights as well as executed


                               45
Power of Attorney to the plaintiff along with one Mr. Yogesh

Kariya. In the said proceedings, Mr. Aniruddha P. Deshpande,

Chief Promoter of the RRCHS had filed an affidavit dated 28th

August 1998, wherein it was stated that the owners/holders

of the said land had executed the Development Agreement

dated 25th July 1992 and thereafter the Supplementary

Agreement dated 23rd June 1995 in his favour and that the

possession of the said property to the extent of their share had

been delivered to him. He had also placed on record the copies

of the General Power of Attorney dated 22nd June 1995 and

12th February 1996 executed by one Mr. Kesu Hari Chavan

and others in his favour.

54. It will be relevant to reproduce Para 2 of the Affidavit

dated 28th August 1998 filed by Mr. Aniruddha P. Deshpande,

Chief Promoter, RRCHS in Civil Suit No. 1023 of 1998, which

reads thus:

     “2. It is submitted that the owners/holders of the
     suit property Shri Abu G. Chavan, Sarubai S.
     Chavan, Pandurang Bhau Chavan, Kesu Hari
     Chavan, Dattatraya R. Chavan, Narayan Nana
     Chavan, Rakhmabai Vithal Chavan and others have
     executed Development agreement 25/7/92 and
     thereafter supplementary agreement dated 23/6/95
     in favour of this applicant. The said owners have also
     delivered the possession of the suit property to the
     extent of their share to this applicant. As such this
                               46
     applicant is in possession of the suit property to the
     extent of the undivided share of the above owners. In
     view of the said fact this applicant is necessary party
     to the suit. It is submitted that if any order is passed
     in the suit the same may seriously affect the right of
     this applicant and the applicant may suffer
     irreparable loss and hardship. The orders passed in
     the suit may also lead to multiplicity of litigation as
     such it is necessary that this third party may be
     added as the Defendant to the suit. If this applicant
     is added as the necessary party to the suit no
     hardship or injustice will be caused either to the
     plaintiff or the Defendant, on the contrary this
     applicant may suffer irreparable loss and hardship,
     hence in the interest of justice this applicant may
     please be added as the necessary party to the suit.
     The details of this applicant is as under:

               SHRI ANIRUDDH P. DESHPANDE
              AGE : 37 YEARS, OCC : BUSINESS
               RESIDING AT : 66/2, APEKSHA,
                 OPPOSITE LAW COLLEGE,
                       PUNE 411 004.”

55. It is further to be noted that another suit being Civil Suit

No.1364 of 1998 was filed by one Mr. Raju Shivaji Bhonsale

and another challenging the allotment of the subject land to

the ‘Chavan Family’. In the said suit also, Mr. Aniruddha P.

Deshpande, Chief Promoter of the RRCHS was made a party

respondent. Mr. Aniruddha P. Deshpande had also filed an

affidavit dated 14th February 2005 in the said suit inter alia

stating therein that during 1995 Mr. Chavan and others had

granted the Development Rights in his favour.


                               47
56. It is further to be noted that the members of the ‘Chavan

Family’ had entered into Development Agreement with Mr.

Aniruddha P. Deshpande on 18th August 1998.

57. It is further to be noted that an order approving the

allotment of the land in favour of the ‘Chavan Family’ was

passed by the Government vide order dated 4th August 1998,

whereas the actual allotment of land by the Collector is by

order dated 28th August 1998.

58. It is relevant to note that in the civil suit filed by Mr.

Rajesh Shah, a Compromise Pursis dated 29th August 1998

was filed by the members of the ‘Chavan Family’, Mr.

Aniruddha P. Deshpande and Mr. Rajesh Shah, which reads

thus:

        “i)   the members of the Chavan family (allottees of
              the said land) and Mr. Aniruddha P. Deshpande
              (Chief Promoter of the Richie Rich Co-operative
              Housing Society) admit, agree and confirm that
              (a)   the   Development     Agreement    dated
              16.2.1995 pertaining to the said land has been
              executed by the three members of the Chavan
              family in favour of Mr. Rajesh Shah and Mr.
              Yogesh Kariya, and (b) the possession of the
              said property was delivered to Mr. Rajesh Shah
              and Yogesh Shah to the extent of shares of
              owners executing the agreement.
        ii)   the Agreement dated 25.7.1992 and the
              Supplementary Agreement dated 23.6.1995
              and Agreement dated 16.2.1995 executed by
                                 48
            the other owners in favour of Mr. Aniruddha P.
            Deshpande is also valid and subsisting and that
            the possession of the said property has been
            given to him to the extent of shares of the
            owners executing the said agreement.
     iii)   the said land is exclusively in the joint
            possession of Mr. Rajesh Shah, Mr. Yogesh
            Kariya, Raghunath Chavan and Aniruddha P.
            Deshpande.
     iv)    an Agreement has been reached between Mr.
            Rajesh Shah and Aniruddha P. Deshpande that
            out of the said land Mr. Shah and Mr. Kariya
            shall be entitled to an area of 8 acres and Mr.
            Aniruddha P. Deshpande shall be entitled to the
            balance area. They shall be deemed to be in
            possession of the respective area; and
     v)     Mr. Raghunath Chavan and other 19 members
            of Chavan family have agreed to sell/grant
            development rights for the respective area to
            Mr. Rajesh Chavan and Mr. Yogesh Kariya and
            Mr. Aniruddha P. Deshpande.”

59. On the very same date i.e., 29th August 1998, after

recording the Compromise Pursis, the said civil suit being Civil

Suit No. 1023 of 1998 came to be disposed of.

60. We ask a question to ourselves as to whether the short

span within which the decision was taken by the Government

to allot the land in favour of the ‘Chavan Family’, the actual

allotment of the land to the ‘Chavan Family’ by the Collector

and the disposal of the suit in terms of the compromise on the

very next day, is merely a coincidence.


                               49
61. It is further to be noted that the allotment order dated

28th August 1998, specifically prohibited the ‘Chavan Family’

in view of conditions (2) and (4), reproduced hereinabove, from

mortgaging, donating, selling, partitioning or exchanging in

any other manner, or allotting the said land on lease to any

other person without the prior permission of the District

Collector. The allotment order further mandated the ‘Chavan

Family’ to bring the said land under cultivation within a period

of two years from the date of the allotment.         It further

prohibited the said land from being used for any other purpose

than agricultural purpose.

62. In the light of these glaring facts, can it be said that the

RRCHS is a bona fide purchaser? The records amply speak

for themselves.

63. It is amply clear that though the Eksali (yearly) lease

expired in 1969, the members of the ‘Chavan Family’ were

silent for a period of almost 20 years. Things started moving

only in 1988.     During the said period, much before the

allotment could be done, the members of the ‘Chavan Family’

had already started negotiating the deals with Mr. Aniruddha

P. Deshpande, the Chief Promoter of RRCHS and Mr. Rajesh

                               50
Shah. The files were moving at different levels from 1991 to

1998, culminating in the final allotment in the year 1998. In

the meantime, all the Development Rights in the land already

stood transferred either to Mr. Aniruddha P. Deshpande, the

Chief Promoter of the RRCHS or to Mr. Rajesh Shah. For the

said purpose, not only had some of the members of the

‘Chavan Family’ entered into a Development Agreement, but

they had also executed Power of Attorney in favour of said Mr.

Aniruddha P. Deshpande surrendering their entire rights in

his favour.

64. In that view of the matter, we find no substance in the

argument that the RRCHS was a bona fide purchaser of the

subject land. The facts point out that the ‘Chavan Family’ was

only set up as a front for the benefit of the Developers.   The

fact that the agricultural land of the ‘Chavan Family’ was

acquired, was being misused by the Developers as a pretext

for grabbing the valuable piece of Forest Land for the purposes

of commercial development. For doing so, even the status of

a person who belongs to backward class was being misused.




                              51
  e. As to whether the RRCHS would be entitled to
     allotment of alternate piece of land in view of the
     order passed by this Court in In Re: “Construction of
     Multi   Storeyed    Buildings    in    Forest   Land
     Maharashtra”.

65. An alternate submission made on behalf of the RRCHS is

that since they are the bona fide purchaser of the subject land

from the members of the ‘Chavan Family’, they would be

entitled to allotment of an alternate piece of land as has been

done by this Court in I.A. No.2771 of 2009.

66. The facts in the present case and the facts in I.A. No.2771

of 2009 are totally different. In the said case (i.e. I.A. No.2771

of 2009), the State had illegally taken possession of the land

belonging to the predecessor-in-title of the applicants therein.

Not only that, but the said land was given to the Armament

Research Development Establishment Institute (“ARDEI” for

short), which was a unit of Defence Department of the Union

of India. There was no acquisition proceeding. The applicants

therein fought right from the Trial Court to this Court and

succeeded in getting a decree for possession of the land. When

they put the decree in execution, the ARDEI opposed the same

contending therein that an Armament Defence establishment

was constructed thereon.

                                52
67. Faced with this situation and realizing its mistake, the

State Government allotted another piece of land in lieu of the

land which was already given in possession of the ARDEI.

However, the record subsequently revealed that the land

which was allotted to the applicants therein was notified as a

Forest Land.

68. The Court noted the following special circumstances in

the said case:

     (i)     “That the applicants had succeeded upto this
             Court and as such, they cannot be denied the
             benefits of the decree passed in their favour;
     (ii)    That the action of the State Government in
             encroaching upon the land of a citizen was itself
             illegal;
     (iii)   The State Government ought to have taken due
             precautions before allotting an alternate piece
             of land to the applicants;
     (iv)    That the land which was notified as a Forest
             Land could not have been allotted;
     (v)     That the State ought to have allotted a land,
             which had a clear title and also had a
             marketable value; and
     (vi)    That after the proceedings had reached finality
             in favour of the petitioners/applicants, the
             matter was lingering in the Court for almost 15
             years.”


69. In the aforesaid factual scenario, this Court passed the

order dated 23rd July 2024, which is as under:


                                 53
     “8. We, therefore, direct the State Government to
     come with a clear stand:
          i.    As to whether another piece of
          equivalent land will be offered to the
          petitioner(s)/applicant(s); or
          ii.   As      to     whether   adequate
          compensation would be paid to the
          petitioner(s)/applicant(s); or
          iii. As to whether the State Government
          proposes to move the Central Government
          for denotification of the said land as forest
          land.”


70. Thereafter, the Additional Chief Secretary, Revenue and

Forest   Department,    Mantralaya,    Mumbai     tendered    an

undertaking before this Court, agreeing to allot an alternate

piece of land in favour of the applicants therein. Accepting the

said undertaking, this Court passed the order dated 9th

September, 2024, which is as under:

     “7. We accept the undertaking and take it on
     record. However, in addition, we direct that the
     Collector, Pune shall personally ensure that the
     alternate land admeasuring 24 acres 38 guntas out
     of Survey No.7 situated at Mouje Yewalewadi, Tq.
     Haveli, District Pune would be measured and
     demarcated and thereafter peaceful and vacant
     possession of the said land would be handed over to
     the applicants/petitioners.
     8.   It is needless to state that if any encroachments
     are there on the said land, the same shall be removed
     prior to the said land being handed over to the
     applicants/petitioners.



                               54
     9.   Insofar as the modification to be issued under
Section 37
of the Maharashtra Regional and Town
     Planning Act, 1966 for changing the land use in
     question from Private/Semi-Private to Residential is
     concerned, we direct that the said procedure shall be
     completed within a period of three months from
     today.
     10. It is further directed that all the formalities for
     conveying the title of the said land in favour of the
     applicants/petitioners shall be completed within a
     period of six weeks from today.”


71. That is not the case here. The RRCHS knowing very well

that the land was a Forest Land had entered into transactions

with the members of the ‘Chavan Family’ much prior to the

land even being allotted in their favour.     The transactions

between the RRCHS and the members of the ‘Chavan Family’

were totally illegal and contrary to the conditions on which the

land was allotted to the ‘Chavan Family’. As per the conditions

of allotment, the land or any part thereof could not have been

transferred by the ‘Chavan Family’ to anyone without the prior

permission of the District Collector. The land was required to

be brought under cultivation within a period of two years from

the date of the allotment and that the land or any part thereof

was not to be used for any other purpose than the agricultural

purpose.



                               55
72. As already discussed hereinabove, the RRCHS through

Mr. Aniruddha P. Deshpande had already entered into

transactions with the members of the ‘Chavan Family’ much

before the land was allotted in their favour. The members of

the ‘Chavan Family’ had given the developmental rights as well

as executed Power of Attorney in favour of said Mr. Aniruddha

P. Deshpande even prior to the allotment of land in their

favour. As discussed hereinabove, immediately on the next

day on which the land was allotted in favour of the ‘Chavan

Family’, the suit with regard to the subject property was

compromised between Mr. Rajesh Shah, plaintiff and Mr.

Aniruddha P. Deshpande. It is thus clear that the case of the

RRCHS, in no way, bears any resemblance to the case in

I.A.No. 2771 of 2009.

73. The RRCHS through Mr. Aniruddha P. Deshpande had,

with open eyes, entered into illegal transactions with the

members of the ‘Chavan Family’. If a direction, as sought by

the applicant-RRCHS is issued, it will amount to granting a

premium to the RRCHS for the illegalities committed by them.

74. In that view of the matter, we do not find any merit in the

said submission.

                              56
   f. As to whether the doctrine of public trust would be
      applicable in the facts and circumstances of the
      present case.

75. That leaves us with the issue with regard to the doctrine

of public trust.

76. Recently, this Court in the case of In Re: T.N.

Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India and others12

had an occasion to consider the importance of doctrine of

public trust in the environmental matters. It will be apposite

to refer to the following observations of this Court:

      “151.     The      importance      of    the    ‘Public
      Trust’ doctrine in environmental and ecological
      matters has been explained by this Court in the case
      of M.C. Mehta v. Kamal Nath. This Court has
      elaborately referred to various articles and the
      judgments on the issue to come to a conclusion that
      the ‘public trust’ doctrine is a part of the law of the
      land in the following paragraphs:
             “23. The notion that the public has a right
             to expect certain lands and natural areas
             to retain their natural characteristic is
             finding its way into the law of the land. The
             need to protect the environment and
             ecology has been summed up by David B.
             Hunter (University of Michigan) in an
             article titled An ecological perspective on
             property : A call for judicial protection of the
             public's interest in environmentally critical
             resources published           in       Harvard
             Environmental Law Review, Vol. 12 1988,
             p. 311 is in the following words:


12 (2025) 2 SCC 641 : 2024 INSC 178


                                      57
  “Another major ecological tenet is
  that the world is finite. The earth can
  support only so many people and
  only so much human activity before
  limits are reached. This lesson was
  driven home by the oil crisis of the
  1970s as well as by the pesticide
  scare of the 1960s. The current
  deterioration of the ozone layer is
  another vivid example of the
  complex,       unpredictable        and
  potentially catastrophic effects posed
  by      our    disregard      of     the
  environmental limits to economic
  growth. The absolute finiteness of the
  environment, when coupled with
  human       dependency        on     the
  environment,       leads      to     the
  unquestionable result that human
  activities will at some point be
  constrained.
  ‘Human activity finds in the natural
  world its external limits. In short, the
  environment imposes constraints on
  our freedom; these constraints are
  not the product of value choices but
  of the scientific imperative of the
  environment's limitations. Reliance
  on improving technology can delay
  temporarily, but not forever, the
  inevitable constraints. There is a
  limit to the capacity of the
  environment to service … growth,
  both in providing raw materials and
  in assimilating by-product wastes
  due to consumption. The largesse of
  technology can only postpone or
  disguise the inevitable.’
Professor Barbara Ward has written of this
ecological imperative in particularly vivid
language:

                    58
‘We can forget moral imperatives. But
today the morals of respect and care
and modesty come to us in a form we
cannot evade. We cannot cheat on
DNA.     We    cannot    get    round
photosynthesis. We cannot say I am
not going to give a damn about
phytoplankton.     All   these     tiny
mechanisms          provide         the
preconditions of our planetary life. To
say we do not care is to say in the
most literal sense that “we choose
death”.’
There is a commonly-recognized link
between laws and social values, but
to ecologists a balance between laws
and values is not alone sufficient to
ensure a stable relationship between
humans and their environment.
Laws and values must also contend
with the constraints imposed by the
outside environment. Unfortunately,
current           legal doctrine rarely
accounts for such constraints, and
thus environmental stability is
threatened.
Historically, we have changed the
environment to fit our conceptions of
property. We have fenced, plowed
and paved. The environment has
proven malleable and to a large
extent still is. But there is a limit to
this malleability, and certain types of
ecologically important resources —
for example, wetlands and riparian
forests — can no longer be destroyed
without enormous long-term effects
on environmental and therefore
social stability. To ecologists, the
need    for      preserving    sensitive
resources does not reflect value

                  59
  choices but rather is the necessary
  result of objective observations of the
  laws of nature.
  In   sum,     ecologists   view     the
  environmental sciences as providing
  us with certain laws of nature. These
  laws, just like our own laws, restrict
  our freedom of conduct and choice.
  Unlike our laws, the laws of nature
  cannot be changed by legislative fiat;
  they are imposed on us by the
  natural world. An understanding of
  the laws of nature must therefore
  inform all of our social institutions.”

24. The ancient Roman Empire developed
a legal theory known as the “Doctrine of
the Public Trust”. It was founded on the
ideas that certain common properties
such as rivers, seashore, forests and the
air were held by Government in
trusteeship for the free and unimpeded
use     of   the    general public.      Our
contemporary      concern     about      “the
environment” bear a very close conceptual
relationship to this legal doctrine. Under
the Roman law these resources were either
owned by no one (res nullious) or by every
one in common (res communious). Under
the English common law, however, the
Sovereign could own these resources but
the ownership was limited in nature, the
Crown could not grant these properties to
private owners if the effect was to interfere
with the public interests in navigation or
fishing. Resources that were suitable for
these uses were deemed to be held
in trust by the Crown for the benefit of
the public. Joseph L. Sax, Professor of
Law, University of Michigan — proponent
of the Modern Public Trust Doctrine — in

                    60
an erudite article “Public Trust Doctrine in
Natural Resource Law : Effective Judicial
Intervention”, Michigan Law Review, Vol.
68, Part 1 p. 473, has given the historical
background                                of
the Public Trust Doctrine as under:
  “The              source              of
  modern public trust law is found in a
  concept that received much attention
  in Roman and English law — the
  nature of property rights in rivers,
  the sea, and the seashore. That
  history has been given considerable
  attention in the legal literature, need
  not be repeated in detail here. But
  two points should be emphasized.
  First, certain interests, such as
  navigation and fishing, were sought
  to be preserved for the benefit of
  the public; accordingly, property
  used for those purposes was
  distinguished                      from
  general public property which the
  sovereign could routinely grant to
  private owners. Second, while it was
  understood that in certain common
  properties — such as the seashore,
  highways, and running water —
  ‘perpetual use was dedicated to
  the public’, it has never been clear
  whether        the public had        an
  enforceable     right     to    prevent
  infringement of those interests.
  Although the State apparently did
  protect public uses, no evidence is
  available that public rights could be
  legally asserted against a recalcitrant
  government.”
25.The Public Trust Doctrine     primari
ly rests on the principle that certain
resources like air, sea, waters and the

                    61
forests have such a great importance to
the people as a whole that it would be
wholly unjustified to make them a subject
of private ownership. The said resources
being a gift of nature, they should be made
freely available to everyone irrespective of
the status in life. The doctrine enjoins
upon the Government to protect the
resources for the enjoyment of the
general public rather than to permit their
use for private ownership or commercial
purposes. According to Professor Sax
the Public Trust Doctrine           imposes
the following restrictions on governmental
authority:
    “Three types of restrictions on
  governmental authority are often
  thought     to    be     imposed   by
  the public trust : first, the property
  subject to the trust must not only be
  used for a public purpose, but it
  must be held available for use by the
  general public; second, the property
  may not be sold, even for a fair cash
  equivalent; and third the property
  must be maintained for particular
  types of uses.”
26. The American law on the subject is
primarily based on the decision of the
United States Supreme Court in Illinois
Central Railroad Co. v. People of the State
of Illinois, [146 US 387 (1892) : 36 L.Ed.
1018]. In the year 1869 the Illinois
Legislature made a substantial grant of
submerged lands — a mile strip along the
shores of Lake Michigan extending one
mile out from the shoreline — to the
Illinois Central Railroad. In 1873, the
Legislature changed its mind and repealed
the 1869 grant. The State of Illinois sued
to quit title. The Court while accepting the

                    62
stand of the State of Illinois held that the
title of the State in the land in dispute was
a title different in character from that
which the State held in lands intended for
sale. It was different from the title which
the United States held in public lands
which were open to preemption and sale.
It was a title held in trust — for the people
of the State that they may enjoy the
navigation of the water, carry on
commerce over them and have liberty of
fishing therein free from obstruction or
interference of private parties. The
abdication of the general control of the
State over lands in dispute was not
consistent      with     the    exercise   of
the trust which required the Government
of the State to preserve such waters for the
use of the public. According to Professor
Sax the Court in Illinois Central [146 US
387 : 36 L.Ed. 1018 (1892)] “articulated a
principle that has become the central
substantive                           thought
in public trust litigation. When a State
holds a resource which is available for the
free use of the general public, a court will
look with considerable skepticism upon
any governmental conduct which is
calculated either to relocate that resource
to     more     restricted    uses     or  to
subject public uses to the self-interest of
private parties”.
27.    In Gould v. Greylock    Reservation
Commission, [350 Mass 410 (1966)] the
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts
took the first major step in developing
the doctrine applicable to changes in the
use      of     lands     dedicated      to
the public interest. In 1886 a group of
citizens interested in preserving Mount
Greylock as an unspoiled natural forest,
promoted the creation of an association for
                    63
the purpose of laying out a public park on
it. The State ultimately acquired about
9000 acres, and the legislature enacted a
statute creating the Greylock Reservation
Commission. In the year 1953, the
legislature enacted a statute creating an
Authority to construct and operate on
Mount Greylock an Aerial Tramway and
certain other facilities and it authorised
the Commission to lease to the Authority
any portion of the Mount Greylock
Reservation.      Before    the      project
commenced, five citizens brought an
action against both the Greylock
Reservation     Commission      and     the
Tramway Authority. The plaintiffs brought
the      suit    as     beneficiaries     of
the public trust. The Court held both the
lease and the management agreement
invalid on the ground that they were in
excess of the statutory grant of the
authority. The crucial passage in the
judgment of the Court is as under:
  “The profit-sharing feature and some
  aspects of the project itself strongly
  suggest a commercial enterprise. In
  addition to the absence of any clear
  or express statutory authorization of
  as     broad     a    delegation    of
  responsibility by the Authority as is
  given by the management agreement,
  we find no express grant to the
  Authority or power to permit use
  of public lands and of the Authority's
  borrowed funds for what seems, in
  part at least, a commercial venture
  for private profit.”
Professor Sax's comments on the above-
quoted paragraph from Gould decision are
as under:
  “It hardly seems surprising, then,
                    64
  that the court questioned why a State
  should subordinate a public park,
  serving a useful purpose as relatively
  undeveloped land, to the demands of
  private investors for building such a
  commercial facility. The court, faced
  with such a situation, could hardly
  have been expected to have treated
  the case as if it involved nothing but
  formal legal issues concerning the
  State's authority to change the use of
  a certain tract of land…. Gould,
  like Illinois Central, was concerned
  with the most overt sort of imposition
  on the public interest : commercial
  interests had obtained advantages
  which          infringed        directly
  on public uses and promoted private
  profits. But the Massachusetts court
  has also confronted a more
  pervasive, if more subtle, problem —
  that concerning projects which
  clearly                            have
  some public justification. Such cases
  arise when, for example, a highway
  department seeks to take a piece of
  parkland or to fill a wetland.”
28.In        Sacco         v. Development
of Public Works, [532 Mass 670], the
Massachusetts Court restrained the
Department of Public Works from filling a
great pond as part of its plan to relocate
part of State Highway. The Department
purported to act under the legislative
authority. The court found the statutory
power inadequate and held as under:
  “the improvement of public lands
  contemplated by this section does
  not include the widening of a State
  highway. It seems rather that the
  improvement of public lands which

                    65
  the legislature provided for … is to
  preserve such lands so that they may
  be enjoyed by the people for
  recreational purposes.”
29. In Robbins v. Deptt. of Public Works,
[244 NE 2d 577], the Supreme Judicial
Court    of  Massachusetts     restrained
the Public Works     Department      from
acquiring Fowl Meadows, “wetlands of
considerable natural beauty … often used
for nature study and recreation” for
highway use.
30. Professor Sax in the article (Michigan
Law Review) refers to Priewev v. Wisconsin
State Land and Improvement Co., [93 Wis
534 (1896)], Crawford County Lever and
Drainage Distt. No. 1, [182 Wis 404], City
of    Milwaukee v. State,     [193     Wis
423], State v. Public Service Commission,
[275 Wis 112] and opines that “the
Supreme Court of Wisconsin has probably
made a more conscientious effort to rise
above rhetoric and to work out a
reasonable            meaning           for
the public trust doctrine than have the
courts of any other State”.
31. Professor Sax stated the scope of
the public trust doctrine in the following
words:
  “If any of the analysis in this Article
  makes sense, it is clear that the
  judicial     techniques      developed
  in public trust cases need not be
  limited    either     to   these    few
  conventional      interests    or     to
  questions          of       disposition
  of public properties. Public trust pro
  blems      are     found     whenever
  governmental regulation comes into
  question, and they occur in a wide
  range of situations in which
                    66
  diffused public interests         need
  protection against tightly organized
  groups with clear and immediate
  goals. Thus, it seems that the
  delicate mixture of procedural and
  substantive protections which the
  courts       have      applied        in
  conventional public trust cases
  would be equally applicable and
  equally appropriate in controversies
  involving     air    pollution,     the
  dissemination of pesticides, the
  location of rights of way for utilities,
  and strip mining of wetland filling on
  private lands in a State where
  governmental permits are required.”

32. We may at this stage refer to the
judgment of the Supreme Court of
California               in National Audubon
Society v. Superior Court of Alpine County,
[33 Cal 3d 419]. The case is popularly
known as “the Mono Lake case”. Mono
Lake is the second largest lake in
California. The lake is saline. It contains
no fish but supports a large population of
brine shrimp which feed vast numbers of
nesting and migrating birds. Islands in the
lake protect a large breeding colony of
California gulls, and the lake itself serves
as a haven on the migration route for
thousands of birds. Towers and spires of
tura (sic) on the north and south shores
are matters of geological interest and a
tourist attraction. In 1940, the Division of
Water Resources granted the Department
of Water and Power of the City of Los
Angeles a permit to appropriate virtually
the entire flow of 4 of the 5 streams flowing
into the lake. As a result of these
diversions, the level of the lake dropped,
the surface area diminished, the gulls
                    67
were abandoning the lake and the scenic
beauty and the ecological values of Mono
Lake were imperilled. The plaintiffs
environmentalist           —          using
the public trust doctrine — filed a law suit
against Los Angeles Water Diversions. The
case eventually came to the California
Supreme Court, on a Federal Trial Judge's
request     for   clarification    of    the
State's public trust doctrine. The Court
explained            the            concept
of public trust doctrine in the following
words:
  “‘By the law of nature these things
  are common to mankind — the air,
  running water, the sea and
  consequently the shores of the sea.’
  (Institutes of Justinian 2.1.1) From
  this origin in Roman law, the English
  common law evolved the concept of
  the public trust, under which the
  sovereign owns ‘all of its navigable
  waterways and the lands lying
  beneath      them   as   trustee    of
  a public trust for the benefit of the
  people.’”
The Court explained the purpose of
the public trust as under:
     “The           objective          of
  the public trust has      evolved    in
  tandem              with            the
  changing public perception of the
  values and uses of waterways. As we
  observed in Marks v. Whitney, [6 Cal
  3d 251], ‘[p]ublic trust easements
  (were) traditionally defined in terms
  of    navigation,    commerce      and
  fisheries. They have been held to
  include the right to fish, hunt, bathe,
  swim, to use for boating and general
  recreation purposes the navigable
                    68
waters of the State, and to use the
bottom of the navigable waters for
anchoring,     standing,    or    other
purposes. We went on, however, to
hold that the traditional triad of uses
— navigation, commerce and fishing
— did not limit the public interest in
the trust res. In language of special
importance to the present setting, we
stated that ‘[t]he public uses to
which tidelands are subject are
sufficiently flexible to encompass
changing public needs.               In
administering the trust the State is
not burdened with an outmoded
classification favouring one mode of
utilization over another. There is a
growing public recognition that one
of the important public uses of the
tidelands — a use encompassed
within the tidelands trust — is the
preservation of those lands in their
natural state, so that they may serve
as ecological units for scientific
study, as open space, and as
environments which provide food
and habitat for birds and marine life,
and which favourably affect the
scenery and climate of the area.’
Mono Lake is a navigable waterway.
It supports a small local industry
which harvests brine shrimp for sale
as fish food, which endeavour
probably qualifies the lake as a
‘fishery’          under          the
traditional public trust cases.  The
principal values plaintiffs seek to
protect, however, are recreational
and ecological — the scenic views of
the lake and its shore, the purity of
the air, and the use of the lake for
nesting and feeding by birds.
                 69
  Under Marks v. Whitney, [6 Cal 3d
  251], it is clear that protection of
  these values is among the purposes
  of the public trust.”
The Court summed up the powers of the
State as trustee in the following words:
  “Thus, the public trust is more than
  an affirmation of State power to
  use public property
  for public purposes.     It    is   an
  affirmation of the duty of the State to
  protect the people's common heritage
  of streams, lakes, marshlands and
  tidelands, surrendering that right of
  protection only in rare cases when
  the abandonment of that right is
  consistent with the purposes of
  the trust….”
The Supreme Court of California, inter
alia, reached the following conclusion:
  “The State has an affirmative duty to
  take the public trust into account in
  the planning and allocation of water
  resources,            and            to
  protect public trust uses whenever
  feasible. Just as the history of this
  State shows that appropriation may
  be necessary for efficient use of water
  despite       unavoidable         harm
  to public trust values,               it
  demonstrates that an appropriative
  water rights system administered
  without         consideration         of
  the public trust may              cause
  unnecessary and unjustified harm
  to trust interests. (See Johnson, 14
  U.C. Davis L. Rev. 233, 256-57/;
  Robie, Some        Reflections       on
  Environmental Considerations in
  Water Rights Administration, 2
  Ecology L.Q. 695, 710-711 (1972);
                    70
  Comment, 33 Hastings L.J. 653,
  654.) As a matter of practical
  necessity, the State may have to
  approve     appropriations    despite
  foreseeable                     harm
  to public trust uses.
  In so doing, however, the State must
  bear in mind its duty as trustee to
  consider the effect of the taking on
  the public trust (see United
  Plainsmen v. N.D. State Water Cons.
  Comm'n, [247 NW 2d 457 (ND 1976)]
  at pp. 462-463, and to preserve, so
  far      as      consistent      with
  the public interest,     the     uses
  protected by the trust.”
The Court finally came to the conclusion
that the plaintiffs could rely on
the public trust doctrine in     seeking
reconsideration of the allocation of the
waters of the Mono basin.
33. It is no doubt correct that
the public trust doctrine under          the
English common law extended only to
certain    traditional    uses    such    as
navigation, commerce and fishing. But the
American Courts in recent cases have
expanded          the        concept      of
the public trust doctrine.              The
observations of the Supreme Court of
California in Mono Lake case, [33 Cal 3d
419] clearly show the judicial concern in
protecting all ecologically important lands,
for example fresh water, wetlands or
riparian forests. The observations of the
Court in Mono Lake case, [33 Cal 3d 419]
to the effect that the protection of
ecological values is among the purposes
of public trust, may give rise to an
argument that the ecology and the
environment protection is a relevant factor

                    71
to determine which lands, waters or airs
are protected by the public trust doctrine.
The Courts in United States are finally
beginning to adopt this reasoning and are
expanding the public trust to encompass
new types of lands and waters. In Phillips
Petroleum Co. v. Mississippi, [108 S.Ct.
791 (1988)] the United States Supreme
Court upheld Mississippi's extension
of public trust doctrine to           lands
underlying non-navigable tidal areas. The
majority judgment adopted ecological
concepts to determine which lands can be
considered tide lands. Phillips Petroleum
case, [108 S.Ct. 791 (1988)] assumes
importance because the Supreme Court
expanded        the public trust doctrine to
identify the tide lands not on commercial
considerations but on ecological concepts.
We        see      no      reason       why
the public trust doctrine should not be
expanded to include all ecosystems
operating in our natural resources.


34. Our legal system-based on English
common                          law-includes
the public trust doctrine as part of its
jurisprudence. The State is the trustee of
all natural resources which are by nature
meant            for public use           and
enjoyment. Public at      large     is     the
beneficiary of the seashore, running
waters, airs, forests and ecologically fragile
lands. The State as a trustee is under a
legal duty to protect the natural resources.
These resources meant for public use
cannot     be    converted    into     private
ownership.
35. We are fully aware that the issues
presented in this case illustrate the classic
struggle between those members of
                     72
     the public who would preserve our rivers,
     forests, parks and open lands in their
     pristine purity and those charged with
     administrative responsibilities who, under
     the pressures of the changing needs of an
     increasingly complex society, find it
     necessary to encroach to some extent
     upon open lands heretofore considered
     inviolate to change. The resolution of this
     conflict in any given case is for the
     legislature and not the courts. If there is a
     law made by Parliament or the State
     Legislatures the courts can serve as an
     instrument of determining legislative
     intent in the exercise of its powers of
     judicial review under the Constitution.
     But in the absence of any legislation, the
     executive             acting          under
     the doctrine of public trust cannot
     abdicate the natural resources and
     convert them into private ownership, or for
     commercial use. The aesthetic use and the
     pristine glory of the natural resources, the
     environment and the ecosystems of our
     country cannot be permitted to be eroded
     for private, commercial or any other use
     unless the courts find it necessary, in good
     faith,     for      the public good      and
     in public interest to encroach upon the
     said resources.”
152. This Court in unequivocal terms has held that
the          executive          acting          under
the doctrine of public trust cannot    abdicate   the
natural resources and convert them into private
ownership, or for commercial use. The aesthetic use
and the pristine glory of the natural resources, the
environment and the ecosystems of our country
cannot be permitted to be eroded for private,
commercial or any other use unless the courts find it
necessary, in good faith, for the public good and
in public interest to encroach upon the said
resources.
                         73
153. The law with regard to the importance of the
‘public trust’ doctrine in ecological/environmental
matters has further been evolved and expanded by
this Court in subsequent judgments. In the case
of Association for Environment Protection v. State of
Kerala11, this Court has referred to some of the
judgments which followed the law laid down in the
case of Kamal Nath (supra), which are as under:
     “6. In M.I. Builders (P) Ltd. v. Radhey
     Shyam Sahu, [(1999) 6 SCC 464], the
     Court applied the public trust doctrine for
     upholding the order of the Allahabad High
     Court which had quashed the decision of
     Lucknow Nagar Mahapalika permitting
     appellant M.I. Builders (P) Ltd. to
     construct an underground shopping
     complex in Jhandewala Park, Aminabad
     Market, Lucknow, and directed demolition
     of    the     construction     made         on
     the park land. The High Court had noted
     that Lucknow Nagar Mahapalika had
     entered into an agreement with the
     appellant for construction of shopping
     complex and given it full freedom to lease
     out the shops and also to sign agreement
     on its behalf and held that this was
     impermissible. On appeal by the builders,
     this Court held that the terms of
     agreement were unreasonable, unfair and
     atrocious. The Court then invoked
     the public trust doctrine and held that
     being a trustee of the park on behalf of
     the public, the Nagar Mahapalika could
     not have transferred the same to the
     private builder and thereby deprived the
     residents of the area of the quality of life to
     which they were entitled under the
     Constitution and municipal laws.
     7. In Intellectuals Forum v. State of A.P.,
     [(2006) 3 SCC 549], this Court again
     invoked the public trust doctrine in a

                          74
matter involving the challenge to the
systematic destruction of percolation,
irrigation and drinking water tanks in
Tirupati Town, referred to some judicial
precedents including M.C. Mehta v. Kamal
Nath [M.C. Mehta v. Kamal Nath, (1997) 1
SCC 388], M.I. Builders (P) Ltd., [(1999) 6
SCC                464], National Audubon
Society [National Audubon
Society v. Superior Court, 658 P 2d 709 :
33 Cal 3d 419 (1983)] and observed :
(Intellectuals Forum case, [(2006) 3 SCC
549], SCC p. 575, para 76)
  “76. … This is an articulation of
  the doctrine from the angle of the
  affirmative duties of the State with
  regard to public trust. Formulated
  from       a       negatory      angle,
  the doctrine does                   not
  exactly prohibit the alienation of the
  property held as a public trust.
  However, when the State holds a
  resource that is freely available for
  the use of the public, it provides for a
  high degree of judicial scrutiny on
  any action of the Government, no
  matter how consistent with the
  existing legislations, that attempts to
  restrict such free use. To properly
  scrutinise such actions of the
  Government, the courts must make a
  distinction         between          the
  Government's general obligation to
  act for the public benefit, and the
  special, more demanding obligation
  which it may have as a trustee of
  certain public resources….”
                   (emphasis in original)
8. In Fomento Resorts and Hotels
Ltd. v. Minguel Martins, [(2009) 3 SCC
571 : (2009) 1 SCC (Civ) 877], this Court
                    75
was called upon to consider whether the
appellant was entitled to block the passage
to the beach by erecting a fence in the garb
of protecting its property. After noticing
the judgments to which reference has been
made hereinabove, the Court held : (SCC
pp. 614-15 & 619, paras 53-55 & 65)
  “53. The public trust doctrine enjoin
  s upon the Government to protect the
  resources for the enjoyment of the
  general public rather than to permit
  their use for private ownership or
  commercial                  purposes.
  This doctrine puts       an   implicit
  embargo on the right of the State to
  transfer public properties to private
  party      if      such      transfer
  affects public interest,    mandates
  affirmative State action for effective
  management of natural resources
  and empowers the citizens to
  question ineffective management
  thereof.
  54. The            heart            of
  the public trust doctrine is that it
  imposes limits and obligations upon
  government agencies and their
  administrators on behalf of all the
  people    and     especially    future
  generations. For example, renewable
  and     non-renewable       resources,
  associated uses, ecological values or
  objects in which the public has a
  special interest (i.e. public lands,
  waters, etc.) are held subject to the
  duty of the State not to impair such
  resources, uses or values, even if
  private interests are involved. The
  same obligations apply to managers
  of forests, monuments, parks,
  the public domain                 and

                    76
other public assets.        Professor
Joseph L. Sax in his classic article,
‘The Public Trust Doctrine in
Natural Resources Law : Effective
Judicial     Intervention’    (1970),
indicates                        that
the public trust doctrine,   of    all
concepts known to law, constitutes
the best practical and philosophical
premise     and    legal   tool   for
protecting public rights   and    for
protecting and managing resources,
ecological values or objects held
in trust.
55. The public trust doctrine is        a
tool       for      exerting        long-
established public rights over short-
term public rights and private gain.
Today every person exercising his or
her right to use the air, water, or land
and associated natural ecosystems
has the obligation to secure for the
rest of us the right to live or otherwise
use that same resource or property
for the long-term and enjoyment by
future generations. To say it another
way, a landowner or lessee and a
water right holder has an obligation
to use such resources in a manner as
not to impair or diminish the people's
rights and the people's long-term
interest in that property or resource,
including downslope lands, waters
and resources.
                    ***
65. We    reiterate   that   natural
resources including forests, water
bodies, rivers, seashores, etc. are
held by the State as a trustee on
behalf of the people and especially
the   future    generations.  These
77
constitute common properties and
             people are entitled to uninterrupted
             use thereof. The State cannot
             transfer public trust properties to a
             private party, if such a transfer
             interferes    with    the    right    of
             the public and the court can invoke
             the public trust doctrine and      take
             affirmative action for protecting the
             right of people to have access to light,
             air and water and also for protecting
             rivers, sea, tanks, trees, forests and
             associated natural ecosystems.”
154. The importance of the doctrine of ‘public trust’
     has further been emphasized in the case of
Tata
     Housing Development Company Limited v. Aalok
     Jagga
(2020) 15 SCC 784 to which one of us
     (B.R. Gavai, J.) was a party.”
77. In the present case, it appears that the then Minister for

Revenue and the then Divisional Commissioner had totally

given a go-bye to the doctrine of public trust.         The facts

appearing on the record are glaring.
78. As already discussed hereinabove, as per the order of the

Tehsildar, Haveli, the land was allotted to the ‘Chavan Family’

on Eksali (yearly) lease and as per the undertaking of the

‘Chavan Family’ the possession of the land was to be returned

on the expiry of the one year and there has been no further

renewal. It further appears that thereafter the members of the

‘Chavan Family’ were in deep slumber.
78
79. From the records, it appears that one Mr. R.S. Chauhan,

a retired Police Inspector, residing in Pune and others, for the

first time, started agitating their rights on 4th August 1988.

They had addressed communications dated 4th August 1988,

30th August 1988 and 27th December 1990 for allotment of

subject land on permanent basis for cultivation in lieu of their

land at Survey No. 37, acquired for Kondhwa Leprosy Hospital.
80. It appears that thereafter for the first time the Collector,

Pune on 19th June 1991 recommended the permanent

allotment of the subject land to the ‘Chavan Family’ only

insofar as 3 Acres and 20 Gunthas are concerned.            The

Collector, Pune specifically observed that the ‘Chavan Family’

had the cultivation rights from 1969 only on 3 Acres and 20

Gunthas, whereas the rest of the land was reserved for village

animal feeding. The Collector, Pune, therefore, recommended

allotment of only 3 Acres and 20 Gunthas to the ‘Chavan

Family’ and also recommended that possession of rest of the

land should be handed over to the Forest Department.
81. It is to be noted that the office of the Collector, Pune on

26th August 1994, rejected the request of the Executive

Engineer, MSEB for establishment of High-Tension Sub-
79
Station on the ground that the land in question was reserved

as “Forest Land”.
82. The Divisional Commissioner in his letter dated 30th

November 1994 addressed to the Secretary, Revenue and

Forest Department, Mantralaya noted that the Collector, Pune

had opined that the ‘Chavan Family’ was entitled only to 3

Acres and 20 Gunthas. He also recorded the objection of the

Forest Department to the effect that the Forest Department

had asked for possession of the subject land for the purposes

of afforestation.
83. In spite of noticing all of these facts, the Divisional

Commissioner recommended that the entire subject land of 11

Hectare 89 Are be granted to the ‘Chavan Family’. Thereafter

the matter remained pending at the level of the State

Government.
84. The then Minister for Revenue considered the proposal

and came to a conclusion that the provisions of the 1980
FC

Act
were not applicable to the present case.    However, he

decided to seek the opinion of the Law and Judiciary

Department of the Government of Maharashtra. The Deputy

Secretary to Government, Law and Judiciary Department on
80
27th July 1998, relying on the judgment of this Court in the

case of Banshi Ram Modi (supra) opined that the permission

of the Government of India is not necessary. While doing so,

he specifically ignored the specific judgment of this Court in

the case of Ambica Quarry Works (supra) and the direction

of this Court dated 12th December 1996 in the present

proceedings.
85. Almost within a week thereafter, i.e. on 4th August 1998,

the Government of Maharashtra issued an order allotting the

land in favour of the ‘Chavan Family’. A corrigendum thereto,

vide order dated 13th August 1998, specifically provided that

the allotment of land was specifically for “Agricultural

purpose”. The Collector, Pune thereafter within a short span,

i.e. on 28th August 1998, allotted the subject land in favour of

the ‘Chavan Family’.
86. The alarming speed with which the events took place

from July to August 1998 speaks volumes.
87. As already discussed hereinabove, though the ‘Chavan

Family’ had already entered into transactions with Mr.

Aniruddha P. Deshpande, the Chief Promoter of the RRCHS,

they transferred the land in favour of RRCHS on 19th
81
December 1998. This is again done in breach of the allotment

order of 28th August 1998.     The Divisional Commissioner

thereafter vide order dated 30th October 1999, permitted the

sale of the subject land to the RRCHS on payment of 75% of

the price fixed by the Collector, Assistant Director, Town

Planning Department, Pune.
88. It is to be noted that though the powers for grant of

permission are with the Collector, it is the Divisional

Commissioner who exercised the said powers for reasons best

known to him.       Thereafter the District Collector granted

permission for use of the subject land for Non-Agricultural

purposes on 8th July 2005.
89. It is to be noted that all this has been done in the teeth

of various communications of the Forest Department since

1991 requesting the Revenue Department to transfer the land

to the Forest Department. It was also brought to the notice

of the Revenue Authorities by the Forest Department that a

plantation had already been carried out on the subject land in

the year 1995-96.
90. In the light of these glaring facts, we have no hesitation

in holding that the then Minister for Revenue, Government of
82
Maharashtra and the then Divisional Commissioner, Pune

have acted totally in breach of public trust to illegally cause

gain to private individuals at the cost of sacrificing precious

Forest Land.
91. In the conclusion, we have no hesitation to hold that the

allotment of the subject land to the ‘Chavan Family’ was in

blatant disregard to the provisions of the law inasmuch as it

was violative of
Section 2
of the 1980
FC Act
as well as the

directions issued by this Court from time to time. We also hold

that the allotment of the subject land was made, ignoring the

communications of the Forest Department which had insisted

that the said land could not be allotted inasmuch as, the same

was classified as a Forest Land. We also have no hesitation to

hold that the then Minister for Revenue and the then

Divisional Commissioner, Pune have given a total go-bye to the

doctrine of public trust inasmuch as, valuable forest land was

allotted to the ‘Chavan Family’ de hors the provisions of the

law.
92. While hearing this matter, another glaring issue has

come to the notice of the Court. It has been noticed that a vast

stretch of the land which is notified as ‘Forest Land’ is still in
83
possession of the Revenue Department.          Such a situation

creates many complexities as is evident in the present matter.

The Revenue Department, despite resistance from the Forest

Department,       allotted     the      land      to     private

individuals/institutions for non-forestry purposes.     This, in

turn, reduced the vital green cover. We, therefore, find that it

is necessary that a direction needs to be issued to all the State

Government and the Union Territories to hand over the

possession of the lands which are recorded as ‘Forest Land’

and which are in possession of the Revenue Department to the

Forest Department.
93. The report of the CEC would also reveal that there is

material to show that many of the Forest Lands have been

allotted to private individuals/institutions for non-forestry

purposes. Any such allotment after 12th December 1996, i.e.,

the date on which the directions were given by this Court in

the present proceedings, would not be sustainable in law.
94. It would, therefore, be imperative that wherever it is

possible to take back the possession of such land, the

State/Union Territory should do so and hand over the

possession to the Forest Department for forestry purposes.
84
However, if on account of such lands already being converted

for non-forest activities, it is found that taking back the

possession of the land would not be in the larger public

interest, then the States/Union Territories should recover the

cost of the land from such individuals/institutions and use

the said amount for the purpose of afforestation, restoration

and conservation.
VI.   CONCLUSION
95. We, therefore, dispose of the Interlocutory Applications

and the Writ Petition in the following terms:
(i)       We hold that the allotment of 11.89 ha of

                Reserve Forest land in Survey No.21 (old

                Survey No.20A) Kondhwa Budruk in District

                Pune for agriculture purposes on 28th August

                1998 and subsequent permission given for its

                sale in favour of RRCHS on 30th October 1999

                was totally illegal;
(ii)      We further hold that Environmental Clearance

                granted by the MoEF on 3rd July 2007 to

                RRCHS is illegal and is accordingly quashed

                and set aside;
85
(iii)   Since the State of Maharashtra has recalled

        the communication dated 4th August 1998

        approving the allotment of the subject land to

        the ‘Chavan Family’, we uphold the same;
(iv)    We direct that the possession of the subject

        land, which is reserved as a Forest Land, but

        is in possession of the Revenue Department,

        should   be     handed        over    to   the   Forest

        Department within a period of three months

        from today;
(v)     We further direct the Chief Secretaries of all

        the States and the Administrators of all the

        Union    Territories     to     constitute       Special

        Investigation    Teams        for    the   purpose    of

        examining as to whether any of the reserved

        Forest Land in the possession of the Revenue

        Department has been allotted to any private

        individuals/institutions for any purpose other

        than the forestry purpose;
(vi)    The   State     Governments          and   the    Union

        Territories are also directed to take steps to
86
take back the possession of the land from the

        persons/institutions in possession of such

        lands and handover the same to the Forest

        Department. In case, it is found that taking

        back the possession of the land would not be

        in the larger public interest, the State

        Governments/Union           Territories   should

        recover the cost of the said land from the

        persons/institutions   to     whom    they   were

        allotted and use the said amount for the

        purpose of development of forests; and
(vii)   We further direct the Chief Secretaries of all

        the States and the Administrators of all the

        Union Territories to constitute Special Teams

        to ensure that all such transfers take place

        within a period of one year from today.
Needless to state that hereinafter such land

        should be used only for the purpose of

        afforestation.
87
96. Before we part with this judgment, we place on record

our deep appreciation for Shri K. Parameshwar, learned Senior

Counsel, ably assisted by Mr. M.V. Mukunda, Ms. Kanti, Ms.

Raji Gururaj and Mr. Shreenivas Patil, learned counsel, for

rendering valuable assistance to this Court as Amicus Curiae.

We also place on record our appreciation for the efforts put in

by Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, Shri Shekhar Naphade and

Shri Aniruddha Joshi, learned Senior Counsel appearing for

the parties.
.................CJI
                                                   (B.R. GAVAI)



                           …………...................................J
                            (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)




                             …………................................J
                                 (K. VINOD CHANDRAN)

NEW DELHI;
MAY 15, 2025.
88