[Cites
4
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Satyama Dubey vs Union Of India on 27 October, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 5346, AIRONLINE 2020 SC 792
Bench:
V. Ramasubramanian
,
A. S. Bopanna
,
S. A. Bobde
1

                                                                   REPORTABLE


                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                   CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                              WRIT PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 296 OF 2020



                         Satyama Dubey & Ors.                       .… Petitioner(s)


                                                   Versus


                         Union of India & Ors.                      …. Respondent(s)


                                                      WITH


                                         Writ Petition (Crl) No.304/2020,
                                         Writ Petition (Crl) No.308/2020,
                                         Writ Petition (Crl) No.314/2020,
                                                       AND
                                          Writ Petition (Crl) No.316/2020




                                                  JUDGMENT
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
1.   The petitioners and all the intervening applicants in
GULSHAN KUMAR
ARORA
Date: 2020.10.27
15:59:21 IST
Reason:
these matters have raised concern with regard to the


                      WP (Crl) No.296/2020 etc.
2
manner in which a 19 years old girl hailing from Hathras,

  Uttar Pradesh is alleged to have been raped, brutally

  assaulted; due to which she lost her life and also the

  manner in which she was cremated. The Writ Petition (Crl)

  No.296/2020 was initially taken on board by this Court and

  notice was ordered to the respondents returnable in a week.

  In   the    meanwhile,         the     remaining         petitions       and      the

  applications were filed in respect of the same incident to

  seek for varied reliefs which are all ultimately in pursuit of a

  fair investigation and bring to justice the culprits.
2.    The details of the other applications and writ petitions

  are as follows:
Petition/Intervenin    Applicant/Petitioner                  Prayers
      g Applications
   Cr. M.P. No. 10597     Ramu alias Ram Kumar       Intervention         Application
   of 2020                                           seeking indulgence of Court
                                                     for ordering CBI investigation
                                                     or formation of SIT to
                                                     investigate the matter under a
                                                     sitting or retired Justice of SC
                                                     or HC. Further, transfer of trial
                                                     to Delhi is prayed for.
   I.A. No. 101799 of     All    India     Women     Prayer for impleadment as
   2020                   Conference        (NGO)    necessary party in the array of
                          through its General        petitioners
                          Secretary Ms. Kuljeet
                          Kaur
   Crl. M.P. No. 102148   Citizens for Justice and   Seeking      intervention  and
   of 2020                Peace            through   directions for:
Secretary                     1. Transfer       of    the
                                                           investigation to CBI
2. Protection of witnesses
                                                           by central para military



WP (Crl) No.296/2020 etc.
3
forces
3. Appointment of a retired
                                                        Judge      of  SC      to
                                                        investigate          the
                                                        circumstances which led
                                                        to the cremation of the
                                                        victim.
Crl. M.P. No. 105463   Radhika Vemula & Ors.   Praying         for       following
   of 2020                                        directions:
1. Transfer of all connected
                                                        cases of gang-rape and
                                                        death from U.P. to Delhi
                                                        Special Court
2. Constitution of SIT for
                                                        investigation into the
                                                        gang-rape and death
                                                        tragedy in order to avert
                                                        political interference
3. Restraining                 the
                                                        respondents               from
                                                        conducting        polygraph
                                                        test, narco-analysis or
                                                        brain mapping on the
                                                        victim’s family
4. Protection to victim’s
                                                        family        and        other
                                                        witnesses.
5. Directing respondents to
                                                        strictly implement
SC &
                                                        ST       (Prevention         of
                                                        Atrocities) Act, 1989
I.A. No. 103488 of     By Members of Delhi     Seeking orders for:
   2020                   High      Court and        1. Constitution of SIT to
                          Supreme Court Bar             investigate the gang-
                          Association                   rape and murder case
                                                        under the Court’s own
                                                        monitoring
2. Providing          adequate
                                                        protection        to        the
                                                        witnesses
3. Transfer of trial from U.P.
                                                        to SC/ST Special Court
                                                        in Delhi subject to
                                                        consent from the victim’s
                                                        family
4. Appointment of a Senior
                                                        Advocate as special
                                                        prosecutor
u/s 15
of the
                                                        SC/ST Act, 1989
   I.A. No. 106081 of     Satendra Kumar          Application                seeking
   2020                                           impleadment as respondent in
                                                  WP (Crl.) No. 296 of 2020 or
                                                  in the alternative seeking



WP (Crl) No.296/2020 etc.
4
permission to intervene in the
                                                      said matter.
Diary            No.   Letter petitions received   For Appropriate directions
   55441/2020, etc.       through      E-Mail    by   being sought for by SC in the
                          citizens                    gang-rape and murder case
   D.No.   54893/2020,    Letter petitions received   For Appropriate directions
   etc.                   through e-mail/by post      being sought for by SC in the
                                                      gang-rape and murder case
   IA No. 105728 of       Applicant/Shobha            Intervention       Application
   2020                   Gupta                       seeking      permission      to
                                                      intervene to make appropriate
                                                      submissions and suggestions
                                                      as the matter is of extreme
                                                      importance.
Crl MP No. 105362      Applicant/Rashtriya       Application             for
   of 2020                Dalit Bachao Andolan        Impleadment       as    he
                          Through its President       himself belongs to the
                          O.P Shukla and Others       SC      community     and
                                                      direction to R to ensure
                                                      dignified cremation of all
                                                      the victims of crime and
                                                      no discrimination to be
                                                      made toward SC, ST,
                                                      OBC
                                                    Direction               for
                                                      investigation against the
                                                      officials    who     were
                                                      responsible            for
                                                      cremation and illegal
                                                      detention of the family
                                                      members         to      be
                                                      monitored       by    this
                                                      Hon’ble Court.
Crl MP No. 105458      Applicant/Radhika         Application             for
   and 105460 of 2020     Vermula and Others          Impleadment            for
                                                      upholding the rights of
                                                      the      SC    and     ST
                                                      community and that of
                                                      society at large
                                                    seeking CBI and SIT
                                                      probe into the case as
                                                      the               impartial
                                                      investigation was being
                                                      conducted by the UP
                                                      police.
   Crl MP No. 105452      Applicant/Munnoka     Application for intervention
   of 2020                Samudaya              seeking an investigation in the
Samrakshana Munnani case against the accused and
                          through its President into the alleged lapses in the
                                                administration into the case.
WP (Crl) No.296/2020 etc.
5
WP(Crl) No. 304 of      Petitioner/Chandra         Prayer for;
2020                    Bhan Singh                    1. Mandamus                 for
   Chandra Bhan Singh                                       investigation of the role
   vs State of UP and                                       of R3-R7 for mishandling
   Others                                                   of body of the victim
                                                         2. Direction      to       the
                                                            Investigating agency to
                                                            get statement of the
                                                            Mother,     father     and
                                                            brother of the victim
                                                            before the magistrate
                                                            and if the allegation
                                                            made by the family are
   Connected: WP(Crl)      Connected:   Petitioner/         true to register FIR
No. 308 of 2020
Sushma Motilal Maurya            against the guilty.
   Sushma       Motilal
                                                      Connected: Direction to take
   Maurya vs State of
cognizance, constitution of the
   UP and Others
                                                      HC monitored Investigation,
                                                      inquiry and suspension of the
                                                      erring police, medical etc
                                                      trying to manipulate the
                                                      evidence, charges to be
                                                      framed against police who
                                                      were       responsible         for
                                                      cremation of the Victim.
WP (Crl) No. 314 of     Petitioner/ Public mail    Praying       for      following
   2020 Public mail        through its publisher
                                                      directions:
through its publisher
   vs Union of India                              1. Mandamus to R to fix
   and Others                                          the responsibilities of the
                                                       Police officials who burnt
                                                       the girl in midnight and
                                                       to punish them
2. Transfer the case to
                                                       Delhi from Hathras
3. Direction to R to make
                                                       special forum or frame
                                                       guidelines for such rape
                                                       in future.
WP (Crl) No. 316 of     Petitioner/   Chetan Petition seeking direction to:
2020        Chetan      Janardhan Kamble
                                                  1. Register offence u/s
   Janardhan Kamble
   Vs Union of India                                   166-A, 193 ,201, 202,
   and Others                                          203, 212, 217,153A and
                                                       339 of the
IPC
and 3(2)
                                                       and 4 of the SC and ST
                                                       Act 1989 against Govt
                                                       officials    involved     in
                                                       destruction of evidence
                                                  2. Investigation by Special
                                                            Task Force (excluding



WP (Crl) No.296/2020 etc.
6
CBI and UP police
                                          3. Deposit all the evidence
                                             including          videos
                                             collected      at      the
                                             Safdarjung hospital for
                                             examination             by
                                             independent forensic lab
                                          4. Direction         granting
                                             protection by CRPF to
                                             the     witnesses     and
                                             members of the family of
                                             victim            pending
                                             investigation.
3.    For a brief narration shorn of unnecessary details and

  to note the nature of the relief sought, the petition in W.P.

  (Crl.) No.296/2020 is referred. In the Writ Petition filed

  under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India the petitioners

  are praying that the Union of India and concerned

  authorities be ordered to conduct a fair investigation; if need

  arise by transferring the case to the Central Bureau of

  Investigation (‘CBI’ for short) or SIT be formed to investigate

  the matter. It is also prayed that a sitting or retired

  Supreme Court Judge or High Court Judge be appointed to

  look into the matter. The petitioners have further prayed

  that the case be transferred from Hathras, Uttar Pradesh to

  Delhi.
4.    The case as put forth is that a 19­year­old girl,

  resident of Hathras village in Uttar Pradesh was brutally


WP (Crl) No.296/2020 etc.
7
gang­raped. The manner in which she was assaulted is

  referred to in the petition. Though she was shifted to

  Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi, she breathed her last and she

  was cremated in the middle of the night without the

  presence of her family members. Considering the manner in

  which the entire incident had taken place, the petitioners

  contended that a fair investigation would be possible only if

  the matter is entrusted to an independent agency.
5.    The pleadings in the other writ petitions and the

  intervention applications are relating to the same incident

  though different reliefs have been sought, which in any

  event is to secure fair investigation and punish the guilty in

  accordance with law.
6.    At the outset, when the first of the petition was taken

  up by this Court on 16.10.2020, Mr. Tushar Mehta, learned

  Solicitor General had fairly submitted that the instant

  petition would not be considered as an adversarial litigation

  and the respondents are also interested that a fair

  investigation be conducted and the offenders be brought to

  book. At that stage, it was noticed that the Allahabad High

  Court, Lucknow Bench having taken note of the incident


WP (Crl) No.296/2020 etc.
8
had passed a detailed order dated 01.10.2020 and ordered

  registration      of      the   suo   moto   petition    being

  PIL(C)No.16150/2020. In that circumstance this Court was

  of the prima facie view that the petitions filed before this

  Court need not be entertained at this stage since the

  jurisdictional High Court was seized of the matter. However,

  Ms. Indira Jaising, learned Senior Counsel while intervening

  on behalf of the intervening advocates had raised concern

  with regard to the adequate protection being provided to the

  victim’s family members and the witnesses. Having found

  that such concern raised needs to be addressed, the learned

  Solicitor General was requested to secure instructions on

  these aspects and file an appropriate affidavit.
7.    Pursuant thereto, an affidavit dated 14.10.2020 sworn

  to by the Special Secretary, Home Department, Uttar

  Pradesh is filed, wherein the details of the security provided

  is indicated. In that regard it is stated that the parents, two

  brothers, one sister­in­law and grandmother of the victim

  who are residing at village Chandpa, District Hathras, Uttar

  Pradesh have been provided protection under a three­fold

  protection mechanism through (a) Armed Constabulary


WP (Crl) No.296/2020 etc.
9
Component, (b) Civil Police Component and (c) Installation

  of CCTV cameras/lights. The details of each of the

  component is also stated in the affidavit and it is further

  stated that the Inspector (In­charge) of Police Station

  Chandpa has been made In­charge of the aforesaid entire

  arrangement to deploy suitable police force for the same.

  The Circle Officer, Sadabad is to ensure robust security

  arrangement by holding regular clear briefings to the police

  force and to inform the family members about the security

  arrangements provided to them. The affidavit also states

  that on enquiry from the family members of the victim it is

  learnt that they have engaged Ms. Seema Kushwaha and

  Mr. Raj Ratan, Advocates on behalf of the family as their

  private advocates.
8.    The affidavit also indicates that the investigation by

  the CBI would be conducted under the supervision of the

  Court in a time bound manner. The Director General of

  Police, State of Uttar Pradesh has also filed an affidavit

  indicating that the State Government itself has sought

  investigation by the CBI to be conducted under the

  supervision of the Court and on 10.10.2020 the CBI


WP (Crl) No.296/2020 etc.
10
accepted     the   request   of   the   State    and   has   started

  investigation in respect of the crime, on 11.10.2020. The

  orders dated 01.10.2020 and 12.10.2020 passed by the

  High Court and the fact that the High Court has been

  apprised that the investigation by the CBI was in progress is

  stated therein.
9.    In addition to hearing Mr. Tushar Mehta, learned

  Solicitor General who appeared for the State, Mr. Harish

  Salve, learned Senior Counsel for DGP and Smt. Seema

  Kushwaha on behalf of the family members of the victim as

  also the other learned counsel lead by Ms. Indira Jaising,

  Mr. Colin Gonsalves, learned Senior Counsel who raised

  concern on behalf of the victim’s family in the various writ

  petitions and applications, we have taken note of the

  submission made by Mr. Sidharth Luthra, learned senior

  counsel who sought to appear on behalf of the accused to

  contend that the legal right available to the accused ought

  not to be ignored in the process.
10.   Though       various   contentions        were   urged,   the

  undisputed fact is that the investigation has in fact been

  entrusted by the State Government itself to the CBI on


WP (Crl) No.296/2020 etc.
11
10.10.2020 and the CBI has started investigation in respect

  of the crime on 11.10.2020. Therefore, the apprehensions

  expressed by the petitioners/applicants that there would be

  no    proper     investigation    if   the    Uttar   Pradesh     Police

  conducted        the   same      would       not   remain   open     for

  consideration at this stage and the grievance to that extent

  stands redressed. Though the petitioners had sought and

  the respondent­State also through their affidavit had

  indicated that this Court can monitor the same, as already

  referred    to    above,   a   PIL(C)No.16150/2020          has    been

  registered in the Allahabad High Court, Lucknow Bench,

  suo moto pursuant to its order dated 01.10.2020. From the

  order passed by the High Court it is noticed that the High

  Court has adequately delved into the aspects relating to the

  case to secure fair investigation and has also secured the

  presence of the father, mother, brother and sister­in­law of

  the victim and appropriate orders are being passed,

  including securing reports from various quarters. In that

  circumstance, we do not find it necessary to divest the High

  Court of the proceedings and take upon this Court to

  monitor the proceedings/investigation. That apart, the


WP (Crl) No.296/2020 etc.
12
incident having occurred within the jurisdiction of that High

  Court and all particulars being available, it would be

  appropriate for the High Court to proceed to monitor the

  investigation in the manner in which it would desire. In that

  view, it would be open for the writ petitioners/applicants

  herein to seek to intervene in the matter before the High

  Court subject to consideration of such request by the High

  Court and if it finds the need to take into consideration the

  contentions to be urged by the petitioners/applicants in

  that regard.
11.   Insofar as the protection to the victim’s family and the

  witnesses, the limited purpose for which this Court had

  directed notice and sought for an affidavit; the affidavit as

  filed no doubt indicates that sufficient steps have been

  taken by the State Government to provide protection. Ms.

  Indira Jaising, learned Senior Counsel would however,

  contend that the protection as provided through the State

  Police would not be appropriate and as such the protection

  be directed to be provided by the Central Reserve Police

  Force (CRPF). It is further contended by her that a Special




WP (Crl) No.296/2020 etc.
13
Public Prosecutor be appointed and the monitoring be

  made.
12.     Having taken note of the contentions and having

  perused the affidavit filed on behalf of the State Government

  we are convinced that steps have been taken by the State

  Government to make adequate arrangement for security to

  the victim’s family and witnesses. However, in a matter of

  the present nature it is necessary to address the normal

  perception and pessimism which cannot be said as being

  without justification.    In that view, without casting any

  aspersions on the security personnel of the State Police; in

  order to allay all apprehensions and only as a confidence

  building measure, we find it appropriate to direct that the

  security to the victim’s family and the witnesses shall be

  provided by the CRPF within a week from today.
13.   On the aspect relating to the investigation, since we

  have indicated that the High Court would look into that

  aspect of the matter, the CBI shall report to the High Court

  in the manner as would be directed by the High Court

  through its orders from time to time. On the request of Ms.

  Indira Jaising, learned senior counsel for appointment of a


WP (Crl) No.296/2020 etc.
14
Special Public Prosecutor we see no need to pass any

  specific order. This is an aspect which could be considered

  by the High Court in the light of the provisions of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of

  Atrocities) Act, 1989
. In the circumstance wherein the

  family members of the victim have chosen to engage Ms.

  Seema Kushwaha and Mr. Raj Ratan, Advocates, they would

  consider these aspects and make request on behalf of the

  victim in accordance with law if such need arises.
14.   Therefore, without expressing any opinion on the

  merits of the rival contentions, all aspects of the matter are

  left open to be considered by the High Court in PIL(C)

  No.16150/2020 relating to the incident regarding which the

  investigation is to be conducted by the CBI and also with

  regard to the grievance put forth alleging illegal cremation.

  With regard to the protection to the victim’s family and

  witnesses, the respondent No.2 (Chief Secretary, State of

  U.P) in WP(Crl) No.296/2020 shall bring this order to the

  notice of the competent officer of the CRPF forthwith with a

  request to provide adequate security to the victim’s family




WP (Crl) No.296/2020 etc.
15
and the witnesses and the CRPF shall take steps to provide

  the same and shall report the same to the High Court.
15.   Insofar as the transfer of the case to Delhi as sought

  by    the    petitioners/applicants,    Ms.    Seema     Kushwaha,

  learned counsel for the victim’s family indicated that the

  need for transfer would arise after the investigation is

  complete.     On this aspect we are also of the view that it

  would be appropriate for investigating agency to complete

  the investigation and in any event since the local police have

  been divested of the investigation and the CBI is carrying

  out    the    investigation   there    would   be   no   room   for

  apprehensions at this stage.           However, the issue as to

  whether the trial of the case is to be transferred is a matter

  which is kept open to be considered if need arises in future.
16.   Before parting, we take note of the submission of the

  learned Solicitor General about the name and relationship of

  the family members with the victim being depicted in the

  face of the order dated 12.10.2020 passed by the High Court

  in PIL(C) No.16150/2020. Since it is a requirement of law

  to avoid such disclosure, the High Court is requested to




WP (Crl) No.296/2020 etc.
16
delete the same and also morph the same in the digital

    records and avoid indication of such contents in future.
17.   In terms of the above observations and directions, the

    writ petitions and applications stand disposed of. No costs.
..…………....................CJI.
(S. A. Bobde)



                                  …..…………....................J.
                                  (A. S. Bopanna)



                                  ..…..………......................J
                                  (V. Ramasubramanian)
October 27, 2020
NEW DELHI




  WP (Crl) No.296/2020 etc.