[Cites
3
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Pravasi Legal Cell vs Union Of India on 1 October, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 747
Author:
R. Subhash Reddy
Bench:
M.R. Shah
,
R. Subhash Reddy
,
Ashok Bhushan
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.



                                                                                REPORTABLE

                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                             CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                        WRIT PETITION (C) NO.        OF 2020
                                               [DIARY NO.10966/2020]

                             Pravasi Legal Cell & Ors.                          …..Petitioners

                                                          Versus

                             Union of India & Ors.                            …..Respondents


                                                          WITH

                                          WRIT PETITION (C) NO.570 OF 2020;
                                          WRIT PETITION (C) NO.595 OF 2020;
                                                        AND
                                          WRIT PETITION (C) NO.952 OF 2020




                                                     JUDGMENT
R. Subhash Reddy, J.
1.   Background facts, and relief sought for, in this batch of

                             cases is similar, as such all these cases are heard together and

                             are being disposed of by this common judgment.
Signature Not Verified   2.   The pandemic situation of COVID­19, has adversely
Digitally signed by
MEENAKSHI KOHLI
Date: 2020.10.01
10:50:03 IST
Reason:                  affected the economy globally, in several sectors. Our country –

                             India – and civil aviation sector is not an exception to the same.
1
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

            To contain the pandemic situation of COVID­19, first lockdown

            was imposed by the Government of India, from 25 th March 2020

            to 14th April 2020. In view of such lockdown, a ban on operation

            of all domestic and international flights was imposed.         The

            lockdown period was further extended upto 03rd May 2020, with

            the ban continuing on operation of all domestic and international

            flights.     There was an issue of refund of air fare during the

            lockdown period, when domestic and international flights’

            operation was suspended. The Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA),

            while acknowledging the unusual situation that has arisen due

            to the lockdown imposed, to contain further spread of COVID­19

            and its consequential effect on the air passengers and airlines, by

            examining the grievances received from various quarters, issued

            an advisory to all stake holders in civil aviation sector in the

            shape of Office Memorandum dated 16th April 2020.              The

            advisory issued read as under:
“3. … … … …
(i)   If a passenger has booked a ticket during
                             the first lockdown period (from 25 th of
                             March to 14 of April, 2020) and the airline
                             has received payment for booking of the air
                             ticket during the first lockdown period for
                             travel during the same period, for both
                             domestic and international air travel and
                             refund is sought by the passenger against
                             that booking being cancelled, the Airline
                             shall refund the full amount collected
                             without levy of cancellation charge. The
                             refund shall be made within a period of
2
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

                            three weeks from the date of request of
                            cancellation.
(ii)   If a passenger has booked a ticket during
                            the first lockdown period and the airline
                            has received the payment for booking of air
                            ticket during first lockdown period (from
                            25th of March to 14th of April 2020) for travel
                            during the second lockdown period (from
                            15th of April to 3rd of May, 2020) for both
                            domestic and international air travel and
                            the passenger seeks refund on cancellation
                            of the ticket, the Airline shall refund the full
                            amount      collected     without     levy    of
                            cancellation charge. The refund shall be
                            made within a period of three weeks from
                            the date of request of cancellation.”


            In the same Memorandum, Government has issued directions to

            Directorate General of Civil Aviation to monitor the compliance of

            such advisories referred above.
3.    Writ Petition(C) being Diary No.10966 of 2020 is filed by a

            society registered under
Societies Registration Act, 1860
by way

            of public interest litigation, to declare the action on the part of

            the   respondent­airlines,      operating    domestic    as    well   as

            international flights in India, in not refunding the full amount

            collected for the tickets, due to the cancellation of flights in the

            wake of restrictions imposed by the Government of India to

            contain COVID­19 as arbitrary and in violation of Civil Aviation

            Requirements, issued by the Directorate General of Civil Aviation.
3
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

            A consequential relief is sought to direct the respondents to

            refund the full amount upon such cancellations.
4.    In this writ petition, it is the allegation of the petitioners

            that though it is obligatory on the part of the respondent­airlines,

            operating domestic as well as international flights, to refund the

            full amount collected for the tickets which are not utilised in view

            of the cancellation of flights in the wake of restrictions imposed

            by Government of India to contain COVID­19, respondents are

            providing a credit shell with the validity of one year, which is

            contrary to Civil Aviation Requirements (CAR) of May 2008. It is

            alleged that as per the CAR, the option of holding refund amount

            in credit shell by the airlines shall be prerogative of the

            passenger and not a default practice of the airline.          While

            referring to O.M. dated 16.04.2020 issued by the MoCA, it is

            alleged that the said Memorandum deals only with the refund for

            the tickets that were booked during the lockdown period and

            leaves out the majority of passengers who had booked tickets

            before the flights were banned. It is the case of the petitioners

            that by issuing O.M. dated 16.04.2020, the Government has

            indirectly approved the practice of airlines for providing Credit

            Shell for the tickets booked before the lockdown was declared

            and the same is in violation of CAR. By further alleging that the

            time lines for refund as mentioned in the O.M. dated 16.04.2020
4
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

            runs contrary to CAR, petitioners have sought relief by way of

            directions to the respondents to refund full amount collected for

            the tickets booked, any time for travel.
5.    W.P.(C)No.570    of   2020       is   filed   by   Air   Passengers

            Association of India, which is also in the nature of public interest

            litigation under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India, seeking

            directions to various airlines operating both – domestic and

            international flights – to refund the ticket amounts collected from

            the passengers of the flights which are cancelled on account of

            lockdown, with a consequential direction to the respondents to

            refund the same without levying any charges on account of

            cancellation etc. In this writ petition also, it is the allegation of

            the petitioner­Association that, the CARs have been issued in

            exercise of powers under provisions of
Aircrafts Act, 1934
, to

            implement the Convention relating to International Civil Aviation

            standards and recommended practices but same is not being

            followed to refund the fare amount in view of the cancellation of

            flights. By further detailing the dates of lockdown declared by

            the Government, it is alleged that the action on the part of the

            airlines in providing ‘Credit Shell’ instead of refunding the full

            amount collected for the tickets cancelled on account of

            cancellation of flights, is in clear violation of CARs.              The

            petitioner also alleges that the option of holding the refund
5
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

            amount in ‘Credit Shell’ by the airline shall be the prerogative of

            passenger not a default practice of the airline. While referring to

            the representation filed by it on 24.05.2020, and various

            complaints received from the numerous passengers regarding the

            actions of the airlines in not refunding the amounts spent by

            them on air tickets, it is alleged that the action of the

            respondents in withholding the amounts spent by them on air

            tickets is illegal and contrary to CAR. In this writ petition it is

            alleged that the several airlines are not acting as per the O.M.

            dated 16.04.2020 in refunding the amounts as directed and

            issuing ‘Credit Shell’ instead of refund.      With the aforesaid

            allegations, petitioner also seeks directions by way of declaration

            that the actions on the part of the airlines, which are operating

            domestic as well as international flights, in not refunding the full

            amount for the tickets due to cancellation of flights in the wake

            of restrictions imposed by the Government of India to contain

            COVID­19 is arbitrary and illegal with a consequential direction

            to refund the same.
6.    W.P.(C)No.952 of 2020 is filed by Col. Ashok Prehar (Retd.)

            and another seeking quashing of O.M. dated 16.04.2020 issued

            by the Ministry of Civil Aviation and also seeking a declaration

            that the denial of refund by the third respondent – Air India Ltd.

            – for tickets booked by them on 18.12.2019 to travel to United
6
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

            States of America on 08.05.2020 with a return ticket to India on

            05.06.2020, as illegal, arbitrary and contrary to CARs. They seek

            directions to refund the full amount of Rs.1,66,434/­ collected by

            respondent no.3 for the tickets booked by them on 18.12.2019.

            In this writ petition it is the case of the petitioners that, petitioner

            no.1 is a senior citizen who has served in Indian Army for 27

            years and retired as a Colonel and the petitioner no.2 is his wife

            and on 18.12.2019 they have booked tickets to Air India Flight

            No.AI­173 to travel to San Francisco, United States of America

            from New Delhi on 08.05.2020 with a return flight AI­102 from

            New York to New Delhi on 05.06.2020 for an amount of

            Rs.1,66,434/­.       While referring to the advisory issued by the

            United States of America, by way of Advisory dated 19.03.2020

            recommending to avoid any travel and the proceedings issued by

            the Director General of Civil Aviation, Government of India for

            banning flights during the lockdown period, it is alleged that in

            view of cancellation of flights they had no option but to cancel

            their tickets by seeking refund of the amount.            In this writ

            petition it is the specific case of the petitioners that the O.M.

            dated 16.04.2020 issued by the Ministry of Civil Aviation, which

            directs all airlines to pay full refund without levying any

            cancellation charges for the bookings made and payment

            received only, during the lockdown period from 25.03.2020 to
7
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

            03.05.2020, as illegal. It is alleged that the said Memorandum

            leaves out a majority of passengers including the petitioners who

            had booked their tickets to travel to United States of America,

            much earlier to restrictions imposed to control the spread of

            CORONA virus. Pleading discrimination for the passengers who

            had booked tickets during the lockdown period, and the

            passengers who had booked tickets earlier, petitioners seek

            quashing of O.M. dated 16.04.2020 by further declaration that

            denial of legitimate refund to the petitioners by the airlines is

            patently unfair and also states that the action of the third

            respondent in offering ‘Credit Shell’ instead of refund is

            unreasonable and unjustified. It is also pleaded that in view of

            their age and the pandemic situation in the world, the travel for

            leisure is likely to remain restricted in the foreseeable future.

            Petitioners, while pleading that giving ‘Credit Shell’ vouchers

            without refunding the full fare to the petitioners, as sought by

            them, runs contrary to CAR, allege that the denial of refund by

            third respondent amounts to unjust enrichment at the expense

            of the petitioners and similarly placed persons.       With the

            aforesaid allegations, petitioners seek quashing of O.M. dated

            16.04.2020, with a consequential direction to refund the full

            amount of Rs.1,66,434/­ collected by the third respondent for

            the flights booked by them on 18.12.2019.
8
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.
7.    W.P.(C)No.595 of 2020 is filed by Travel Agents Federation

            of India, a society registered under the
Societies Registration Act,

            1860
seeking declaration that the action on the part of the

            airlines operating domestic as well as international flights in

            India, in refusing to refund the full amount collected for tickets to

            travel during the period of ban on air travel, as illegal and

            arbitrary with a consequential direction to the respondents to

            facilitate refunds of the amounts received by the airlines towards

            the booking of tickets during the period of ban on air travel. In

            this writ petition, petitioner­Federation seeks directions against

            the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Directorate General of Civil

            Aviation, for issuance of appropriate directions to airlines for full

            refund on tickets booked for travel during the lockdown on

            account of their cancellation.        It is the allegation of the

            petitioners that there are certain ambiguities in the O.M. dated

            16.04.2020 and 19.04.2020, which are being used by the airlines

            to avoid payment of refund, as sought by the passengers towards

            the cancellation of flights. In writ petition, it is stated that there

            are many passengers who had booked their flights through travel

            agents who are the members of the present petitioner.           While

            stating that the flight booking process through travel agents is

            distinct from passengers who have booked the tickets directly

            from the airline. It is the allegation of the petitioner that instead
9
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

            of refunding the amount deposited by the travel agents with the

            airlines they are compelling the travel agents/passengers to

            accept the facility of ‘Credit Shell’, which compels the bookings to

            be rescheduled instead of cancellation. While pleading that there

            is no certainty in rescheduling the travel plans, petitioner­

            Federation has questioned the action of the respondents in

            offering ‘Credit Shell’ and seeks directions for refund of full

            amount in lieu of cancellation of tickets. In the writ petition, by

            giving details of various orders passed by the Government and

            also the Directorate General of Civil Aviation banning the flights

            during the lockdown period and ban imposed on operation of

            domestic as well as international flights, it is the case of the

            petitioner that non­refund of the amount by airlines for the

            tickets due to cancellation, is illegal and contrary to CAR. While

            referring to the CARs issued by DGCA and Rule 133A of the

            Aircraft Rules, it is alleged that holding the refund amount in

            credit shell by the airlines is the prerogative of the passenger and

            not a default practice of the airline. With reference to O.M. dated

            16.04.2020 issued by the MoCA, it is the case of the petitioner

            that the said Memorandum directs the airlines to refund value of

            only those tickets that were booked during the lockdown period

            by leaving vast majority of passengers who had booked tickets

            before the flights were banned and also on the tickets which are
10
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

            booked by the travel agents. It is the case of the petitioner that

            as per the practice in vogue there are several travel agents who

            have booked tickets to passengers even before receipt of fare

            amount from the passengers and if the refunds are not made to

            them, they will suffer undue hardship.      While referring to the

            situation of pandemic COVID­19 globally, it is stated that

            tourism industry is suffering from great financial losses and it is

            further unlikely that people will travel for leisure activities in

            near future, until the spread of COVID­19 is contained fully. It is

            the case of the petitioner that where the tickets are booked by

            travel agents from their account, refund should be made in the

            same manner and channel through which payments for tickets

            have been received by the airline.       It is alleged that such

            directions would secure fair and expedient justice by avoiding

            locking up of funds of the passengers as well as the members of

            the petitioner­Federation.
8.    The first Writ Petition (C) being Diary No.10966 of 2020 is

            filed by the Pravasi Legal Cell and other subsequent writ

            petitions are also tagged with the same. Pursuant to order of this

            Court, Airlines were impleaded as the party respondents, and

            some Airlines and others have filed applications on their own for

            intervening in the matter which were allowed by this Court.

            Common affidavit was filed on behalf of respondents nos.1 and 2
11
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

            – Union of India and Directorate General of Civil Aviation in the

            abovementioned writ petition. Individual affidavits were filed by

            the impleaded respondents on behalf of the Airlines; Travel

            Agents Federation of India and others who are allowed to be

            impleaded as party respondents.
9.    In the affidavit filed on behalf of respondent nos.1 and 2

            while denying the various allegations made by the petitioners,

            they have explained the existing legal regime with respect to

            refund of fares and clarified the circumstances which led to

            issuance of O.M. dated 16.04.2020.       While referring to the

            meetings held by the Ministry of Civil Aviation with the

            representatives of Airlines, the affidavit discloses the concerns

            highlighted during such meetings and indicated the proposed

            workable solutions keeping in view the interests of passengers as

            well as the airlines.    The Ministry of Civil Aviation after

            consulting all the stake holders arrived at certain formulations,

            which were referred to in the affidavit and deals with various

            situations, such as, for domestic airlines where tickets were

            booked by the passengers directly with the airline; for domestic

            airlines when the ticket had been booked through a travel agent,

            by the passenger with the airlines; for international travel when

            the ticket had been booked on an Indian carrier, when the

            booking is for ex­India; and for international travel when the
12
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

            tickets have been booked on a foreign carrier and the booking is

            ex­India.     The supplementary affidavit filed on behalf of

            respondent nos.1 and 2 further clarified on categories of

            passengers who are proposed to be covered and clarified the

            period of booking of tickets and also with regard to the credit

            shell. Further additional affidavit is also filed on behalf of the

            said respondents further clarifying with regard to credit shell

            proposals as proposed by the Government which were referred to

            in the earlier affidavits. Detailed affidavits are filed on behalf of

            the airlines and other stake holders who are impleaded as party

            respondents.
10.   We have heard Sri Sanjay Hegde, learned senior counsel

            appearing for the petitioner­Pravasi Legal Cell in W.P.(C).Diary

            No.10966 of 2020; Sri C.A. Sundaram, learned senior counsel

            appearing for the petitioner in W.P.(C)No.570 of 2020; Ms. Sonal

            Jain, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners in W.P.

            (C)No.952 of 2020 and Sri Harshwardhan Bhende, learned

            counsel appearing for the Travel Agents Federation of India; Sri

            Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General appearing for the Union

            of India; Sri Arvind P. Datar, learned senior counsel appearing for

            Go Airlines (India) Ltd.; Sri Harish N. Salve, learned senior

            counsel appearing for Spicejet Ltd.; Sri Mukul Rohtagi, learned

            senior counsel appearing for Interglobe Aviation Ltd. (Indigo
13
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

            Airline); Sri Pinaki Misra, learned senior counsel appearing for

            Tata SIA Airlines Ltd. (Vistara Airlines) and Air Asia India Ltd.

            and Sri Pallav Shishodia, learned senior counsel appearing for

            the Indian Association of Tour Operators.
11.   By    considering   the   grievances    amongst       the   airline

            passengers on the issue of refund of tickets by airlines, the

            Directorate General of Civil Aviation has issued Civil Aviation

            Requirements by proceedings dated 22nd May 2008. As indicated

            in the said requirements when the tickets are purchased by

            means of credit card payments, refund shall be made by airlines

            within seven days of cancellation; in case of cash transactions

            refund shall be made immediately; in case of purchase of tickets

            through travel agents airline shall ensure that the refund process

            is completed within 30 working days.         Further directions were

            issued to the airlines to refund all statutory taxes and User

            Development Fee/Airport Development Fee/Passenger Service

            Fee to the passengers in case of cancellation/non­utilisation of

            tickets.    Similar   such   Requirements      are   also   issued    by

            proceedings dated 06.08.2010 which were revised on 27.02.2019

            and clause 3.3 of the said Requirements deals with the issue

            relating to ‘cancellation of flight’ and the obligations on the

            airliner either to offer an alternate flight or refund the ticket as

            acceptable to the passenger.          In ordinary course the said
14
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

            requirements are to be followed by the airliner whenever there is

            a cancellation of tickets.
12.   In view of peculiar situation which has arisen on account of

            pandemic COVID­19, to resolve the issues raised by the various

            stake holders, while issuing notice this Court vide order dated

            12.06.2020 has passed the following order :
“… … … …
                      WRIT PETITION(CIVIL) .. Diary No.(s).10966/2020
                        Issue notice. Mr. Rajat Nair, learned counsel
                      accepts notice on behalf of the Union of India.
                        Let notice be issued to the other respondents.
                         Mr. Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General
                      appearing for the Union of India may file counter
                      affidavit to the writ petition within two weeks from
                      today.
Learned Solicitor General submits that a
                      suggestion given by Mr. Harish Salve, learned
                      senior counsel that the Ministry of Aviation shall
                      call for a meeting with the airlines and sort out all
                      the issues is a welcome suggestion and steps shall
                      be taken by the Ministry of Aviation to do the
                      needful.
Liberty is given to the airlines to file counter
                      affidavit within three weeks.
… … … …”
13.   In the affidavit filed on behalf of respondent nos.1 and 2 in

            compliance of order dated 12.06.2020, filed by Director General

            of Civil Aviation it is stated that after the order dated 12.06.2020

            passed by this Court, a meeting was held on 02.07.2020 at 17:00

            Hrs. under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Civil Aviation through
15
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

            video conferencing, to discuss issues relating to refund of air

            fares by airlines.   As referred in the affidavit, the meeting was

            attended by the following participants:
Name and Designation

            MoCA:
Shri Pradeep Singh Kharola, Secretary
1.

                  Smt. Usha Padhee, Joint Secretary
2.

                  Shri Amit Kumar Jha, SO
3.
4.    Shri Avinav Tiwari, ASO

            DGCA:
Shri Arun Kumar, DG
5.
Airlines:­

                  Shri Vinay Dubey, CEO, Go Air
6.

                  Shri Rajiv Bansal, CMD, Air India
7.

                  Shri K. Shyam Sundar, CEO, Air India Express
8.

                  Shri V. Hejmadi, Director Finance, Air India
9.

                  Shri Melwin D’Silva, ED (Commercial), Air India
10.

                  Shri Bhaskar Bhat, Chairman, Vistara
11.
12.   Shri Leslie Thng, CEO, Vistara

                  Shri Moin Wasil, Head (Regulations), Vistara
13.
16
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

                  Shri Ankur Garg, CCO, Air Asia
14.

                  Ms. Priya Mehra, Head (Legal), IndiGo
15.

                  Shri Sanjay Gupta, Head (Commercial), IndiGo
16.

                  Shri Chandan Sand, Spicejet
17.



            A copy of the Minutes of the meeting dated 02.07.2020 is also

            placed on record. Thereafter further follow­up meeting was held

            on 08.07.2020. By referring to two more meetings held by the

            Ministry on 11.07.2020 – one with Online Travel Agents and

            other with TAAI/TAFI representatives, minutes of such meeting

            are also placed on record.    While explaining the existing legal

            regime relating to refund of fares, it is stated that same is

            governed by Civil Aviation Requirements, which recognise the

            rights of air passengers to seek refund of their air tickets. While

            referring to relevant provisions of the CARs of 22.05.2008 and

            06.08.2010 as revised on 27.02.2019, it is stated that for

            cancellation of flights due to force majeure (extraordinary

            circumstances beyond the control of airline), though airline is not

            obligated to pay any compensation but it is obligated to refund

            the fare to the passengers. At the same time while referring to

            the meetings held by the respondent nos.1 and 2 concerning the

            issues which are raised by the passengers as well as the airlines,
17
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

            and other stake holders it is stated if any enforcement action is

            initiated by the DGCA for violations of CARs mentioned above,

            same may result in reduction/suspension of approved schedule

            of airline, who have already started operating their flights with

            limited capacity.      It is stated that any such strict enforcement

            action    against     airline   would       further   restrict/reduce        their

            operation and any such strict enforcement action may further

            jeopardise the possibility of generation of cash by the airline

            which can further adversely affect/delay the refund cycle.                     As

            suggested by the respondents, the workable solutions keeping in

            view the interests of both passengers as well as airlines the

            following formulations are arrived at to harmonise the interests of

            passengers and the viability of airlines to an extent.               The said

            formulations read as under:
“Formulations based on the discussions with
                     scheduled domestic airlines on refund of air fare
                     ­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
                     A. For domestic airlines when the ticket has been
                        booked directly by the passenger with the airline.
1. If the tickets have been booked during the first
                           lockdown period, i.e. 25th of March, 2020 to
                           14th of April, 2020 for the journeys to be
                           undertaken in both first and second lockdown
                           period i.e. from 25th of March, 2020 to 3rd of
                           May, 2020, in all such cases, full refund shall
                           be given by the airlines immediately (this is
                           being mandated vide MoCA’s OM dated 16TH
                           April, 2020 as the airlines were not supposed
                           to book such tickets).
18
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.
2. For all other cases, the airlines shall make all
                         endeavours to refund the collected amount to
                         the passenger within 15 days.
3. If on account of financial distress, if the airlines
                         are not able to do so they shall provide a credit
                         shell equal to the amount of fare collected.
                         This credit shell shall be issued in the name of
                         the passenger who has booked the ticket.
a. The passenger shall be able to consume the
                            credit shell up to 31st March, 2021 on any
                            route of his choice. If the passenger wants
                            to buy a ticket of value more than the credit
                            shell, then he can use cash to top it up. If
                            he wants to buy a ticket of value less than
                            the credit shell, he/she can do so and the
                            balance amount of credit shell shall be
                            available to him/her.
b. There shall be an incentive mechanism to
                            compensate the passenger if there is a delay
                            in consuming the credit shell – from the date
                            of cancellation upto 30th June, 2020 the
                            value of credit shell shall be enhanced by
                            0.5% of the face value (the amount of fare
                            collected) for every month or part thereof
                            between the date of cancellation and 30th
                            June, 2020. Thereafter, the value of credit
                            shell shall be enhanced by 0.75% of the face
                            value per month, up to March 2021.
c. The credit shell shall be transferable. The
                            passenger can transfer the credit shell to
                            any person, and the airlines shall honour
                            such a transfer. The airlines shall devise a
                            mechanism to facilitate such a transfer.
d. By the end of March, 2021, the Airlines shall
                            refund cash to the holder of the credit shell.
4. Notwithstanding what is stated above, the
                         airlines shall refund the full amount in case of
                         travellers who have since expired to the
19
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

                         account of the            passenger   or   to   his
                         representative.
B. For domestic airlines when the ticket has been
                      booked through a travel agent (including OTA) by
                      the passenger with the airline.
1. If the tickets have been booked during the
                         lockdown period for travel within the lockdown
                         period, in all such cases full refund shall be
                         given by the airlines immediately (this is being
                         mandated vide MoCA’s OM dated 16 th April,
                         2020 as the airlines were not supposed to book
                         such tickets). This amount shall be passed on
                         immediately by the Agent to the passengers.
2. For all other cases, the airlines shall make all
                         endeavours to refund the collected amount
                         within 15 days. This amount shall be passed
                         on immediately by the Agent to the passengers.
3. If on account of financial distress, if the airlines
                         are not able to do so they shall provide a credit
                         shell equal to the amount of fare collected.
                         This credit shell shall be issued in the name of
                         the passenger who has booked the ticket. The
                         credit shell shall be transferred by the Agent to
                         the passengers (if booking is through an agent).


                         a. The passenger shall be able to consume the
                            credit shell up to 31st March, 2021 on any
                            route of his choice. If the passenger wants
                            to buy a ticket of value more than the credit
                            shell, then he can use cash to top it up. If
                            he wants to buy a ticket of value less than
                            the credit shell, he/she can do so and the
                            balance amount of credit shell shall be
                            available to him/her.
b. There shall be an incentive mechanism to
                            compensate the passenger if there is a delay
                            in consuming the credit shell – from the date
20
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

                             of cancellation up to 30th June, 2020 the
                             value of credit shell shall be enhanced by
                             0.5% of the face value (the amount of fare
                             collected) for every month or part thereof
                             between the date of cancellation and 30th
                             June, 2020. Thereafter, the value of credit
                             shell shall be enhanced by 0.75% of the face
                             value per month, up to March 2021.
c. The credit shell shall be transferable. The
                            passenger can transfer the credit shell to
                            any person, and the airlines shall honour
                            such a transfer. The airlines shall devise a
                            mechanism to facilitate such a transfer.
d. By the end of March, 2021, the Airlines shall
                            refund cash to the holder of the credit shell.


                         e. The travel agents shall be entitled for their
                            usual fees/service charges/commission.
4. Notwithstanding what is stated above, the
                         airlines shall refund the full amount in case of
                         persons who have since expired. This amount
                         shall be passed on immediately by the Agent to
                         the passengers.
C. For international travel when the ticket has been
                      booked on an Indian carrier and the booking is
                      ex­India
1. If the tickets have been booked during the
                         lockdown period for travel within the lockdown
                         period, in all such cases full refund shall be
                         given by the airlines immediately (this is being
                         mandated vide MoCA’s OM dated 16 th April,
                         2020 as the airlines were not supposed to book
                         such tickets). This amount shall be passed on
                         immediately by the Agent to the passengers, as
                         the case may be.
21
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.
2. For all other cases, the airlines shall make all
                         endeavours to refund the collected amount
                         within 15 days. This amount shall be passed
                         on immediately by the Agent to the passengers,
                         as the case may be.
3. If on account of financial distress, if the airlines
                         are not able to do so they shall provide a credit
                         shell equal to the amount of fare collected.
                         This credit shell shall be issued in the name of
                         the passenger who has booked the ticket. The
                         credit shell shall be transferred by the Agent to
                         the passengers (if booking is through an agent).


                         a. The passenger shall be able to consume the
                            credit shell up to 31st March, 2021 on any
                            route of his choice. If the passenger wants
                            to buy a ticket of value more than the credit
                            shell, then he can use cash to top it up. If
                            he wants to buy a ticket of value less than
                            the credit shell, he/she can do so and the
                            balance amount of credit shell shall be
                            available to him/her.
b. There shall be an incentive mechanism to
                            compensate the passenger if there is a delay
                            in consuming the credit shell – from the date
                            of cancellation up to 30th June, 2020 the
                            value of credit shell shall be enhanced by
                            0.5% of the face value (the amount of fare
                            collected) for every month or part thereof
                            between the date of cancellation and 30th
                            June, 2020. Thereafter, the value of credit
                            shell shall be enhanced by 0.75% of the face
                            value per month, up to March 2021.
c. The credit shell shall be transferable. The
                            passenger can transfer the credit shell to
                            any person, and the airlines shall honour
                            such a transfer. The airlines shall devise a
                            mechanism to facilitate such a transfer.
22
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

                         d. By the end of March, 2021, the Airlines shall
                            refund cash to the holder of the credit shell.


                         e. Notwithstanding what is stated above, the
                            airlines shall refund the full amount in case
                            of persons who have since expired. This
                            amount shall be passed on immediately by
                            the Agent to the passenger’s representative.


                   D. For international travel when the ticket has been
                      booked on a foreign carrier and the booking is ex­
                      India
1. If the tickets have been booked during the
                         lockdown period for travel within the lockdown
                         period, in all such cases full refund shall be
                         given by the airlines immediately (this is being
                         mandated vide MoCA’s OM dated 16 th April,
                         2020 as the airlines were not supposed to book
                         such tickets). This amount shall be passed on
                         immediately by the Agent to the passengers, as
                         the case may be.
2. For all other cases, the airlines shall refund the
                         collected amount to the passenger within 15
                         days.     This amount shall be passed on
                         immediately by the Agent to the passengers. (If
                         the booking is through an agent).”
14.   Further affidavit in the form of supplementary affidavit is

            filed on behalf of respondent nos.1 and 2 which is more in the

            nature of a clarificatory one on certain doubts expressed by the

            learned counsel for the petitioners. While clarifying the category

            of passengers who are proposed to be covered under the

            proposed formulations mentioned in the earlier affidavit, it is

            clarified that the following categories are covered:
23
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

                    “(i)      Passengers who had booked their tickets
                              directly from the domestic airline for domestic
                              travel;
(ii)      Passengers who had booked their tickets
                               through a travel agent (including OTA) for
                               domestic airline for domestic travel;
(iii)     International travel passengers who had
                               booked their ticket on an Indian carrier and
                               the booking is ex­India;
(iv)      International travel passengers who had
                               booked their ticket on a foreign carrier and
                               the booking is ex­India.
Though the term ex­India is not defined in the
Aircraft Act, 1934
and the Aircraft Rules, 1937, but
                    in aviation industry this term denotes the flights
                    which are originating from India.”


            Further clarification is also made on period of booking of tickets.

            It is stated that the formulations suggested will cover category of

            cases where passengers who have booked the tickets prior to

            lockdown for travel upto 24th May 2020 and refund of fares to

            passengers covered under this category shall be governed by the

            proposed formulation relating to credit shell and incentive

            scheme.         Further, passengers who have booked tickets during

            lockdown         for   travel   during    lockdown,   such   category   of

            passengers are entitled for immediate refund of fares by the

            airline as the airlines were not supposed to book such tickets.

            With regard to passengers who have booked tickets at any period
24
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

            of time but for travel after 24 th May 2020 it is stated that the

            passengers covered under this category shall be governed by the

            provisions of CAR. While clarifying the issue raised by the tour

            operators with regard to credit shell, it is stated that in this

            category there are two types of purchase of ticket by the agents.

            The first mode is that when initially passengers pay the money to

            agent and agent purchases ticket for the passenger and the

            second mode is the one where agent purchases the ticket for the

            passengers through its advance deposit with the airline and the

            passengers pay the money either at the time of consumption of

            ticket or may be even after consumption of ticket. In the affidavit

            it is made clear that even in cases where tickets are purchased

            by tour operator, who has paid the money to the airline for

            purchasing the ticket for the client but the client is yet to pay

            that money to the agent, then on cancellation of ticket and

            converting it into a credit shell, the ticket will remain in the name

            of passenger and in case passenger utilises the credit shell he

            will have to pay to the agent and not to the airline. However, in

            case the passenger does not utilise the credit shell till 31 st March

            2021, then airline will have to refund the amount as per

            proposed formulation and money will go back to the same

            account of the agent from which the ticket amount was paid to

            the airline. It is also clarified that in case passenger in whose
25
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

            name the ticket is booked does not utilise the credit shell till 31 st

            March 2021, then the airline will have to refund with interest

            prescribed in the formulation to the agent from whose account

            the ticket was booked.
15.   Referring to supplementary affidavit filed on behalf of

            respondent nos.1 and 2 learned counsel appearing for the agents

            have submitted that when the tickets are purchased by the agent

            for the passenger by paying their money which is yet to be

            received from the passenger, there should not be any difficulty

            for giving the credit shell in the name of the agent himself who

            has purchased the ticket. When it was pointed out that as per

            the supplementary affidavit filed by the respondent nos.1 and 2 it

            was made clear that in cases where tickets were purchased by

            agents for passengers, where credit shell is given in the name of

            passenger, if it is not utilised before 31 st March 2021 money will

            be returned to the account of agent from whose account money

            was paid to the airline,    there should not be any difficulty in

            issuing credit shell in the name of agent, the learned Solicitor

            General obtained instructions in this regard and filed additional

            affidavit on 24th September 2020 on behalf of respondent nos.1

            and 2. In this affidavit, it is stated that the existing regulatory

            mechanism recognises the contract between the passenger and

            the airlines only, for a ticket which is purchased and for which a
26
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

            named passenger only can be accounted for in the ‘passenger

            manifest’ of a schedule flight which is to be maintained as per

            the best international practices and regulations.              The travel

            agent, if any, involved in the purchase of any ticket on behalf of

            any passenger remains only a via­media, leaving the principal

            contract between the airline and the passenger only. Therefore,

            the proposed formulation suggested earlier, only recognises the

            contract between the airline and the passenger of a purchased

            ticket.   As such it is stated that credit shell is proposed to be

            issued in the name of passengers only who have booked their

            tickets through agents and it is not feasible to issue a credit shell

            in the name of agent, as much as ticket was purchased in the

            name of passenger but at the same time it is clearly stated that if

            such voucher is not used before 31 st March 2021 as per the

            formulation, money has to be paid back by the airliner through

            the same account from which they have received money.
16.     In view of such formulations which are arrived at during

            the course of meetings held by the respondent nos.1 and 2 with

            other     stake   holders,   airlines   etc.,   it   is   submitted   that

            substantially their grievances stand resolved but at the same

            time certain issues were raised during the course of hearing.
17.     Sri Sanjay Hegde, learned senior advocate appearing for the

            Pravasi Legal Cell has submitted that in view of the proposals as
27
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

            mentioned in the affidavit filed by the respondent nos.1 and 2,

            their grievances are substantially redressed but at the same time

            he has submitted that for the bookings made for foreign air travel

            through Indian carriers outside the country, same formulation as

            proposed by the respondent nos.1 and 2 can be applied. Sri C.A.

            Sundaram,      learned   senior   counsel   appearing   for   the   Air

            Passengers Association of India has submitted that whatever the

            mode they have booked, all passengers are entitled for refund

            immediately.     It is submitted that the problems faced by the

            airlines is no ground for not refunding the money which is paid

            by the passengers. Sri Harshwardhan Bhende, learned counsel

            appearing for the Travel Agents Federation of India has

            submitted that when the tickets are booked by travel agents by

            investing their money on behalf of the passengers there is no

            reason for not issuing credit shell in the name of agents.          Sri

            Pallav Shishodia, learned senior counsel appearing for Indian

            Association of Tour Operators has contended that, when tickets

            are booked by agents, there is no reason for not issuing credit

            shell in the name of agents. It is further submitted that in case

            credit shell is not utilised by 31st of March 2021, refund has to

            come back to the same account of the agent, from which account

            money is paid for bookings.
28
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.
18.   Shri Harish Salve, learned senior counsel appearing for

            Spicejet Ltd., in view of the stand of respondent nos.1 and 2 in

            their first affidavit, has stated that the formulations arrived at as

            mentioned in the affidavit are by and large acceptable to his

            client. Sri Rohtagi, learned senior counsel appearing for Indigo

            Airlines, also has submitted that the suggestions/ formulations

            as suggested in the affidavit filed on behalf of respondent nos.1

            and 2 are acceptable. Shri Pinaki Misra, learned senior counsel

            appearing for Tata SIA Airlines Ltd. (Vistara Airlines) and Air Asia

            India Ltd. has submitted that the incentive mechanism suggested

            for enhancing the face value of the credit shell, in the affidavit

            filed by respondent nos.1 and 2 itself is reasonable and no higher

            amount of interest may be considered on the refund. Sri Arvind

            Datar, learned senior counsel appearing for Go Airlines India Ltd.

            by drawing our attention to the detailed affidavit filed on its

            behalf has submitted that COVID­19 is an existential threat to

            commerce generally, and to airlines in particular. It is submitted

            that in developed countries airline industry has been able to

            secure itself more broad­based State relief (whether by bail­out or

            otherwise, including dispensations from refunds).      However, no

            comparable measures have yet been introduced in India.            By

            referring to facts and figures as mentioned in the affidavit,

            learned senior counsel has submitted that airlines is one of the
29
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

            worst affected sectors on account of pandemic COVID­19.

            Learned counsel drew our attention to the Report dated 09 th June

            2020, of IATA (the world­wide Aviation Industry Association) on

            the economic performance of the airline industry. In its report,

            after predicting a world­wide US$ 434 billion drop in airline

            revenue and related indirect tax receipts and a 50.6% fall in

            passenger demand it further states that GDP growth is likely to

            contract by 5.0% in 2020; COVID­19 will have a significant

            impact on international trade (a 13% decline); 2020 will be the

            worst year in the history of airlines with net losses of $84.3

            billion; and 32 million jobs supported by aviation are at risk etc.

            Referring to the severe liquidity crunch faced by airlines it is

            submitted that if the credit shells are not utilised by 31 st March

            2021, it is not possible to refund the money as ordered and

            learned counsel has requested to extend the time to encash

            credit shell at least upto 31st March 2022 to balance the equities.
19.   Though the various contentious issues are raised on both

            sides and at the same time the suggestions/formulations as

            suggested by respondent nos.1 and 2 in the affidavits filed before

            this Court are by and large acceptable to the majority of stake

            holders. In ordinary course modalities and timelines for refund

            on cancellation of tickets are governed by, the Civil Aviation

            Requirements, i.e. CAR dated 22nd May 2008; 06th August 2010
30
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

            as revised on 27th February 2019, and the said Requirements are

            issued by the competent authority in exercise of powers under

            the provisions of
Aircrafts Act, 1934
and the Rules made

            thereunder. But at the same time we cannot lose sight of the

            present situation prevailing in the country and across the globe,

            i.e. the effect of pandemic COVID­19. It cannot be disputed that

            the civil aviation sector, which is one of the important sectors, is

            seriously affected in view of the ban imposed for operating flights.

            Added to the same, air passenger traffic has come down heavily

            and which is gradually being restored. At this moment any strict

            enforcement action of the CARs would further restrict/reduce

            their operations and such enforcement action may further

            jeopardise the possibilities of generation of cash by airlines which

            can further adversely affect/delay the refund cycle.          Strict

            enforcement of Civil Aviation Requirements at this moment may

            not yield any meaningful result for any stake holder. In view of

            the suggestions and formulations arrived at in the meetings held

            by respondent nos.1 and 2, which are acceptable to the majority

            of stake holders, have to be implemented in letter and spirit. We

            also feel that such formulations are workable solutions in these

            peculiar circumstances which are prevailing in the country. The

            grievances which are raised on behalf of agents can be taken care

            by this Court by issuing appropriate directions wherever
31
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

            bookings are made by them, so as to see that their interest is

            safeguarded.    Sri Arvind Datar, learned senior counsel, though

            has argued to extend the timelines for encashment of credit shell

            at least up to 31st March 2022 or any other shorter period but we

            are not inclined to accept the same, keeping in mind that the

            passengers who, with the hope of travel, have booked their

            tickets by spending their own money. For these reasons we are

            not inclined to delve any further on any of the contentions and

            deem it appropriate to dispose of this batch of cases with the

            following directions:
1.     If a passenger has booked a ticket during the
                 lockdown period (from 25th March, 2020 to 24th May,
                 2020) for travel during lockdown period and the
                 airline has received payment for booking of air ticket
                 for travel during the same period, for both domestic
                 and international air travel and the refund is sought
                 by   the   passenger   against   that   booking   being
                 cancelled, the airline shall refund the full amount
                 collected without any cancellation charges.        The
                 refund shall be made within a period of three weeks
                 from the date of cancellation.
2.     If the tickets have been booked during the
                 lockdown period through a travel agent for a travel
                 within the lockdown period, in all such cases full
                 refund shall be given by the airlines immediately.
On such refund, the amount shall be passed on
                 immediately by the agent to the passengers.
32
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.
3.       Passengers who booked tickets at any period
                 of time but for travel after 24th May, 2020 – refund of
                 fares to the passengers covered under this category
                 shall be governed by the provisions of Civil Aviation
                 Requirements (CAR).
4.       Even for international travel, when the tickets
                 have been booked on an Indian carrier and the
                 booking is ex­India, if the tickets have been booked
                 during the lockdown period for travel within the
                 lockdown period, immediate refund shall be made.
5.       If the tickets are booked for international
                 travel on a foreign carrier and the booking is ex­India
                 during the lockdown period for travel within the
                 lockdown period, full refund shall be given by the
                 airlines and said amount shall be passed on
                 immediately     by   the   agent   to   the   passengers,
                 wherever such tickets are booked through agents. In
                 all other cases airline shall refund the collected
                 amount to the passenger within a period of three
                 weeks.
6.       In all other cases, the airlines shall make all
                 endeavours to refund the collected amount to the
                 passenger within 15 days from today. If on account
                 of financial distress, any airline / airlines are not
                 able to do so, they shall provide credit shell, equal to
                 the amount of fare collected, in the name of
                 passenger when the booking is done either directly
                 by the passenger or through travel agent so as to
                 consume the same on or before 31st March, 2021. It
                 is open to the passenger either to utilize such credit
33
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

                 shell upto 31st March, 2021 on any route of his
                 choice or the passenger can transfer the credit shell
                 to any person including the travel agent through
                 whom he / she has booked the ticket and the
                 airlines shall honour such a transfer.
6.1.    The credit shell issued in the name of the
                 passenger shall be transferable which can be utilized
                 upto 31st March, 2021 and the concerned airline
                 shall   honour    such     a   transfer   by   devising   a
                 mechanism to facilitate such a transfer.         It is also
                 made clear that such credit shell can be utilized by
                 the concerned agent through whom the ticket is
                 booked, for third party use.        It is also made clear
                 that even in cases where credit shell is transferred to
                 third party, same is to be utilized only through the
                 agent who has booked the ticket at the first instance.
7.      In cases where passengers have purchased
                 the ticket through an agent, and credit shell is
                 issued in the name of passenger, such credit shell is
                 to be utilized only through the agent who has booked
                 the ticket.      In cases where tickets are booked
                 through agent, credit shell as issued in the name of
                 the passenger which is not utilized by 31st March,
                 2021, refund of the fare collected shall be made to
                 the same account from which account amount was
                 received by the airline.
8.      In all cases where credit shell is issued there
                 shall be an incentive to compensate the passenger
                 from the date of cancellation upto 30th June, 2020 in
                 which event the credit shell shall be enhanced by
34
W.P.(C)D.No.10966 of 2020 etc.

                  0.5% of the face value (the amount of fare collected)
                  for every month or part thereof between the date of
                  cancellation and 30th June, 2020.     Thereafter the
                  value of the credit shell shall be enhanced by 0.75%
                  of the face value per month upto 31st March, 2021.



            Further, the second respondent­Directorate, shall ensure strict

            compliance of the directions referred above, by issuing necessary

            instructions to the all concerned.
20.    With the above directions, these writ petitions are disposed

            of.
………….………………………………...J.
                                         [ASHOK BHUSHAN]



                                         ….…………………………………………J.
                                         [R. SUBHASH REDDY]



                                         ….…………………………………………J.
                                         [M.R. SHAH]

            New Delhi.
October 01, 2020.
35