[Cites
5
, Cited by
75
]
Supreme Court of India
Shantilal Gulabchand Mutha vs Tata Engineerng & Locomotive ... on 18 March, 2013
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2013 SC 341, AIRONLINE 2013 SC 409
Bench:
Fakkir Mohamed Ibrahim Kalifulla
,
B.S. Chauhan
REPORTABLE




                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                        CIVIL APPEAL NO.6162 OF 2005




      Shantilal Gulabchand Mutha                   … Appellant


                                     Vs.


      Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co. Ltd.  & Anr.     … Respondents




                                  O R D E R
1.    This appeal has been preferred against the  judgment  and  order
      dated 22.6.2005 of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay,  passed  in
      Appeal No.478 of 2005 in Notice of  Motion  No.503  of  2004  in  Suit
      No.1924 of 1988.
2.    Facts and circumstances giving rise to this appeal are :
A.    That the appellant had purchased five Tata Diesel Vehicles  from
      the respondent No.1 for a sum of Rs.9,58,913/- which was to be paid in
      8 installments through respondent No.2 as per repayment schedule.  The
      appellant alleges that eight Bills  of  Exchange  were  drawn  by  the
      respondent no.1 upon the respondent no.2 – banker of the appellant and
      by way of which the entire amount was  paid.   Respondent  no.1  filed
      Suit No.1924 of 1988 on 2.6.1988 against the appellant as well as  the
      banker for  recovery  of  sum  of  Rs.5,66,000/-  alongwith  interest.
Summons were served upon  the  appellant  and  he  entered  appearance
      through advocate to contest the suit.  However, subsequently under the
      impression that the entire amount had already been paid,  he  did  not
      file the written statement.  The High  Court  decreed  the  suit  vide
      judgment and decree dated 12.11.2003 under  the  provisions  of
Order
      VIII Rule 10  of  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure
1908,  (hereinafter
      referred to as ‘
CPC
’) without considering any issue  involved  therein
      or taking note of the pleadings in the plaint itself.
      B.    Aggrieved, the appellant took out a  Notice  of  Motion  bearing
      no.503 of 2004 in the said suit for  setting  aside  ex  parte  decree
      dated  12.11.2003,  however,  it  stood  rejected  vide  order   dated
      10.12.2004 holding it to be not maintainable in view of division bench
      judgment of the Bombay High Court wherein it had been  held  that  any
      decree passed under
Order VIII Rule 10 CPC
could not be  subjected  to
      the application under
Order IX Rule 13 CPC
.
C.    Aggrieved,  the  appellant  filed  the  appeal  which  has  been
      dismissed vide order  dated  22.6.2005  concurring  with  the  learned
      Single Judge.
Hence, this appeal.
3.    We have heard Shri Prasenjit Keswani, learned  counsel  for  the
      appellant and Shri Debmalaya Banerjee, learned counsel for  respondent
      no.1 and perused the record.
4.    This Court in
Balraj Taneja & Anr. V. Sunil Madan  &  Anr.
,  AIR
      1999 SC 3381 dealt with the issue and held that even  in  such   fact-
      situation, the court should not act blindly on the averments  made  in
      the plaint merely because the written statement has not been filed  by
      the defendant traversing the facts set out by the  plaintiff  therein.
      Where a written statement has not been filed  by  the  defendant,  the
      court should be little cautious  in proceeding under Order VIII,  Rule
      10,
CPC
. Before passing the judgment against  the  defendant  it  must
      ensure that even if the facts set out in the  plaint  are  treated  to
      have been admitted, a judgment could possibly by passed in  favour  of
      the plaintiff without requiring him to prove any fact mentioned in the
      plaint.  It is a matter of Court’s satisfaction and,  therefore,  only
      on being satisfied that there is no  fact  which  need  be  proved  on
      account of  deemed  admission,  the  court  can  conveniently  pass  a
      judgment  against  the  defendant  who  failed  to  file  the  written
      statement.  However, if the plaint itself  indicates  that  there  are
      disputed questions of fact involved in the case  regarding  which  two
      different versions are set out in the plaint itself, it would  not  be
      safe for the Court to pass a judgment without requiring the  plaintiff
      to prove the facts so as to settle the factual controversy.  The power
      of  the  court  to  proceed  under
Order  VIII,  Rule   10   CPC
is
      discretionary.  The court further held that  judgment  as  defined  in
Section 2(9)
CPC means the statement given by the Judge of the grounds
      for a decree or  order.   Therefore,  the  judgment  should  be  self-
      contained document from which it should appear as  to  what  were  the
      facts of the case and what was the controversy which was tried  to  be
      settled by the court and in what manner.  The process of reasoning  by
      which the court came to the ultimate conclusion and decreed  the  suit
      should be reflected clearly in the judgment.  The court  further  held
      as under:-
“Whether it is a case which is contested by  the  defendants  by
           filing a written statement, or a case which  proceeds  ex  parte
           and is ultimately decided as an ex parte case, or is a  case  in
           which the written statement is not filed and the case is decided
           under Order 8 Rule 10, the court has to write a  judgment  which
           must be in conformity with the provisions  of  the  Code  or  at
           least  set  out  the  reasoning  by  which  the  controversy  is
           resolved.” (Emphasis added)
5.
In
Bogidhola Tea & Trading Co. Ltd. & Anr. v. Hira  Lal  Somani
,
      AIR 2008 SC 911, this Court while reiterating a similar view  observed
      that a decree under
Order VIII, Rule  10  CPC
should  not  be  passed
      unless the averments made in plaint are established.  In the facts and
      circumstances of a case, the court must decide the issue of limitation
      also, if so, involved.
(See also:
Ramesh Chand Ardawatlya v. Anil Panjwani
, AIR 2003 SC 2508)
6.    In view  of  the  above,  it  appears  to  be  a  settled  legal
      proposition  that  the  relief  under
Order  VIII  Rule  10  CPC
is
      discretionary, and court has to be more cautious while exercising such
      power where defendant fails to file the  written  statement.  Even  in
      such circumstances, the court must be satisfied that there is no  fact
      which need to be proved in spite of deemed admission by the defendant,
      and the court must give reasons for passing  such  judgment,  however,
      short it be, but by reading the judgment, a party must understood what
      were the facts and circumstances on the basis of which the court  must
      proceed, and under what reasoning the suit has been decreed.
7.    The instant case is required to be examined in the light of  the
      aforesaid settled legal propositions.  It is evident from  the  plaint
      that eight Bills of Exchange, all dated 4.6.1982  for  the  respective
      amounts had been inclusive of interest and each one of the said  bills
      were accepted by the appellant payable at  the  Mercantile  Bank  Ltd.
      Bombay and the said bills were discounted by the  respondent/plaintiff
      with its bankers.  It is further admitted in the plaint that the  bank
      of the appellant paid the said amount to the  respondent/plaintiff  on
      the respective dates, as the five amounts have been mentioned in  para
      5 of the plaint.  However, as the same  did  not  satisfy  the  entire
      demand, the suit was filed with the following prayer:-
“That the Defendant No.1 and Defendant No.2 may be  ordered  and
           decreed to pay to the plaintiff the  sum  of  Rs.999388.30p.  as
           mentioned in paragraph 7 above together with interest on the sum
           of Rs.5,66,000/- at the rate of 18.5% per annum from the date of
           suit till payments.”
8.    The Trial Court while deciding Suit No.1924 of 1988 decreed  the
      suit vide judgment and decree dated 12.11.2003, which reads as under:-
“Advocate for the plaintiffs is present.  Nobody is present  for
           the defendants.  The matter is on board for  proceeding  against
           the defendants for want of written statement.  Suit is of  1988.
           So far no written statement is filed.  Therefore, there shall be
           decree in favour of the plaintiffs and  against  the  defendants
           under Order VIII Rule10
of the Code of Civil Procedure
for a sum
           of Rs.9,99,388.30 with interest on the amount  of  Rs.5,66,000/-
           at 12% p.a. from the date  of  the  suit  till  realization  and
           costs. Prayer (a) only of the plaint is  granted  in  the  above
           terms.  Decree be drawn up accordingly.”
9.    The appellant take Notice of Motion to set aside  the  aforesaid
      judgment and  decree  which  was  dismissed  and  the  said  order  of
      dismissal has been  approved  by  the  division  bench.   We  are  not
      examining the issue as to whether such a judgment and decree ex  parte
      could be subjected to the provisions of
Order IX Rule 13 CPC
but  the
      court has not examined  as  to  whether  the  suit  was  filed  within
      limitation and whether on the basis of pleadings, the  relief  granted
      by the court could have been granted.  The court did not even consider
      it proper to examine the case prima facie before passing  the  decree,
      as is evident from the above quotation. The same is complete  impugned
      judgment.
10.   As the Trial Court failed to meet the parameters
laid  down  by
this court to proceed under
Order VIII Rule 10 CPC
, the  judgment  and
      decree of the Trial Court dated 12.11.2003 is set aside and  the  case
      is remanded to the Trial Court to decide afresh.  The appellant is  at
      liberty to file the written statement within a period of 3 weeks  from
      today and the Trial Court is at liberty to proceed in accordance  with
      law thereafter. As the matter is very old, we request the Trial  Court
      to conclude the trial expeditiously.  The Original Record, if any, may
      be sent back forthwith.
Before parting with the case, we would like to clarify  that  we
      have not decided the issue as to whether application  under
Order  IX
      Rule 13 CPC
in such a case is maintainable.
The appeal is disposed of accordingly.
...……………………………...................................J.
                               (Dr. B.S. CHAUHAN)




                       …..………………………….. ...................................J.
                                          (FAKKIR MOHAMED IBRAHIM KALIFULLA)


      NEW DELHI
      MARCH 18, 2013.
-----------------------
8