[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S.Ashoka Metal Decor Pvt.Ltd. vs Commissioner Of Trade Tax,Lucknow on 9 January, 2023
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
Krishna Murari
,
M.R. Shah
REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 108 OF 2013


          AMD Industries Limited
          (Earlier known as M/s. Ashoka Metal
          Décor Pvt. Ltd.)                                            …Appellant(s)


                                                   Versus


          Commissioner of Trade Tax,
          Lucknow and Anr.                                           …Respondent(s)



                                              JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.             I.A. No. 118667 of 2021 is allowed. The appellant is permitted to

          change its name in the cause title from M/s. Ashoka Metal Décor Pvt.

          Ltd. to AMD Industries Limited and the I.A. is accordingly disposed of.
2.             Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

          and order passed by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in Trade

          Tax Revision No. 275 of 2004 by which the High Court has dismissed
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Neetu Sachdeva
the said revision application preferred by the appellant herein and has
Date: 2023.01.09
17:21:27 IST
Reason:
confirmed the order passed by the learned Trade Tax Tribunal, Lucknow
1
Bench, Lucknow (hereinafter referred to as “Tribunal”) and the

Assessing Officer holding that for the goods manufactured, the appellant

is not entitled to the exemption under Section 4-A (5) of the U.P. Trade

Tax Act (hereinafter referred to as “Act”), the manufacturer – original

revisionist has preferred the present appeal.
3.    The facts leading to the present appeal in nutshell are as under:-
3.1   The appellant herein established the unit for manufacture of “Spun

Line Crown Cork” in the year 1986, used as one of the packing materials

of the 'glass bottles'. The appellant submitted an application on

24.05.2000 for granting eligibility certificate under Section 4-A of the Act

before the Divisional Level Committee for manufacture of “double Lip

Dry Blend Crown” under the program of diversification.


3.2   On the basis of the joint spot inquiry consisting of two members

committee, the appellant was granted the eligibility certificate under

‘modernisation’ instead of eligibility certificate under ‘diversification’

scheme.
3.3   At this stage, it is required to be noted that if the goods

manufactured would have been considered as a new product under the

diversification scheme, the appellant was entitled to the exemption under

Section 4-A(5) of the Act.    The appellant was denied the exemption
2
under Section 4-A(5) of the Act.      The appellant preferred an appeal

under Section 10 of the Act against the order dated 10.12.2003 passed

under Section 4-A of the Act before the Trade Tax Tribunal contending

inter alia that the process of manufacture and the machineries used for

both the products (existing and the new) are different.


3.4   It was also the case on behalf of the appellant that the existing

(old) product cannot be manufactured on the new installed machine and

vice-a-versa, the new product cannot be manufactured on the old

machines. It was also the case on behalf of the appellant that one of the

major raw materials for both the products are not the same and that

ultimate use of both the products are different.
3.5   It was submitted that under the term “modernization” only those

units fall, which by the modern technical produce the same goods and

the scheme of “modernization” do not apply on the units which produce

different goods.
3.6   The appeal preferred by the appellant came to be dismissed. The

second appeal before the Tribunal also came to be dismissed. It was

specifically held that the nature of goods being produced under the

modern technology is not different than the goods produced by the unit

earlier, as both the produced material are used in packing the bottles of
3
cold drinks and therefore, as the goods manufactured are not different

but the same and used for the same purpose, the appeals came to be

dismissed.   Against the order passed by the Tribunal, the revision

application before the High Court has been dismissed by the impugned

judgment and order, and, hence the present appeal.
4.    Shri Atul Yeshwant Chitale, learned Senior Advocate appearing on

behalf of the appellant has submitted that the issue involved in the

present appeal is with respect to the interpretation of Explanation 5 to

Section 4-A(5) of the Act, which grants exemption from payment of trade

tax to units, which had undertaken ‘diversification’ in their units on or

after 31.03.1995.
4.1   It is submitted that the appellant is a manufacturer of crown corks

used for sealing glass bottles.   Initially, it was producing “Spun Line

Crown Corks”. However, subsequently, it diversified the manufacturing

activity to manufacture “Double Lip Dry Blend Crowns” for which it

imported new plant and machinery and invested a fixed capital cost of

Rs. 4.5 crores.
4.2   It is submitted that the new product being manufactured by the

appellant is an eco-friendly product using PVC granules as raw
4
materials.   The new product is different from the “Spun Line Crown

Corks” manufactured earlier.
4.3   It is submitted that the new product is an entirely different product

from what was manufactured earlier and the use of the product was also

different. It is submitted that the new product was an entirely different

product in commercial parlance. It is submitted that the mere fact that

both the products are commonly known as “Corks” would have no

relevance. It is submitted that similarly the fact that both the products

are used for sealing glass bottles would also not be a relevant criterion.

The test which was to be applied is whether the goods were different

from those manufactured earlier. It is submitted that the appellant was

entitled to claim exemption from trade tax since it has undertaken

diversification and the goods i.e., “Double Lip Dry Blend Crowns” now

being manufactured are of a nature different from those manufactured

earlier by the appellant being a different commercial commodity.


4.4   It is submitted that the Trade Tax Tribunal as well as the High

Court have misconstrued the Explanation 5 to Section 4-A(5) of the Act

and the notification dated 31.03.1995 on the basis of which the appellant

had sought eligibility certificate on the ground of diversification.
5
4.5   It is submitted that in order to be entitled to claim exemption from

trade tax on the ground of diversification, the goods had to be of a

nature different from those manufactured earlier. Ultimate use of the

goods is irrelevant for the consideration for exemption from trade tax.

Different goods can be used for same thing. However, this does not

mean that the nature of the goods is the same. It is submitted that even

mere fact that both the goods are commonly known as “Corks” is also

not a relevant factor for determining if the goods are different goods.


4.6   The learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant

has drawn our attention to the difference in earlier product and the

subsequent product. In support of his submission that the new product

is altogether a different product than that of the earlier product, he has

also drawn our attention to the difference in process of manufacturing of

both the products.
4.7   It is submitted that both, the Trade Tax Tribunal and the High

Court have erroneously introduced a new criterion that the use of both

products is the same. It is submitted that the criteria of use of goods is

neither provided in the section nor in the notification. Section 4-A(5) and

the notification only requires the nature of goods to be different. It is

submitted that as per the settled position of law, an exemption

notification is required to be given a literal meaning. Reliance is placed
6
on the decisions of this Court in the case of
Hansraj Gordhandas Vs.

H.H. Dave, Assistant Collector of Central Excise Customs, Surat

and Ors.
, AIR 1970 SC 755;
Parle Biscuits (P) Ltd. Vs. State of Bihar

and Ors.
, (
2005) 9 SCC 669 and Assistant Commissioner (CT) LTU

and Anr. Vs. Amara Raja Batteries Limited
, (2009) 8 SCC 209.


4.8   Making above submissions and relying upon the above decisions,

it is prayed to allow the present appeal.
5.    Present appeal is vehemently opposed by Shri Bhakti Vardhan

Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents.


5.1   It is submitted that in the present case, the appellant established a

unit for manufacture of the “Spun Line Crown Corks” used as one of the

packing materials of the glass bottles, to be sold to the glass bottlers. It

is submitted that after ‘modernisation’, the appellant manufactured

“Corks” also used as one of the packing materials of the glass bottles.


5.2   It is submitted that under Section 4-A(5) of the Act and the

notification, exemption from trade tax shall be available to a unit, which

has undertaken “expansion, diversification or modernization” and

manufactures the different goods from those manufactured earlier by

such undertaking. It is submitted that therefore, the issue involved in the

present appeal is as to whether the investment of the appellant can be
7
said to be in the unit, having undergone “diversification” or is in a unit

having undergone “modernization” and whether the goods manufactured

by    the   appellant’s   unit     has       undergone   “diversification”   or

“modernization”?
5.3   It is submitted that therefore under Section 4-A(5) of the Act, the

requirement for availing the benefits under the head of “diversification”

therefore is that the “goods of different nature is required to be

produced”. It is submitted that the exemption notification issued under

Section 4-A also uses the terminology and resultantly the test for

diversification is the “production of a goods which is different in nature

than that was produced earlier”.
5.4   It is submitted that clause (5) of Section 4-A also makes the legal

position clear. It is submitted that the opening sentence of clause (5)

seeks to refer “expansion, diversification and modernization” and then

clarifying in one separate sub-clause the exercise of “expansion or

modernization” means the “increase in production” and thereafter in

another separate sub-clause clarifies “diversification” to mean that the

production of goods of a different kind, distinct and different in nature, a

new article as understood in commercial circle.
8
5.5   It is submitted that the test is how a good is understood in the

commercial parlance or commercial circle. It is submitted that the goods

manufactured by the appellant prior to the investment exercise was

subject to levy under the class of goods namely “Corks”.          After the

investment exercise, the manufacturing of the “Double Lip Dry Blend

Crowns” is merely the enhanced quality and quantity of goods namely

“Corks” earlier produced before the investment exercise. It is submitted

that therefore, the investment was an exercise of “modernization and

expansion” only and the different goods were not manufactured, not

entitled to the exemption under Section 4-A(5) of the Act and the

notification issued under Section 4-A.         In support of his above

submissions, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents

has
placed reliance upon
the decision of this Court in the case of
Commissioner of Sales Tax, Orissa and Anr. Vs. Jagannath Cotton

Company and Anr.
, (1995) 5 SCC 527 (para 5).
5.6   It is further submitted that mere change in technology now the

goods being manufactured by the unit of the appellant cannot be

considered “different in nature” than the goods being manufactured

earlier by the unit because of the fact that the goods are being utilized

for packing the bottles. It is submitted that as per the settled position of

law, the exemption notifications are to be strictly construed.
9
5.7    Making above submissions and relying upon the findings recorded

by the High Court that the goods manufactured now by the appellant

cannot be said to be different than that of the goods manufactured

earlier and the goods manufactured earlier and the new are used as

“Corks”, it is prayed to dismiss the present appeal.
6.     Heard the learned counsel for the respective parties at length.
7.     The short question which is posed for consideration of this court

is:-
“Whether for the goods, manufactured by use of modern

       technologies can be said to be “diversification”, and

       manufacturing of the goods of a nature different from the

       goods manufactured earlier entitle the appellant to claim

       the exemption from trade tax as provided under Section

       4-A (5) of the U.P. Trade Tax Act?
8.     While considering the aforesaid issue, relevant provisions of

Section 4-A are required to be referred to, more particularly, Section 4-

A(2)(c), Section 4-A(5)(b)(i) & (ii) and Section 4-A(5)(c), which reads as

under:-
“Section 4-A - Exemption from trade tax in certain
       cases
10
(1)     …………..
(2) It shall be lawful for the State Government to specify in
the notification under sub-section (1) that the exemption
from, or reduction in the rate of tax, shall be admissible—
(a) …….
(b) …….
(bb) …….
(c) in respect of those goods only which are manufactured
in a unit which has undertaken expansion, diversification
or modernisation on or after April 1, 1990, and which in
the case of diversification, are different from the
goods manufactured before such diversification, and
in the case of expansion or modernisation are additional
production as a result of such expansion or
modernisation; and

(3) …….
(4) …….
(5) "Unit      which  has      undertaken expansion,
diversification or modernisation" means an industrial
undertaking—
(a) …….
(b) whose first date of production of goods,--
(i) of a nature different from those manufactured
      earlier by such undertaking, in case of units
      undertaking diversification, and
(ii) manufactured in excess of base production in
      such undertaking, in case of units undertaking
      expansion or modernisation, falls at any time after
      March 31, 1990;
11
(c) the production capacity whereof except as provided in
      the proviso to sub-section (1) has increased by atleast
      twenty-five percent as a result of expansion or
      modernisation, or wherein goods of a nature different
      from those manufactured earlier are manufactured
      after diversification;”



8.1   Thus, on a fair reading of the aforesaid provisions, it is clear that in

case of “diversification” the goods manufactured by diversification shall

be different from the goods manufactured before such diversification

[Section 4-A(2)(c)].
8.2   In the case of “expansion or modernization”, the exemption shall

be available, if there is an additional production as a result of such

modernization or expansion. In the present case, we are concerned with

the case of “diversification”. Therefore, the goods manufactured after

diversification must be different goods from the goods manufactured

before such diversification. As per the settled position of law, in case of

an exemption notification/exemption provision, the same is required to

be construed literally and the person claiming the exemption must satisfy

all the conditions of exemption provision.
8.3   In the present case, the appellant was manufacturing / producing

“Spun Line Crown Cork” used for sealing the glass bottles. With the use

of modern technologies, now the appellant is manufacturing “Double Lip
12
Dry Blend Crowns”, which is also used for sealing the glass bottles. The

earlier product being manufactured by the appellant was used for sealing

glass bottles and subsequently the additional product produced with the

use of modern technology is also being used for the same purpose

namely, “sealing glass bottles”. Therefore, the same cannot be said to

be manufacturing of goods different from being manufactured before

such diversification. With the passage of time, due to advancement in

technology, if there is a replacement of the old machinery with the new

machinery for improvement in quality and quantity of a product, at the

most, it can be said to be expansion and/or modernization, but it cannot

be said to be “diversification”, which is “manufacturing of goods different

from the goods manufactured before such diversification”. In a case of

“diversification”, the effect has to be that the quality and quantity of the

product should have been improved and/or increased but if the ultimate

use is the same, the product manufactured on use of modern and/or

advanced technology cannot be said to be manufacturing the different

goods for claiming the exemption from payment of trade tax. The words

used in Section 4-A are very clear and unambiguous. As per the settled

proposition of law and as observed hereinabove, the Statute and more

particularly, the exemption provisions are to be read as they are and to

be construed literally and should be given a literal meaning. Giving the

literal meaning to the exemption provision namely, Section 4-A, it cannot
13
be said that the appellant is entitled to the exemption as claimed.



8.4   Considering the aforesaid facts and circumstances of the case and

as observed hereinabove, when the provisions of the Act unequivocally

provides that the “diversification” can be considered only in a case where

“goods of different nature” are produced, and only then the exemption

shall be available. The goods manufactured on “diversification” must be

a “different”, “distinct” and a “separate” good in nature. In the present

case, the goods manufactured on use of advance and/or modern

technology, cannot be said to be a different commercial activity at all.

The High Court has not committed any error in refusing to grant

exemption to the appellant. We are in complete agreement with the view

taken by the High Court.
9.    In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, present

appeal fails and the same deserves to be dismissed and is accordingly

dismissed. No costs.
………………………………….J.
                                            [M.R. SHAH]


NEW DELHI;                               ………………………………….J.
JANUARY 09, 2023.                          [KRISHNA MURARI]
14