[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
John Anthonisamy @ John vs State Rep. By The Inspector Of Police on 19 January, 2023
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
C.T. Ravikumar
,
M.R. Shah
REPORTABLE
                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 466 OF 2017




          John Anthonisamy @ John                                     …Appellant(s)
                                                Versus
          State, Rep. by the Inspector of Police                    …Respondent(s)




                                             JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.             Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned final

                         judgment and order dated 22.07.2016 passed by the High

                         Court of Judicature at Madras in Criminal Appeal No.

                         171/2015, by which, the High Court has dismissed the

                         said appeal preferred by the appellant herein – original

                         accused No. 1 and has confirmed the conviction and

                         sentence imposed by the learned Trial Court for the
Signature Not Verified
offences punishable under Section 302 read with Section
Digitally signed by
Neetu Sachdeva
Date: 2023.01.19
16:40:12 IST
Reason:                  201 of the
IPC
, the original accused No. 1 has preferred the

                         present appeal.
1
2.    The prosecution case is elaborately stated by the High

      Court in the impugned judgment in paragraph 2. As per

      the case of the prosecution, the deceased was employed as

      a driver by PW-1 to drive a taxi owned by him. On

      26.06.2006 at about 06.30 a.m., the deceased left his

      house after informing his wife. That thereafter, he did not

      return.
2.1   That A-1 was also driving a taxi for some time and in such

      a way he knew the deceased. It was alleged that all the

      accused persons on 23.05.2006 hatched a conspiracy to

      engage the car driven by the deceased and after taking him

      to a far-off isolated place, kill him and then to steal the car

      and other personal belongings owned by the deceased. As

      per the prosecution case, in pursuance of the said

      conspiracy, on 26.05.2006, A-2 to A-5 met A-1 at Pollachi

      Thermutti Bus Stop. Then, A-1 spoke to the deceased and

      fixed him for going to Udumalpet in the taxi driven by the

      deceased. Accordingly, the deceased came in the taxi to

      Thermutti Bus Stop. Then, all the five accused got into the

      taxi. The taxi proceeded towards Udumalpet. When it was
2
nearing the village known as Ammapatti at an isolated

      place, the accused wanted the deceased to stop the car for

      a while. The deceased stopped the car, as soon as the car

      came to a halt suddenly A-2 came to strangulate the

      deceased by neck. A-3 and A-4 tied the hands of the

      deceased and A-5 tied the legs of the deceased with ropes.

      Then, they put the deceased in between the front and back

      seats of the car. A-3 to A-5 sat on the back seat of the car

      and ensured that the deceased was not crying. The car

      was driven by A-1. The deceased died. All the five accused

      put the dead body of the deceased into the pit and buried

      the same. Thereafter, all the five accused ran away from

      the scene of occurrence with the car.
2.2   PW-1 tried to contact the deceased on 26.06.2006 over

      phone, but his phone was found to be switched off mode

      and PW-1 went to the house of deceased and met PW-3

      and PW-3 informed him that after 26.06.2006 at about

      6.30 am deceased was not seen. After the search the

      deceased was not found and therefore, PW-1 made a

      complaint to the Police on 30.06.2006. PW-11, the then
3
Sub-Inspector of Police registered a case as Crime No.

363/2006 under
Section 406
of IPC. That thereafter, an

FIR   was   assigned   to   the   jurisdictional   court.   That

thereafter, PW-11 started investigation. He recorded the

statement of the relevant witnesses. However, thereafter,

PW-11 closed the case on 04.02.2007 as undetected. The

learned Magistrate accepted the closure report. However,

thereafter on the basis of a letter alleged to have been

written by A-1 addressed to PW-22 which was received by

him on 29.12.2007, by which A-1 had alleged to have

confessed that he along with other accused engaged the

taxi in question, took the driver (deceased), killed him and

buried the dead body and took away the taxi. According to

the confessional statement recorded in the said letter some

parts of the car were taken by A-2 to A-5. PW-22 went to

the Police Station along with the said letter on 30.12.2007

and handed over the letter to PW-30. On the basis of the

same, the investigation begun. On the basis of the

statement of A-1, the place where the car was hidden and

the dead body was buried came to be recovered. Thus, the

dead body was recovered at the instance of A-1. PW-30
4
altered the case into one under
Sections 302
and
396
of

      IPC. PW-30 arrested A-1. During the investigation, on

      disclosure statement of A-1, PW-30 recovered the car

      without engine and the gear box from PW-16 as identified

      by A-1. On the disclosure statement of A-1, the car engine

      and the gear box were also recovered. As observed

      hereinabove, the dead body was exhumed from the place

      identified by A-1. Post-mortem of the deceased was

      conducted. Several injuries were found. On completion of

      the investigation, PW-30 filed the chargesheet against all

      the accused. The case was committed to the Sessions

      Court. The accused pleaded not guilty and therefore, all of

      them came to be tried for the offence under
Section 302
and other offence of
IPC
.
2.3   The prosecution examined a number of witnesses. PW-16

      can be said to be the star witness from whom the car

      driven by the deceased was seized by the Police on the

      disclosure statement made by A-1. After conclusion of the

      prosecution evidence, further statements of the accused

      under
Section 313
CrPC were recorded. The accused
5
denied   the   allegations   against   them.   The   accused

     examined DW-1 in their defence. On appreciation of

     evidence the learned Trial Court convicted A-1 – appellant

     herein. The judgment and order of conviction and sentence

     passed by the learned Trial Court has been confirmed by

     the High Court by the impugned judgment and order.

     Hence, the present appeal at the instance of the appellant

     – original accused No. 1.
3.   Ms. N.S. Nappinai, learned counsel has appeared on behalf

     of the appellant – accused and Dr. Joseph Aristotle S.,

     learned counsel has appeared on behalf of the State.
4.   Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the accused has

     vehemently submitted that in the present case the

     prosecution case is based solely on the circumstantial

     evidence. It is submitted that it is settled law that before

     convicting an accused each link in the chain ought to be

     established such that it leads to the irresistible conclusion

     of guilt of the accused.
6
4.1   It is submitted that in the present case, the prosecution

      has not established that the death of the deceased was

      homicidal. It is submitted that as such the doctor who

      performed the post-mortem was not able to give any

      definite opinion as to the cause of the death.


4.2   It is submitted that in the present case both, learned Trial

      Court as well as the High Court has convicted the accused

      based   on   the   confessional   statement/extra    judicial

      confession. It is submitted that as per the settled

      proposition of law extra judicial confession is weak

      evidence. It is submitted that recovery pursuant to the

      confession of accused does not establish anything beyond

      possession of stolen goods and it does not implicate

      accused of committing murder.
4.3   It is submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf

      of the accused that in the present case the recovery of the

      dead body from the place shown by A-1 and that recovery

      of car without engine and gear box from the place

      identified by A-1 and thereafter, recovery of gear box of the

      car from PW-16 cannot be believed as the same was on the
7
basis of the confessional statement/disclosure statement.
It is submitted that therefore, the circumstances set out by

      the High Court do not support the prosecution case.


4.4   It is further submitted that so far as the recovery of the

      dead body from the place identified by A-1 is concerned, it

      is submitted that as such on 31.12.2007, after the arrest,

      A-2 gave a voluntary confessional statement before Police

      in which he disclosed the place of burial. It is submitted

      that the place of burial was disclosed by A-2. It is

      submitted that therefore the place of burial of the dead

      body was within the prior knowledge of Police.


4.5   It is further submitted that when PW-22 received the extra

      judicial confession letter on 29.12.2007, which he handed

      over to the Police on 30.12.2007 in that letter place of

      burial of the dead body was mentioned. It is submitted

      that the place of burial was disclosed on 29.12.2007 itself.

      It is submitted that the Police arrested A-1 at the instance

      of PW-22 on 30.12.2007. It is submitted that as such the

      alleged extra judicial confession letter addressed to PW-22

      received on 29.12.2007 is not believable at all and as such
8
the Courts below has not believed the same. It is

      submitted that the said letter has been rejected by the

      High Court. It is submitted that therefore, the entire

      investigation can be said to be tainted and cannot be relied

      upon.
4.6   It is vehemently submitted that the place of burial was not

      discovered from A-1’s confessional statement but it was

      discovered already from A-2’s confession and extra judicial

      confession. It is submitted that therefore, the appellant –

      accused could not have been convicted on the basis of

      recovery of the dead body on the alleged disclosure made

      by the A-1.
4.7   Now so far as the recovery of the car without engine and

      gear box recovered from the place identified by A-1 is

      concerned, it is submitted that for the aforesaid the High

      Court has relied upon PW-16 evidence. It is submitted that

      however, the learned Trial Court rejected the PW-16

      evidence and suspected the recovery of M.O.1, M.O.2 and

      M.O.3 i.e., the car, engine, and gear box, respectively. It is

      submitted that while accepting PW-16 evidence, the High
9
Court has failed to consider and/or discuss the evidence

      recorded by the learned Trial Court.
4.8   Now so far as the recovery of engine and gear box of the

      car recovered from PW-17 is concerned, it is submitted

      that all the witnesses in connection with the recovery of

      stolen objects like PW-17 and PW-23 did not support the

      recovery of car – M.O.1. It is submitted that therefore, the

      alleged recovery of gear box, engine and car speakers

      stated to have been recovered in pursuance of alleged

      confession are not acceptable.
4.9   It is submitted that therefore when the prosecution case

      rests only on the above circumstantial evidence, each of

      which is demonstrably untrustworthy and inadequate to

      sustain the serious charges against the accused, the

      prosecution is required to establish the guilt of the

      accused beyond reasonable doubt and/or to substantiate

      each link to sustain the conviction, which the prosecution

      has failed.
10
4.10   It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing

       on behalf of the accused – appellant that A-1 has already

       undergone 15 years in prison for a crime which he did not

       commit and therefore, it is prayed to allow the present

       appeal and acquit the accused.
5.     Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State while

       opposing the present appeal has vehemently submitted

       that in the present case, the dead body was exhumed from

       the place shown and identified by A-1. It is submitted that

       the place of burial shown by A-1 and the identification of

       the body by him has been duly proved by the prosecution.

       The evidence of anthropology of expert is accepted. It is

       submitted that even the stolen car was also recovered on

       the basis of disclosure statement made by A-1. It is

       submitted that engine and gear box were found to be in

       custody of PW-17 on the basis of disclosure statement

       made by A-1. It is submitted that PW-17 has deposed that

       some parts were sold by A-1. It is submitted that aforesaid

       crucial circumstances have not at all been explained by the

       accused in his further statement under
Section 313
CrPC.
11
It is submitted that deposition of DW-1 has been rejected

      by the Court(s). It is submitted that therefore, no error has

      been committed by the Courts below in convicting the

      accused for the offence punishable under
Section 302
and

      other offence of
IPC
.
5.1   Making the above submissions, it is prayed to dismiss the

      present appeal.
6.    We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of

      accused as well as the State. We have gone through the

      findings recorded by the learned Trial Court as well as the

      High Court while holding the appellant – accused No. 1

      guilty for the offence punishable under
Sections 302
and
201
of IPC.
6.1   It is the case on behalf of the appellant – accused No. 1

      that he has been convicted on the confessional statement

      and therefore, in case of circumstantial evidence and

      unless and until the complete chain of events were proved

      and established, he could not have been convicted on

      confessional statement.
12
However, from the judgment(s) and order(s) passed by the

      learned Trial Court as well as the High Court, it cannot be

      said that the appellant has been convicted on the basis of

      confessional statement. In the present case, there is no

      confession by the accused that he committed the offence,

      which has been relied upon by the Court. It is required to

      be noted that the so-called communication by the accused

      No. 1 addressed to PW-22 is as such not believed by the

      High Court being secondary evidence and the same has

      not been proved. Therefore, as such the High Court has

      not   given     much     weightage    so    far   as    the

      letter/communication is concerned. Therefore, it cannot be

      said that the appellant – accused No. 1 has been convicted

      on    the     confessional   statement     made    in   the

      letter/communication.
6.2   However, at the same time, it can be seen that the

      communication/letter received by Police on 30.12.2007

      was the cause for reopening of the case, as earlier the case

      was closed on 04.02.2007 as untraceable. That thereafter,

      the actual investigation began by PW-30. That thereafter,
13
during investigation A-1 disclosed the place where he had

      buried the dead body of the deceased. The dead body was

      exhumed from the place identified by A-1. Thus, it was a

      case of recovery of the dead body at the instance of the

      accused from the place which was disclosed by the

      accused who can be said to be in exclusive knowledge of

      the place where the dead body was buried. That thereafter,

      the super imposition test was conducted and the DNA

      examination was conducted on the bones and the skull

      and it was proved that the dead body was that of the

      deceased. This is the first strong circumstance against the

      appellant – A-1 which has led to his conviction.


6.3   That thereafter, even the car which was driven by the

      deceased at the relevant time was recovered from PW-16

      which was at the instance of the accused himself. That

      there is a recovery of car driven by the deceased from the

      place and the person disclosed by the accused No. 1 –

      appellant. The prosecution has successfully proved the

      same by examining PW-16, a person to whom the stolen

      car was sold by the appellant – accused No. 1. This is the
14
second strong circumstance against the appellant –

      accused No. 1.
6.4   That thereafter, the prosecution has been successful in

      proving that the engine and gear box which were sold by

      the appellant – accused No. 1 was recovered from PW-17.

      The engine and gear box of the stolen car were found from

      the custody of PW-17 on the disclosure statement made by

      A-1. Though, PW-17 has turned hostile, however, at the

      same time, the recovery of engine and gear box from PW-

      17 which were recovered on the disclosure statement made

      by A-1 has been established and proved by the prosecution

      by examining Police witness – PW-30, we see no reason to

      disbelieve PW-30 on the aforesaid. This is another

      circumstance against the appellant – accused No. 1. Thus

      on the basis of the aforesaid strong circumstances when

      the learned Trial Court as well as the High Court has

      convicted the accused – appellant for the offences under
Sections 302
and
201
of IPC, we see no reason to interfere

      with the same in exercise of powers under
Article 136
of

      the Constitution of India.
15
6.5   Now so far as the submissions made on behalf of the

      appellant that the prosecution has failed to prove that the

      death of deceased was the homicidal as in the post-

      mortem report the cause of death was unascertainable is

      concerned, it is required to be noted that as the dead body

      was buried and was found after numbers of months, it

      may not be possible for the prosecution to prove that the

      death was a homicidal death. However, at the same time

      and as rightly observed by the High Court, by other

      circumstances the prosecution has established and proved

      that the deceased was killed after his car was stolen/taken

      away by the appellant – accused No. 1.
7.    Considering the aforesaid facts and circumstances, we are

      more than satisfied that the High Court has not committed

      any error in dismissing the appeal and confirming the

      judgment and order of conviction and sentence imposed by

      the learned Trial Court convicting the appellant – accused

      No. 1 for the offences punishable under
Sections 302
and
201
of IPC.
16
7.1   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, no

      interference of this Court is called for. The appeal deserves

      to be dismissed and is accordingly dismissed.
………………………………….J.
                                     [M.R. SHAH]



NEW DELHI;                           ………………………………….J.
JANUARY 19, 2023                     [C.T. RAVIKUMAR]
17