[Cites
16
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The Esi Corporation vs M/S Radhika Theatre on 20 January, 2023
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
C.T. Ravikumar
,
M. R. Shah
REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 312 OF 2023
                                     (@ SLP(C) NO. 12520 OF 2022)

          The ESI Corporation                                         ...Appellant(S)

                                                Versus

          M/s. Radhika Theatre                                      ...Respondent(S)


                                           JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.             Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                         judgment and order dated 17.02.2021, passed by the High

                         Court for the State of Telangana at Hyderabad in Civil

                         Misc. Appeal No. 125/2011, by which, the High Court has

                         allowed the said appeal and has set aside the order dated

                         13.12.2010 passed by the Employees Insurance Court

                         (hereinafter referred to as the EI Court) dismissing EIC No.

                         14/2003 in which the respondent herein challenged the

                         demand notice dated 31.08.1994 issued by the ESI
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Neetu Sachdeva
Date: 2023.01.20
16:12:10 IST
Reason:
Corporation, the ESI Corporation has preferred the present

                         appeal.
1
2.    The facts leading to the present appeal in nutshell are as

      under: -
2.1   That the respondent herein was running a Cinema Theatre

      since 1981. It paid ESI contributions up to September,

      1989. However, thereafter, as its employees were less than

      20 in number, it did not pay the contributions. Therefore,

      the appellant – corporation issued demand notices. The

      respondent herein challenged the demand notices before

      the EI Court by way of EIC No. 14/2003 containing, inter

      alia, that prior to the insertion of Sub-section (6) of
Section

      1
of the ESI Act, 1948 w.e.f. 20.10.1989, it employed less

      than 20 persons and therefore, it was not liable to be

      covered under the provisions of the
ESI Act
. The EI Court

      dismissed the case vide order dated 13.12.2010. The order

      passed by the EI Court confirming the demand notices was

      the subject matter of appeal before the High Court. Before

      the High Court, it was the case on behalf of the respondent

      – original appellant that Sub-section (6) of
Section 1
of the

      ESI Act which came to be inserted on 20.10.1989 shall not

      be made applicable retrospectively and the same would be
2
effective only on or after 20.10.1989 and not prior to that

date. On the other hand, it was the case on behalf of the

ESI Corporation that the
ESI Act
being a social welfare

legislation, greater amplitude is required to be given to the

same, as, it is intended for the welfare of the workmen

concerned. It was submitted that as per amended Sub-
section (6) of
Section 1
, all the establishments shall be

governed by the
ESI Act
, notwithstanding the fact that the

number of persons engaged therein is less than the

prescribed number. However, thereafter, by the impugned

judgment and order the High Court has allowed the appeal

preferred by the respondent herein taking the view that

amendment to
Section 1
of the ESI Act by which Sub-

section (6) of
Section 1
came to be inserted w.e.f.

20.10.1989,    the   same      shall   not     be    applicable

retrospectively and the same shall not be made applicable

to    an      establishment,     established        prior    to

20.10.1989/31.03.1989.
3
2.2   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

      judgment and order passed by the High Court, the ESI

      Corporation has preferred the present appeal.
3.    Shri Mahesh Srivastava, learned counsel appearing on

      behalf of the appellant – ESI Corporation has vehemently

      submitted that the High Court has materially erred in

      allowing the appeal and setting aside the demand notices

      even for the period post 20.10.1989 by holding that

      amendment to
Section 1
by inserting Sub-section (6) shall

      not be applicable retrospectively.
3.1   It is vehemently submitted that the High Court has not

      properly appreciated the object and purpose of the
ESI Act
and that the
ESI Act
is a social welfare legislation and

      intended for the welfare of the workmen concerned. It is

      submitted that therefore, to achieve the object and

      purpose of the
ESI Act
, the legislature thought it fit to

      insert Sub-section (6) to
Section 1
of the ESI Act by which

      a factory or an establishment shall be governed by the
ESI

      Act
notwithstanding the number of persons employed

      therein at any time falls below the limit specified by or
4
under the
ESI Act
or the manufacturing process therein

      ceases to be carried on with the aid of power.


3.2   It is submitted that demand notices for the period post

      20.10.1989, therefore, cannot be said to be illegal applying

      Sub-section (6) of
Section 1
retrospectively as observed

      and held by the High Court. It is submitted that at the

      most,   the   demand   notices   for   the   period   prior   to

      20.10.1989 can be said to be bad in law as in that case

      Sub-section (6) of
Section 1
of the ESI Act can be said to

      have applied retrospectively.
3.3   It is submitted that in any case in view of insertion of Sub-
section (6) of
Section 1
w.e.f. 20.10.1989, any factory or

      establishment shall have to be governed by the
ESI Act
notwithstanding that the number of persons employed

      therein at any time falls below the limit specified by or

      under the
ESI Act
.
3.4   Making the above submissions and relying upon the

      decision of this Court in the case of
Bangalore Turf Club
5
Limited Vs. Regional Director, ESIC
; (2014) 9 SCC 657,

     it is prayed to allow the present appeal.
4.   Though served none has appeared on behalf of the

     respondent.
5.   Having heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

     appellant – corporation and having gone through the

     impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court,

     the short question which is posed for consideration of this

     Court is whether with respect to the demand notices post

     20.10.1989 a factory or an establishment, established

     prior to 20.10.1989 shall be governed by the
ESI Act
notwithstanding that the number of persons employed

     therein at any time falls below the limit specified by or

     under the
ESI Act
?
An   incidental   question    which   is    also   posed   for

     consideration of this Court is whether the demand notices

     for the period after 20.10.1989 i.e., from the date by which

     Sub-section (6) of
Section 1
of the ESI Act came be

     inserted can it be said that the amended
Section 1
of the

     ESI Act can be said to have been applied retrospectively?
6
6.    While answering the aforesaid issues/questions the object,

      purpose and preamble of the
ESI Act
is required to be

      referred to and considered. The Preamble of the ESI Act is

      as under: -
“
An Act
to provide for certain benefits to employees in
          case of sickness, maternity and employment injury
          and to make provisions for certain other matters in
          relation thereto.”


6.1   Thus, the ESI Act being a social welfare legislation, any

      interpretation     which   would     lean   in   favour       of   the

      beneficiary should be given. The object and purpose of the
ESI Act
has been elaborately considered by this Court in

      the case of
Bangalore Turf Club Limited
(supra). After

      considering catena of earlier decisions under the
ESI Act
,

      it is observed and held that
ESI Act
should be given liberal

      interpretation and should be interpreted in such a manner

      so that social security can be given to the employees. In

      paragraph 16 to 21, it is observed and held as under: -
“16. The primary rule of interpretation of statutes may be
          the literal rule, however, in the case of beneficial
          legislations and legislations enacted for the welfare of
          employees, workmen, this Court has on numerous
          occasions adopted the liberal rule of interpretation to
          ensure that the benefits extend to those workers who
7
need to be covered based on the intention of the
legislature.
17.
The ESI Act
is a welfare legislation enacted by the
Central Government as a consequence of the urgent need
for a scheme of health insurance for workers. It would be
beneficial to reproduce the Preamble of the ESI Act in this
context. It is as under:
“
An Act
to provide for certain benefits to employees in
case of sickness, maternity and employment injury and to
make provision for certain other matters in relation
thereto”
18. In ESI Corpn. v. Francis De Costa [1993 Supp (4) SCC
100 : 1994 SCC (L&S) 195] , this Court held that : (SCC
pp. 105-06, paras 5-6)

“5.
The Act
seeks to cover sickness, maternity,
employment injury, occupational disease, etc.
The Act
is a
social security legislation. It is settled law that to prevent
injustice or to promote justice and to effectuate the object
and purpose of the welfare legislation, broad
interpretation should be given, even if it requires a
departure from literal construction. The court must seek
light from loadstar
Articles 38
and
39
and the economic
and social justice envisaged in the Preamble of the
Constitution which would enliven meaningful right to life
of the worker under
Article 21.
The State is enjoined
under
Article 39(e)
to protect the health of the workers,
under
Article 41
to secure sickness and disablement
benefits and
Article 43
accords decent standard of life.
Right to medical and disability benefits are fundamental
human rights under
Article 25(2)
of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and
Article 7(b)
of the
International Convention on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights. Right to health, a fundamental human
right stands enshrined in socio-economic justice of our
Constitution and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. Concomitantly right to medical benefit to a
workman is his/her fundamental right.
The Act
seeks to
succour the maintenance of health of an insured
workman. The interpretative endeavour should be to
effectuate the above. Right to medical benefit is, thus, a
fundamental right to the workman.
8
6. Moreover, even in the realm of interpretation of
statutes, rule of law is a dynamic concept of expansion
and fulfilment for which the interpretation would be so
given as to subserve the social and economic justice
envisioned in the Constitution. Legislation is a conscious
attempt, as a social direction, in the process of
change. The fusion between the law and social change
would be effected only when law is introspected in the
context of ordinary social life. Life of the law has not been
logic but has been experience. It is a means to serve social
purpose and felt necessities of the people. In times of
stress, disability, injury, etc. the workman needs statutory
protection and assistance.
The Act
fastens in an insured
employment, statutory obligation on the employer and the
employee to contribute in the prescribed proportion and
manner towards the welfare fund constituted under the
Act (
Sections 38
to
51
of the Act) to provide sustenance to
the workmen in their hours of need, particularly when
they become economically inactive because of a cause
attributable to their employment or disability or death
occurred while in employment. The fact that the employee
contributed to the fund out of his/her hard-earned wages
cannot but have a vital bearing in adjudicating whether
the injury or occupational disease suffered/contracted by
an employee is an employment injury. The liability is
based neither on any contract nor upon any act or
omission by the employer but upon the existence of the
relationship which employer bears to the employment
during the course of which the employee had been
injured.
The Act
supplants the action at law, based not
upon the fault but as an aspect of social welfare, to
rehabilitate a physically and economically handicapped
workman who is adversely affected by sickness, injury or
livelihood of dependents by death of a workman.”
19. A three-Judge Bench of this Court, in reference to the
ESI Act
, in
Transport Corpn. of India v. ESI Corpn.
[(2000)
1 SCC 332 : 2000 SCC (L&S) 121] , held that : (SCC pp.
357-58, paras 27-28)
“27. Before parting with the discussion on this point, it is
necessary to keep in view the salient fact that the Act is a
beneficial piece of legislation intended to provide benefits
to employees in case of sickness, maternity, employment
injury and for certain other matters in relation thereto. It
9
is enacted with a view to ensuring social welfare and for
providing safe insurance cover to employees who were
likely to suffer from various physical illnesses during the
course of their employment. Such a beneficial piece of
legislation has to be construed in its correct perspective so
as to fructify the legislative intention underlying its
enactment. When two views are possible on its
applicability to a given set of employees, that view which
furthers the legislative intention should be preferred to the
one which would frustrate it. …
28. Dealing with this very Act, a three-Judge Bench of
this     Court     in
Buckingham       and    Carnatic    Co.
Ltd. v. Venkatiah
[AIR 1964 SC 1272] speaking through
Gajendragadkar, J., (as he then was) held, accepting the
contention of the learned counsel, Mr Dolia that : (AIR p.
1277, para 10)
‘10. … It is a piece of social legislation intended to confer
specified benefits on workmen to whom it applies, and so,
it would be inappropriate to attempt to construe the
relevant provisions in a technical or a narrow sense. This
position cannot be disputed. But in dealing with the plea
raised by Mr Dolia that the section should be liberally
construed, we cannot overlook the fact that the liberal
construction must ultimately flow from the words used in
the section. If the words used in the section are capable of
two constructions one of which is shown patently to
assist the achievement of the object of the Act, courts
would be justified in preferring that construction to the
other which may not be able to further the object of the
Act.’”
20. In Bombay      Anand     Bhavan     Restaurant v. ESI
Corpn. [Bombay Anand Bhavan Restaurant v. ESI Corpn.,
(2009) 9 SCC 61 : (2009) 2 SCC (L&S) 573] , it was
observed that : (SCC p. 66, para 20)
“20.
The Employees' State Insurance Act
is a beneficial
legislation. The main purpose of the enactment as the
Preamble suggests, is to provide for certain benefits to
employees of a factory in case of sickness, maternity and
employment injury and to make provision for certain
other matters in relation thereto.
The Employees' State
Insurance Act
is a social security legislation and the
canons of interpreting a social legislation are different
from the canons of interpretation of taxation law. The
10
courts must not countenance any subterfuge which
         would defeat the provisions of social legislation and the
         courts must even, if necessary, strain the language of the
         Act in order to achieve the purpose which the legislature
         had in placing this legislation on the statute book.
The
         Act
, therefore, must receive a liberal construction so as to
         promote its objects.”
21. The legislature enacted the
ESI Act
to provide certain
         benefits to employees in case of sickness, maternity in
         case of female employees, employment injury and to make
         provision in certain other matters in relation thereto. The
         provisions of the
ESI Act
apply to all the factories other
         than seasonal factories. The State Government with the
         approval of the Central Government is authorised to
         make the provisions of the
ESI Act
applicable to any other
         establishment or establishments. The provisions of the
ESI Act
provide that all employees in factories or
         establishments to which the
ESI Act
applies shall be
         insured in the manner provided under the
ESI Act
. Since
         the ESI Act is passed for conferring certain benefits to
         employees in case of sickness, maternity and employment
         injury, it is necessary that the
ESI Act
should receive a
         liberal and beneficial construction so as to achieve
         legislative purpose without doing violence to the language
         of the enactment.”
7.   Prior to insertion of Sub-section (6) of
Section 1
of the ESI

     Act, only those establishments/factories engaging more

     than 20 employees were governed by the
ESI Act
. However,

     thereafter, Sub-section (6) of
Section 1
of the ESI Act has

     been inserted on 20.10.1989, and after 20.10.1989 there

     is a radical change and under the amended provision a

     factory or establishment to which
ESI Act
applies would be

     governed by the
ESI Act
notwithstanding that the number
11
of persons employed therein at any time falls below the

limit specified by or under the
ESI Act
. Therefore, on and

after 20.10.1989, irrespective of number of persons

employed a factory or an establishment shall be governed

by the
ESI Act
. Therefore, for the demand notices for the

period after 20.10.1989, there shall be liability of every

factory or establishment irrespective of the number of

persons employed therein. With respect to such a notice it

cannot be said that amended
Section 1
inserting Sub-

section (6) is applied retrospectively as observed and held

by the High Court. Only in case of demand notice for the

period prior to inserting Sub-section (6) of
Section 1
of the

Act, it can be said that the same provision has been

applied retrospectively. Therefore, the High Court has

committed a very serious error in observing and holding

that even for the demand notices for the period subsequent

20.10.1989 i.e., subsequent to inserting Sub-section (6) of
Section 1
the said provision is applied retrospectively and

the High Court has erred in allowing the appeal and

setting aside the demand notices even for the period

subsequent to 20.10.1989. Sub-section (6) of
Section 1
12
therefore, shall be applicable even with respect to those

     establishments,         established          prior           to

     31.03.1989/20.10.1989     and    the
ESI   Act
shall   be

     applicable irrespective of the number of persons employed

     or notwithstanding that the number of persons employed

     at any time falls below the limit specified by or under the
ESI Act
.
8.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the

     present appeal succeeds. The impugned judgment and

     order passed by the High Court is hereby set aside and the

     demand notices for the period post 20.10.1989 are hereby

     restored. Present appeal is accordingly allowed. No costs.
…………………………………J.
                                     (M. R. SHAH)


                                     …………………………………J.
                                     (C.T. RAVIKUMAR)
NEW DELHI,
JANUARY 20, 2023.
13