[Cites
49
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Himachal Pradesh vs Goel Bus Service Kullu on 13 January, 2023
Author:
Vikram Nath
Bench:
Vikram Nath
,
Abhay S. Oka
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
REPORTABLE

                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                            CIVIL APPEAL No(s).5534-5594 of 2011


          THE STATE OF HIMACHAL
          PRADESH AND OTHERS                                       …APPELLANT(S)
                            VERSUS

          GOEL BUS SERVICE KULLU
          ETC. ETC.                                             …RESPONDENT(S)


                                          JUDGMENT
Vikram Nath, J.
1.             The above set of appeals were referred to larger Bench

          of three Judges in terms of the order dated 05.03.2020

          which reads as follows:
“Considering the fact that the issue raised in
                             these appeals was referred to a larger Bench of
                             three Judges in terms of order dated 27.02.1998
                             in Civil Appeal No. 10457/1995 and other
                             connected cases [reported in (1998) 9 SCC 676]
                             but which appeals later on repealed by Rajasthan
Signature Not Verified       Act, 1951, which is on similar lines with the
Digitally signed by
provision involved in the present appeals.
Deepak Singh
Date: 2023.01.13
16:36:06 IST
Reason:
1
Hence, we deem it appropriate to refer these
         appeals to a larger Bench of three Judges for
         an authoritative pronouncement on the questions
         involved.
Registry is directed to place the matters before
         Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India for constituting
         the   appropriate     Bench    for   hearing    these
         appeal(s).”
2.   The above referred order dated 27.02.1998 passed in

Civil Appeal No. 10457 of 1995 and connected matters

reported in
State of Rajasthan Vs. Khalsa Travels
,

(1998) 9 SCC 676 is reproduced below:
“1.   These appeals filed by the State of Rajasthan
         raise questions relating to the constitutional validity
         of
Section 4-B(3)
of the Rajasthan Motor Vehicles
         Taxation Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred to as “the
         Act”) and Rule 4-CC of the Rajasthan Motor Vehicles
         Taxation Rules, 1951 (hereinafter referred to as “the
         Rules”) which make provision of levy of special road
         tax on a transport vehicle which is used without a
         valid permit or in any manner not authorized by the
         permit. By the impugned judgments the High Court
         has held that
Section 4-B(3)
is ultra vires the rule-
         making powers conferred on the State Government
         under the Act.
2
2.    According to the High Court the imposition,
         though described as a tax, is, in substance, a fine for
         an alleged offence of plying the vehicle without a valid
         permit or in contravention of the conditions of permit
         and such a penalty cannot be treated as a part of
         regulatory or compensatory tax. On that view, The
         High Court has declared that
Section 4-B(3)
of the Act
         is ultra vires the powers conferred on the State
         Legislature under Entry 56 of List II of the Seventh
         Schedule to the Constitution of India. The question
         that falls for consideration in these appeals is
         whether the imposition under Section 4-B(3) is
         not a tax but a penalty and is ultra vires the
         legislative powers of the State Legislature under
         Entry 56 and Entry 57 of List II.
3.    Having regard to the importance of the
         question, we consider it appropriate that these
         matters are considered by a Bench of three Judges.
The matter may, therefore, be placed before the
         Hon’ble Chief Justice for necessary directions.”



A careful perusal of the above orders confines the question

for consideration to be whether the imposition of

additional special road tax levied on transport vehicle used

without a valid permit is not a tax but a penalty and is

ultra vires the legislative powers of the State Legislature
3
under Entries 56 and 57 of List II (the State List) of the

Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.
3.     Civil Appeal No.10457 of 1995 was dismissed vide

order dated 15.04.1998 for the reason that similar

provisions enacted in the State of Rajasthan were repealed

by the Rajasthan Finance Act, 1977 and, as such, the

question raised was held to be no longer a live issue. The

said    appeals     along      with       connected      appeals    were

accordingly dismissed, however, the question was left

open. The said order dated 15.04.1998 is reproduced

hereunder: -
“These appeals involve the question regarding the
           validity of
Section 4 (B) (3)
of the Rajasthan Motor
           Vehicles Act, 1951 and Rule 4 CC of the Rajasthan
           Motor Vehicles Taxation Rules. While the matters
           were pending in this Court the State legislature has
           enacted Rajasthan Finance Act, 1977 whereby
Section 4 (B) (3)
has been repealed and since Rule 4
           CC was made to give effect to the provisions contained
           in
Section 4 (B) (3)
the said rule also has ceased to
           apply. In view of the aforesaid amendment that has
           been made by the Rajasthan Finance Act, 1977 the
           question raised by the appellant in these appeals is
4
no longer a live issue and, therefore, it is not
                  necessary to go into the same. The appeals are
                  accordingly dismissed and the question is left open.
                  No order as to costs.”

FACTS:
4.        The respondent and several other similarly situate

public transport operators challenged the validity of

Section 3-A, Section 3-C,
Section 4-A
, Section 5-A along

with Schedule-III under Section 3-A introduced vide the

Himachal Pradesh Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment)

Act, 19991 to be held ultra vires the Constitution of India

and           further          the   notifications     dated     18.12.1999,

23.12.1999, 31.12.1999, 06.01.2000, 12.02.2000 and

01.04.2000 be quashed and set aside. The relief as

claimed in one of the petitions bearing C.W.P. No.32 of

2000 (
Goel Bus Service Vs. State of Himachal Pradesh and

others
) is reproduced below:
“(i)     That the impugned Annexure-PA, PB, PC, PD,
                  PE, dated 18th December, 1999, 23rd December, 1999,
1
In short “HPMVT
(A) Act
1999”
5
6th January, 2000, 12.2.2000 and 31st December,
         1999 may kindly be quashed and set aside;
(ii)    That Section 3-A, 3-C,
4-A
, 5-A along with
         Schedule-III under Section 3-A may be struck down
         being ultra vires the Constitution of India.
(iii)   Any other relied as may be deemed just and
         proper keeping in view the facts and circumstances of
         the case may also be granted in favour of the
         petitioner.”
5.   The above provisions, validity of which was sought to

be declared as ultra vires, were introduced vide HPMVT
(A)

Act
1999 as also vide HPMVT
(A) Act
2001. Consequent to

insertion of the said provisions, State of Himachal Pradesh

issued several notifications
referred to above
, which were

also assailed in a large number of writ petitions. The High

Court, vide impugned judgment dated 06.07.2007, upheld

the validity of all the Sections except Section 3A (3) under

challenge as not offending either Part III or any other

provision of the Constitution of India. With respect to

Section 3-A (3) it was held that in substance it imposes a

penalty and as such could not be treated as regulatory or
6
compensatory      tax    and     was,     therefore,      beyond   the

legislative competence of the State Legislature. It, further

quashed the two notifications dated 06.01.2000 and

01.04.2000 being not in consonance with the scheme of

the Constitution. It also struck down the decision dated

01.01.2000 based upon negotiations held on 31.12.1999

relating to special Toll Tax, as they were held to be against

statutory provisions of the Act. The operative portion of the

impugned judgment reads as follows:
“On account of the above reasoning and the findings,
         we are of the view that Sections 3-A (1), (2), (4) and
         Section 3-C do not offend either the fundamental
         rights or any other provision of the Constitution of
         India, therefore, these are held not ultra vires of the
         Constitution. Since Section 3-A (3) in substance
         imposes a fine as held above, therefore, such a nature
         of penalty can neither be treated as regulatory nor
         compensatory tax and is out of the legislature
         competence of the State and the           subordinate
         legislation, that is the notifications dated 6.01.2000
         and 1.04.2000 are based upon lump sum charges of
         the levy thus are not in consonance with the scheme
         of the Constitution, therefore, these are held to be
         ultra vires. Further, the decision dated 1.1.2000
         based upon negotiations held on 31.12.1999 relating
7
to SRT is against the statutory provisions of the Act
             as stated above. Therefore, it is struck down being
             contrary to law.
All the petitions are disposed of in the aforesaid
             terms. No orders as to costs.
All the Misc. applications in the writ petitions are also
             disposed of.”
6.    The State of Himachal Pradesh is in appeal against

the aforesaid judgment of the High Court.
7.    We have heard Sri Abhinav Mukerji, learned counsel

for the appellant-State of Himachal Pradesh and Sri

Siddharth Bhatnagar, learned Senior Counsel appointed

as Amicus Curiae to assist the Court on behalf of the

respondent-operators.
SUMMARY OF SUBMISSIONS:
8.    Submissions advanced on behalf of appellants are

summarized as under:
• The     constitutional         Courts      must       restrain    from

      interfering in the matters of economic/tax legislation
8
until and unless the offending provision is manifestly

  unjust or glaringly unconstitutional.

• Laws relating to economic activities should be viewed

  with greater latitude and more play should be given

  to the Government in comparison to other laws

  relating to civil rights.
• Reliance was placed upon the following judgments in

  support of the above submissions:
“(i)   R.K. Garg etc. vs. Union of India &
       Others reported in (1981) 4 SCC 675 (Para
       7, 8, 16 & 2018).
(
ii)   Bhavesh D. Parish & Others vs. Union
       of India & Another
reported in (2000) 5
       SCC 471 Para 26)).
(
iii) Indian Oil Corporation vs. State of
       Bihar
reported in (2018) 1 SCC 242 (Para
       25-28).”

• Lump sum tax could be levied as it would be

  compensatory in nature.
• The wisdom of the State legislature should be read in

  the broadest possible terms and merely because the
9
levy is payable in lump sum or on one time basis

  would not make it invalid or unconstitutional. Such

  levy could be for administrative reasons and the

  manner & mode of collection, cannot be the

  conclusive test to decide the nature of levy.

• Quashing of the notifications dated 06.01.2000 and

  01.04.2000 were also bad in law as imposition of

  lump sum tax is by now well recognized by the

  Courts.
• Reliance was placed upon the following judgments, in

  support of the above submissions:
(
i)    State of T.N. vs. M. Krishnappan and
      Anr.
(2005) 4 SCC 53 (Para 18-23).
(
ii)   Commr. Of Agricultural Income Tax
      vs. Netley ‘B’ Estate
(2015) 11 SCC 462
      (Para 20-22).
(
iii) Ashok Leyland Ltd. vs. State of T.N.
(2004) 3 SCC 1 (Para 65 to 71).
10
(iv)   Aas   Mohammad        vs.   State     of
       Rajasthan (2020 2 RLW 1567 (Raj) (Para
       22 to 26).
• The tax imposed under
Section 3(A)
3
of the 1972 Act

  is regulatory and compensatory in nature. The

  appellant-State being a hilly State with difficult

  terrains, in order to maintain roads and bridges

  which are the life-line of hilly terrains, a sizeable part

  of   the    budget   is   spent   on    the     construction,

  development, repair, upkeep and maintenance of

  roads and bridges.
• Reference was made to the counter affidavit filed by

  the State before the High Court and also referred to

  in the impugned judgment, enumerating special

  circumstances for imposition and upholding of a

  compensatory or a regulatory tax as valid. In this

  connection, reliance has been placed upon the

  following judgments:
11
(
i)    Ranjit Singh vs. Taxation Officer,
Rampur
and etc (2002 SCC Online All 75
(Para 14,15, 22 and 23)
(ii)   In State of Himachal Pradesh and
Ors. Vs. Yash Pal Garg (Dead) by LRs and
Ors. (2003) 9 SCC 92 (Para 11-13,20 and
23)
(
iii) State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors. vs.
Sukhpal Singh Bal
(2005) 7 SCC 615 (Para
11 to 19).
(iv)   B.A. Jayaram and Ors. vs. Union of
India (UOI) and Ors. (1984) 1 SCC 168 (Para
9-11).
(
v)    Bolani Ores Ltd. vs. State of Orissa
(1974) 2 SCC 777 (Para 15 & 29)
(vi)     Sharma    Transport   Rep.   by   D.P.
Sharma       vs.   Government    of   Andhra
Pradesh and Ors. (2002) 2 SCC 188 (Para,
1,8 and 11)).
(
vii) State of Maharashtra and Ors. vs.
Madhukar Balkrishna Badiya and Ors
.
(1988) 4 SCC 290 (Para 6 & 10).
(
viii) Rajeev Suri vs. Delhi Development
Authority and Ors.
(2021 SCC Online SC 7
(Para 220 to 226).
12
(
ix)   Janhit Manch and Anr. vs. The State
           of Maharashtra and Ors.
(2019) 2 SCC 505
           (Para 13).
• The High Court, though upheld the power of the State

       legislature to enact provisions for levy of special road

       tax under Sections 3-A(1)(2)(4), but at the same time

       erred in holding the provisions under Section 3-A(3)

       to be ultra vires being unconstitutional.

     • The appeals be allowed, the judgment of the High

       Court impugned be set aside and the writ petitions be

       dismissed.
9.     On the other hand, Shri Siddharth Bhatnagar,

learned Amicus Curiae made the following submissions:
• The offences and penalties in respect of using vehicles

       without permit is covered under
Chapter XIII of the

       Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
and in particular Section

       192-A thereof.
13
• The Motor Vehicles Act, 19882 being a Central Act is

           relatable to Entry 35 of List III of the Seventh

           Schedule to the Constitution.
• The penalty for use of vehicle without permit is

           already provided in Section 192-A of the 1988 Act.
The 1988 Act provides a complete mechanism in

           respect of laws relating to motor vehicles including its

           violations, consequences and penalties thereon. The

           said provision specifically deals with the act of a

           transport vehicle being used without a permit.
•
The Himachal Pradesh Motor Vehicle Taxation Act
relates to Entry 57 of the List II of the Seventh

           Schedule of the Constitution.     It is subject to two

           limitations (i) that the vehicle be suitable for use on

           roads and (ii) any law made under this entry would

           be subject to any law made under Entry 35 of list III.
2
the 1988 Act
14
• Any enactment by the State which encroaches on or

  overlaps with the provisions of the 1988 Act would be

  invalid to that extent.
• Reliance is placed upon the judgment of the Supreme

  Court in
State of West Bengal Vs. Kesoram

  Industries Ltd. & Others
, (2004) 10 SCC 201.
• The tax sought to be levied under Section 3A (3) is in

  the nature of penalty which cannot be done in view of

  the provisions contained in the 1988 Act. Reliance

  was placed upon the following two decisions of the

  Supreme Court:
(
i) M.P. AIR Permit Owners Association
      and Another Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh
,
      (2004) 1 SCC 320,
(
ii) Hardev Motor Transport Vs. State of
      M.P. and Others
, (2006) 8 SCC 613.
• The impugned judgment does not suffer from any

  infirmity in holding that the special tax sought to be

  levied under Section 3A (3) is a penalty. The appeals

  are, thus, liable to be dismissed.
15
Relevant Constitutional & Legal provisions:
10. Before proceeding to deal with the submissions

advanced, a brief reference to statutory and constitutional

provisions may be noted.
11.
Article 246
of the Constitution lays down the subject

matters of the laws to be made by the Parliament and by

the Legislatures of States. According to it, three lists of

the Seventh Schedule would be determining the subjects

over which the Parliament may have exclusive power to

make laws (List I also referred to as the Union List),

subjects over which the State would have exclusive power

to make laws (List II also referred to as the State List) and

also the subjects where the Parliament as also the

Legislature of States would have power to make laws

covered by List III (referred to as the Concurrent List).

Additional power is given to the Parliament under sub-
Article 4
to make laws with respect to any matter for any

part of the territory of India not included in a State even
16
though such matter is enumerated in the State List.
Article 246
is reproduced hereunder:
“(1) Notwithstanding anything in clauses (2) and (3),
        Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with
        respect to any of the matters enumerated in List I in
        the Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred to
        as the “Union List”).
(2)   Notwithstanding     anything    in   clause    (3),
        Parliament, and, subject to clause (1), the Legislature
        of any State also, have power to make laws with
        respect to any of the matters enumerated in List III in
        the Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred to
        as the “Concurrent List”).
(3) Subject to clauses (1) and (2), the Legislature of
        any State has exclusive power to make laws for such
        State or any part thereof with respect to any of the
        matters enumerated in List II in the Seventh Schedule
        (in this Constitution referred to as the “State List”).
(4) Parliament has power to make laws with respect
        to any matter for any part of the territory of India not
        included in a State notwithstanding that such matter
        is a matter enumerated in the State List.”
12.
Article 254
of the Constitution of India provides for

the effect in case of inconsistency between laws made by

the Parliament and the laws made by the Legislature of

States. The same is reproduced hereunder:
17
“(1) If any provision of a law made by the Legislature
         of a State is repugnant to any provision of a law made
         by Parliament which Parliament is competent to
         enact, or to any provision of an existing law with
         respect to one of the matters enumerated in the
         Concurrent List, then, subject to the provisions of
         clause ( 2 ), the law made by Parliament, whether
         passed before or after the law made by the Legislature
         of such State, or, as the case may be, the existing law,
         shall prevail and the law made by the Legislature of
         the State shall, to the extent of the repugnancy, be
         void

         (2) Where a law made by the Legislature of a State
         with respect to one of the matters enumerated in the
         concurrent List contains any provision repugnant to
         the provisions of an earlier law made by Parliament or
         an existing law with respect to that matter, then, the
         law so made by the Legislature of such State shall, if
         it has been reserved for the consideration of the
         President and has received his assent, prevail in that
         State: Provided that nothing in this clause shall
         prevent Parliament from enacting at any time any law
         with respect to the same matter including a law
         adding to, amending, varying or repealing the law so
         made by the Legislature of the State.”
13. As already noted above, the Seventh Schedule flowing

out from
Article 246
has three lists, which gives power to

the Parliament and the State Legislatures to make laws on
18
the subjects enumerated therein. It would be relevant to

mention that List I (the Union List) does not cover any

subject relating to motor vehicles or taxation relating to it.

List II (the State List) has two entries viz. 56 and 57 which

refer to subjects relating to taxes on goods and passengers

and taxes on vehicles. Both the above entries of List II are

reproduced below:
“56. Taxes on goods and passengers carried by road
          or on inland waterways.
57.     Taxes   on   vehicles,   whether   mechanically
          propelled or not, suitable for use on roads, including
          tramcars subject to the provisions of entry 35 of List
          III.”



The above subjects fall within the domain of Legislature of

the State to make laws.
14. Under List III (the Concurrent List), Entry 35 spells

out the subject as mechanically propelled vehicles and

also the principles on which taxes on such vehicles can be

levied.   Under this entry both the Parliament and the
19
Legislatures of State could frame laws. The said Entry 35

of List III is reproduced hereunder:
“35. Mechanically propelled vehicles including the
         principles on which taxes on such vehicles are to be
         levied.”
15. The first enactment relating to motor vehicles in India

was the Indian Motor Vehicles Act, 1914. It was replaced

by the second enactment which came in 1939 as
Motor

Vehicles Act, 1939
. After the coming of the Constitution

in 1950, a new
Motor Vehicles Act
was enacted by the

Parliament in 1988, the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
. The

Parliament enacted the 1988 Act drawing its source from

Entry 35 of the List III (the Concurrent List). The subject

covered by the above entry is mechanically propelled

vehicles including the principles on which taxes on such

vehicles are to be levied.        The Parliament as also the

Legislature of States were thus competent to make laws

regarding the mechanically propelled vehicles including

the principles on which taxes could be levied on such
20
vehicles.   Thus, the Concurrent List, insofar as taxes

concerned, is limited to the principles on which taxes are

to be levied.     But the power to frame laws relating to

imposition of tax exclusively vests with the State

Legislatures under Entries 56 and 57 of List II. Entry 56

covers the subject of laying down law on imposition of

taxes on goods and passengers being carried by road or on

inland waterways. Whereas Entry 57 covers laws related

to taxation on vehicles, whether mechanically propelled or

not however such vehicles being suitable for use on roads.

The laws so framed would remain subject to the provisions

of entry 35 of List III.
16. Chapter V of the 1988 Act deals with Control of

Transport Vehicles. Section 66 makes it mandatory for

owners of motor vehicles to use such vehicles as a

transport vehicle whether actually carrying passengers or

goods only with a valid permit granted as provided therein.

Section 66 reads as follows:
21
“66. Necessity for permits.—(1) No owner of a motor
        vehicle shall use or permit the use of the vehicle as a
        transport vehicle in any public place whether or not
        such vehicle is actually carrying any passengers or
        goods save in accordance with the conditions of a
        permit granted or countersigned by a Regional or
        State Transport Authority or any prescribed authority
        authorising him the use of the vehicle in that place in
        the manner in which the vehicle is being used:
Provided that a stage carriage permit shall, subject to
        any conditions that may be specified in the permit,
        authorise the use of the vehicle as a contract carriage:
        Provided further that a stage carriage permit may,
        subject to any conditions that may be specified in the
        permit, authorise the use of the vehicle as a goods
        carriage either when carrying passengers or not:
        Provided also that a goods carriage permit shall,
        subject to any conditions that may be specified in the
        permit, authorise the use of the vehicle for the
        carriage of goods for or in connection with a trade or
        business carried on by him.
(2) The holder of a goods carriage permit may use the
        vehicle, for the drawing of any trailer or semi-trailer
        not owned by him, subject to such conditions as may
        be prescribed: 1[Provided that the holder of a permit
        of any articulated vehicle may use the prime-mover of
        that articulated vehicle for any other semi-trailor.]”
17. Chapter XIII of the 1988 Act lays down the provisions

for Offences, Penalties and Procedure.                  Section 192A

introduced in 1994 provides that any motor vehicle being
22
driven in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (1)

of Section 66 or in contravention of any condition of permit

relating to the road on which or the area in which or the

purpose for which the vehicle may be used would be a

punishable offence which will result into imprisonment for

a term which may extend to six months and fine of

Rs.10,000/- for the first offence and for subsequent

offences the imprisonment could extend to one year but

would not be less than six months or with fine of

Rs.10,000/- or with both.
18. Sub-section (2) thereof provides for an exception

where a motor vehicle may be used in an emergency for

carrying persons suffering from sickness or injury or for

supply of food or materials or medical supplies to relieve

distress. Other offences and penalties prescribed under

Chapter XIII are not relevant for the present controversy,

as such the same are not being referred to. Section 192A

reads as follows:
23
“(1) Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or
allows a motor vehicle to be used in contravention of
the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 66 or in
contravention of any condition of a permit relating to
the route on which or the area in which or the
purpose for which the vehicle may be used, shall be
punishable for the first offence with a fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees but shall not be less
than two thousand rupees and for any subsequent
offence with imprisonment which may extend to one
year but shall not be less than three months or with
fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees but
shall not be less than five thousand rupees or with
both: Provided that the court may for reasons to be
recorded, impose a lesser punishment.
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to the use of a
motor vehicle in an emergency for the conveyance of
persons suffering from sickness or injury or for the
transport of materials for repair or for the transport
of food or materials to relieve distress or of medical
supplies for a like purpose: Provided that the person
using the vehicle reports about the same to the
Regional Transport Authority within seven days from
the date of such use.
(3) The court to which an appeal lies from any
conviction in respect of an offence of the nature
specified in sub-section (1), may set aside or vary any
order made by the court below, notwithstanding that
no appeal lies against the conviction in connection
with which such order was made.]”
24
19. The State of Himachal Pradesh, exercising the powers

drawn from Entries 56 and 57 of List II of the Seventh

Schedule enacted the
Himachal Pradesh Motor Vehicles

Taxation Act
19723. In the said Act various amendments

were brought from time to time. Vide Amending Act No.15

of 1999, Sections 3A, 3B and 3C were incorporated. The

object and reasons as spelled out for bringing out the
Amending             Act
of    1999      was     mainly      to    augment

finances/funds              for     development,        construction         and

maintenance of roads and bridges being a vital part of

expanding and developing trading facilities in the State. It

also mentioned that Himachal Pradesh being a hilly State,

substantial           amount        of   its   budget      was       spent    on

construction, maintenance and development of roads and

bridges. Objects and reasons as reflected in the Bill No.

10 of 1999, is reproduced here under:
“Developed roads and bridges constitute arteries of a
                 healthy economy.    Himachal Pradesh being a hill
3
HPMVT Act 1972
25
State, the importance of roads, their construction and
                 maintenance can hardly be over emphasized as a vital
                 trading facility. Each year, the government has to
                 incur considerable part of its budget on construction,
                 maintenance and development of roads and bridges
                 in the State. Since it is essential to finance these
                 activities, it is considered necessary to levy road tax
                 on transport vehicles used or kept for use on public
                 roads in Himachal Pradesh.”
20. In the original Act of 19724,
Section 3
provided for levy

and collection of taxes on all motor vehicles which were to

be used or kept for use in the State of Himachal Pradesh.
Section 3
reads as follows:
“SECTION-3** LEVY OF TAX.
*(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, on and
                 from the commencement of the Himachal Pradesh
                 Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2004,
                 there shall be levied, charged and paid to the State
                 Government, a tax on all motor vehicles specified in
                 column (2) of Schedule-I, used or kept for use in
                 Himachal Pradesh, at the rate as may be specified by
                 the State Government, by notification, but not
                 exceeding the rates specified in column (3) of
                 Schedule-I..
**(2) On and from the commencement of the Himachal
                 Pradesh   Motor    Vehicles    Taxation   (Amendment)
                 Act,2004, there shall be levied, charged and paid to
4
HPMVT Act 1972
26
the State Government, a tax on motor cycles/scooters
or personal vehicles, used or kept for use in Himachal
Pradesh, for a period of fifteen years from the date of
issue of certificate of registration under sub- section
(3) of
section 41
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, (59
of 1988) at the rates as may be specified by the State
Government, by notification, on the basis of the price
of such motor cycle/scooter or personal vehicle,
subject to the maximum of ten percent of the price
thereof.
**(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
sections (1), on and from the commencement of the
Himachal     Pradesh     Motor    Vehicles    Taxation
(Amendment) Act, 2004, there shall be levied, charged
and paid to the State Government, a tax on motor
cabs or maxi cabs which are allowed to be converted
as personal motor vehicles, and on second hand
personal motor * Substituted vide H.P. Motor Vehicles
Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2004. * Substituted vide
H.P. Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 1999.
6 vehicles which are to be registered in the State of
Himachal Pradesh for the first time, used or kept for
use in Himachal Pradesh, at the rates as may be
specified by the State Government, by notification,
subject to the maximum of ten percent of the price of
such motor vehicles to be determined by the taxation
authority after deducting eight percent depreciation
per annum from the original price of the motor vehicle
provided that:- (a) in the case of motor vehicles having
original price upto two lacs fifty thousand rupees, the
floor price shall not be less than fifty thousand
rupees, or (b) in the case of motor vehicles having
27
original price more than two lacs fifty thousand
         rupees but not exceeding five lacs fifty thousand
         rupees, the floor price shall not be less than one lac
         rupees, or (c) in the case of motor vehicles having
         original price more than five lacs fifty thousand
         rupees but not exceeding ten lacs rupees, the floor
         price shall not be less than two lacs rupees, or (d) in
         the case of motor vehicles having original price more
         than ten lacs rupees, the floor price shall not be less
         than four lac rupees, or (e) in the case of two wheelers,
         the floor price shall not be less than five thousand
         rupees.”
21.
By the Amending Act
of 1999, Section 3A was

introduced which carries a heading: Levy of Special Road

Tax. This special road tax was in addition to the tax levied

under
Section 3
. The special road tax was also levied and

charged on all transport vehicles used or kept for use in

Himachal Pradesh specified in column 2 of Schedule 3 and

the rate of tax was to be not exceeding the rates specified

in column 3 of Schedule 3 of the Act.                     Section 3A is

reproduced hereunder:
“3-A. Levy of special road tax.-
(1) In addition to the tax levied under
section 3
, on
         and from the commencement of the Himachal
         Pradesh Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act,
28
1999, there shall be levied, charged and paid to the
State Government, a special road tax on all transport
vehicles specified in column (2) of Schedule-III, used
or kept for use, in Himachal Pradesh, and, at such
rates as may be specified by the State Government,
by notification, but not exceeding the rates specified
in column (3) of Schedule-III of this Act.
2 [(2) The rates of special road tax, as may be specified
under subsection (1), in respect of stage carriages
shall be applicable to and charged on the entire
distance covered as per time table fixed by the
Regional Transport Authority and shall be payable
monthly by such date as may be notified by the State
Government from time to time.]

(3) Where a transport vehicle is plied without a valid
permit or in any manner not authorised by the permit
to be plied, there shall be levied, charged and paid to
the State Government further special road tax in
addition to the tax payable under sub-section (1), on
such vehicles at the rates as may be specified by the
State Government, by notification, but not exceeding
the rates specified in column (3) of Schedule-III of this
Act.
(4) Where a transport vehicle is registered in a State
other than the State of Himachal Pradesh, enters and
is used on any public road, or kept for use, in the
State of Himachal Pradesh, the special road tax shall
become chargeable, on such entry in the prescribed
manner.
Explanation.- For the purpose of special road tax
levied under this Act, transport vehicles shall include
29
non-transport vehicles when used as transport
         vehicles by the owner. ”
22. Challenge before the High Court was also to the

validity of a few other provisions. However, the High Court

upheld the validity of all other provisions and it only

declared sub-section (3) of Section 3A as ultra vires. What

is, thus, required to be decided in this reference is whether

the High Court was right in declaring Section 3A(3) as ultra

vires.
23. The High Court was of the opinion that the tax

imposed by Section 3A(3) was in the nature of penalty and

for which the State Legislature had no power to make laws.

According to the High Court it was penalty because a

further special road tax was leviable where a transport

vehicle was plied without any valid permit or in any

manner not authorized by the permit to be plied. The High

Court opined that imposition of such an additional special

road tax for a default or a wrong committed with respect

to a transport vehicle would amount to a penalty and not
30
a tax. The finding recorded by the High Court is

reproduced hereunder:
“Further, the powers of State Legislature under the
        entry aforesaid being subject to Entry 35 of List III, if
        there is an existing law made by the Parliament laying
        down the principles on which taxes on mechanically
        propelled vehicles should be levied, then any State
        Legislation enacted under this entry must conform to
        these principles as
laid down in
the existing laws or
        the earlier law made by the Parliament. If the
        provisions of the State Laws are repugnant to those
        principles, the Law made by the State Legislature
        must fail to the extent of repugnancy, unless reserved
        for the consideration of and assented to by the
        President. The tax under this entry is leviable by the
        State Legislature or all vehicles suitable for use on
        roads, which are kept in the State, but such tax must
        have some nexus with the vehicles using the public
        roads of the State because it is compensatory in
        nature, even though registered under the
Motor
        Vehicles Act
. Contra the State Legislature is not
        competent to levy, under the present entry, an impost
        which   is   not   in   substance    a   regulatory   or
        compensatory tax for the transport of the vehicle
        along the road, but a fine , for example using a vehicle
        without a valid permit or for issuing it in a manner
        not authorized by       the permit, is     beyond the
        competence of the State Legislature, thus ultra vires.
        (Please See AIR 1992, Rajasthan 181 DB). Further on
        the perusal of Section 3-A (3), it transpires that the
        tax specified therein is in substance a fine for the
31
alleged offence of plying a vehicle without a valid
         permit or in any manner not authorized by the permit
         to be plied. Such a penalty cannot be treated as a part
         of regulatory or compensatory tax and is out of the
         legislature competence of the State. The nature of
         penalty without providing any mechanism for
         show    cause,   adjudication       or    the   appellate
         authority by not providing any such mechanism,
         also offends the principle of natural justice.
         Therefore, it is held ultra vires the powers
         conferred in the State Legislature under Entry 56
         to 57 of List-II. For this, we put our reliance on
         AIR 1992 Rajasthan 181 (DB).” (Emphasis added)
24. The High Court had also quashed the notifications

dated 06.01.2000, 01.04.2000 as also the decision dated

01.01.2000      being     contrary      to        statutory    provisions.

Quashing of the notifications would be dealt with at a later

stage after first dealing with the issue relating to

declaration of Section 3A(3) as ultra vires.

ANALYSIS:
A: Scope of Interference in Fiscal Statutes:
25. It is by now well settled that any tax legislation may

not be easily interfered with. The Courts must show
32
judicial restraint to interfere with tax legislation unless it

is shown and proved that such taxing statute is manifestly

unjust or glaringly unconstitutional. Taxing statutes

cannot be placed or tested or viewed on the same

principles as laws affecting civil rights such as freedom of

speech, religion, etc. The test of taxing statutes would be

viewed on more stringent tests and the law makers should

be given greater latitude. It would be useful to refer to a

couple of judgments on the above proposition.
26. In the case of R.K. Garg etc. vs. Union of India and

others, (1981) 4 SCC 675, the Constitution Bench was

judging the constitutionality of economic legislation

wherein challenge was to the validity of the provisions of
Special Bearer Bonds (Immunities and Exemption Act,

1981
) on the grounds of discrimination and violation of
Article 14.
P.N. Bhagwati J., speaking for himself, Chief

Justice Chandrachud, A.C. Gupta, S. Murtaza Fazal Ali

and A.N. Sen, J.J., observed in paragraph 7 regarding the
33
presumption in favour of constitutionality of the statute

and that the burden is on the person who attacks it, to

establish that there has been clear transgression of the

constitutional principles. In paragraph 8, it was laid down

that laws relating to economic activities should be viewed

with greater latitude than laws touching civil rights such

as freedom of speech, religion, etc. The views of Justice

Frankfurter in the case of Morey vs. Doud, 354 US 457

was relied upon. The same is reproduced hereunder:
“In the utilities, tax and economic regulation cases,
         there are good reasons for judicial self-restraint if not
         judicial      deference   to   legislative   judgment.   The
         legislature after all has the affirmative responsibility.
         The courts have only the power to destroy, not to
         reconstruct. When these are added to the complexity
         of economic regulation, the uncertainty, the liability
         to error, the bewildering conflict of the experts, and
         the number of times the judges have been overruled
         by events - self-limitation can be seen to be the path
         to judicial wisdom and institutional prestige and
         stability.”
27.
In case of
Bhavesh D. Parish and others vs. Union

of India and another
, (2000) 5 SCC 471, the challenge
34
was to the validity of
section 9
of Reserve Bank of India

Act as amended by the Amendment Act 1997 on the

ground that it was violative of
Article 14
and
Article

19(1)(g)
of the Constitution. This Court dismissed the

challenge to the said provision in paragraph 26 of the

report. It observed that matters of economic policy should

be best left to the wisdom of the legislature. Further, it

went on to state that in the context of a changed economic

scenario the expertise of the people dealing with the

subject should not be lightly interfered with. It was also

observed that while dealing with economic legislation, this

court would interfere only in those few cases where the

view reflected in the legislation is not possible to be taken

at all.
28.
In the case of
Indian Oil Corporation Limited vs.

State of Bihar and another
, (2018) 1 SCC 242,

provisions of the Bihar Tax on Entry of Goods into Local

Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale therein Act 1993, was
35
under challenge. Justice Nariman speaking for the Bench

observed in paragraph 25 that when it comes to taxing

statute, the law
laid down by
this Court is clear that it can

be said to be breach only when there is perversity or gross

disparity resulting in clear and hostile discrimination

without any rational justification for the same.
SPECIAL ROAD    TAX   IS              REGULATORY         OR
COMPENSATORY IN NATURE
29. The arguments raised before the High Court by the

respondent Transport operators (original writ petitioners

before the High Court) was that the fine imposed by
Section 3(A)(3)
was in the nature of a penalty and the State

Legislature had no power to impose a penalty. The High

Court had accepted the said contention and accordingly

struck down the said provision.
30. The object and reasons for offending enactment is

already reproduced in the earlier part of this judgment. At

the cost of repetition, it is stated that the appellant State

being a hilly State, the roads and bridges are its lifeline.
36
The State has to allocate sizeable part of its budget for the

construction,    development,      repair,   upkeep     and

maintenance of roads and bridges. It was with this object

in the background that the offending provisions were

brought in by way of amendments in 1999 and 2001

which are described as special road tax.
31. This Court in a number of cases dealing with similar

provisions has upheld the same. It has withheld that tax

charged for non-fulfilment of any obligation would also be

compensatory and regulatory in nature. Distinction was

carved out between a penalty imposed for breach of

statutory duty and penalty imposed being a subject matter

of a complaint that would require adjudication. The view

expressed consistently is that it would be compensatory or

regulatory where it is imposed for breach of a statutory

duty.
32.
In the case of the
State of U.P and others vs.

Sukhpal Singh Bal
, (2005) 7 SCC 615, Justice Kapadia
37
speaking for the Bench held that
section 10(3)
of U.P.

Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1997, which provided for

charging of such tax or additional tax along with penalty

where transport vehicles were found plying in Uttar

Pradesh without payment of tax or additional tax under

the said Act to be valid as being regulatory and

compensatory.
33. The High Court had struck down the said provision.

This Court allowed the appeal of the State. After referring

to the judgments in the case of Bhavesh D. Parish and

R.K. Garg, this Court went on to hold that
section 10(3)
was enacted to protect public revenue and as a deterrent

for tax evasion. Deterrence was the main theme and object

behind the imposition of penalty under
Section 10(3)
as

such would be regulatory in nature. Paragraphs 15 and

16 of the report in the case of
Sukhpal Singh Bal
(supra)

are reproduced below:
38
“15. In the light of the above judgments as applicable
to the provisions of the said 1997 Act, we are of the
view that the High Court had erred in striking down
section 10(3)
as ultra vires
articles 14
and
19(1)(g)
of
the Constitution. "Penalty" is a slippery word and it
has to be understood in the context in which it is used
in a given statute. A penalty may be the subject-
matter of a breach of statutory duty or it may be the
subject-matter of a complaint. In ordinary parlance,
the proceedings may cover penalties for avoidance of
civil liabilities which do not constitute offences
against the State. This distinction is responsible for
any enactment intended to protect public revenue.
Thus, all penalties do not flow from an offence as is
commonly understood but all offences lead to a
penalty. Whereas the former is a penalty which flows
from a disregard of statutory provisions, the latter is
entailed where there is mens rea and is made the
subject-matter of adjudication. In our view, penalty
under
section 10(3)
of the Act is compensatory. It is
levied for breach of a statutory duty for non-payment
of tax under the Act.
Section 10(3)
is enacted to
protect public revenue. It is enacted as a deterrent for
tax evasion. If the statutory dues of the State are paid,
there is no question of imposition of heavy penalty.
Everything which is incidental to the main purpose of
a power is contained within the power itself. The
power to impose penalty is for the purpose of
vindicating the main power which is conferred by the
statute in question. Deterrence is the main theme of
object behind that imposition of penalty under
section
10(3)
.
39
16.
In the case of
State of Tamil Nadu v. M
         Krishnappan & Another
reported in (2005) 4 SCC 53,
         this Court has held that entry 57 of list II of the
         seventh schedule to the Constitution provides a field
         to the State legislature to impose tax in respect of
         every aspect of a vehicle. The State has to find funds
         for making new roads and for maintenance of existing
         roads.
The Motor Vehicles Act
is regulatory and
         compensatory in nature in the sense that it is
         imposed to meet the increasing costs of maintenance
         and upkeep and to that extent it is not plenary. In
the
         said judgment
, it has been held that imposition of
         higher burden of tax on vehicles based on intelligible
         reasoning and differentia will not make the impugned
         levy discriminatory, arbitrary or unreasonable so as
         to violate
article 14
of the Constitution. ”
34. From the very object and reasons of the
Amending Act
1999, it is apparent that the special road tax was

introduced as a compensatory measure. The object and

reasons as spelled out in the original bill at the cost of

repetition is reproduced below:
“Developed roads and bridges constitute arteries of a
         healthy economy.      Himachal Pradesh being a hill
         State, the importance of roads, their construction and
         maintenance can hardly be over emphasised as a vital
         trading facility. Each year, the government has to
         incur considerable part of its budget on construction,
         maintenance and development of roads and bridges
40
in the State. Since it is essential to finance these
          activities, it is considered necessary to levy road tax
          on transport vehicles used or kept for use on public
          roads in Himachal Pradesh.”
35. What is to be seen is whether the tax imposed will

have identifiable object and a nexus between the subject

and the object of the levy. The power has been given to

the States to make its own legislations by imposing tax on

motor vehicles as also the goods being transported in

order to compensate itself for the services, benefits and

facilities provided by it.
36. This Court in
B.A. Jayaram and Ors. vs. Union of

India (UOI) and Ors.
(supra) laid down the proposition

that to uphold a tax claim to be compensatory tax, there

must be existence of a specific identifiable object behind

the levy. It further laid down that the levy must have a

nexus between the subject and the object of levying. In

the said case the challenge was to a notification issued by

the State of Karnataka dated 31 May, 1981 withdrawing

the exemption granted under Section 63(7) of the 1939
41
Act. The said exemption was granted to promote tourist

traffic on an inter-state basis.                   This Court, after

considering the object behind the compensatory and

regulatory levy, held that such tax fell outside
Article 301
of the Constitution of India and withdrawal of the

exemption granted would neither be discriminatory nor

arbitrary and, accordingly, upheld the withdrawal. In this

context, it would be useful to reproduce paragraphs 9 and

10:
“9. By virtue of the power given to them by Entries 56
         and 57 of List Il each one of the States has the right
         to make its own legislation to compensate it for the
         services, benefit and facilities provided by it for motor
         vehicles operating within the territory of the State.
         Taxes resulting from such legislative activity are by
         their very nativity and nature, cast (sic caste) and
         character, regulatory and compensatory and, are
         therefore, not within the vista of Article 301. unless,
         as we said, the tax is a mere pretext designed to injure
         the freedom of inter-State trade, commerce and
         intercourse. The nexus between the levy and the
         service is so patent in the case of such taxes that we
         need say no more about it.
The Karnataka Motor
         Vehicles Taxation Act
and the Motor Vehicles
         Taxation Acts of other States are without doubt
42
regulatory and compensatory legislations outside the
range of
Article 301
of the Constitution.
10. It is true that the object of enacting Section 63(7)
by the Parliament was to promote all-India and inter-
State tourist traffic.
But taxes on vehicles... suitable for use on roads is a
State legislative subject and it is for the State
Legislature to impose a levy and to exempt from the
levy. True again, Entry 57 of the State List is subject
to Entry 35 of the Concurrent List and, as explained
by us at the outset, it is therefore open to the
Parliament to lay down the principles on which taxes
may be levied on mechanically propelled vehicles. But
the Parliament while enacting
Section 63(7)
of the
Motor Vehicles Act refrained from indicating any such
principles,   either     expressly   or   by   necessary
implication. The State's power to tax and to exempt
was left uninhibited. It may be that a State legislation,
plenary or subordinate, which exempts "non-home-
State tourist vehicles" from tax would be advancing
the object of
Section 63(7)
of the Motor Vehicles Act
and accelerating inter-State trade, commerce and
intercourse. But merely by Parliament legislating
Section 63(7), the State Legislatures are not obliged
to fall in line and to so arrange their tax laws as to
advance the object of Section 63(7), be it ever so
desirable. The State is obliged neither to grant an
exemption nor to perpetuate an exemption once
granted. There is no question of impairing the
freedom under
Article 301
by refusing to exempt or by
withdrawing an exemption. Not to pat on the back is
not to stab in the back. True, straw by straw, the
43
burden of taxation on tourist vehicles increases as
         each State adds its bit of straw, but, then, each State
         is concerned with its coffers and has the right to tax
         vehicles using its roads; and, the contribution which
         a tourist carriage is required to make to its treasury
         is no more than what other contract carriages are
         required to make. We are firmly of the view that there
         is no impairment of the freedom under
Article 301.
The special submission on behalf of the 'Karnataka
         Operators' that the withdrawal by the Karnataka
         Government of the exemption granted to 'outsiders
         has resulted in the 'Karnataka Operators' having to
         pay tax in every State in the country and, therefore,
         the withdrawal has impaired the freedom under
Article 301
is but the same general submission, seen
         through glasses of a different tint. It does not even
         have the merit that the withdrawal of the Karnataka
         exemption affects them directly. The submission is
         rejected.”
37. Similarly, in the case of
Bolani Ores Ltd. vs. State

of Orissa
(supra), a question arose with regard to the

taxes imposed under Entry 57 of List II being in the nature

of regulatory and compensatory measures. The appellants

in the said case were companies engaged in mining

operations and were seeking a declaration that rockers,

dumpers and tractors were not taxable under the Bihar
44
and
Orissa Motor Vehicles Taxation Act
1930 as they were

not motor vehicles defined under the Act. The contention

of the appellants was that the tractors, dumpers and

rockers were not using any roads but were only plied

within the premises of the mining area which was privately

owned by the companies, and would not be liable to any

tax so long as they are within the premises. However, if

they use the roads, then the tax component will be

applicable.   In para 29 of the report, this Court again

explained the nature of the State Legislation relating to

taxation on motor vehicles as being regulatory measure

and compensatory in nature to raise revenue. Relevant

extract is reproduced hereunder:
“
The Taxation Act
is a regulatory measure imposing
         compensatory taxes for the purpose of raising
         revenue to meet the expenditure for making roads,
         maintaining them and for facilitating the movement
         and regulation of traffic. The validity of the taxing
         power under Entry 57 List I of the Seventh Schedule
         read with
Article 301
of the Constitution depends
         upon the regulatory and compensatory nature of the
         taxes. It is not the purpose of the
Taxation Act
to levy
45
taxes on vehicles which do not use the roads or in any
         way form part of flow of traffic on the roads which is
         required to be regulated. The regulations under the
Motor Vehicles Act
for registration and prohibition of
         certain categories of vehicles being driven by persons
         who have no driving licence, even though those
         vehicles are not plying on the roads, are designed to
         ensure the safety of passengers and goods etc. etc.
         and for that purpose it is enacted to keep control and
         check on the vehicles. Legislative power under Entry
         35 of List III (Concurrent List) does not bar such a
         provision. But Entry 57 of List Il is subject to the
         limitations
referred to above
, namely, that the power
         of   taxation   thereunder     cannot    exceed    the
         compensatory nature which must have some nexus
         with the vehicles using the roads viz. public roads.”
38. The argument by Mr.Bhatnagar, learned amicus that

the offending provision contained in Section 3A(3) being

repugnant to the central legislation, will have to give way

and cannot be sustained.            His submission is that the

power to impose penalty is given in
Section 192 A
of the

1988 Act. According to him, Entry 57 of List II being

subject to the provisions of Entry 35 of List III under which

the 1988 Act has been enacted,
Section 192A
provides for
46
penalty being imposed on vehicles being used without

permit or in contravention of the provisions of sub-section

(1) of
Section 66
(providing for necessity for permits).

According to him once the central Act contains a penal

provision for such a violation of imprisonment as also fine,

the State could not have imposed a tax for the same

violation. This submission of Shri Bhatnagar can be

sustained only if any repugnancy or any conflict can be

established between the State law and the Central law.

The provisions under
Section 192A
are in no way violated

or conflicted by imposing an additional special tax for

violation of use of vehicles without permit. It can be said

to be in addition to the penalty provided in
Section 192A
of the 1988 Act. This Court, in the case of
Sukhpal Singh

Bal
(supra) has already upheld that such imposition of tax

for violation of statutory provisions, is to be treated as a

regulatory measure and only to work as a deterrent of the

vehicle owners’ violating the law. Such a tax would be

regulatory in nature and would only check violations of
47
the statutory provisions.
In the case of Sharma

Transport Rep. by D.P. Sharma vs. Government of

Andhra Pradesh and Ors. (supra), a similar issue was

considered and this Court was of the view that under

Entry 35 of List III the permission is to lay down the

principles on which the tax may be levied whereas the

State had a right to levy such tax. Paras 8 and 11 of the

said report dealing with the aforesaid aspect are

reproduced hereunder:
“8. This is not a case where the theory of occupied
        field can be made applicable.
The Taxation Act
essentially deals with fares charged from passengers
        and freight collected from them. On the contrary, the
        Act deals with levy on vehicles. They are conceptually
        different. Whatever has been stated above in the
        background of
Article 73
is equally applicable to
Articles 256
and
257
of the Constitution.
Article 256
provides that the executive power of every State shall
        be so exercised as to ensure compliance with the laws
        made by Parliament and any existing laws which
        apply in that State and the executive power of the
        Union shall extend to the giving of such directions to
        a State as may appear to the Government of India to
        be necessary for that purpose.
48
This article has application only when any law has
been made by Parliament and the executive power of
the State is made subservient to it by requiring it to
ensure compliance with such laws.
Where it appears to the Government of India that it is
so necessary to do, directions can be issued.
Article
257
provides that the executive power of every State
shall be so exercised as not to impede or prejudice the
exercise of the executive power of the Union. Where
the Government of India feels it so necessary to do so,
it can issue a direction. At the cost of repetition it may
be noted that there is no law specifying the principles
of taxation on the subject-matter of controversy so as
to bring in application of either
Article 256
or
Article
257
of the Constitution.
11. Power to levy taxes on vehicles, whether
mechanically propelled or not vests solely in the State
Legislature, though it may be open to Parliament to
lay down the principles on which the taxes may be
levied on mechanically propelled vehicles in the
background of Entry 35 of List III. To put it differently,
Parliament may lay down the guidelines for the levy
of taxes on such vehicles, but the right to levy such
taxes vests solely in the State Legislature. No
principles admittedly have been formulated by
Parliament. In that sense, the Government of India's
communication dated 30-8-1993 does not in any
sense violate the power of the State Legislature or its
delegate to levy or exempt taxes from time to time.”
49
39. Mr. Mukerji, learned counsel for the appellants, has

referred to a number of judgments of this Court relating to

levy of tax being compensatory and regulatory in nature.

The same are not being discussed in detail to unnecessary

burden the judgment. However, a reference has already

been made to the said judgments quoted earlier.
40. In the above backdrop of the legal position, the

validity of Section 3A(3) of the 1972 Act introduced vide
Amending Act
of 1999 is being discussed hereunder.
41.
Section 3
of the 1972 Act provided for levy of taxes on

all motor vehicles kept or used in the State of Himachal

Pradesh as per the schedules appended to the said Act.

Insertion of Section 3A provided for levy of special road

tax. The special road tax as provided under sub-sections

(1), (2) and (4) of Section 3A have been upheld by the High

Court. It is only the levy of special road tax under sub-

section (3) which has been struck down.        Testing the

provisions of the offending section with regard to the
50
settled principles of interpretation of taxing statutes, it is

to be ascertained on the following three aspects:
(1)   Whether    it    is   manifestly   unjust   or   glaringly

unconstitutional;
(2)   Whether it is regulatory or compensatory in nature;
and

(3)   Whether there is any repugnancy with the provisions

in the Central enactment.
Manifestly unjust or glaringly unconstitutional:
42. The Legislatures of the State have not only the power

to make laws on the taxation to be imposed on motor

vehicles as     also    the passengers and        goods being

transported by motor vehicles but also the power to lay

down principles on which taxes on vehicles are to be

levied. In the absence of any principles having been laid

down by the Parliament, no fault could be found in the law

enacted by Legislature of the State of Himachal Pradesh.

The offending provision is regulatory in nature and
51
therefore within the competence of the Legislature of State

of Himachal Pradesh. There is nothing on record to indict

the offending provision as being manifestly unjust or

glaringly unconstitutional.
Regulatory or Compensatory:
43. The objects and reasons for bringing in the 1999

Amendment was clearly compensatory in nature.          The

object was to augment funds and finance for construction,

maintenance, repair and upkeep of the roads in the State

of Himachal Pradesh which has a totally hilly terrain. The

offending section only provided that if any vehicle used

without a valid permit or in any manner not authorised by

the permit, further special road tax would be levied,

charged and paid to the state government in addition to

the tax payable under sub-section (1) at such rates as may

be specified by the state government by notification.

However, the restriction was that the same would not
52
exceed the rates specified in column 3 of Schedule 3 of the

Act.
44. Imposition of such additional special road tax was

only to keep a check or a discipline on the transport

vehicle operators to use their vehicles in accordance with

the statutory provisions. This could work as a deterrent

for the transport operators to not commit any breach and

to follow the mandate of the law. Such additional special

road tax could be termed as regulatory in nature so as to

regulate other statutory provisions being implemented

and strictly followed.
45. This Court in the case of
Sukhpal Singh Bal
(supra)

relating to challenge to
Section 10(3)
of the U.P. Motor

Vehicles Taxation Act, 1997 where a similar provision was

incorporated and even though termed as penalty, was held

to be regulatory and compensatory in nature. The High

Court had struck down the said provision but this Court

held that such penalty imposed under
Section 10(3)
to
53
protect public revenue and as a deterrent for tax evasion.

In view of the above, it cannot be said that levy of such an

additional special road tax would be said to be manifestly

unjust or glaringly unconstitutional. It was, in effect, to

ensure payment of the chargeable taxes and use of the

vehicles as per the terms of the permit.
Repugnancy, if any, with Central enactment:
46. Entry 35 of List II conferred the power on the

Parliament as also the State Legislatures to make laws

relating to mechanically propelled vehicles of all kinds and

also to lay down the principles on which taxes on such

vehicles are to be levied. The central enactment i.e. the

law made by the Parliament has not laid down any

principles for levy of taxes. The State Legislatures had the

power to levy taxes not only under Entries 56 and 57 of

List II but also to lay down the principles under Entry 35

of List III. Therefore, no repugnancy of any kind could be

alleged or pleaded or proved in the absence of there being
54
any central law laying down principles of levy of tax. In

view of the above, no repugnancy or conflict of the State

enactment with the central enactment could be sustained.
47. The next argument of the learned amicus with respect

to the 1988 Act containing
Section 192A
wherein violation

of
Section 66(1)
would constitute a criminal offence

punishable with sentence and also fine, as such the

offending section being repugnant to the said provision,

cannot be sustained. Under
Section 192A
a punishment

of imprisonment along with fine is provided whereas under
the offending section, an additional special road tax is

being charged for such a violation of using vehicle without

permit or in contravention of the terms of the permit. The

offending section was incorporated with a view to augment

more revenue in order to construct and maintain the roads

of the state which uses a large chunk of its finances being

a state having a completely hilly terrain. The additional

special road tax chargeable under Section 3A(3) would be
55
in addition to any sentence or fine imposed under
Section

192A
. Punishment for offence is with an object to create

deterrence and curtailing such offences as it creates a fear

in the mind of offender likely to commit the offence. The

same is the object of the additional special road tax to

make it work as a deterrent from the transport operators

in plying vehicles without permit and in contravention of

the terms of the permit. As such there is no repugnancy

or any conflict caused by the offending provision with the

central enactment.
48. For all the reasons recorded above, the validity of

Section 3A(3), in our opinion, has been wrongly held to be

ultra vires by the High Court. The tax imposed under

Section 3A(3) is regulatory in character and is not a

penalty.
Lumpsum taxation:
49. The High Court had also quashed the notifications

issued by the State for levy of the taxes under
Section
56
3A(3) holding that lumpsum taxes could not be levied on

general assessment and it had to be levied as per actual

default. Levy of lumpsum tax has been upheld by a three

Judge Bench of this Court in the case of
State of Tamil

Nadu vs. M. Krishnappan and Anr.
reported in (2005) 4

SCC 53. We find no reason to take a different view. It may

also be noted that the learned Amicus Curiae has also not

advanced any arguments on this point.
50. In view of the above, it would not be a futile exercise

to send the matters back to the regular Bench as we have

held that said Section 3A(3) of the 1972 Act being within

the legislative competence of the State Legislature, and

lumpsum tax could be levied. Nothing further remains to

be examined by the regular Bench in these appeals.
51. We, accordingly, allow the appeals, set aside the

impugned judgment and order of the High Court and

further dismiss the writ petitions.
57
52. There shall be no order as to costs.
53. Pending application(s), if any, are disposed of.
…..……..........................J.
                                    [SANJAY KISHAN KAUL]


                                  ………….........................J.
                                              [ABHAY S. OKA]


                                  ………….........................J.
                                              [VIKRAM NATH]
NEW DELHI
JANUARY 13, 2023.
58