[Cites
0
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Bank Of India vs Kamal Kishore Prasad on 9 January, 2023
Author:
Bela M. Trivedi
Bench:
Bela M. Trivedi
,
Krishna Murari
REPORTABLE


                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 175 OF 2023
                                     (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 9819 of 2018)


                      STATE BANK OF INDIA & ORS.                     .... APPELLANTS


                                                       VERSUS


                      KAMAL KISHORE PRASAD                           .... RESPONDENT




                                                JUDGMENT
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J.
1.              Leave granted.
2.              The present appeal is directed against the judgment and order

                         dated 01.02.2018 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Patna

                         in LPA No. 2035 of 2016, whereby the High Court has dismissed

                         the appeal filed by the Appellant-Bank and confirmed the order

                         passed by the Single Bench.
3.
Signature Not Verified   The short facts giving rise to the present petition are that the
Digitally signed by
Jayant Kumar Arora
respondent while posted as a Branch Manager at Marufganj
Date: 2023.01.10
11:26:48 IST
Reason:
Branch and at various other branches, was found to have
1
committed various lapses, in respect of which he was suspended

     on 14.06.1993 in terms of Rule 50A(i)(a) of SBIOSR, 1992. On the

     departmental proceedings having been conducted against him, the

     Inquiry Authority had submitted its report on 09.03.1998, whereby

     some of the allegations were found to be proved and some were

     found to be partly proved. The Disciplinary Authority agreed with

     some of the findings recorded by the Inquiry Authority and called

     upon the respondent to make his submissions on the same.

     However thereafter the matter was sent to the Appointing Authority,

     which imposed the penalty of “Dismissal from Service” as per the

     order dated 11.08.1999.
4.   The respondent being aggrieved by the said order had filed a Writ

     Petition being no. 2739 of 2000 before the High Court which came

     to be allowed by the Single Bench vide order dated 26.03.2003.

     The Appellant-Bank aggrieved by the said order had filed an LPA

     being no. 378 of 2003. On 09.05.2003, the Division Bench stayed

     the implementation of the order dated 26.03.2003 passed by the

     Single Bench, however finally dismissed the said LPA vide order

     dated 22.04.2010. In the meantime, the respondent attained the

     age of superannuation on 30.11.2009. The Appellant-Bank having

     filed SLP (C) No. 16541 of 2010 challenging the order dated
2
22.04.2010 passed by the Division Bench, the same came to be

     allowed by this Court on 25.11.2013. While allowing the SLP, this

     Court observed as under:
“10. We have heard learned counsel for the parties to
                the lis.
11. The Writ Court while deciding the writ petition filed
                by the respondent against the orders passed by the
                Appointing Authority had followed the dicta of this
                court wherein it is said that the person who hears the
                matter should necessarily pass an order. The Division
                Bench of the High Court in its judgment has referred
                to the subsequent decisions of this Court. In our
                opinion, we need not have to refer to those decisions.
It is now a well settled principle that the person who
                hears the matter requires to pass an order.
12. Since, that is the view of the Learned Single
                Judge, we are of the opinion that such a view cannot
                be taken exception to by us. However, the Division
                Bench while rejecting the Letters Patent Appeal filed
                by the appellant-bank has made certain observations
                which in our opinion, would not arise in the matter of
                this nature. Therefore, we cannot sustain the
                judgment and order passed by the Division Bench of
                the High Court.
13. In the result, we allow this appeal and set aside
                the judgment and order passed by the Division Bench
                of the High Court in Letters Patent Appeal No.378 of
                2003. Since we are told that the delinquent officer has
                already retired from service on attaining the age of
                superannuation, we now direct the Appointing
                Authority to take appropriate decision as expeditious
                as possible, at any rate within two months from the
                receipt of copy of this order.
14. All the contentions of all the parties are kept open.
                Ordered accordingly.”
5.   In view of the above order passed by this Court, the Appointing

     Authority issued a show-cause notice to the respondent on

     06.02.2014, to which the respondent submitted his response on
3
10.02.2014. The Appointing Authority after granting personal

     hearing to the respondent on 14.02.2014, passed an order on

     17.02.2014 imposing upon the respondent the penalty of

     “Dismissal from Service” in terms of Rule 67(J) of SBISOR w.e.f.

     11.08.1999 and treating his period of suspension as not on duty.
6.   Being aggrieved by the said order passed by the Appointing

     Authority, the respondent filed Departmental appeal before the

     Appellate Authority on 24.02.2014, which came to be dismissed on

     09.08.2014. The respondent therefore again approached the High

     Court by way of filing CWJC No. 10192 of 2014. The Single Bench

     of the High Court vide the order dated 22.08.2016 allowed the said

     petition, and quashed and set aside the order of dismissal passed

     by the Appellant-Bank and directed the Appellant-Bank to pay all

     the consequential benefits i.e., arrears of salary and retiral benefits

     within 3 months thereof. The aggrieved appellant-bank filed LPA

     being no. 2035 of 2016 on 17.10.2016, which came to be

     dismissed by the Division Bench vide the impugned order dated

     01.02.2018.
7.   The learned ASG Mr. Balbir Singh for the Appellant-Bank

     vehemently submitted that the High Court had committed gross

     error in confirming the order passed by the Single Bench, and in
4
misinterpreting the Rule 19(1) and 19(3) of the SBIOSR, 1992.
According to him, this Court in the first round of litigation had

     allowed the appeal filed by the Appellant-Bank and set aside the

     order passed by the Division Bench, and while observing that the

     person who hears the matter requires to pass an order, had

     directed the Appointing Authority to take appropriate decision

     within 2 months, keeping all the contentions of the parties open.

     The appointing authority, therefore had issued a show-cause

     notice to the respondent and after giving him an opportunity of

     hearing had passed the order of dismissal, which was wrongly set

     aside by the Single Bench and by the Division Bench.
8.   However, the learned counsel Mr. Kripa Shankar Prasad

     appearing for the respondent submitted that an affirmative action

     was expected to be taken by the Appellant-Bank in view of the

     order passed by the Supreme Court on 25.11.2013, as the

     respondent had already attained the age of superannuation

     pending the proceeding before the High Court. He further

     submitted in the said order the Supreme Court had set aside the

     order of Division Bench, however had agreed with the view

     expressed by the Single Bench that as per the settled legal

     principle, the person who hears the matter is required to pass an
5
order. According to him, the Supreme Court had granted the liberty

     only to the extent of directing the Appointing Authority to take

     appropriate action in accordance with law as the respondent had

     attained the age of superannuation. Under the circumstances, the

     Appointing Authority was required to take steps either to extend

     the service of the respondent in terms of Rule 19(1), or to continue

     the disciplinary proceedings, even after the superannuation of the

     respondent under Rule 19(3) of the Rules, however the Appellant-

     Bank did not take recourse to any of the said rules. He further

     submitted that the discretion to continue with the disciplinary

     proceedings had to be exercised as an affirmative action by taking

     a conscious decision, which the Appointing Authority of the

     Appellant-Bank had failed to take, and on the contrary passed the

     order of dismissal with retrospective effect which was not legally

     permissible.
9.   Since much reliance has been placed by the learned counsel

     appearing for the respondent on Rule 19(1) and 19(3) of the

     SBIOSR Rules, the same are reproduced for the sake of

     convenience.
"19.(1) An officer shall retire from the service of the
                Bank on attaining the age of fifty-eight years or upon
                the completion of thirty years' service or thirty years'
                pensionable service if he is a member of the Pension
                Fund, whichever occurs first.
6
Provided that the competent authority may, at
its discretion, extend the period of service of an officer
who has attained the age of fifty-eight years or bas
completed thirty years' service or thirty years'
pensionable service as the case may be, should such
extension be deemed desirable in the interest of the
Bank, so however, that the service rendered by the
concerned officer beyond 58 years of age except to
the extent of the period of leave due at that time will
not count for purpose of pension.
Provided further that an officer who had joined
the service of the Bank either as an officer or
otherwise on or after July, 19, 1969 and attained the
age of 58 years shall not be granted any further
extension in service.
Provided further that an officer may, at the
discretion of the Executive Committee, be retired from
the Bank's service after he has attained 50 years of
age or has completed 25 years' service or 25 years'
pensionable service as the case may be, by giving
him three months' notice in writing or pay in lieu
thereof.
Provided further that an officer who has
completed 20 years' service or 20 years' pensionable
service, as the case may be, may be permitted by the
competent authority to retire from the Bank's service,
subject to his giving three months' notice or pay in lieu
thereof unless this requirement is wholly or partly
waived by it.
19.(2) .......... …… ….. .......
19.(3) In case disciplinary proceedings under
the relevant rules of service have been initiated
against an officer before he ceases to be in the
Bank's service by I the operation of, or by virtue of,
any of the said rules or the provisions of these rules,
the disciplinary proceedings m'ay, at the discretion of
the Managing Director, be continued and concluded
by the authority by which the proceedings were
initiated in the manner provided for in the said rules
as if the officer continues to be in service, so however,
that he shall be deemed to be in service only for the
purpose of the continuance and conclusion of such
proceedings.
Explanation: An officer will retire on the last
day. of the month in which he completes the stipulated
service or age of retirement."
7
10.   On the bare perusal of the said Rules it clearly transpires that as

      per Rule 19(1) of the Rules, an officer could retire from the service

      of the bank on attaining the age of 58 years or upon the

      completion of 30 years’ service or 30 years’ of pensionable service

      if he is a member of the Pension Fund whichever occurs first,

      subject to the provisos mentioned therein. As per the Rule 19(3), in

      case the disciplinary proceedings under the relevant rules of

      service have been initiated against an officer before he ceases to

      be in the Bank’s service by operation of, or by virtue of any of the

      rules, the disciplinary proceedings may at the discretion of

      Managing Director be continued and concluded, as if the officer

      had continued to be in service. However, the officer in that case

      shall be deemed to be in service only for the purpose of the

      continuance and conclusion of such proceedings.
11.   So far as the facts of the present case are concerned, the

      disciplinary proceedings against the respondent were already

      initiated and had stood concluded, culminating into dismissal from

      service as per the order dated 11.08.1999 passed by the

      Appointing Authority. The said order was challenged by the

      respondent by filing the Writ Petition, which came to be allowed by

      the Single Bench on 26.03.2009 whereby the order of dismissal
8
was set aside, nonetheless the Appellant-Bank having preferred

      the LPA No. 378 of 2003, the Division Bench had stayed the

      operation and implementation of the said order passed by the

      Single Bench on 09.05.2003. The said LPA came to be dismissed

      on 22.04.2010, in the meantime on 30.11.2009, the respondent

      attained the age of superannuation i.e., during the time, when the

      operation of the order of Single Bench was stayed. Thus, the order

      of Single Bench setting aside the order of dismissal passed by the

      Appointing Authority having been stayed by the Division Bench,

      the respondent could not be deemed to have continued in service,

      and also when he had attained the age of superannuation on

      30.11.2009. Thereafter, the order of Division Bench dated

      22.04.2010 passed in the LPA 378 of 2003 having been set aside

      by this Court while allowing the appeal filed by the Appellant-Bank

      vide the order dated 25.11.2013, again it could not be said that the

      respondent was continued in service, till he attained the age of

      superannuation.
12.   The reliance placed by the learned counsel for the respondent on

      Rule 19(3) of the Rules is also thoroughly misplaced in as much as

      Rule 19(3) contemplates a situation, when the disciplinary

      proceedings against a bank officer, have already been initiated,
9
and are pending when the officer ceases to be in the Bank’s

      service, and in that case the Managing Director in his discretion

      may continue and conclude the disciplinary proceedings against

      the officer as if the officer continues to be in service. However, in

      the instant case, there was no question of Managing Director

      exercising such discretion under Rule 19(3) as the disciplinary

      proceedings    initiated   against   the   respondent   had   already

      culminated into his dismissal as per the order dated 11.08.1999

      passed by the Appointing Authority. Though the said order of

      dismissal was set aside by the Single Bench, the order of Single

      Bench had remained stayed pending the LPA filed by the Bank;

      and though the LPA was dismissed by the Division Bench, the said

      order in LPA was set aside by this Court, observing that the person

      who hears the matter has to decide it.
13.   It was only pursuant to the direction given by this Court vide the

      order dated 25.11.2013, the Appointing Authority was expected to

      hear the respondent and pass appropriate order. This Court had

      kept all the contentions of all the parties open. Hence the

      Appointing Authority after issuing show-cause notice and granting

      opportunity of hearing to the respondent had passed the order

      imposing the penalty of “Dismissal from Service” w.e.f. 11.08.1999,
10
i.e., from the date when the first order of dismissal was passed by

      the Appointing Authority. Since all the contentions were kept open

      by this Court while allowing the appeal filed by the Appellant-Bank,

      as such no affirmative action was expected from the Appellant-

      Bank, as sought to be submitted by the learned counsel for the

      respondent. The said order of Appointing Authority dismissing the

      respondent from service after granting opportunity of hearing to

      the respondent was in consonance with the direction given by this

      Court and could not be said to be arbitrary illegal or in violation of

      Rule 19(3) of the said Rules. The impugned order of the High

      Court setting aside the said order of dismissal being under

      misconception of facts and law deserves to be quashed and set

      aside.
14.   In that view of the matter the impugned order passed by the

      Division Bench confirming the order passed by the Single Bench,

      is hereby accordingly set aside.
15.   The appeal stands allowed.
………………………. J.
[KRISHNA MURARI]

                                                   …..................................J.
                                                          [BELA M. TRIVEDI]
NEW DELHI;
09.01.2023
11