[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Rohan Dhungat vs The State Of Goa on 5 January, 2023
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
C.T. Ravikumar
,
M.R. Shah
REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                EXTRA-ORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                          SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL) NOS. 12574-12577 OF 2022
                                      (@ DIARY NO. 29535 OF 2022)


                         Rohan Dhungat Etc.                                         ...Petitioner(s)

                                                        Versus

                         The State of Goa & Ors Etc.                             …Respondent(s)



                                                 JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                              judgment and order passed by the High Court of Bombay at

                              Goa in Criminal Writ Petition Nos. 466 of 2021, 467 of 2021,

                              471 of 2021 and 472 of 2021 dated 03.08.2022, by which,

                              the High Court has dismissed the said writ petitions holding

                              that the period of Parole is to be excluded from the period of

                              sentence   while   considering          the   14   years   to   actual

                              imprisonment for the purpose of premature release, the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Neetu Sachdeva
original writ petitioners have preferred the present Special
Date: 2023.01.05
16:39:18 IST
Reason:
Leave Petitions.
Page 1 of 10
2.   That the original petitioners are all convicts undergoing life

     imprisonment. That all of them were released on parole

     under    the   provisions   of   Goa   Prisons   Rules,   2006

     (hereinafter referred to as the “Rules, 2006”). That all the

     original petitioners applied for premature release under the

     Rules,   2006.    The   State     Sentence   Revenue      Board

     recommended for premature release. The State Government

     sought opinion of the convicting Court on the premature

     release of the petitioners. The convicting Court opined that

     the convicts shall not be released prematurely considering

     the gravity of offence. Therefore, the State Government

     rejected the premature release of the petitioners. The

     convicts – original writ petitioners, therefore, preferred the

     respective writ petitions before the High Court of Bombay

     challenging the State’s decision to not considering their case

     for premature release. Before the High Court, it was the case

     on behalf of the original writ petitioners that the convicts

     have completed 14 years in custody and therefore, as such

     were entitled for premature release. It was the case on

     behalf of the convicts- original petitioners that the period of

     parole is not to be excluded from the period of sentence

     under the Rules, 2006 while considering 14 years of actual
Page 2 of 10
imprisonment for the purpose of premature release. Taking

     into consideration the Rule 335 of the Rules, 2006 which

     provides that the period of release on Furlough and Parole

     “shall be counted as remission of sentence ….” the High

     Court by impugned judgment and order has observed and

     held that the period of parole is to be excluded from the

     period of sentence while considering 14 years of actual

     imprisonment for the purpose of premature release. As the

     respective convicts – original writ petitioners excluding

     period of parole did not complete 14 years of actual

     imprisonment, the High Court by the impugned judgment and

       Hon’ble Mr. Justice M.R. Shah has pronounced the
reportable judgment of the Bench comprising His Lordship
and Hon’ble Mrs. Justice B.V. Nagarathna.
The appeal is dismissed in terms of the signed
reportable judgment.
Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
(NEETU SACHDEVA)                                      (NISHA
TRIPATHI)
ASTT. REGISTRAR-cum-PS                              ASSISTANT
REGISTRAR
(signed reportable judgment is placed on the file) order has

     dismissed the respective writ petitions. Feeling aggrieved

     and dissatisfied with the impugned common      judgment and

     order passed by the High Court, the original writ petitioners

     have preferred the present petitions.
Page 3 of 10
3.   Shri Siddharth Dave, learned senior counsel appearing on

     behalf   of    the   respective    petitioners   has   vehemently

     submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the case

     the Hon’ble High Court has seriously erred in holding that

     the period of parole is to be excluded from the period of

     sentence under the Rules, 2006 while considering 14 years

     of actual imprisonment for the purpose of premature release.


3.1. It is vehemently submitted by Shri Dave learned Senior

     Counsel for the respective petitioners that the Hon’ble High

     Court has erred in relying on the Rule 335 of the Rules,

     2006 to hold that since period of release on parole is

     counted as remission, the same cannot be counted as part

     of sentence.
3.2. It is submitted that even while on parole the accused

     /convicts can be said to be in custody / judicial custody and

     therefore, period of parole is to be included while considering

     14 years of actual imprisonment for the purpose of

     premature release.
3.3. It is vehemently submitted that as such the view taken by the

     High Court is just contrary to the decision of this Court in the
Page 4 of 10
case of
Sunil Fulchand Shah vs. Union of India
reported

     in (2000) 3 SCC 409 as well as in the case of
Avtar Singh

     vs. State of Haryana
reported in (2002) 3 SCC 409 (para
11).
3.4. It is further submitted by Shri Dave learned senior counsel

     for the original writ petitioners-convicts that even as per
Section 55
of the Prisons Act, 1894, a prisoner when being

     taken to or from any prison in which he may be lawfully

     confined, shall be deemed to be in prison and therefore,

     deemed to be in custody and therefore, the period of parole

     shall have to be included as in custody for the purpose of

     actual period of imprisonment while considering 14 years of

     actual imprisonment.
Making above submissions, it is prayed to hold that the

     period of parole is to be included while considering 14 years

     of actual imprisonment for the purpose of premature release.
4.   The short question which is posed for the consideration of

     this Court is whether the period of parole is to be excluded

     from the period of sentence under the Rules, 2006 while

     considering 14 years of actual imprisonment for the purpose
Page 5 of 10
of premature release?
5.   While considering the aforesaid question /issue, the object

     and purpose of parole is required to be taken into

     consideration.
Parole is a conditional release. Parole can be granted

     in   case     of   short-term    imprisonment.    Duration    of

     parole extends to one month. Parole is granted by the State

     Government. For parole, specific reason is required. Parole

     can be granted for number of times.
6.   “Imprisonment” is defined under Rule 2(21) of the Rules,

     2006.     “Imprisonment”   means       imprisonment   of   either

     description as defined in
Section 53
of the Indian Penal

     Code, 1860 and the
General Clauses Act,1897
. The term of

     imprisonment is not included in the computation of term of

     parole.
7.   Keeping in mind the above, the issue involved in the present

     case viz. whether the period of parole is to be excluded

     from the period of sentence while considering 14 years

     of actual imprisonment for the purpose of premature release

     is to be considered.
Page 6 of 10
7.1. The High Court while passing the impugned judgment and

     order and taking the view that the period of parole is to be

     excluded from the period of sentence while considering 14

     years of actual imprisonment has heavily relied upon or

     considered Rule 335 of the Rules, 2006 which provides that

     the period of release on Furlough and Parole “shall be

     counted as remission of sentence ….”. Once the period of

     parole is to be counted as remission of sentence, as rightly

     observed and held by the High Court, the period of parole is

     also required to be excluded from the period of sentence

     while considering 14 years of actual imprisonment.
8.   Now, so far as the reliance placed upon the decision of this

     Court in the case of
Sunil Fulchand Shah
(supra) relied

     upon by learned senior counsel for the respective petitioners

     – convicts / prisoners is concerned
,
the said decision
shall

     not be applicable to the facts of the case on hand. It was a

     case of detenue under the provisions of the
COFEPOSA Act
.

     Even in
the said decision
, it is observed and held that the

     period of detention would not stand automatically extended

     by any period of parole granted to the detenu unless the

     order of parole or rules or instructions specifically indicates
Page 7 of 10
as a term and condition of parole, to the contrary. In the

     present case the term ‘imprisonment’ is not included in the

     computation of term of parole. Rule 335 specifically provides

     that parole is to be counted as remission of sentence.

     Therefore
,
the said decision
would not be applicable to the

     facts of the case on hand.
8.1. Similarly, the decision of this case in the case of
Avtar

     Singh
(supra) also shall not be applicable to the facts of the

     case on hand while considering the issue viz. whether the

     period of parole is to be excluded from the period of

     sentence under the Rules, 2006 while considering 14 years

     of actual imprisonment.
9.   Now, so far as the submission on behalf of the petitioners

     relying upon
Section 55
of the Prisons Act, 1894 that even

     on parole the prisoners shall be deemed to be in custody

     and therefore, the said period is to be included for the

     purpose of actual imprisonment is concerned, the aforesaid

     has no substance.
Section 55
of the Prisons Act, 1894 shall

     not be applicable with respect to release on parole.
Section

     55
of the Prisons Act, 1894 shall be applicable in a case

     where a prisoner is taken out from any prison, he shall deem
Page 8 of 10
to have been in prison. However, the same shall not be

      applicable with respect to release on parole.
10.   If the submission on behalf of the prisoners that the period of

      parole is to be included while considering 14 years of actual

      imprisonment is accepted
,
in that case
, any prisoner who

      may be influential may get the parole for number of times as

      there is no restrictions and it can be granted number of times

      and if the submission on behalf of the prisoners is accepted,

      it may defeat the very object and purpose of actual

      imprisonment. We are of the firm view that for the purpose of

      considering actual imprisonment, the period of parole is to be

      excluded. We are in complete agreement with the view taken

      by the High Court holding so.
11.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, all

      these Special Leave Petitions deserve to be dismissed and

      are accordingly dismissed.
………………………………….J.
                                        [M.R. SHAH]



                                      ………………………………….J.
                                        [C.T. RAVIKUMAR]

NEW DELHI;
Page 9 of 10
JANUARY 05, 2023
Page 10 of 10