[Cites
1
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Rajasthan vs Komal Lodha on 13 January, 2023
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
S. Ravindra Bhat
,
M. R. Shah
NON­REPORTABLE

                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                           CRIMINAL APPEAL NOs. 2239 ­2240 OF 2022
                             (@ SLP(Crl) NOs. 10707­10708 OF 2022)

         The State of Rajasthan                                     ...Appellant(S)

                                               Versus

         Komal Lodha                                              ...Respondent(S)


                                             ORDER
M. R. Shah, J.
1.              Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with impugned judgment

                         and order dated 11.05.2022 passed by the High Court of

                         Judicature for Rajasthan Bench at Jaipur in D.B. Criminal

                         Death Reference No. 6/2019 connected with D.B. Criminal

                         Appeal (DB) No. 374/2019, by which, on remanding the

                         matter by this Court, the Division Bench of the High Court

                         has commuted the death penalty to life imprisonment, the

                         State has preferred the present appeals. The State is also
Signature Not Verified
aggrieved of the observations made by the High Court in
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
Date: 2023.01.13
16:29:06 IST
Reason:
paragraph 42 in the impugned judgment and order.
1
2.    The facts leading to the present appeals in a nutshell are

      as under: ­



2.1   That the respondent – accused was convicted for the

      offence punishable under
Section 302
IPC. The learned

      Trial Court awarded the death penalty. However, the High

      Court    has      commuted       the     death    penalty    to   life

      imprisonment mechanically and without considering the

      aggravating and mitigating circumstances which were

      required to be considered while considering the case of

      death penalty. The matter was carried to this Court by the

      State   against    commuting       the    death    penalty   to   life

      imprisonment.
2.2   That vide judgment and order dated 06.01.2002, this

      Court after hearing the counsel appearing on behalf of the

      State as well as the accused set aside the order passed by

      the High Court commuting the death penalty to life

      imprisonment and remanded the matter to the High Court

      to consider the question of sentence for the offence under
Section 302
IPC, namely, whether death penalty and/or
2
life sentence or any other appropriate sentence. That

     thereafter, on remand after considering the aggravating

     and mitigating circumstances, the High Court not only has

     commuted the death penalty to life imprisonment, but also

     in   paragraph      42   has    made    certain   unwarranted

     observations on the investigation and that when this Court

     passed the order certain aspects were not brought to the

     notice of this Court and no assistance was provided to the

     accused – respondent herein to prefer an appeal before

     this Court. In the impugned judgment and order, the High

     Court has also directed to investigate the matter afresh to

     book certain other accused whose DNAs were obtained

     from the leggings of the deceased for the offence of murder,

     rape, sodomy and POCSO.
3.   Having heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

     State and Shri K.V. Viswanathan, learned Senior Advocate

     appearing on behalf of the respondent – accused and

     having gone through the impugned judgment and order

     passed   by   the    High   Court,     more   particularly,   the

     observations made in paragraph 42, we are of the opinion
3
that the observations made by the High Court in

     paragraph 42 are absolutely unwarranted and against the

     judicial discipline and propriety. When this Court earlier

     confirmed the conviction of the accused for the offence

     under
Section 302
IPC and that too after hearing learned

     Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the accused,

     thereafter, it was not open for the High Court to make

     comments upon the investigation and/or on merits of the

     case.
4.   The High Court also ought not to have made observations

     in paragraph 42 that certain aspects were not brought to

     the notice of this Court and no assistance was provided to

     the accused to prefer an appeal before this Court and that

     the conviction was upheld without hearing the side of the

     accused – respondent herein. However, it is required to be

     noted that when this Court passed the order remanding

     the matter for sentence and confirmed the conviction, this

     Court heard the learned Senior Advocate appearing on

     behalf of the accused. Therefore, the High Court is not

     right even factually in observing that this Court confirmed
4
the conviction without hearing the side of the accused on

     merits.   Judicial   discipline   requires   that   once   the

     conviction was confirmed by this Court that too after

     hearing the accused, the High Court should not have

     thereafter made any comment on the merits of the case,

     more particularly, when the conviction was specifically

     confirmed by this Court and the matter was remitted to

     the High Court only for the purpose of considering the

     sentence, namely, whether death penalty and/or life

     sentence or any other appropriate sentence. Even Shri

     K.V. Viswanathan, learned Senior Advocate appearing on

     behalf of the accused in the present case has also fairly

     conceded and stated that the observations made in

     paragraph    42   are   absolutely   unwarranted    and    are

     unsustainable. Leaving the matter there, we set aside the

     observations made by the High Court made in paragraph

     42 of the impugned judgment and order.
5.   Now so far as the impugned judgment and order passed by

     the High Court commuting the death penalty to life

     imprisonment is concerned, we see no reason to interfere
5
with the same, more particularly, when the High Court

     after   considering   the       aggravating   and   mitigating

     circumstances has commuted the death penalty to life

     imprisonment.
6.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above we

     set aside and expunge paragraph 42 of the impugned

     judgment and order passed by the High Court. Rest of the

     impugned judgment and order commuting the death

     penalty to life imprisonment is not interfered with. Present

     appeals are partly allowed to the aforesaid extent.
…………………………………J.
                                       (M. R. SHAH)



                                       …………………………………J.
                                       (S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
NEW DELHI,
JANUARY 13, 2022.
6