[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Mohinder Pal vs The State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 12 January, 2023
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
M.M. Sundresh
,
B.R. Gavai
REPORTABLE
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1863 OF 2010

                         MOHINDER PAL AND OTHERS                    ...APPELLANT (S)

                                                    VERSUS
                         STATE OF J & K                           ...RESPONDENT (S)


                                                   JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1.   Present appeal challenges the judgment and order dated

                         5th June, 2009, passed by the Division Bench of the High Court

                         of Jammu and Kashmir at Jammu (‘High Court’ for short) in

                         Criminal Appeal No. 09 of 1991, thereby dismissing the appeal

                         filed by Appellants-accused and confirming the order of

                         conviction and sentence awarded on 23 rd March, 1991 by

                         learned Sessions Judge, Kathua (‘Sessions Judge’ for short) in

                         Trial Case No. 89/1990.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Narendra Prasad
Date: 2023.01.19
18:49:47 IST
Reason:
1
2.        The facts leading to present appeal are as under:
i.     On 16th May, 1990, Police Station, Kathua (‘Police

            Station’ for short) at about 12 noon received reliable

            information   that   accused   No.1-Lal   Chand   (since

            deceased) and his sons were assaulting two young

            persons, who were forcibly detained by them in their

            house situated in Jagatpur, Tehsil Kathua. An entry

            was made regarding the same in Daily Diary Register.

            On receipt of said information, Head Constable-Raj Mal

            accompanied by constable Chaman Lal and Tirath

            Singh reached the house of the accused-appellants,

            they found that Manjit Kumar and Jaswinder were

            seriously injured and were found lying unconscious in

            one of the rooms. They were moved to District Hospital,

            Kathua for providing them immediate medical aid. Sub-

            Inspector Basant Singh reached the hospital and

            recorded the statement (Exh.PW-BS) of Jaswinder in
2
presence of Dr Renu Jamwal, who declared him fit to

      give the statement. On the basis of statement of

      Jaswinder (EX.PW-BS) First Information Report (‘FIR’

      for short) No. 213/90 was registered under section

      307/382/342/148/149 of the Jammu and Kashmir

      State Ranbir Penal Code (‘RPC’ for short) at the Police

      Station. Later, Manjit Kumar and Jaswinder both

      succumbed to their injuries. Thereafter, Section 302 of

      RPC was added.
ii.   In the statement (EX.PW-BS) of deceased Jaswinder it

      is stated that, he and Manjit Kumar had gone to village

      Jagatpur to get fodder. When they were walking in the

      street abutting the house of the accused party, accused

      Lal Chand, Bias, Sant Kumar, Roshan, Madan Lal

      along with other sons of accused No.1-Lal Chand (since

      deceased) dragged them inside the house and assaulted

      them with iron rods (Sariya), sickle (drat) and sticks.
3
They     were        provided   water      which        was

       undrinkable/tasteless. Further, accused-Sant Kumar

       stole Rs 300 from the deceased’s pocket.


iii.   The prosecution’s case, in a nutshell, is that accused

       No.2-Bias Raj had borrowed a sum of Rs 50 from the

       brother of the deceased-Jaswinder i.e. P.W.1-Praveen

       Kumar and P.W.1-Praveen Kumar had demanded the

       sum 3-4 days prior to occurrence of the incident. On

       the day of the incident P.W.1-Praveen Kumar had gone

       to village to get labourers. When he was close to the

       house of the Appellants, he was dragged inside and

       assaulted. Thereafter, they confined him to fodder room

       and assaulted Manjit Kumar and Jaswinder.             P.W.1-

       Praveen Kumar managed to escape the place of

       occurrence.     P.W.1-Praveen     Kumar         was     also

       accompanied     by     P.W.2-Hardev     Singh    and     the
4
occurrence of the above incident was narrated to P.W.3-

      Chajju Ram and Krishan Chand Lambardar.


iv.   The Investigating Officer (‘IO’ for short) submitted final

      report wherein it is stated that the above-mentioned

      incident    was     preceded   by   assault   and    wrongful

      confinement of P.W.1-Praveen Kumar by the Appellants

      when he had come in search of labourers.
v.    Accused No.1-Lal Chand (since deceased), Accused

      No.2-Bias    Raj,    Accused    No.3-Mohinder       Pal   alias

      Roshan, Accused No.4-Basant Kumar, Accused No.5-

      Om Prakash alias Doctor, Accused No.6-Kishan Chand

      and Accused No.7-Madan Lal were tried. Accused Nos.

      2 to 6 are sons of Accused No.1-Lal Chand (since

      deceased). On 16th August 1990, charges came to be

      framed by the Sessions Judge for offences punishable

      under section 302, 148 and 149 of the RPC.
5
vi.   The Appellants pleaded not guilty and claimed to be

      tried. The prosecution examined as many as 19

      witnesses    to   bring   home    the   guilt    of    accused-

      appellants. Their defence was that the Appellants

      exercised the right of private defence as Accused No.1-

      Lal Chand (since deceased) was assaulted by both the

      deceased who were hired as there was litigation pending

      between the parties. At the conclusion of the trial, the

      Sessions Judge acquitted Accused No.5-Om Prakash

      and   Accused      No.6-Kishan    Chand     and        convicted

      Accused Nos. 1 to 4 and 7 under section 302, 148 and

      149   of    the   RPC     and   sentenced       them    to   life

      imprisonment with a fine of Rs. 500 each and three

      months simple imprisonment in case of default in

      payment of fine.
6
vii.     Being aggrieved thereby, Appellants-accused filed an

              appeal before the High Court. Accused No.1- Lal Chand

              died during the pendency of the appeal. Accused No.2-

              Bias Raj was absconding and his presence could not be

              secured even after issuing Non-Bailable Warrant.     On

              5th June, 2009, High Court vide impugned judgment,

              dismissed the appeal filed by the Appellants and upheld

              their conviction and confirmed the sentence awarded to

              them by the Sessions Judge.
3.          Being aggrieved thereby the present Appeal was filed by

Accused No.3-Mohinder Pal, Accused No.7-Madan Lal and

Accused No.4-Basant Kumar.
4.          We have heard Mr. Tripurari Ray, learned counsel

appearing         for   the   Appellants-Accused   and   Mr.   Shailesh

Madiyal, learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent-

State of Jammu and Kashmir.
7
5.   Mr. Tripurari Ray submits that the High Court and the

Sessions Judge have grossly erred in convicting the appellants-

accused. Mr. Ray submits that it was the deceased-Manjeet

Kumar and Jaswinder who trespassed into the house of the

Appellants and assaulted Accused No.1- Lal Chand (since

deceased).   Thereafter, the appellants exercised their right of

private defence and assaulted the deceased. Further, most of

the injuries that were caused to the deceased were on their legs

and not with an intention to cause severe harm.
6.   Mr. Ray further submits that on a perusal of the dying

declaration i.e. statement of deceased Jaswinder it would reveal

that Dr. Renu Jamwal stated that the patient was not in a

condition to sign the statement due to swelling. The said

statement    does   not   state       any   details   regarding   the

mental/physical state of the patient whether he is of sound

mind and consciousness. Further, Dr. Renu Jamwal admitted
8
that the patient was ‘minimum conscious and not fully oriented

to place’.
7.   Mr. Ray urged that the evidence of P.W.1-Praveen Kumar

and P.W.3-Chhajju Ram contradict the dying declaration on

several points. The dying declaration does not state that P.W.1-

Praveen Kumar was assaulted and confined in the house of the

Appellants which is why both the deceased went to the house of

the Appellants instead it just states that they were finishing

their work and were assaulted by the Appellants.
8.   Mr.     Shailesh   Madiyal   appearing   on   behalf   of   the

respondent-state submits that the Sessions Judge and High

Court have concurrently held that dying declaration is a

substantive piece of evidence. The same is attested by PW-SI

Basant Singh and Dr. Renu Jamwal. It is also corroborated by

the evidence of the P.W.1-Praveen Kumar and P.W.2-Hardev

Singh. Thus, it cannot be simply brushed aside.
9
9.   Mr. Madiyal further submitted that the right of private

defence should be exercised in reasonable manner. The nature

of injuries would reveal multiple fractures and the weapons

used would indicate that the Appellants assaulted the deceased

with intention to kill them.
10. We have perused the materials placed on record. From the

materials placed on record, particularly, the Post-Mortem

Report, it cannot be disputed that the death of the deceased

was homicidal.
11. Insofar as the incident is concerned, the prosecution

mainly relies on the dying declaration of deceased-Jaswinder as

well as the oral testimony of P.W.1- Praveen Kumar, the brother

of deceased-Jaswinder and P.W.2-Hardev Singh.          The dying

declaration of deceased-Jaswinder implicates accused No.1-Lal

Chand (since deceased) as well as the accused-appellants. It is

to be noted that though in the dying declaration it is stated that

there was no previous enmity between deceased-Jaswinder and
10
the accused appellants, from the evidence of P.W.1-Praveen

Kumar, it would reveal that an amount of Rs.50/- was taken by

accused Bias from P.W.1-Praveen Kumar and the dispute was

with regard to non-payment of the same.
12. Though P.W.1-Praveen Kumar states that he went to

village Jagatpur to fetch labourers and the accused appellants

caught him and started beating him and thereafter tied him and

confined him in a verandah, there is no mention with regard to

the same in the dying declaration of deceased-Jaswinder.

P.W.1-Praveen Kumar states in his evidence that after some

time, when his brothers Manjit and Jaswinder were going in the

lane abutting the house of accused persons, the accused

persons assaulted them with Drat and Iron rod. According to

him, when they, on account of injuries, became unconscious,

the accused persons dragged them into the house. He states

that he untied the rope and managed to escape.     He further

states that when he reached Teli More, he revealed the
11
occurrence of the incident to Kewal Krishna and thereafter they

went to Police chowki to lodge a report.
13. P.W.2- Hardev Singh in his evidence states that on the day

of the incident he was working on thresher, which was set near

Jagatpur and when he was going to buy bidis, he met P.W.1-

Praveen Kumar on the way. He states that when they reached

in   Gali   near   the   house   of   accused   persons,   accused

Omprakash, Mahendra, Madi, Bias, Sant, Kashi and Gar

caught P.W.1-Praveen Kumar and took him into the house by

giving him beatings.     It is however to be noted that in the

evidence of P.W.1-Praveen Kumar, there is no mention with

regard to the presence of P.W.2-Hardev Singh.
14. P.W.2-Hardev Singh submitted that thereafter he went

back and when he reached near Jagatpur canal, he met Manjit

alias Babi and Jaswinder and he informed them about the

incident of P.W.1-Praveen Kumar meeting him and being

assaulted. He stated that thereafter he along with both Manjit
12
and Jaswinder went to the place of occurrence. He stated that

he was at a short distance from them.     He stated that when

they reached in the Gali of house of the accused persons, the

accused persons caught both the deceased as well and started

giving beatings. From there, he went to Lakhanpur and made a

telephone call to Parshotam Lal that deceased persons have

been detained in the house by accused persons. He states that

when they reached the house of accused persons, Police had

already reached there.
15. P.W.3-Chhajju Ram, who resides near the house of

accused persons has turned hostile.
16. It is to be noted that the place of occurrence is the house

of accused persons.      The versions as to why the deceased-

Jaswinder and Manjit as well as P.W.1-Praveen Kumar went to

the house of the accused persons are varying.      As per the

version of P.W.1-Praveen Kumar, he had gone there in search of
13
labourers and thereafter he was caught by the accused persons

since there was a dispute with regard to loan amount of Rs.50/.
17. As per the dying declaration of deceased Jaswinder,

deceased Jaswinder and Manjit had gone there to collect grass

(fodder). Whereas as per the evidence of P.W.2-Hardev Singh,

when he was going to Jagatpur to buy bidis he met P.W.1-

Praveen Kumar and both of them went to the Gali of the

accused persons.   He admitted that bidi shop was not in the

same Gali.     According to him, after P.W.1-Praveen was

assaulted by the accused persons, he went from there and on

the way deceased Jaswinder and Manjit met him and he

informed them about the incident of P.W.1-Praveen Kumar

being assaulted and tied. After that, all three of them went to

the Gali where the house of the accused persons was situated.

There the accused persons assaulted Jaswinder and Manjit and

he went away from there. It is further to be noted that accused

No.1-Lal Chand (since deceased) had also received injuries in
14
the said incident.     The prosecution has failed to explain the

same. The I.O. has admitted that he did not make investigation

as to how accused No.1-Lal Chand (since deceased) had

received injuries.    It is the specific defence taken by accused

No.1-Lal Chand (since deceased) that while he was lying on the

bed in his room, two persons entered his room and one of them

gave a lathi blow on his head as a result of which he started

bleeding and became unconscious because of the fracture.
18. From the materials placed on record, it appears that the

prosecution has not come with clean hands and has attempted

to   suppress   the    genesis   of   the   incident.   There   are

contradictions in the dying declaration as well as in the

evidence of P.W.1-Praveen Kumar and P.W.2-Hardev Singh as

to in what circumstances the deceased Jaswinder and Manjit

went to the house of the accused persons. The prosecution has

failed to explain the injury sustained by accused No.1-Lal

Chand (since deceased).      A suggestion was also given by the
15
accused persons that the accused were having enmity with

Mohan Lal and Kewal Krishna and deceased as well as P.W. 1-

Praveen Kumar and P.W.2-Hardev Singh were sent by them to

assault accused No.1-Lal Chand (since deceased).    No doubt

that this is denied.
19. The defence of the accused appears to be that the

deceased-Jaswinder and Manjit as well as P.W.1-Praveen

Kumar and P.W.2-Hardev Singh were engaged by Mohan Lal

and Kewal Krishna to take revenge on account of previous

enmity.
20. As already discussed herein above, the place of occurrence

is the house of accused No.1-Lal Chand (since deceased). Out

of six remaining accused, 5 are his sons. There are material

contradictions as to how and in what circumstances the

deceased Jaswinder and Manjit went to the house of the

appellants. The version given in the dying declaration as well

as in the evidence of P.W.1-Praveen Kumar and P.W.2-Hardev
16
Singh are totally different. The prosecution has failed to prove

the injuries sustained by the accused No.1-Lal Chand (since

deceased). It is the specific case of the accused No.1-Lal Chand

(since deceased) that two persons had come to his house and

they assaulted him with a lathi.       The possibility that the

accused persons enraged by the assault on accused No.1-Lal

Chand (since deceased) whilst deprived of the power of self-

control, by grave and sudden provocation, attacked the

deceased-Jaswinder and Manjit resulting in their death cannot

be ruled out. We find that the appellants are entitled to benefit

of doubt in view of Exception I of Section 300 of the RPC. As

such, we are of the considered view that the prosecution has

failed to prove the case under Section 302 of the RPC beyond

reasonable doubt.
21. The conviction and sentence imposed upon the appellants

under Section 302 RPC is converted to the one under Part-I of

Section 304 of the RPC. The appellants have already served a
17
sentence of about ten years, we, therefore, find that the

sentence already undergone would serve the purpose. The bail

bonds of the appellants shall stand discharged.
22. The appeal is partly allowed in the above terms.
…….........................J.
                                                 [B.R. GAVAI]



                                        …….........................J.
                                          [M.M. SUNDRESH]

NEW DELHI;
JANUARY 12, 2023
18