[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Talat Sanvi vs State Of Jharkhand on 24 January, 2023
Author:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                        CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.205 /2023
                                        [@ SLP [CRL]. NO.8501/2022]

                         TALAT SANVI                                        Appellant(s)

                                                         VERSUS

                         STATE OF JHARKHAND & ANR.                           Respondent(s)

                                                       J U D G M E N T
SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
Leave granted.
1.     The issue raised in this appeal is that whether

                         interim       victim        compensation    in    proceedings        for

                         anticipatory bail can be imposed as a condition for

                         the same.
2.     We do believe that the impugned order suffers

                         from an infraction of law as the question of interim

                         victim     compensation        cannot    form    part   of   the    bail

                         jurisprudence.
3.     This    issue        already   stands     clarified    by     the

                         pronouncements of this Court               inter alia in           Sahab

                         alam   @
Guddu       v.    The   State   of    Jharkhand    &    Anr
.
-Criminal Appeal No.1318/2022, dated 24.08.2022 and
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ASHA SUNDRIYAL           Udho Thakur and Anr. ETC. v. The State of Jharkhand
Date: 2023.02.04
13:25:34 IST
Reason:
& Anr. - Criminal Appeal Nos.1703-1704 of 2022 dated

                         29.09.2022.
4.   In Sahab Alam case (supra) we had dealt with

the orders passed by the learned Judge in various

matters   granting     bail     on    condition          of    depositing

substantive sums of money without consideration of

the requirements of bail dependent on the nature of

offences and thus, it was observed that bail cannot

per se be granted if a person can afford to deposit

the money or has the capacity to pay.
5.   All the impugned orders were set aside and the

matter was remitted back.
6.   In Udho Thakur (supra) the aspect of use of

expression    “victim     compensation”            was    found      to    be

inappropriate as pre-arrest bail proceedings are not

money recovery proceedings.
7.   The matter in this case is one step further as

it is not a payment of money/deposit of money as a

condition    of   grant    of   anticipatory             bail      but    the

direction is to pay interim victim compensation in

the proceedings for anticipatory bail.
8.   Looking      back     on        the     aspect           of     victim

compensation      we     may    note        that     in        1960s      the

‘victimology’        movement        made     way        for       monetary

compensations offered an incentive to governments by

linking such compensation to victims’ cooperation in

the pursuit of criminal prosecutions.                          Canada and

several     states     within    the        United       States        began

providing victim compensation and thereby encouraged
participation in criminal prosecutions.                      The early

80s witnessed the pioneers of victimology and victim

justice taking predominant initiatives of reforming

the criminal justice system on behalf of the victims

of crime.       The UN Declaration on Basic Principles of

Justice     for        Victims     and        Abuse   of    Power     was

unanimously adopted by the General Assembly in 1985

(Groenhuijsen, 2014).            The Declaration made way for

specific       rights     and    entitlements         of    victims     of

crime, including the right to compensation.
9.
Section 357
of the Code of Criminal Procedure

provides for order to pay compensation when a court

imposes a sentence of fine or a sentence (including

a sentence of death) of which fine forms a part in

the circumstances enumerated therein.                       Sub-section

(2) imposes a limitation that when fine is imposed

in a case which is subject to appeal no such payment

shall     be    made      before     the       period      allowed    for

presenting the appeal has elapsed, or if an appeal

is presented, before the decision of the appeal.

Under sub-section (3) it is by way of compensation

for the person who has suffered any loss or injury

by reason of the act for which the accused person

has     been    so     sentenced.             Sub-section     (4)     also

provides for the appellate court or the High Court

or    Court       of     Sessions        to     direct     payment     of

compensation when exercising its power of revisions.
10. We     have    set    forth        this    to    appreciate     that

                victim compensation is simultaneous with the final

                view taken in respect of the alleged offence, i.e.,

                whether it was so committed or not and, thus, there

                is no question of any imposition pre-finality of the

                matter pre-trial.
11.
In a recent judgment of this Court in
Dharmesh

                v. State of Gujarat1
it was opined that it was clear

                from the plain reading of
Section 357
that such

                compensation can only arise after the conclusion of

                trial albeit, of course, the same being a matter of

                discretion.       The    High      Court’s      direction      to   the

                accused for deposit of compensation for the legal

                heirs of the deceased (victim), as a condition for

                the bail cannot be sustained and, thus, logically

                set aside.
12.   The Court opined that the objective is clear

               that in cases of offences against body, compensation

               to the victim should be methodology for redemption.

               Similarly,         to     prevent       unnecessary          harassment,

               compensation        has    been    provided          where   meaningless

               criminal     proceedings          had    been    started.        Such   a

               compensation can hardly be determined at the stage

               of grant of bail.
13.   Not     being       appreciative          of      such    judicial

               misadventure, we have no hesitation in quashing the


1 (2021) 7 SCC 198
condition   imposed   in   the   impugned    order    in   this

behalf while maintaining the other aspects of the

grant of anticipatory bail.
14.   The   appeal    is   accordingly      allowed   leaving

parties to bear their own costs.
……………………………………....J.
                                      [SANJAY KISHAN KAUL]



                                     ……………………………………....J.
                                           [ABHAY S. OKA]
NEW DELHI;
JANUARY 24, 2023.