[Cites
1
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Oswal Plastic Industries vs Manager Legal Deptt N.A.I.C.O Ltd on 13 January, 2023
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
C.T. Ravikumar
,
M. R. Shah
REPORTABLE

                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 83 OF 2023
                                   (@ SLP(C) NO. 9049 OF 2021)

         M/s Oswal Plastic Industries                              ...Appellant(S)

                                              Versus

         Manager, Legal Deptt N.A.I.C.O. Ltd.                   ...Respondent(S)


                                         JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.              Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                         judgment and order dated 20.02.2019, passed by the

                         National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, New

                         Delhi (hereinafter referred to as the NCDRC) in First

                         Appeal No. 207/2015, by which the NCDRC has set aside

                         the order passed by the State Consumer Disputes

                         Redressal Commission, Punjab (hereinafter referred to as

                         the State Commission) and has modified the same to the
Signature Not Verified
extent that the insurance company shall be liable to pay
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
Date: 2023.01.13
16:29:12 IST
Reason:
1
only Rs. 12,60,000/­ instead of Rs. 29,17,500/­, the

     original complainant has preferred the present appeal.
2.   That the appellant herein obtained Standard Fire and

     Special Perils Policy with effect from 02.07.2009. The sum

     insured was Rs. 2.50 crores. According to the appellant,

     the policy was on reinstatement value. The policy was

     enhanced to Rs. 4.50 crores. That during the validity

     period of policy i.e., on 17.10.2009 fire broke out in the

     factory premises resulting into loss of material, stock, and

     machinery of the value of Rs. 76,64,000/­. The surveyor

     appointed by the insurance company observed/assessed

     as such the loss on reinstatement value basis at Rs.

     29,17,500/­ and on depreciated value at Rs. 12,60,000/­.

     The insurance company despite the reports of the surveyor

     and investigator repudiated the claim. The appellant

     herein – original complainant filed the complaint before the

     State Commission, inter­alia, seeking a claim of Rs.

     76,64,000/­ together with interest. It was the case on

     behalf of the complainant that the complainant had

     purchased   the   machinery    to   replace   the   damaged

     machinery at the cost of Rs. 1,34,07,836/­. The State
2
Commission vide order dated 10.11.2014 relying upon the

surveyor report and the loss assessed by the surveyor on

the basis of the reinstatement value awarded a sum of Rs.

29,17,500/­ together with 9% interest from the date of

repudiation    letter    dated    28.10.2010.     The     State

Commission also awarded Rs. 1 lakh as compensation and

Rs. 11,000/­ as litigation expenses. At this stage, it is

required to be noted that though the original complaint

was for Rs. 76,64,000/­, however, in view of surveyor

report and on reinstatement value determined at Rs.

29,17,500/­,    the     State    Commission     awarded    Rs.

29,17,500/­ being reinstatement value. The order passed

by the State Commission was the subject matter of appeal

by the insurance company before the NCDRC. By the

impugned judgment and order, the NCDRC has allowed

the said appeal and has modified the order passed by the

State Commission awarding Rs. 12,60,000/­ along with

interest @ 7% from Rs. 29,17,500/­ by observing that the

complainant shall be entitled to the depreciated value and

not the reinstatement value. The NCDRC also set aside the

award of compensation of Rs. 1 lakh.
3
2.1   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

      judgment and order passed by the NCDRC awarding Rs.

      12,60,000/­ only instead of Rs. 29,17,500/­ i.e., awarding

      depreciated value and not the reinstatement value, the

      original complainant has preferred the present appeal.
3.    Shri Jay Savla, learned Senior Advocate appearing on

      behalf of the appellant herein – original complainant has

      vehemently submitted that the impugned judgment and

      order passed by the NCDRC awarding depreciated value

      and not the reinstatement value is just contrary to Clause

      9 of Section 2 of the insurance policy.
3.1   It is submitted that as such the surveyor assessed the loss

      on reinstatement basis at Rs. 29,17,500/­. It is submitted

      that therefore, as such the repudiation was rightly held to

      be improper.
3.2   It is submitted that as such the complainant had

      purchased the new machinery in view of five machines

      being gutted in fire and therefore, the State Commission
4
was absolutely justified in awarding Rs. 29,17,500/­ being

      reinstatement value on the basis of the surveyor report.



3.3   Relying upon Clause 9 of Section 2 of the policy, it is

      vehemently submitted that the complainant shall be

      entitled to the reinstatement value. It is submitted that the

      NCDRC has wrongly reduced the claim to Rs. 12,60,000/­

      by mis­interpreting Clause 9 of Section 2 of the policy. It is

      submitted that as such the said clause 9 shall not have

      any relevance. It is submitted that it only gives option to

      the insurance company to reinstate or replace the

      damaged/destroyed property. It is submitted that as the

      company has not reinstated the property, the clause itself

      was not applicable.
3.4   It is submitted that as observed and held by this Court in

      the case of
Canara Bank Vs. United India Insurance

      Company     Limited    and     Ors.
;   2020   (3)   SCC   455,

      provisions of the policy must be read and interpreted in

      such a manner so as to give effect to the reasonable

      expectations of all the parties. It is submitted that it is
5
further held that coverage provisions should be interpreted

      broadly and if there is any ambiguity, the same should be

      resolved in favour of the insured.
3.5   Making the above submissions and relying upon
the above

      decision
, it is prayed to allow the present appeal by

      quashing and setting aside the impugned judgment and

      order passed by the NCDRC and to restore the order

      passed by the State Commission.
4.    Present appeal is vehemently opposed by the learned

      counsel appearing on behalf of the insurance company.


4.1   It is submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the

      case and on true interpretation of Clause 9 of Section 2 of

      the insurance policy, the NCDRC has not committed any

      error in awarding the depreciated value and not awarding

      the reinstatement value as claimed by the complainant.


4.2   It is submitted that as rightly observed by the NCDRC that

      the goods insured were to be replaced on "as is basis" i.e.,

      if the machinery is an old machinery, it is to be replaced
6
by an old machinery and therefore, as the actual

      reinstatement has not been done by the complainant or by

      the insurance company and the money is to be paid to the

      insured on reinstatement basis, one has to find out the

      value of the machinery on replacement basis i.e., the value

      of the old machinery, which can be calculated only

      through deducting the value of the depreciation from the

      current value of the machinery.
4.3   Making the above submissions, it is prayed to dismiss the

      present appeal.
5.    The short question which is posed for consideration of this

      Court is whether in the facts and circumstances of the

      case and on true interpretation of relevant clause of

      insurance policy, in case of damage of the plant and

      machinery due to fire, the complainant shall be entitled to

      the reinstatement value or the depreciated value?


5.1   While dealing with the aforesaid issue, relevant clause 9 of

      Section 2 of the policy is required to be considered, which

      reads as under: ­
7
"9. If the Company at its option, reinstate or
         replace the property damaged or destroyed, or any
         part thereof, instead of paying the amount of the
         loss or damage, or join with any other Company or
         Insurer(s) in so doing the Company shall not be
         bound to reinstate exactly or completely but only
         as circumstances permit and in reasonably
         sufficient manner, and in no case shall the
         Company be bound to expend more in
         reinstatement than it would have cost to reinstate
         such property as it was at the time of the
         occurrence of such loss or damage nor more than
         the sum insured by the Company thereon. If the
         Company so elect to reinstate or replace any
         property the insured shall at his own expense
         furnish    the   Company      with   such   plans,
         specifications, measurements, quantities and such
         other particulars as the Company may require,
         and no acts done or caused to be done, by the
         Company with a view to reinstatement or
         replacement shall be deemed an election by the
         Company to reinstate or replace.
If in any case the Company shall be unable to
         reinstate or repair the property hereby insured,
         because of any municipal or other regulations in
         force affecting the alignment of streets or the
         construction of buildings or otherwise, the
         Company shall, in every such case, only be liable
         to pay such sum as would be requisite to reinstate
         or repair such property if the same could lawfully
         be reinstated to its former condition."
5.2   On true interpretation and on fair reading of above clause,

      firstly the option is given to the insurance company to

      reinstate or replace property damaged or destroyed instead

      of paying the amount of loss or damage. If the insurance

      company exercises the option of reinstatement or replaces
8
the property damaged, the company shall not be bound to

reinstate completely or partly but only as circumstances

permit and in reasonably sufficient manner, and in no

case shall the company be bound to expend more in

reinstatement than it would have cost to reinstate such

property as it was at the time of the occurrence of such

loss or damage not more than the sum insured by the

company thereon. However, in any case the company is

unable to reinstate or repair the property insured, because

of any municipal or other regulations in force affecting the

alignment of streets or the construction of buildings or

OTHERWISE
,
in that case
, the company shall be liable to

pay such sum as would be requisite to reinstate or repair

such property if the same could lawfully be reinstated to

its former condition. Present is the case dealing with

second eventuality, namely, the company was unable to

reinstate or repair the property. The surveyor in its report

determined the loss on the basis of reinstatement value at

Rs. 29,17,500/­ and on the basis of depreciated value at

Rs. 12,60,000/­. Though, the complainant claimed Rs.

76,64,000/­ being the value of the new machinery,
9
however, as rightly observed by the State Commission as

well as the NCDRC, the complainant shall not be entitled

to the said amount. However, at the same time considering

second part of Clause 9 reproduced hereinabove, in case

company is unable to reinstate or repair the property

insured, the insurance company shall be liable to pay such

sum as would be requisite to reinstate or repair such

property if the same could lawfully be reinstated to its

former condition. For the aforesaid purpose, the report of

surveyor wound be relevant evidence to consider the sum

required to reinstate or repair. Therefore, as per second

part of Clause 9 of Section 2 of the policy, the complainant

shall be entitled to the reinstatement value and not the

depreciated value. The NCDRC has mis­interpreted and

mis­read the Clause 9. The NCDRC has seriously erred in

observing and holding that the insurance company shall

be liable to pay the depreciated value only and not the

reinstatement value. The State Commission was absolutely

justified   in   awarding   the   reinstatement   value.   The

impugned judgment and order passed by the NCDRC
10
awarding the depreciated value and not the reinstatement

     value is unsustainable for the reasons stated hereinabove.
6.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the

     present appeal succeeds. The impugned judgment and

     order passed by the NCDRC is hereby quashed and set

     aside. The order passed by the State Commission is hereby

     restored.   The   complainant    shall   be   entitled   to   Rs.

     29,17,500/­ being the reinstatement value with interest @

     7% from the date of order of the State Commission i.e.,

     10.11.2014 till the actual payment. The present appeal is

     accordingly allowed. No costs.
…………………………………J.
                                      (M. R. SHAH)



                                      …………………………………J.
                                      (C.T. RAVIKUMAR)
NEW DELHI,
JANUARY 13, 2023.
11