[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd vs The State Of Odisha on 20 January, 2023
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
C.T. Ravikumar
,
M. R. Shah
REPORTABLE

                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 220 OF 2023
                                   (@ SLP(C) NO. 16835 OF 2019)

          Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd.                                  ...Appellant(S)

                                               Versus

          State of Odisha & Ors.                                  ...Respondent(S)


                                          JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.             Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                         judgment and order dated 02.04.2019, passed by the High

                         Court of Orissa at Cuttack in W.P. (C) No. 2477/2009, by

                         which, the High Court has dismissed the said writ petition

                         preferred by the appellant herein and has confirmed the

                         demand made by the District Magistrate & Collector,

                         Sambalpur, of Rs. 70 lakhs towards the premium of the

                         government land, the appellant – Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Neetu Sachdeva
Date: 2023.01.20
16:12:11 IST
Reason:
has preferred the present appeal.
1
2.    The facts leading to the present appeal in a nutshell are as

      under: -
2.1   That the lands in question owned by the State Government

      of Odisha came to be acquired by the Government of India

      under
Section 9
of the Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and

      Development) Act, 1957 (hereinafter referred to as the Act,

      1957). That thereafter, vide order dated 04.09.1981 and in

      exercise of powers conferred by Sub-section (1) of
Section

      11
of the Act, 1957 with respect to some lands acquired,

      the Central Government directed that the rights in or over

      the lands vested absolutely in the Central Government,

      shall, instead of continuing to vest in the Central

      Government, under Sub-section (1) of
Section 10
, vest in

      the Western Coalfields Limited. That vide order dated

      15.12.1988, with respect to some other lands acquired by

      the Central Government and in exercise of powers

      conferred by the Sub-section (1) of
Section 11
of the Act,

      1957, the Central Government directed that the said lands

      and rights so vested shall, with effect from 16.05.1987

      instead    of   continuing       to   so   vest   in   the   Central
2
Government, shall vest in the Government Company,

subject to the terms and conditions mentioned in the said

order. That is how, the appellant acquired the lands and

rights over the lands in question. That respondent issued

the demand notice dated 15.03.1984 for a sum of Rs. 70

lakhs towards premium for Government land and Rs. 40

lakhs towards compensation. That various similar demand

notices were issued for area of Non-Forest Government

land and Revenue Forest land. The demands were

challenged by the appellant by way of writ petition before

the High Court. Before the High Court,
Section 18(a)
of the

Act, 1957 was pressed into service by the appellant herein

and it was submitted that in view of the notification as the

lands and rights on the lands absolutely vested in the

Central Government thereafter, the State Government is

not entitled to any compensation with respect to the lands

so acquired/vested except the royalty leviable under
Section 18(a)
of the Act, 1957. By the impugned judgment

and order the High Court has interpreted
Section 2(d)
of

the Act, 1957 and has observed that the State Government

can be said to be person interested in land and therefore,
3
entitled to the compensation over and above in lieu of

      losing the rights over the land. That thereafter, by the

      impugned judgment and order the High Court has

      dismissed the writ petition and has confirmed the

      demand(s).
2.2   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

      judgment and order passed by the High Court the

      appellant – original writ petitioner – Mahanadi Coalfields

      Limited has preferred the present appeal.
3.    Shri K.M. Nataraj, learned ASG, appearing on behalf of the

      appellant has taken us to the entire scheme of the Act,

      1957 right from
Section 4
to
Section 11
. It is submitted

      that as per
Section 4
of the Act, 1957, whenever it appears

      to the Central Government that coal is likely to be obtained

      from land in any locality, it may, by notification in the

      Official Gazette give notice of its intention to prospect for

      coal therein. It is submitted that thereafter after following

      the due procedure as required the Central Government

      being satisfied, after considering the report, if any, made

      under
Section 8
that any land or any right in or over such
4
land should be acquired, a declaration shall be made by it

to that effect. It is submitted that thereafter once the

declaration under
Section 9
of the Act is issued on the

publication in Official Gazette of the declaration, the land

or the rights in or over the land, as the case may be, shall

vest absolutely in the Central Government free from all

encumbrances as per
Section 10
of the Act. It is further

submitted     that   as    per
Section         11
of     the   Act,

notwithstanding anything contained in
Section 10
, the

Central   Government       may,    if   it   is    satisfied     that   a

Government company is willing to comply or has complied

with   such    terms      and    conditions        as    the     Central

Government may think fit to impose, direct, by order in

writing, that the land or the rights in or over the land, as

the case may be, shall, instead of vesting in the Central

Government under
Section 10
or continuing to so vest,

vest in the Government company either on the date of

publication of the declaration or on such other date as

may be specified in the direction. It is submitted that

therefore, once the land or the rights vested in the Central

Government and/or in a Government company (under
5
Section 11
), the same is vested absolutely free from all

     encumbrances and the State Government is not entitled to

     recover any amount of premium of the land or the

     compensation or any rental except the royalty leviable

     under
Section 18(a)
of the Act, 1957. It is submitted that

     therefore, the demands made by the State Government

     upheld by the High Court towards premium/rental, etc., is

     absolutely illegal.
4.   Opposing the present appeal Shri Umakant Mishra,

     learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State has

     vehemently submitted that the appellant has been vested

     with the rights in the land in question pursuant to the

     order of the Central Government issued under
Section 11
of the Act, 1957. It is submitted that it cannot be disputed

     that the State Government was the owner of the lands in

     question.   It   is   submitted   that   therefore,    the   State

     Government             is         entitled        to          the

     premium/compensation/rentals with respect to the lands

     in question of the land vested or rights so vested in the

     Government company.
6
4.1   It is submitted that as such
Section 18(a)
of the Act, 1957

      which has been inserted in the year 1971 is distinct from

      and over and above the right of the State Government to

      recover the compensation/rental, etc. It is submitted that

      the royalty is for the extraction of the minerals/coal from

      the lands in question. He has taken us to the Statements

      of Objects and Reasons for inserting
Section 18(a)
in the

      Act, 1957.
4.2   Making the above submissions, it is prayed to dismiss the

      present appeal by submitting that the High Court has

      rightly interpreted
Section 2(d)
of the Act, 1957 and has

      rightly observed that the State being person interested in

      the land shall be entitled to the compensation/rental over

      and above the amount of royalty leviable/payable under
Section 18(a)
of the Act, 1957.
5.    We have heard learned ASG on behalf of the appellant and

      learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State. It cannot

      be disputed that as per
Sections 4
to
10
, on the

      declaration   being   issued      under
Section   9
of   the
7
acquisition, the land/rights in or over the land, as the case

may be, shall be vested absolutely in the Central

Government free from all encumbrances. However, as per
Section 11
of the Act, notwithstanding anything contained

in
Section 10
, the Central Government may, if it is

satisfied that a Government company is willing to comply,

or has complied with such terms and conditions as the

Central Government may think fit to impose, direct, by

order in writing, that the land or the rights in or over the

land, as the case may be, shall, instead of vesting in the

Central Government under
Section 10
or continuing to so

vest, vest in the Government company either on the date of

publication of the declaration or on such other date as

may be specified in the direction. As per Sub-section (2) of
Section 11
, where the rights under any mining lease

acquired under this Act vest in a Government company

under Sub-section (1), the Government company shall, on

and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have

become lessee of the State Government as if a mining lease

under the Mineral Concession Rules had been granted by

the State Government to the Government company, the
8
period thereof being the entire period for which such a

lease could have been granted by the State Government

under those rules; and all the rights and liabilities of the

Central Government in relation to the lease or the land

covered by it shall, on and from the date of such vesting,

be deemed to have become the rights and liabilities of the

Government     company.
Section   13
provides    for

compensation for prospecting licences ceasing to have

effect, rights under mining leases being acquired. Thus, as

per
Section 11
, the Government company in whose favour

the order has been issued by the Central Government shall

be deemed to be the lessee and shall be liable to pay the

compensation/rental, etc., to the State Government being

‘person interested’. ‘Person interested’ is defined under
Section 2(d)
of the Act. The State Government being the

original owner can be said to be deemed lessor and ‘person

interested.’ As per Sub-section (2) of
Section 11
of the Act,

the Government company in whose favour the order is

issued under
Section 11
can be said to be the deemed

lessee of the State Government. Therefore, the State

Government can be said to be the ‘person interested’ in
9
getting the compensation. Therefore, the High Court is

      absolutely right in observing and taking the view that

      being ‘person interested’ the State Government is entitled

      to the compensation/rental, etc.


5.1   Now so far as the submission made on behalf of the

      appellant that the Government company in whose favour

      the order is passed under
Section 11
after which the land

      is vested absolutely with the Central Government except

      the amount of royalty as per
Section 18(a)
of the Act, the

      Government company is not liable to pay any amount is

      concerned,     the     aforesaid     has     no    substance.        The

      compensation/rental payable with respect to the lands by

      the lessee/deemed lessee is altogether different than the

      royalty. Royalty is for extraction of minerals in the lands in

      question.    The     aforesaid     would     be    clear    from     the

      Statements of Objects and Reasons of the Act 54 of 1971

      by which
Section 18(a)
of the Act was introduced. The

      same reads as under: -
“Act 54 of 1971-
The Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and
          Development) Act, 1957
(20 of 1957) hereinafter referred to as
          the Coal Bearing Areas Act) provides inter alia for the
          acquisition by the Central Government of virgin lands,
          including underground minerals, or rights in or over such
10
lands. Under the Explanation to clause (a) of sub-section (5) of
section 13
, which provides that the value of any minerals lying
         in the land will not be taken into consideration in determining
         the market value of any land no compensation is payable to
         the State Governments in respect of the underground minerals
         which also vest in the Central Government when the land is
         acquired by the Central Government. The State Government
         have been representing from time to time that this results in
         their being deprived of large sums by way of revenue. The
         Central Government has considered the representations of the
         State Government and has decided that the State Governments
         should be paid purely on an ex gratia basis such sums as they
         would have been entitled to receive by way of royalty, had
         mining leases been granted in respect of the areas acquired. It
         is now proposed to amend the Coal Bearing Areas Act to make
         such payments obligatory.
6.   In that view of the matter over and above the amount of

     royalty the coal company/Government company shall be

     liable to pay the compensation and surface land rent, etc.,

     Therefore, the High Court is absolutely justified in

     confirming the respective demand(s). The amount of

     royalty cannot be mixed with the compensation/loss

     caused to the State Government due to loss of land and

     surface land rent as the State Government is entitled for

     the adequate compensation. If the submission made on

     behalf of the appellant is accepted in that case nothing

     would be paid towards the lands except the amount of

     royalty under
Section 18(a)
of the Act, which is for

     extraction of minerals.
11
7.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the

     impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court is

     not required to be interfered with. However, if the

     appellant is disputing the quantum and/or calculation of

     demand(s), it would be open for them to approach the

     appropriate authority, however, the demand(s) as such

     is/are upheld. With this, present appeal stands dismissed.

     No costs.
…………………………………J.
                                   (M. R. SHAH)


                                   …………………………………J.
                                   (C.T. RAVIKUMAR)
NEW DELHI,
JANUARY 20, 2023.
12