[Cites
5
, Cited by
7
]
Supreme Court of India
New India Assurance Co.Ltd vs Priya Blue Industries Pvt. Ltd on 9 March, 2011
Equivalent citations: 2011 AIR SCW 1831, 2011 (4) SCC 231, 2011 (2) AIR JHAR R 528, AIR 2011 SC (CIVIL) 946, (2011) 3 SCALE 502, (2011) 3 ALL WC 2364, (2015) 3 CURCC 256, (2012) 4 CIVILCOURTC 538, (2012) 4 KER LJ 356, (2012) 4 KER LT 39, (2013) 2 CRIMES 52, (2013) 1 CRIMES 428, (2014) 4 JLJR 81, (2015) 148 ALLINDCAS 506 (JHA), (2015) 2 CIVLJ 535, (2015) 1 JCR 282 (JHA), (2015) 2 CURCC 281, (2013) 2 CPR 18, (2011) 1 WLC(SC)CVL 631, (2011) 2 UC 1422, (2011) 100 ALLINDCAS 99 (SC), (2011) 3 ANDHLD 142, (2011) 3 CIVLJ 79, (2011) 2 RECCIVR 410, (2011) 2 CPJ 15, (2013) 2 CURCC 30, (2014) 4 CURCC 248, 2011 (2) KCCR SN 125 (SC)
Author:
B. Sudershan Reddy
Bench:
Surinder Singh Nijjar
,
B. Sudershan Reddy
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 

             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 


          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3714 OF 2005 



The New India Assurance Co. Ltd.                ...Appellant

                            Versus

Priya Blue Industries Pvt. Ltd.           ...Respondent



                            WITH

          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2116 OF 2006 



Priya Blue Industries Pvt. Ltd.                               ...

Appellant

                            Versus

The New India Assurance Co. Ltd.                     ...


Respondent



               J U D G M E N T
B. SUDERSHAN REDDY, J.
1.    This   appeal   under
Section   23
of   the   Consumer 


Protection   Act,   1986   is   directed   against   the   final 


judgment and order of the National Consumer Disputes
2
Redressal   Commission.     The   National   Commission   by 


the   impugned   judgment   allowed   the   complaint 


preferred   by   the   respondent   complainant   and 


accordingly   directed   the   appellant   Company   to   pay   a 


sum of Rs. 13.69 crores with interest at 9% per annum 


from 9th June, 1997 till its realization.
2.     In order to consider as to whether the impugned 


judgment   of   the   National   Commission   (for   short   `the 


Commission')   suffers   from   any   infirmity   requiring   our 


interference,   it   may   be   just   and   necessary   to   notice 


relevant facts.
3.    The respondent-complainant at the relevant time 


was   carrying   on   ship   breaking   and   scrap   dealing 


business.  It  had under a Memorandum of Agreement 


dated   2.6.1997   purchased   and   imported   to   Alang,   a 


very large bulk ore and oil carrier by the name of "Vloo 


Arun"   for   the   purpose   of   scrapping   (ship 


breaking/demolition)   from   one   M/s.   Ruby   Enterprises
3
Inc.   Belgium.     There   is   no   controversy   that   the 


respondent   has   taken   a   marine   insurance   policy   for 


hull   and   machinery   on   4.6.1997   for   the   said   vessel. 


The policy was obtained after taking possession of the 


vessel for covering only 9 kms. distance between Alang 


Anchorage   to   Alang   Ship   Breaking   yard.   Insurance 


cover   was   for   a   sum   of   Rs.   25.70   crores   for   which   a 


premium of Rs. 1,14,280/- was paid. As per the special 


condition it was "Institute Voyage Clause (hulls) dated 


1.10.1983 as attached with a specific condition, `but to 


cover   and/or   Constructive   Total   Loss   only'   including 


salvage and sue and labour and expenses."
4.    The case of the complainant is that on 9.6.1997, 


when   vessel   started   its   `funeral   voyage'   on   its   way   it 


was completely damaged and could not be beached at 


the   specified   place   because   of   extremely   rough 


weather   resulting   in   total   loss.     The   insurance 


Company   was   accordingly   informed,   followed   by 


several   letters   by   the   complainant   requesting   it   to
4
state as to what action was to be taken with regard to 


the stranded vessel.   The insurance Company did  not 


respond.
5.    It   is   under   those   circumstances   the   respondent 


complainant   has   claimed   an   amount   of   Rs. 


18,30,44,912/-   with   interest   @   19.5%   p.a   from 


14.6.1997  till   its   payment   and   Rs.  2.5  lakhs  as   costs 


and  expenses of the   litigation  and    further  a sum  of 


Rs.   5   lakhs   towards   harassment   meted   out   by   the 


appellant insurance Company.
6.    In response to the claim, the appellant insurance 


Company   appointed   two   Surveyors,   and   the 


respondent   complainant   with   the   acceptance   and 


approval   of   the   appellant   insurance   Company 


appointed Tony Fernandez Average Adjusters Pvt. Ltd. 


as its Surveyor.  Each one of the Surveyors  appointed 


by   the   appellant   insurance   Company   submitted   their 


respective reports on 24.6.1997 and 14.7.1997.
5
7.    In addition to the aforesaid two reports on record, 


there is a report on record of Tony Fernandez Average 


Adjusters   Pvt.   Ltd.   which   was   appointed   by   the 


respondent   complainant.     The   appellant   insurance 


Company had accepted and approved its appointment. 


In   the   report   submitted   by   Tony   Fernandez   Average 


Adjusters Pvt. Ltd., the cause of loss is as under:
"The   proximate   and   dominant   cause   of   the   vessel 

becoming   a   total   loss   was   the   stranding   on   a   rocky 

shoal   prior   to   arriving   at   the   destination.     The 

stranding itself was due to heavy weather encountered 

on the "funeral" voyage to the ship-breaking yard. The 

stranding was accidental and fortuitous in nature. 

Both   heavy   weather   and   stranding   are   perils   of   the 

sea.     The   proximate   cause   of   the   loss   is   an   insured 

peril,   falling   under   Clause   4.1.1   of   Institute   Voyage 

Clauses   Hulls,   1/10/83   wordings   (Clause   285),   which 

covers loss of or damage to the subject-matter caused 

by, `perils of the seas rivers, lakes or other navigable 

waters.' 

We  have  satisfied  ourselves  that  the loss  was  neither 

caused   proximately   nor   concurrently,   by   any   of   the 

excluded   perils   listed   in
Section   55
of   the   Marine 

Insurance  Act, 1963, (MIA 1963), read in conjunction 

with   the   terms   and   conditions   of   the   Policy   of 

Insurance.
We have also satisfied ourselves that the loss was not 

caused   proximately   or   concurrently   by   perils
6
enumerated   in   the   Paramount   Exclusions   of   Clauses 

20, 21, 22 and 23 of the Institute Voyage Clause Hulls 

1.10.83 wordings."
It is further observed in the said report that there was 


"no   evidence   to   indicate   that   there   was   either   non-


disclosure of material facts or of any misrepresentation 


to underwriters by PBIL as the Proponent." They finally 


assessed the claim under Total Loss Claim at Rs. 13.69 


crores.
8.    The   National   Commission,   upon   a   meticulous 


assessment   and   analysis   of   all   the   aforesaid   survey 


reports, found that:
A)    Insurance coverage was taken for a short voyage 

of   the   vessel   from   Alang   Anchorage   to   Alang   Ship 

Breaking Yard;
B)    The   vessel   came   from   Singapore   to   Alang 

Anchorage point and was on its funeral voyage; 

C)    From Singapore to Alang Anchorage point voyage 

was carried out on one engine only.
D)    Delivery of the vessel was given to the insured at 

the Alang Anchorage point by the seller; 

E)    At   the   time   of   the   delivery   one   engine   was 

functioning   and   was   in   working   condition.   The   other 

engine was out of order;
7
F)    Beaching   of the vessel was scheduled on 6.6.97 

at the evening tide time;
G)    As   the   engine   failed   to   start,   beaching   was   not 

carried out;
H)    Thereafter, beaching was scheduled on 9.6.97; 

I)    During   the   voyage,   the   sea   condition   was   rough 

and   strong   sea   currents   were   flowing   due   to   strong 

monsoon winds.;
J)    The   vessel   started   drifting   away   from   the   yard, 

and drifted towards a different point; 

K)    Near Plot No. V-5(resting place) and beyond there 

was   a coral  rock   structure   on   see  bed   which   was  not 

visible  during  the high  tide  time.   The   vessel's  bottom 

collided   with   rocks   and   the   vessel   was   grounded   and 

all efforts to move the vessel on available power failed. 

L)    The   vessel   was   thereafter,   badly   damaged   and 

was found deeply imbedded to the depth of 5ft.
M)    It has developed holes and cracks; 

N)    With all normal efforts floating of the vessel was
not possible because it was partially lying on the rock 

structure and partially submerged in sand; and 

O)    The grounded vessel could not be re-floated with 

the   normal   salvaging   procedure   and   could   not   be 

beached.
In   addition,   in   the   report   of   J.B.   Boda   Offshore 


Surveyors   &   Adjusters   Pvt.   Ltd,   it   is  inter   alia 


observed:   "It   is   a   `total   loss'   because   it   was
8
irretrievably   stranded   -   it   was   concluded   that   the 


vessel   was   irretrievably   stranded   due   to   marine 


casualty   which   has   resulted   for   the   vessel   being 


deemed a total loss."
9.    Tony   Fernandez   Average   Adjusters   Pvt.   Ltd. 


further inter alia stated that "there is no evidence with 


regard   to   non-disclosure   of   material   fact,   nor 


misrepresentation;   and   the   proximate   and   dominant 


cause of vessel becoming a total loss was stranding on 


the   rocky   shoal   prior   to   arriving   at   the   destination. 


This   was   due   to   heavy   weather   encountered   on   the 


`funeral'   voyage   to   the   ship-breaking   yard.     The 


stranding was accidental and a fortuitous one in nature 


and was proximately caused by an insured peril".
10. In   the   proceedings   before   the   National 


Commission,   the   respondent   complainant   mainly 


contended that the vessel was badly damaged due to 


rough weather and strong winds and has collided with
9
coral   rock   structure   which   was   not   visible   during   the 


high tide and efforts to move the vessel failed.  It had 


relied   upon   the   surveyors'   reports   that   there   was   a 


total loss and grounded vessel cannot be refloated with 


normal salvaging procedure and cannot be beached.  It 


relied   upon   the   version   of   the   Port   Officer   that   the 


damage by stranding was attributable to the prevailing 


adverse   weather  conditions   at  the   time  of   attempting 


to beach the vessel at the designated plot.  It is under 


those   circumstances   the   complainant   contended   that 


there   was   no   justifiable   reason   or   ground   for 


repudiating the claim.
11. On behalf of the appellant insurance Company, it 


was merely contended that there was no deficiency of 


service on the part of the appellant insurance Company 


which   was   repelled   by   the   National   Commission.     It 


was   also   contended   on   behalf   of   the   appellant 


Insurance   Company   that   there   was   no     `total   and/or 


constructive  loss' as defined under
Sections 57
and
60
10
of   the   Marine   Insurance   Act,   1963   inasmuch   as   the 


insured has recovered  more than Rs. 13.00 crores by 


sale   of   the   vessel.            The   Commission   having 


meticulously   examined   the   rival   contentions   with 


regard   to   this   particular   point,   found   that   there   was 


actual total loss of the vessel to the complaint because 


the   complainant   could   not   bring   the   vessel   to   the 


destined point for its breaking.  The Commission found 


that   the   vessel   was   brought   for   the   sole   purpose   of 


`breaking' and the complainant has lost its purpose as 


it   could   not   bring   it   to   the   destined   point   because   of 


the sea peril.  It was impossible for the complainant to 


refloat the vessel for bringing  it to the destined point 


for   the   purpose   for   which   it   was   purchased.     The 


National   Commission   also   rejected   the   contention   of 


the appellant insurance Company that the respondent 


complainant   has   committed   utmost   breach   of   the 


principles  of good faith.    It was the  contention of the 


appellant   insurance   Company   that   the   respondent
11
complainant   did   not   disclose   at   or   before   taking   the 


insurance policy that:
(a)    one   engine   of   the   vessel   (viz.   starboard   engine) 

was not working.
(b)    the Addendum no. 2 dated 3.6.97, which records 

that   the   starboard   engine   of   the   vessel   was   not 

working.
This   plea   of   the   appellant   insurance   Company   was 


resisted by the respondent mainly contending that the 


issue has been raised for the first time at the time of 


filing   the   written   statement   alleging   non-disclosure   of 


material facts. The National Commission, after a critical 


analysis of the material available on record, found that 


the   contract   is   liable   to   be   repudiated   for   non-


observance   of   good   faith   or   non-disclosure   of   the 


material   facts.   At   all   points  of   time,   the   contract  was 


sought   to   be   repudiated   on   the   one   and   only   ground 


that   there   was   no   total   loss.   In   this   connection,   the 


National   Commission   examined   the   complete
12
correspondence   that   has   taken   place   between   the 


parties   prior   to   filing   of   the   complaint   and   written 


statement   before   the   National   Commission   and   found 


that   at   no   point   of   time   the   insurance   company   took 


any   plea  or  stand   that   there   was  any   suppression  on 


the part of the complainant in not disclosing that one 


engine   of   the   vessel   was   not   functioning.   The 


Commission   referred   to   the   evidence   led   by   the 


appellant   insurance   Company   in   which   it   was 


specifically  admitted that repudiation  was only  on the 


ground   that   the   vessel   had   encountered   neither   total 


loss   nor   a   constructive   total   loss.     It   is   under   those 


circumstances   the   Commission   found   that   the   issue 


has been raised by the insurance Company for the first 


time   in   the   proceedings   before   it   only   as   an 


afterthought.
12. The   Commission   also   found   that   at   the   time   of 


making insurance proposals, the respondent had given 


Memorandum   of   Agreement   (MOA)   along   with   two
13
addendums and one addendum clearly stated that the 


vessel   was   with   one   engine,   and   it   has   come   from 


Singapore   to   Alang   Anchorage   for   its   funeral   voyage. 


The   Commission   found   that   there   is   no   reason   to 


disbelieve this version of the respondent.   Neither the 


agent of the insurance Company nor the Development 


Officer   stated   that   addendum  No.  2  was   not  given  to 


the   insurance   Company   at   the   time   of   issuing   the 


policy.     The   Commission   also   noticed   that   the   vessel 


sailed   from   Singapore   with   one   engine   without   any 


difficulty   and   in   such   view   of   the   matter,   the 


Commission found that it would be of no significance in 


the present case even if there is non-disclosure of fact 


that only one engine was working.
13. We do not wish to refer to other issues raised by 


the  insurance  Company  before  the  Commission  which 


were   dealt   with   since   the   only   question   that   was 


argued   before   us   in   this   appeal   relates   to   non-


disclosure   of   the   material   facts.     The   learned   counsel
14
for   the   appellant   submitted   that   the   respondent 


complainant   suppressed   the   material   fact   that   one 


engine   of   the   vessel   was   not   working   and   therefore, 


not   entitled   to   any   relief.     We   do   not   find   any   merit 


whatsoever   in   the   submission   made   by   the   learned 


counsel   for   the   appellant.     The   material   available   on 


record which has been taken into consideration by the 


National   Commission   clearly   demonstrates   that   the 


respondent            complainant             never         made         any 


representation   that   the   vessel   had   two   functional 


engines.  On the other hand, addendum No. 2 to MOA 


expressly speaks about the fact that starboard engine 


was   not   working.     The   MOA   that   was   forwarded 


included both the addendums and in fact it was one of 


the reasons for demolishing the vessel.  At any rate, as 


observed   by   the   National   Commission,   at   no   point   of 


time   the   insurance   Company   took   this   plea   to 


repudiate   the   contract.     This   plea   was   raised   for   the 


first time in the written statement filed in the National
15
Commission as an afterthought.
14.   The   learned   counsel   for   the   appellant   did   not 


show any material available on record in support of her 


submission.     Nor   the   counsel   could   point   out   any 


material or evidence which has a bearing on the issue 


that   had   escaped   the   attention   of   the   Commission. 


Thus   it   is   not   a   case   of   non-consideration   of   any 


evidence available on record by the Commission.   The 


findings   and   conclusions   drawn   by   the   National 


Commission   are   based   on   proper   appreciation   and 


elaborate consideration of the entire material available 


on record.   The Commission did not commit any error 


in   appreciating   the   evidence   available   on   record.   The 


contention urged before us in this appeal is accordingly 


rejected. No other contention was raised.
15. For   the   same   reasons,   we   find   no   merit   in   the 


cross appeal preferred by the respondent complainant.
16. The appeals are accordingly dismissed.
16
..........................................J.

                                        (B. SUDERSHAN REDDY)




                          ..........................................J.

                          (SURINDER SINGH NIJJAR)

NEW DELHI,

March 9, 2011.