[Cites
31
, Cited by
51
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of U.P.& Ors vs Bharat Singh & Ors on 8 March, 2011
Author:
T.S. Thakur
Bench:
T.S. Thakur
,
V.S. Sirpurkar
REPORTABLE




                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICITION


           CIVIL APPEAL NO.       2351           OF 2011

            (Arising out of SLP (C) No.25966 of 2008)




State of U.P. & Ors.                              ...Appellants





        Versus





Bharat Singh & Ors.                               ...Respondents





With Civil Appeal Nos.     2352-2361       of 2011

(Arising  out  of  SLP  (C)  Nos.27077,  27522-27524,  27526-

27528, 27530-27531 of 2008 and No.455 of 2009


With 


T.P. (C) Nos.3 and 1136 of 2009


Contempt Petition (C) No.32 of 2009 in SLP (C) No.25966 of 

2008


                          J U D G M E N T
T.S. THAKUR, J.
1.    Leave granted.
2.    These appeals arise out of a judgment and order dated 


7th  August  2008  passed  by  the  High  Court  of  Allahabad 


whereby  the  High  Court  has  allowed  the  writ  petitions  filed 


by  the  selected  candidates,  quashed  the  orders  under 


challenge  in  the  same  and  by  a  mandamus  directed  the 


Director,     Higher     Education     to     give     effect     to     the 


recommendations  made  by  the  U.P.  Higher  Education 


Service Commission for appointment to the post of Principals 


in  aided/affiliated  Degree  and  Post-Graduate  colleges.    The 


High Court has further directed issue of placement orders in 


favour  of  the  selected  candidates  without  any  delay.    The
2
facts  giving  rise  to  the  filing  of  the  petitions  may  be 


summarized as under:
3.    The Government of U.P. has established what is known 


as  `Uttar  Pradesh  Higher  Education  Services  Commission'  in 


terms of
Section 3
of the U.P. Higher Education Services Act, 


1980.  The  Commission  is,  among  other  functions  assigned 


to  it  under  the  Act,  empowered  to  prepare  guidelines 


touching  the  method  of  recruitment  of  teachers  in  colleges 


and  conduct  examinations,  hold  interviews  and  make 


selection  of  candidates  for  being  appointed  as  teachers  and 


make  recommendations  to  the  managements  concerned 


regarding  the  appointment  of  selected  candidates.  The 


selection     process  undertaken  by  the  Commission  is, 


however, confined only to colleges to which the privileges of 


affiliation or recognition have been granted by the University 


including  colleges  that  are  maintained  by  local  authorities.
Colleges  that  are  maintained  by  the  State  Government  or
3
colleges  imparting  medical  education  are  outside  the 


purview  of  the  Act  aforementioned.  We  shall  presently  refer 


to  the  provisions  of  the  Act  in  greater  detail  but  we  may  at 


this  stage  only  say  that  in  terms  of
Section  12
of  the  Act, 


the    Managements  of  the  colleges  are  required  to  intimate 


the existing vacancies and the vacancies likely to be  caused 


during  the  course  of  the  ensuing  academic  year  to  the 


Director  of  Education  who  is  then  required  to  notify  to  the 


Commission  a  subject  wise  consolidated  list  of  vacancies 


intimated to him from all colleges to enable the Commission 


to initiate and undertake the selection process.
4.    Based on the information notified to the Commission in 


terms of the above procedure, a consolidated advertisement 


bearing multiple numbers (33 to 36) was issued by it on 29th 


May  2003  inviting  applications  for  the  vacancies  mentioned 


in  the  said  advertisement.    A  large  number  of  writ  petitions 


challenging  the  said  advertisement  came  to  be  filed  before
4
the High Court of Allahabad primarily on the ground that the 


post  of  Principals  notified  by  the  Commission  available  as 


they  were  in  different  colleges  affiliated  to  the  University 


being  single  posts  in  the  cadre  were  not  amenable  to 


reservation.  These  writ  petitions  were  entertained  by  the 


High  Court  and  by  interim  orders  dated  1st  September,  15th 


September  and  22nd  September  2003,  directions  issued  to 


the Commission to the effect that the post of Principals shall 


be treated as non-reserved posts.
5.    In     compliance     with     the     above     directions,     the 


Commission  issued  a  fresh  advertisement  dated  24th 


February      2005     being     advertisement         No.39     inviting 


applications  for  140  posts  of  Principals,  out  of  which  87 


posts  were  available  in  Post-Graduate  Colleges  while  53 


others  were  in  Degree  Colleges.    The  advertisement  did  not 


make  any  mention  about  any  reservation  implying  thereby 


that  the  posts  were  offered  in  the  general/open  merit
5
category.   The  entire  selection  process  was  to  be  subject to 


the  ultimate  outcome  of  the  writ  petitions  pending  before 


the Allahabad High Court.  It is common ground that interim 


orders  dated 1st September 2003,  15th September 2003  and 


22nd  September  2003  were  challenged  before  this  Court  by 


way  of  SLPs,  but  the  said  petitions  were  dismissed  on  the 


ground  of  delay  and  laches  by  this  Court's  order  dated  3rd 


November, 2008.
6.    The Commission took nearly two years to complete the 


selection  process  which  culminated  in  the  publication  of  a 


select  list  in  terms  of  a  notification  dated  15th  May  2007.
With  the  publication  of  the  select  list,  the  batch  of  writ 


petitions  pending  before  the  High  Court  in      which  the 


interim  orders  mentioned  above  had  been  issued  was 


dismissed  as  infructuous.    The  High  Court  while  doing  so 


noted  the  submission  made  on  behalf  of  the  Commission 


that  there  was  no  cadre  of  Principals  in  the  Post-Graduate
6
colleges and the posts of Principals were not interchangeable 


or transferable.
7.    In the case of the appellant-State of Uttar Pradesh that 


before appointment orders could be issued to those included 


in the select list, a number of complaints were received by it 


against  the  selection  held  by  the  Commission  alleging  large 


scale  irregularities and  malpractices  of  serious  nature in  the 


selection  procedure  and  demanding  an  inquiry  into  the 


same.  The  State  Government  accordingly  directed  the 


Divisional  Commissioner,  Allahabad  to  hold  an  inquiry  into 


the  allegations  and  to  submit  a  report  within  15  days.    The 


Divisional     Commissioner      in     turn     asked     for     certain 


information from the Service Commission in connection with 


the  inquiry  with  a  copy  to  the  Director,  Higher  Education 


requesting  him  to  show  restraint  in  issuing  the  placement 


orders  in  terms  of  the  recommendations  received  from  the 


Service Commission.
7
8.    Aggrieved  by  the  said  communication,  the  selected 


candidates  filed  several  writ  petitions  before  the  High  Court 


of  Allahabad  challenging  the  notification  issued  by  the 


Government  appointing  the  Divisional  Commissioner  as  an 


inquiry officer and the letter written by him to the Director of 


Education  asking  him  to  withhold  the  issue  of  placement 


orders  in  favour  of  the  selected  candidates.  While  the  said 


writ  petitions  were  still  pending  disposal  the  Divisional 


Commissioner  submitted  a  preliminary  inquiry  report  dated 


6th  July  2007  in  which  he  recorded  a  prima  facie  conclusion 


that  a  series  of  irregularities  and  malpractices  had  been 


committed  by  the  Service  Commission  in  the  process  of 


selection. The High Court in the meantime passed an interim 


order  dated  13th  July  2007  staying  the  operation  of  the 


notification  appointing  the  Divisional  Commissioner  as  an 


inquiry  officer  with  a  direction  to  the  respondent  to  issue
8
appointment  letters  to  the  selected  candidates  within  three 


weeks.
9.     Aggrieved  by  the  interim  order  referred  to  above,  the 


State filed a special leave petition in this Court in which this 


Court by an order dated 21st August 2007 stayed the interim 


direction  in  so  far as the same  directed  the Director,  Higher 


Education  to  issue  appointment  letters  in  favour  of  the 


selected  candidates.  The  special  leave  petition  was  finally 


disposed by this Court on 12th February 2008 with a request 


to the High Court to dispose of the writ petitions within four 


months.    The  interim  order  issued  by  this  Court  on  21st 


August 2007 was continued in the meantime.
10.    Before  the  High  Court,  the  Government  filed  a  counter 


affidavit  to  the  writ  petition  stating  that  there  were  serious 


infirmities  in  the  process  and  an  indepth  inquiry  into  the 


matter  was  necessary.    The  High  Court  eventually  allowed
9
the  writ  petition  quashing  orders  dated  12th  June  2007  and 


16th June 2007 impugned therein and issued a mandamus to 


the  Director,  Higher  Education  Service  Commission  to  make 


placements in favour of the selected candidates. The present 


appeals assail the correctness of the said orders.
11.    We may at this stage point out that by an interim order 


dated 20th November, 2008 passed in these cases this Court 


directed     the     appellant-State     to     appoint     the     selected 


candidates-respondents  in  these  appeals  as  Principals  of 


various  aided  non-Government  degree  colleges  and  post-
graduate  colleges  within  a  period  of  one  month  subject  to 


the decision of these appeals, provided the respondents filed 


undertakings in this Court to the effect that in case they lose 


the  battle  they  will  stand  reverted  to  the  posts  of  Readers 


and  the  difference  of  salary  amount  drawn  by  them  as 


Principals  recovered  and  paid  back  to  the  State.  That 


direction was reiterated by this Court in terms of order dated
10
23rd April, 2009 whereby this Court directed that although 56 


candidates  had already been appointed out  of the select list 


in different Degree and Post-Graduate colleges, the direction 


issued by this Court should be complied with in toto within a 


period of one month from the date of the said order. Hearing 


of  the  SLPs  was  also  directed  to  be  expedited.    It  is  not  in 


dispute  that  the  State  has  pursuant  to  the  above  direction 


appointed     the     selected     candidates     upon     their     filing 


undertakings  before  this  Court  with  the  result  that  all  the 


selected  candidates  are  duly  appointed  subject  to  the 


outcome  of  the  present  appeals  and  subject  to  the 


conditions stipulated in the interim orders mentioned above.
12.    Appearing  for  the  appellant-State  Mr.  Srivastava  made 


a  two-fold  submission  in  support  of  the  appeals.  Firstly,  he 


contended that the High Court had fallen in error in quashing 


order  dated  12th  June,  2007  appointing  the  Divisional 


Commissioner,  Allahabad  for  holding  a  preliminary  enquiry
11
into  the  allegations  of  malpractices  in  the  selection  process 


based  on  the  complaints  received  by  the  Government.  He 


urged  that
Section  6(1)
of  the  Uttar  Pradesh  Higher 


Education  Services  Commission  Act,  1980  empowered  the 


State Government to remove from office any member of the 


Service     Commission,     in     situations     where     the     State 


Government  considers  them  unfit  to  continue  in  office  by 


reason  of  proved  misconduct.  The  source  of  power  so 


available  was  according  to  the  learned  counsel  sufficient  for 


the  Government  to  hold  an  enquiry  into  the  allegations 


regarding  the  legality  and  procedural  regularity  of  the 


selection  process  for  it  was  only  on  the  basis  of  any  such 


enquiry  that  the  Government  could  determine  whether  any 


misconduct  had  been  committed  by  the  members  of  the 


Commission.  The  Government  could  on  the  basis  of  the 


outcome  of  the  enquiry  act  against  the  member  responsible 


for  such  misconduct  and  irregularity  and/or  refuse  to 


approve  the  end  result  of  the  selection  process.  The
12
preliminary  enquiry,  therefore,  had  the  sanction  of  law, 


argued  the  learned  counsel  and  could  not  be  cut  short  by 


the High Court in the manner it has done.
13.    Mr. Srivastava further contended that even if
Section 6
is  given  a  restricted  interpretation  its  rigors  are  confined  to 


the  removal  of  the  members  of  the  Commission  from  office 


and  do  not  extend  to  the  holding  of  an  enquiry  into  the 


validity  of  the  selection  process,  yet  the  general  executive 


power  vested  in  the  State  Government  under
Article  154
of 


the  Constitution  of  India  was  wide  enough  to  entitle  the 


Government  to  institute  such  an  enquiry  in  cases  where 


allegations  of  rampant  corruption,  malpractice  and  the  like 


vitiating  the  selection  process  are  made.  Relying  upon  the 


pronouncements of this Court it was urged that no candidate 


had  a  right  to  seek  an  appointment  simply  because  he  has 


been  empanelled  for  such  an  appointment.    In  cases  where 


the State has serious, reservations about the fairness of the
13
selection  process  and  where  allegations  casting  a  cloud  on 


the legality and propriety of the procedure have been made, 


the  State  could  not  refuse  an  enquiry  nor  could  any  such 


enquiry  be  struck  down  and  appointments  ordered  having 


regard  to  the  compelling  need  for  maintaining  absolute 


purity in the selection process leading to such appointments.
14.    Secondly, it was argued that the High Court was wrong 


in  disposing  of  writ  petition  Nos.  39369/2003,  39370/2003, 


48621/2003,       41191/2003,             52411/2003,         70062/2003, 


42992/2003,  41345/2003  and  38714/2003  as  infructuous.
The  High  Court  had  ignored  the  fact  that  the  issue  of 


advertisement No.39 pursuant to the interim direction of the 


High Court and the selection process concluded on the basis 


thereof was subject to the outcome of the said writ petitions.
Mere  issue  of  a  fresh  notification  in  compliance  with  the 


order  passed  by  the  High  Court  or  the  completion  of  the 


selection     process     did     not     render     the     writ     petitions 


infructuous,  for  the question  whether  the  posts  of  Principals
14
were subject to reservation had to be answered by the High 


Court which it had omitted to do. It was further argued that 


the  High  Court  had  not  only  ignored  the  decision  of  a 


coordinate Bench in
Onkar Dutt Sharma and Ors. v. State 


of  U.P.  and  Ors.
(2001)  1  SAC  505,  but  failed  to 


satisfactorily  address  the  question  whether  the  post  of 


Principals  constituted  a  cadre  and  was,  therefore,  amenable 


to  reservation  in  terms  of  The  Uttar  Pradesh  Services 


(Reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and 


other  Backward  Classes)  Act,  1994.    It  was  contended  that 


the provisions of the
Uttar Pradesh Higher Education Service 


Commission  Act,  1980
had  the  effect  of  clubbing  posts  of 


Principals  in  different  affiliated  colleges  and  once  such 


clubbing  was  statutorily  prescribed  for  purposes  of  process 


of selection and recommendations for appointment, the said 


posts could be treated as a part of one single cadre to which 


provisions of Reservation Act, 1994 would apply.
15
15.     Mr.  Dinesh  Dwivedi  learned,  senior  counsel  appearing 


for     the     management          who     are     interveners         in     SLP 


No.27077/2008  contended  that  the  expression  "cadre"
appearing in the Reservation Act, 1994 had to be interpreted 


liberally.  So  interpreted  Uttar  Pradesh  Higher  Services 


Commission  Act  had  the  effect  of  bringing  about  a  cadre  of 


Principals  in  aided  and  affiliated  Degree  and  Post-Graduate 


institutions     argued     the      learned        counsel.     He      further 


submitted  that  several  features  supported  the  caderisation 


of  the  posts  in  such  institutions.  For  instance  the  salary  of 


the incumbent Principals in such institutions was paid by the 


State  Government.  Reference  in  this  regard  was  made  by 


him  to
Sections  60-A
,
60-B
,
60-D
and
60-E
of  the  Uttar 


Pradesh State Universities Act, 1973. It was argued that the 


clubbing of posts for conduct of a common selection process 


under  1980  Act  (supra)  and  the  fact  that  the  power  of 


appointment  against  the  said  post  was  effectively  with  the 


Director  having  regard  to  the  provisions  of
Sections  12
and
16
13
of  the  Act  was  also  a  significant  feature  that  indicated 


that  the  posts  comprised  a  single  cadre  of  Principals.    The 


posts  of  teachers  were  also  interchangeable  subject  to 


certain  conditions  and  restrictions.  The  fact  that  the  terms 


and  conditions  of  service  of  the  employees  were  the  same 


under  the  relevant  rules  stipulated  by  the  affiliating 


universities  and  the  retirement  and  termination  was  not  in 


the hands of the managements also suggested, according to 


the  learned  counsel,  that  the  posts  of  Principals  constituted 


a  single  cadre.  Mr.  Dwivedi  also  drew  support  from  the  fact 


that  posts  of  Principals  of  secondary  schools  were  excluded 


from  the  rigors  of  reservations  while  the  Degree  and  Post-
Graduate  institutes  did  not  enjoy  any  such  immunity.  The 


difference between the two provisions was, according to Mr. 


Dwivedi,  significant  and  showed  that  wherever  reservation 


was not intended to apply to the post of Principals as in the 


case of secondary schools, a specific provision  to that effect 


was made in the statute.
17
16.    On  behalf  of  the  respondents  Mr.  P.S.  Patwalia,  senior 


counsel,     argued     that     the     enquiry     instituted     by     the 


Government  into  the  validity  of  the  selection  process  was 


motivated by political considerations. He urged that selection 


process  having  been  completed  by  the  Commission  during 


the  previous  regime  the  same  was  not  found  palatable  by 


the successor Government in the State of Uttar Pradesh who 


contrived  to  subvert  the  entire  exercise  on  one  pretext  or 


other.
17.    Mr.  Patwalia  further  submitted  that  there  was  no  real 


basis  for  the  Government  to  institute  an  enquiry  into  the 


validity of the selection especially when the allegations were 


totally  vague,  unfounded  and  imaginary  containing  an 


appeal  to  the  Government  to  intervene  on  caste  and 


community considerations rather than any concrete evidence 


regarding  the  commission  of  any  malpractices.  He  drew  our
18
attention to the order passed by the High Court to show that 


the State Government had failed to come out with a specific 


statement that it intended to conduct any further enquiry or 


proceedings  in  the  matter.  The  High  Court  was,  therefore, 


justified in quashing the preliminary report submitted by the 


Divisional Commissioner  especially because the Government 


did  not,  according  to  the  learned  counsel,  have  the  power 


under  Section  6  of  the  Uttar  Pradesh  Higher  Education 


Services  Act  to  nullify  a  validly  concluded  selection  process.
He  refuted  the  contention  that  the  Government  could 


exercise its general executive power under
Article 154
of the 


Constitution and submitted that no such argument was ever 


urged before the High Court.
18.    Mr.  Patwalia  further  contended  that  the  provisions  of 


the
Uttar Pradesh Higher Education Services Commission Act
did  not  have  the  effect  of  bringing  about  a  cadre  of 


Principals and termed the submissions made to that effect to
19
be  wholly  fallacious.  He  submitted  that  the  minimum 


requirement  for  holding  that  a  cadre  exists  in  any  given 


service  is  that  those  who  constitute  a  part  of  a  given  cadre 


must  have  a  common  employer.    This  requirement  was  not 


satisfied  in  the  instant  case  as  the  employer  of  each  one  of 


the     Principals     was     the      management          of       the     college 


concerned.      The      posts         of     the     Principals      were      not 


interchangeable or transferrable under the Rules except with 


the mutual consent of the incumbents and the management 


under  whom  they  were  serving.  The  question  whether  a 


cadre  existed  in  such  circumstances  was,  according  to  Mr. 


Patwalia,  concluded  by  the  decision  of  this  Court  in
Balbir 


Kaur  and  Anr.  v.  Uttar  Pradesh  Secondary  Education 


Services Selection Board, Allahabad and Ors.
(2008) 12 


SCC 1.
19.     Mr.  Pallav  Shishodia  and  Mr.  V.  Shekhar,  senior 


counsels  who  appeared  for  some  of  the  respondents  also
20
adopted the arguments advanced by Mr. Patwalia that there 


was  nothing  in  the  provisions  of  the
Uttar  Pradesh  Higher 


Education Services Commission Act
or the Reservation Act of 


1994  for  that  matter  to  suggest  that  the  Legislature  ever 


intended  to  create  a  cadre  of  Principals  serving  under 


different  managements.  The  only  purpose  underlying  the 


two  legislations,  according  to  the  learned  counsel,  was  to 


provide  a  unified  mechanism  for  selection  of  suitable 


candidates  for  appointment  as  Principals  to  ensure  that 


appointments are made on a fair and transparent basis.  The 


State  considered  that  to  be  necessary  not  only  in  the 


interests  of  getting  the  best  candidates  for  the  institutions 


that  were  affiliated  to  the  universities  and  were  serving  a 


laudable public purpose but also because the salary payable 


to  those  appointed  against  such  vacancies  was  reimbursed 


to the institutions by the State.
20.    Two questions fall for our determination, these are :
21
(i) Whether the High Court was justified in quashing the 


       appointment of the enquiry officer appointed to look into 


       the allegations of malpractice allegedly committed in the 


       course of selection process and
(ii)  Whether  the  posts  of  Principals  in  different 


       affiliated/aided  Degree  and  Post-Graduate  institutions 


       constitute  a  cadre  and  are,  therefore,  subject  to 


       reservation  as  prescribed  under  the  provisions  of  the 


       Reservation Act of 1994.
21.     We propose to take up the questions ad seriatim.
Re: Question No.(i)
22.     Selection  of  Principals  in  affiliated/aided  Degree  and 


Post-graduate  colleges  is  regulated  by  the
Uttar  Pradesh 


Higher  Education  Services  Commission  Act
,  the  Rules  and
22
Regulations  framed  thereunder.  The  selection  process  was 


initiated and concluded by the Commission treating the post 


to  be  open  category  post  pursuant  to  the  interim  directions 


issued  by  the  High  Court.  The  select  list  was  also  duly 


notified.  In  the  ordinary  course  recommendations  of  a 


statutory  Commission  established  for  selecting  suitable 


candidates  as  teachers  including  Principals  for  the  colleges 


ought to get the respect it deserved. The State Government, 


however,  appears  to  have  received  some  complaints  on  the 


basis  of  which  it  initiated  an  enquiry  culminating  in  the 


submission  of  a  preliminary  report  finding  fault  with  the 


procedure adopted by the Commission in the conduct of the 


selection  process.  According  to  the  appellant-State  of  U.P. 


the allegations made in the complaint were serious in nature 


and deserved to be looked into.  It was urged that the State 


had all the intentions of instituting a further enquiry into the 


matter on the basis of the preliminary report submitted to it.
The High Court did not think so.  From a reading of the order
23
passed  in  W.P.  No.29524  of  2007,  it  appears  that  the  High 


Court  had  given  an  opportunity  to  the  learned  counsel  for 


the  State  to  take  instructions  whether  the  Government 


intended  to  institute  any  further  enquiry  in  the  matter.
Despite  the  opportunity  learned  counsel  for  the  State  had 


reported  no  instructions  in  the  matter.  This  is  evident  from 


the  following  passage  appearing  in  the  order  passed  by  the 


High Court:
"On all these dates, we requested the standing 

            counsel  to  give  the  stand  of  the  State  Government. 

            Learned  standing  counsel  informs  that  he  had  sent 

            the  information  to  the  State  Government  but  no 

            instructions have been received by him."
23.    The High Court,  therefore, proceeded on  the basis  that 


the  Government  did  not  intend  to  conduct  any  further 


enquiry  into  the  matter  and  accordingly  quashed  the  order 


appointing the enquiry officer as also the instructions issued 


by him against the making of the appointments. We consider 


it  unnecessary  to  examine  whether  the  complaints  allegedly 


received  by  the  State  Government  made  out  a  prima  facie
24
case  for  an  enquiry  into  the  matter  or  whether  the  enquiry 


instituted by the Government was vitiated by any political or 


other  considerations.    We  would  also  not  like  to  go  into  the 


question whether or not the power vested in the State under
Section  6
of  the  Uttar  Pradesh  Higher  Education  Services 


Commission  Act  (supra)  which  the  State  Government 


purportedly  invoked  could  be  invoked  by  it  for  purposes  of 


undoing  the  selection  process  and  if  could  not  be,  whether 


the  general  executive  power  vested  in  the  State  under
Article  154
of  the  Constitution  could  be  exercised  by  it  to 


institute  an  enquiry  in  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the 


case.  We  say  so  not  because  the  questions  were  not 


germane  to  the  controversy  before  us  but  because  any 


enquiry  by  the  State  Government  whether  in  exercise  of  its 


power  under
Section  6
or  in  exercise  of  its  executive  power 


under
Article  154
would only duplicate the exercise  which  is 


already pending before the High Court in the form of several 


writ  petitions  in which  the aggrieved candidates have raised
25
issues  relating  to  the  validity  of  the  selection  process  on 


several grounds including those which the State Government 


purports  to  be  looking  into  on  the  basis  of  the  complaints 


received  by  it.  We  had  in  that  view  asked  Mr.  Srivastava 


whether  there  was  any  need  for  the  State  Government  to 


undertake     a     parallel     exercise     especially     when     the 


examination by the High Court of all matters concerning the 


validity  of  selection  would  give  an  opportunity  not  only  to 


the  State  Government  but  also  to  the  aggrieved  candidates 


who  have  been  selected  to  present  their  respective  version 


before  it.    If  the  High  Court  on  the  basis  of  whatever 


material  is  placed  before  it  by  the  parties  came  to  the 


conclusion  that  there  was  nothing  wrong  with  the  selection 


process,  any  enquiry  made  by  the  State  would  be  wholly 


unnecessary. On the contrary, if the High Court came to the 


conclusion that the selection was vitiated by any illegality or 


irregularity,  the  State  Government  could  exercise  its  power 


and institute an enquiry for the removal of any member who
26
may  have  committed  any  misconduct  by  being  a  party  to 


any  such  illegality  or  irregularity.    To  the  credit  of  Mr. 


Srivastava,  we  must  record  that  he  was  agreeable  to  the 


course  of  action  suggested  by  us  with  the  only  exception 


that  the  vigilance  case  that  stood  registered  by  the  State 


Vigilance  Department  is  allowed  to  go  on  to  look  into  the 


criminal angle if any involved in the so-called illegal selection 


conducted  by  the  Commission.  In  the  circumstances, 


therefore,  it  is  unnecessary  for  us  to  authoritatively 


determine the question whether the institution of enquiry by 


the  State  Government  was  justified  and,  if  so,  whether  the 


source  of  power  invoked  by  the  Government  was  indeed 


available  to  it.  We  are  of  the  view  that  in  the  writ  petitions 


filed  by  the  aggrieved  candidates  before  the  High  Court  all 


aspects of the matter shall be open to examination in which 


everyone  connected  with  the  selection  process  would  have 


an opportunity to place his/her point of view.
27
24.    We are told that the selected candidates may not have 


been  impleaded  as  parties  to  the  pending  writ  petitions 


although  they  are  necessary  parties  having  regard  to  the 


fact  that  any  order  that  the  High  Court  may  pass  regarding 


the  validity  of  the  selection  may  affect  them  adversely.  The 


selected  candidates  who  have  been  appointed  on  the  basis 


of  the  selection  process  and  who  have  filed  undertakings 


before this Court shall, therefore, be impleaded as parties to 


the  pending  writ  petitions  to avoid  any  technical  infirmity  in 


the proceedings and any consequent delay in the disposal of 


the matter.  A specific direction to this effect is being issued 


by  us  in  the  operative  part  of  this  order.  Question  No.(i)  is 


answered accordingly.
Regarding Question No. (ii)
25.
Uttar  Pradesh  Higher  Education  Services  Commission 


Act,  1980
was  introduced  to  make  the  selection  of  teachers
28
in  Degree  and  Post-graduate  Colleges  fair,  objective  and 


transparent.  The  statement  of  objects  and  reasons  for  the 


legislation  has  referred  to  favoritism  in  the  selection  of 


candidates  for  such  colleges  and  elimination  of  such 


infirmities  from  the  selection  process  as  one  of  the 


objectives underlying the enactment.
26.    In  terms  of
Section  4
of  the  Act,  the  Commission 


established  under
Section  3
consists  of  a  Chairman  and  not 


less  than  two  and  not  more  than  four  other  members  to  be 


appointed by the State Government satisfying the conditions 


of  eligibility  stipulated  under  sub-section  (2)  and  (2-a) 


thereof.
Section  11
enumerates  the  functions  of  the 


Commission  which  includes  the  preparation  of  guidelines  on 


matters  relating  to  the  method  of  recruitment,  conduct  of 


examinations  where  considered  necessary,  holding  of 


interviews  for  making  selection  of  candidates  to  be 


appointed  as  teachers  and  selection  of  experts  and 


appointment of  examiners for such examination.
Section 12
29
of the Act stipulates the process for appointment of teachers 


and inter alia provides that appointment of a teacher of any 


college  shall  be  made  by  the  Management  only  in 


accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  Act  and  that  any 


appointment  made  in  contravention  thereof  shall  be  void.
Sub-section  (2)  of  Section  12  requires  the  management  of 


the  colleges  to  intimate  the  existing  vacancies  and  the 


vacancies  likely  to  be  caused  during  the  ensuing  academic 


year to the Director of Education (Higher Education) in such 


manner as may be prescribed.  Sub-section (3) requires the 


Director  to  notify  to  the  Commission  in  the  manner 


prescribed  a  subject  wise  consolidated  list  of  vacancies 


intimated to him from all colleges.
27.    The  manner  of  selection  of  persons  for  appointment  to 


the post of teacher of a college has also to be determined by 


regulations.    It  is  further  provided  that  candidate  shall  be 


required to indicate their order of preference for the various
30
colleges,  vacancies  wherein  have  been  advertised.
Section 


13
of  the  Act  requires  the  Commission  to  hold  interviews 


with  or  without  written  examination  and  to  send  to  the 


Director  a  list  recommending  such  number  of  names  of 


candidates found most suitable in each subject as may be as 


far as practicable twenty five percent more than the number 


of  vacancies  in  that  subject  duly  arranged  in  the  order  of 


merit.  Such a list would then be valid till the receipt of new 


list  from  the  Commission.  Sub-section  (3)  empowers  the 


Director  to  intimate  to  the  Management  the  name  of  a 


candidate  from  the  list  referred  to  in  sub-section  (1)  for 


being appointed in the vacancies. Sub-section (6) requires a 


copy  of  such  intimation  to  be  sent  to  the  candidate 


concerned.
28.
Section  14
of  the  Act enjoins  upon  the Management  to 


issue  an  appointment  letter  to  the  person  whose  name  has 


been intimated to it.  It reads:
31
"14.  Duty  of  Management.-  (1)  The  management 

           shall  within  a  period  of  one  month  from  the  date  of 

           receipt  of  intimation  under  sub-section  (3)  or  sub-

           section  (4)  or  sub-section  (5)  of  Section  13,  issue 

           appointment  letter  to  the  person  whose  name  has 

           been intimated.
(2)  Where  the  person  referred  to  in  sub-section(1) 

           fails  to  join  the  post  within  the  time  allowed  in  the 

           appointment  letter  or  within  such  extended  time  as 

           the  management  may  allow  in  this  behalf,  or  where 

           such     person     is     otherwise     not     available     for 

           appointment,  the  Director,  shall  on  the  request  of 

           the  management  intimate  fresh  name  from  the  list 

           sent  by  the  Commission  under  sub-section(1)  of 

           Section 13 in the manner prescribed."
29.
Section  15
entitles  the  person  recommended  for 


appointment  but  not  so  appointed  by  the  management  to 


approach  the  Director  for  issue  of  an  appropriate  direction 


under  sub-section  (2).    Director  is  under  the  said  provision 


empowered to hold an inquiry and to pass an order requiring 


the  management  to  appoint  the  applicant  as  a  teacher  and 


to pay to him the salary from the date specified in the order.
32
30.    The  Government  has  in  exercise  of  its  power  under
Section  32
and
Section  31
of  the  Uttar  Pradesh  Higher 


Education  Services  Commission  Act,  1980  framed  what  are 


known      "Uttar     Pradesh      Higher        Education       Services 


Commission  Rules,  1981"  and  "Uttar  Pradesh  Higher 


Education  Services  Commission  (Procedure  for  Selection  of 


Teachers)      Regulations,        1983".        While     the       Rules 


aforementioned        deal     with     the     constitution       of     the 


Commission,  disqualification  of  the  members,  investigation 


into  misconduct  of  members,  staff  etc.  the  Regulations
referred  to  above
deal  with  matters  like  qualifications  and 


experience  for  appointment  as  teacher,  determination  and 


intimation of vacancies, procedure for selection and the like.
31.    A careful reading of the provisions of the Act, the Rules 


and  the  Regulations
referred  to  above
do  not  support  the 


theory  propounded  by  Mr.  Srivastava  and  Mr.  Dwivedi  that 


the  same  by  a  fiction  of  law  create  a  cadre  of  principals
33
either  for  the  purpose  of  applying  reservation  or  otherwise.
As  seen  earlier  the  object  underlying  the  legislation  was 


limited  to  ensuring  a  combined  process  of  selection  that 


would  save  time  and  expense  involved  in  such  selections  if 


the  same  are  made  individually  for  each  college.  It  is  also 


intended  to  remove  the  element  of  arbitrariness  and  other 


malpractices  that  were  noticed  in  the  making  of  such 


selections  and  appointments  by  the  institutions  if  left  to 


themselves.  The  setting  up  of  the  Statutory  Commission, 


appointment  of  persons  qualified  for  the  same,  stipulating 


the  terms  and  conditions  of  service  of  those  appointed  and 


the  power  to  remove  the  members  for  misconduct  and 


laying  down  the  procedure  for  appointment  of  teachers  are 


all meant to ensure that the process of selection is free from 


mal-practices  that  were  generally  associated  with  such 


process when handled by the institutions. There is nothing in 


the  Act,  the  Rules  and  Regulations,  to  even  remotely, 


suggest  that  the  legislature  intended  to  create  a  cadre  of
34
principals  even  where  none  existed  earlier  either  for 


purposes of reservation or otherwise.
32.    The  fact  that  the  management  was  required  to 


communicate  the  available  vacancies  to  the  Director  of 


Higher  Education  or  that  an  appointment  order  must  be 


issued,  once  the  selection  process  is  completed  and  a 


candidate  is recommended for appointment also does not in 


our opinion have the effect of creating a cadre of principals.
All  that  the  said  provision  is  intend  to  achieve  is  to  ensure 


that the vacancies are referred to the Statutory Commission 


to enable it to conduct the process of selection and once the 


process  is  completed  and  recommendations  made,  the 


management  do  not  refuse  appointment  to  the  candidate 


considered best for the post.
33.    The  power  vested  in  the  Director  to  hold  an  enquiry 


and  to  issue  directions  for  payment  of  salary,  in  case  the
35
management does not appoint, is also meant to be a step in 


aid  of  the  process  of  selection  and  appointment  giving 


primacy  to  the  opinion  of  the  Commission  regarding  the 


merit  and  suitability  of  the  candidate  for  such  appointment 


and     entitling     the     candidate     to     claim     salary     if     the 


appointment is unjustifiably denied to him.  Suffice it to say 


that  the  provisions  of  the  Act  and  the  Regulations  do  not 


have anything to do with creation of a cadre of Principals nor 


can  the  commonality  of  the  selection  process  be  confused 


with the caderisation of the post of Principals.
34.     That brings us to the question whether similarity of the 


terms  and  conditions  of  the  employees  serving  in  the 


aided/affiliated colleges and the effect the payment of salary 


due to such teachers is reimbursed by the State Government 


would  have  the  effect  of  creating  a  cadre  of  Principals.  Our 


answer  is  in  the  negative.  The  fact  that  the  State 


Government  offers  financial  aid  to  the  affiliated  colleges  in
36
terms of payment of salary of those serving such institutions 


does  not  in  our  opinion  have  any  relevance  to  the  question 


whether  the  posts  of  Principals  in  different  colleges  under 


different  managements  constitute  a  cadre.  Merely  because 


the  Government  supports  the  institutions  which  are  in  all 


other  respects  autonomous  in  their  functioning,  and  are 


managed  by  individual  managements  cannot  by  any  stretch 


of  reasoning  be  taken  as  a  circumstance  constituting  the 


posts  in  such  colleges  into  a  single  cadre.    So  also  the  fact 


that  the  terms  and  conditions  of  service  of  such  teachers 


serving  in  different  colleges  including  Principals  are  similar 


on  account  of  such  colleges  being  affiliated  to  the  same 


university  and  being  governed  by  the  same  set  of  Statutes, 


Rules  and  Regulations  also  does  not  have  anything  to  do 


with  the  creation  or  the  existence  of  a  single  cadre 


comprising  such  posts.    There  is  no  gainsaying  that  such 


common  features  do  not  in  any  way  impinge  upon  the 


autonomous character of such institutions nor does payment
37
of  salaries  and  the  similarity  of  conditions  of  service  of  the 


employees provide a test for holding that although serving in 


different  institutions  totally  independent  of  each  other  the 


Principals  appointed  in  such  institution  form  a  common 


cadre.
35.    It  was  also  contended  on  behalf  of  the  respondents, 


that the power of appointment effectively rests only with the 


Director of Higher Education and that managements have no 


option but to comply with the directions in that regard.  This 


according  to  the  respondents  suggests  that  the  Director  of 


Education  is  the  real  employer  and  the  management  of  the 


institutions in which such appointments are made only carry 


out  a  ministerial  duty  that  does  not  clothe  them  with  the 


character of being the true employers. We see no merit even 


in  that  contention.    It  is  true  that  in  terms  of
Section  14
of 


the Act, managements are required to issue an appointment 


letter to the person whose name has been intimated to it but
38
any  such  obligation  flowing  from  Section  14  does  not  make 


the     State  Government        the     employer     of     the     person 


appointed.    It  is  evident  from  a  plain  reading  of  Section  14 


that  the  appointment  letter  has  to  be  issued  only  by  the 


management. There is no provision empowering the Director 


to  do  so.    This  implies  that  the  selected  candidate  is  taken 


into  the  employment  of  the  institution  only  when  the 


management of the institution issues in his favour a letter of 


appointment.    It  is  manifest  that  the  appointing  authority 


even under the scheme of the Act remains the management 


of  the  institutions.  The  provisions  of  the  Act  simply  make 


sure  that  the  management  makes  an  appointment  only  of 


the  persons  selected  for  the  post  and  no  more.  The 


authorities  under  the  Act  do  not  substitute  themselves  as 


the employer of the person appointed.
36.     Last  but  not  the  least  is  the  fact  that  the  post  of 


Principals  in  different  aided/affiliated  institutions  is  not
39
transferable  or  interchangeable.  Interchangeability  of  the 


post and transferability of incumbents to another post in the 


same  cadre  are  essential  attributes  of  a  cadre,  which  is  in 


the  instant  case  absent.    Reference  in  this  connection  may 


be  made  to  the  Uttar  Pradesh  Higher  Education  Aided 


Colleges  Transfer  of  Teachers  Rules,  2005  framed  by  the 


State Government in exercise of its powers under
Section 32
of the U.P. Higher Education Services Commission Act, 1980.
Rule  4  of  the  said  Rules  is  in  this  regard  relevant  and  may 


be extracted:
"4(1)  Teachers  appointed  on  regular  basis  and 

           holding  lien  as  permanent  teachers  shall  be  entitled 

           to transfer after 10 years of service only once in the 

           whole service period.
(2)  The  transferred  teacher  shall  become  the 

           employee  of  the  college  to  which  he  has  been 

           transferred  as  his  service  conditions  shall  be 

           governed      by     the     statutes     of     the     University 

           concerned.
(3)  The  protection  of  salary  of  the  teacher  shall  be 

           admissible  but  the  service  rules  of  the  new 

           employers shall be applicable, to such teacher.
40
(4) The transferred teacher, shall be the junior most 

teacher  of  his  cadre  working  on  the  date  of  his 

joining in the college concerned.
(5)  The  teachers  shall  be  transferred  against  such 

posts  for  which  salary  is  paid  from  the  salary 

payment  account.      The  management  of  the  college 

before giving its consent to any teacher, shall ensure 

that no enquiry or any proceeding is pending against 

the  teacher  concerned  and  the  post  to  which  he  has 

been considered to be appointed by transfer shall not 

be advertised by the Uttar Pradesh Higher Education 

Services Commission.
(6)       The     transfer      application      for     single/mutual 

transfers  from  one  college  to  other  shall  be 

submitted  to  the  Director,  High  Education  through 

the  management  legally  construed  and  approved  by 

the University along with the written consent of both 

the  two  management.    The  Director,  High  Education 

shall       submit      his       recommendations               to       the 

Government  within  one  month  from  the  date  of 

receipt  of  the  application  within  one  month  from  the 

date  of  receipt  of  the  application.    The  Government 

shall      take     decision       either       on     the     basis      of 

recommendation of the Director or on its own.


(7)  No  travel  Allowance  shall  be  admissible  to  the 

teachers against such transfers.
(8)  The  Manager  of  the  former  institution  shall  send 

its  service  book,  Character  Rolls,  Leave  Account, 

G.P.F.,  Group  Insurance  account  and  last  pay 

certificate counter signed by the District Inspector of 

Schools/Regional  Higher  Education  Officer,  as  the 

case  may  be,  to  the  Regional  Higher  Education 

Officer  of  the  Region  concerned  and  to  the  Director, 

Higher Education."
41
37.    It  is  evident  from  the  above  that  there  is  no  power 


vested  in  the  State  Government  or  any  other  authority  for 


that  matter  to  transfer  the  Principal  from  one  institution  to 


another  institution  as  it  may  do  for  instance  in  the  case  of 


Government  run  institutions  where  Principal  from  one 


government       college     may      be     transferred     to     another 


government college in the same cadre.  Sub-rule (1) of Rule 


4 (supra) does not talk about the power of transfer vested in 


any  authority.  It  talks  about  entitlement  of  a  permanent 


teacher to be transferred after 10 years of service only once 


in  the  whole  service  period.    Sub-rule  (2)  provides  that  the 


transferred teacher shall become an employee of the college 


to which he has been transferred. More importantly sub-rule 


(4)  makes  the  transferred  teacher  go  to  the  bottom  of  the 


cadre  to  which  he  may  be  transferred.  That  provision  may 


not  make  much  sense  when  it  comes  to  transfer  of  a 


Principal  from  one  college  to  another  but  it  certainly  shows 


that  even  when  there  are  plurality  of  posts  in  the  cadre
42
lower than the principal the person transferred from another 


institution would figure at the bottom of the said cadre. This 


again  is  a  circumstance  which  negates  the  theory  of 


Principals being a part of the same cadre.
38.    Similarly  in  terms  of  sub-rule  (5)  the  management  of 


the college has to ensure that no enquiry or any proceeding 


is  pending  against  the  teacher  concerned  before  giving  its 


consent for the transfer of the teacher.  This means that the 


institutions  may  refuse  to  relieve  a  teacher  even  when  he 


may  like  to  be  transferred,  should  an  enquiry  be  pending 


against him.  Sub-rule (6) envisages that the transfer can be 


made only by mutual consent.
39.    It is abundantly clear from the above that the attribute 


of  interchangeability  and  transferability  is  missing  in  the 


case  of  Principals  -  in  much  the  same  measure  as  in  the 


case of teachers, in the lower cadre. We have, therefore, no
43
hesitation  in  holding  that  there  is  no  cadre  of  Principals 


serving  in  different  aided  and  affiliated  institutions  and  that 


the  Principal's  post  is  a  solitary  post  in  an  institution.
Reservation  of  such  a  post  is  clearly  impermissible  not  only 


because  the  Uttar  Pradesh  Public  Services  (Reservation  for 


Scheduled  Castes,  Scheduled  Tribes  and  other  Backward 


Classes)  Act,  1994  provides  for  reservation  based  on  the 


`cadre  strength'  in  aided  institutions  but  also  because  such 


strength being limited to only one post in the cadre is legally 


not     amenable      to     reservations     in     the     light     of     the 


pronouncement  of  this  Court  to  which  we  shall  presently 


refer.
40.     We  may  before  referring  to  the  decisions  of  this  Court 


on  the  question  whether  a  single  post  can  be  reserved, 


notice  the  decision  of  this  Court  in
Balbir  Kaur
's  case 


(supra)  relied  upon  by  Mr.  Patwalia.  That  was  also  a  case 


from  the  State  of  U.P.  It  related  to  appointment  of  a
44
Principal  under  the
U.P.  Secondary  Education  Services 


Commission  and  Selection  Boards  Act,  1982
.  One  of  the 


questions that fell for consideration was whether the post of 


Principal  in  institutions  offering  secondary  education  was 


amenable  to  reservation  having  regard  to  the  Reservation 


Act  of  1994
referred  above
.  This  Court  answered  the 


question in the negative and gave two reasons in support of 


that  conclusion.    Firstly,  the  Court  found  that
Section  10
of 


the  U.P.  Secondary  Education  Services  Commission  and 


Selection  Boards  Act,  1982  expressly  excluded  the  post  of 


Principal from the purview of the Reservation Act of the year 


1994. Secondly and more importantly the post of Principal in 


an  educational  institution  being  a  single  post  in  the  cadre 


such  a  post  was  held  not  amenable  to  reservation  for  any 


such  reservation  would  amount  to  making  a  100% 


reservation which was found impermissible under
Articles 15
and
16
of the Constitution.
Relying upon the decision of this 


Court in
Dr. Chakradhar Paswan v. State of Bihar & Ors
.
45
(
1988)  2  SCC  214  and  Post  Graduate  Institute  of 


Medical  Education  &  Research,  Chandigarh  v.  Faculty 


Association  &  Ors.
(1998)  4  SCC  1,  this  Court  held  that 


any reservation  qua a single post cadre either directly  or by 


the device of rotation of roster was not valid.  The Court also 


held that since the Reservation Act, 1994 did not provide for 


clubbing  of  all  the  educational  institutions  in  the  State  of 


U.P.  for  the  purpose  of  reservation  there  is  no  question  of 


clubbing  the  post  of  Principals  in  all  the  educational 


institutions  for  the  purpose  of  applying  the  principles  of 


reservation  under  the  1994  Act.  The  following  passage  is  in 


this regard apposite:
"it was held that there cannot be any reservation in a 

           single  post  cadre  and  the  decisions  to  the  contrary, 

           upholding  reservation  in  single  post  cadre  either 

           directly  or  by  device  of  rotation  of  roster  were  not 

           approved.  Besides,  as  noted  above,  neither  the 

           principal  Act,  nor  the  Rules  made  thereunder  or  the 

           1994  Act  provide  for  clubbing  of  all  educational 

           institutions  in  the  State  of  U.P.  for  the  purpose  of 

           reservation  and,  therefore,  there  is  no  question  of 

           clubbing  the  post  of  Principals  in  all  the  educational 

           institutions  for  the  purpose  of  applying  the  principle 

           of reservation under the 1994 Act."
46
41.    It  was  argued  on  behalf  of  the  respondents  that  while
Section  10
of  the  U.P.  Secondary  Education  Services 


Commission  and  Selection  Boards  Act,  1982  specifically 


excluded the post of Head of the institution from the process 


of  determination  of  number  of  vacancies  to  be  reserved  for 


candidates  belonging  to  Scheduled  Caste,  Scheduled  Tribes 


and other Backward Classes, no such exclusion was made in 


the  case  of  the  1980  Act  that  regulates  selection  for 


appointment  to  the  Degree  and  Post-degree  Colleges.    This 


according  to  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  implied  that 


wherever  the  legislature  intended  that  the  post  of  Principal 


should  be  excluded  from  reservation  it  specifically  provided 


so  and  in  case  such  exclusion  was  not  intended  no  such 


provision  was  made.  The  decision  in
Balbir  Kaur
's  case 


(supra)  argued  learned  counsel  for  the  appellants  was  on 


that basis distinguishable.
47
42.    We  do  not  think  so.    It  is  true  that
Section  10
of  the 


1982  Act  which  stipulates  the  procedure  for  selection  of 


candidates  for  direct  recruitment  requires  determination  of 


the vacancies to be reserved for candidates belonging to SC, 


ST and Backward Classes and reference of such vacancies to 


be  made  to  the  Commission  established  under  the  said  Act 


but  excluding  the  post  of  Principal/Head  of  the  institution 


from  the  said  determination  but  it  is  equally  true  that 


Section  12  of  1982  Act  with  which  we  are  concerned  does 


not require any exercise to be undertaken by the Institutions 


for  determining  the  number  of  vacancies  to  be  reserved  for 


candidates  belonging  to  reserved  categories.  There  is 


consequently       no     provision       by     which     the     post     of 


Principal/Head  of  the  institution  is  excluded  from  any  such 


process.  The  two  provisions  in  that  sense  are  not 


comparable.  In  one  case  the  number  of  vacancies  to  be 


reserved  is  required  to  be  determined  while  in  the  other  no
48
such  requirement  has  been  stipulated.  Exclusion  of  the 


Principal's post from such determination under the 1982 Act 


cannot,  therefore,  be  overemphasized  in  the  absence  of  a 


provision     requiring     a     determination     of     the     reserved 


vacancies under Section 12 of the 1980 Act.
43.    That apart we repeatedly asked learned counsel for the 


appellant-State  and  Mr.  Dwivedi,  learned  counsel  appearing 


for  the  managements  whether  there  was  any  rationale  for 


giving a differential treatment to Principals in Degree & Post-
Graduate  colleges  in  the  matter  of  reservation,  keeping  in 


view  the  fact  that  Principals  in  Secondary  Educational 


Institutions  were  not  subject  to  any  such  reservation.  We 


neither  expected  nor  got  any  explanation  from  the  learned 


counsel.  The reason was obvious.  If the posts of Principals 


in  the  secondary  school  which  are  much  larger  in  number 


than  the  Degree  and  Post-Graduate  colleges  are  not 


amenable to reservation and have been specifically excluded
49
from  that  process,  there  is  no  earthly  reason  why  posts  of 


Principals  in  Degree  and  Post-Graduate  colleges  which  are 


relatively  fewer  in  number  available  in  colleges  imparting 


higher  education  ought  to be  subjected  to  such  reservation.
What  is  true  in  the  case  of  secondary  schools  would, 


therefore,  be  true  in  the  case  of  Degree  and  Post-Graduate 


colleges  also.  Any  interpretation  that  may  render  the  legal 


position  anomalous  or  absurd  shall,  therefore,  have  to  be 


eschewed.
44.    The other reason why we have no difficulty in rejecting 


the contention urged by appellants is the fact that this Court 


has  in
Balbir  Kaur
's case  (supra)  specifically  examined  the 


question  whether  the  post  of  Principals  in  secondary 


institutions can be reserved independent of the provision  by 


which  such  post  are  excluded  from  reservation.    This  Court 


held  that  since  the  posts  of  Principals  are  single  post  such 


reservation  is  not  permissible  qua  them.  There  is  no  way
50
that view can be ignored or wished away by the State or the 


managements. Whether or not a single post can be reserved 


is  even  otherwise  fairly  well  settled  by  the  decisions  of  this 


Court to which we need refer only briefly.
45.    The decision of this Court in Indra Sawhney and Ors.
v.  Union  of  India  and  Ors.,  1992  Supp.(3)  SCC  217, 


continues  to  be  the  locus  classicus  on  the  subject  of 


reservation.  This  Court
in  that  case
held  that  reservation 


under
Articles 14
, 15
and
16
must be applied in a manner so 


as to strike a balance between opportunities for the reserved 


classes  on  the  one  hand  and  other  members  of  the 


community  on  the  other.  Such  reservation  cannot  exceed 


50% in order to be constitutionally valid.
46.
In
Chakradhan  Paswan
's  case  (supra)  this  Court 


relying upon the decision in
Arati Ray Choudhury v. Union 


of India
1974 (
1) SCC 87, M.R. Balaji v. State of Mysore
51
AIR 1963 SC 649 and T. Devadasan v. Union of India AIR 


1964  SC  179  held  that  separate  posts  in  different 


institutions  cannot  be  clubbed  together  for  the  purpose  of 


reservation  and  that  reservations  may  be  made  only  where 


there are more than  one posts. Reservation  of  only  a single 


post  in  the  cadre  would  amount  to  100%  reservation  and 


thereby violate
Articles 14(1)
and
16(4)
of the Constitution.
In  Bhide  Girls  Education  Society  v.  Education  Officer, 


Zila  Parishad,  Nagpur  and  Ors.,  1993  Supp  (3)  SCC  527 


this  Court  held  that  a  single  post  of  Headmistress  of  an 


institution could not be reserved as the same would amount 


to making a 100% reservation.
47.    The  controversy  was  authoritatively  set  at  rest  by  the 


Constitution  Bench  decision  of  this  Court  in  Post-graduate 


Institute of Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh 


v.  Faculty  Association  and  Ors.   (1998)  4  SCC  1     case 


(supra)  where  this  Court  overruled  the  decisions  of  this
52
Court in Union of India and Anr. v. Madhav s/o Gajanan 


Chaubal  and  Anr.  (1997)  2  SCC  332,  Union  of  India  v.
Brij  Lal  Thakur  (1997)  4  SCC  278  and  State  of  Bihar  v.
Bageshwari Prasad 1995 Supp (1) SCC 432 and observed:
"34. In a single post cadre, reservation at any point 

          of  time  on  account  of  rotation  of  roster  is  bound  to 

          bring  about  a  situation  where  such  a  single  post  in 

          the  cadre  will  be  kept  reserved  exclusively  for  the 

          members  of  the  backward  classes  and  in  total 

          exclusion of the general members of the public. Such 

          total exclusion of general members of the public and 

          cent per cent reservation for the backward classes is 

          not  permissible  within  the  constitutional  framework. 

          The  decisions  of  this  Court  to  this  effect  over  the 

          decades have been consistent.
35. Hence, until there is plurality of posts in a cadre, 

          the question of reservation will not arise because any 

          attempt of reservation by whatever means and even 

          with  the  device  of  rotation  of  roster  in  a  single  post 

          cadre  is  bound  to  create  100%  reservation  of  such 

          post     whenever      such     reservation      is     to     be 

          implemented.  The  device  of  rotation  of  roster  in 

          respect  of  single  post  cadre  will  only  mean  that  on 

          some  occasions  there  will  be  complete  reservation 

          and  the  appointment  to  such  post  is  kept  out  of 

          bounds  to  the  members  of  a  large  segment  of  the 

          community who do not belong to any reserved class, 

          but  on  some  other  occasions  the  post  will  be 

          available  for  open  competition  when  in  fact  on  all 

          such occasions, a single post cadre should have been 

          filled only by open competition amongst all segments 

          of the society."
53
48.    In  the  light  of  the  above  decision,  we  have  no 


hesitation  in  holding  that  the  post  of  principals  in  each  one 


of  the  aided/affiliated  institution  being  a  single  post  in  the 


cadre is not amenable to any reservation. Question No.(ii) is 


accordingly answered in the affirmative.
49.    Mr.      Patwalia,       learned      counsel     for      the     selected 


candidates then argued that if the High Court was correct in 


holding        that     the     provisions     of     1994       Act     regulating 


reservation of vacancy did not apply to the post of Principals 


in  different  affiliated/aided  Degree  and  Post-Graduate 


colleges,  there  was  no  reason  why  the  undertakings 


furnished  by  the  selected  candidates  to  this  Court  as  a  step 


in  aid  of  their  appointments  should  not  be  discharged  and 


the  selected  candidates  allowed  to  assume  office  on  a 


substantive  basis  subject  to  any  direction  which  the 


competent  Court  may  issue  as  regards  the  validity  of  the
54
selection  process  and  the  consequent  appointments.    He 


urged  the  State  Government  was  not  releasing  in  favour  of 


the     appointed     candidates      the     full     benefits     of     such 


appointments  in the form  of increments  and allowances  etc. 


only  because  the  appointments  made  were  subject  to  the 


outcome of these proceedings and the undertaking furnished 


by  the  candidates.  Alternatively,  he  urged  that  even  if  the 


appointments  made  by  the  State  pursuant  to  the  directions 


of  this  Court  were  to  remain  incohate  and  subject  to  the 


outcome  of  the  writ  petitions  before  the  High  Court  there 


was no reason why dues legitimately payable to the selected 


candidates  should  not  be  directed  to  be  released  on  such 


conditions as the Court deem fit and proper.
50.     On behalf of the State and the management it was per 


contra argued that the release of any further benefits to the 


selected  candidates  could  await  the  disposal  of  the  writ
55
petitions pending before the High Court which disposal could 


be expedited in the interest of all concerned.
51.    The  view  taken  by  the  High  Court  in  so  far  as  the 


applicability  of  reservation  to  single  posts  of  Principal  in  the 


affiliated  and  aided  institutions  has  been  affirmed  by  us 


while  answering  question  No.(ii)  above.  To  that  extent  the 


controversy  is  being  given  a  quietus.  All  the  same  the 


question  whether  there  were  any  malpractices  and  if  so 


whether the selection process could be nullified by the State 


Government  in  exercise  of  its  power  under
Section  6
of  the 


1980  Act  or
Article  154
of  the  Constitution  has  been  left 


open  by  us  in  the  light  of  the  fact  that  the  question 


regarding  legality  of  the  selection  process  is  pending 


adjudication  before  the  High  Court  where  all  parties 


concerned  would  have  an  opportunity  to  present  their 


respective cases. A parallel enquiry at the Government level 


into those questions has been held by us to be unnecessary.
56
There  is,  therefore,  no  final  adjudication  of  the  dispute 


between the parties in so  far as the validity  of  the selection 


process  is  concerned.  Such  being  the  case  we  do  not 


consider  it  necessary  to  relieve  the  appointed  candidates  of 


the  obligations  flowing  from  the  undertaking  given  by  them 


subject  to  which  only  the  appointments  were  allowed  to  be 


made.  This  may  not,  however,  mean  that  the  appointed 


candidates  will  not  be  entitled  to  claim  full  benefit  of  the 


post  admissible  to  the  incumbent  to  which  they  have  been 


appointed  during  the  period  such  appointments  continue  to 


remain     in     force.     The     directions     under     which     the 


appointments  were  allowed  to  be  made  also  did  not  permit 


the State to withhold benefits legitimately flowing from such 


appointments.  If any additional financial benefits by way of 


allowances become payable to the appointed candidates the 


same  must  be  allowed  to  be  drawn  by  them.  Enjoyment  of 


all  such  benefits  would  also  remain  subject  to  the 


undertakings  which  the  appointed  candidates  have  filed
57
before this Court.
52.    An  apprehension  was  expressed  before  us  that  the 


matter may continue languishing in the High Court for a long 


time  especially  because  of  the  failure  of  the  writ  petitioners 


before  the High  Court  in impleading the selected  candidates 


as  parties.    It  was  submitted  that  orders  for  addition  of  the 


selected  candidates  could  be  passed  by  this  Court  to  allay 


any  such  apprehensions.   We see no  impediment in  passing 


appropriate  orders  in  that  regard,  especially  when,  none  of 


the  parties  before  us  were  opposed  to  any  such  orders 


impleading  the  selected  candidates  as  party  respondents  to 


the pending writ petitions before the High Court.
53.    In  the  result  we  dispose  of  these  appeals  with  the 


following directions:
58
(1)    The  impugned  orders  passed  by  the  High  Court  to  the 


extent  the  same  hold  that  the  posts  of  Principals  in 


affiliated/aided colleges are not amenable to reservation are 


affirmed.
(2)    Order dated 12th June, 2007 issued by the Government 


appointing  the  Divisional  Commissioner,  Allahabad  as  an 


Enquiry  Officer  to  hold  an  enquiry  into  the  validity  of 


selection  process  and  the  report  submitted  by  the  said 


Enquiry Officer shall stand quashed and the order passed by 


the High Court to that effect affirmed.
(3)    The  question  whether  the  Government  was  competent 


to direct an enquiry into the validity of the selection process 


under
Section  6
of  the  Uttar  Pradesh  Higher  Education 


Services  Commission  Act,  1980  or  under
Article  154
of  the 


Constitution  is  left  open  in  view  of  the  pendency  of  the  writ 


petitions  challenging  the  validity  of  the  selection  process 


before the High Court.
59
(4)    The  High  Court  shall  in  the  writ  petitions  pending 


before  it  be  free  to  examine  all  issues  regarding  the 


selection  process  in  question  including  the  validity  of  the 


procedure  followed  in  making  the  same.    Depending  upon 


whether  the  High  Court  finds  the  selection  process  to  be 


valid  or  otherwise  the  Government  shall  have  the  liberty  to 


institute  an  enquiry  against  the  members  of  the  State 


Services  Selection  Commission  if  such  enquiry  is  otherwise 


permitted  under  law.  In  case,  however,  the  High  Court 


upholds  the  selection  process  and  dismisses  the  writ 


petitions  there  shall  be  no  room  left  for  the  State 


Government  to  embark  upon  any  further  enquiry  into  the 


matter on the administrative side. The aggrieved party shall 


be  free  to  challenge  the  view  taken  by  the  High  Court  in 


appropriate proceedings in accordance with law.
60
(5)    The selected candidates who have filed undertakings in 


this Court and have been appointed to the posts of Principals 


pursuant to the orders of this Court shall stand impleaded as 


parties  to  each  of  the  writ  petitions  pending  in  the  High 


Court  and  challenging  the  selection  process.    The  selected 


candidates  shall  based  on  this  direction  appear  before  the 


High  Court  on  2.5.2011  without  any  further  notice  in  each 


one  of the petitions  and  file  their  counter-affidavits.   Failure 


on  the  part  of  the  candidates  to  do  the  needful  shall  be 


suitably  dealt  with  by  the  High  Court  who  shall  be  free  to 


proceed ex-parte, against those who fail to comply with this 


direction.
(6)    In  order  to  expedite  the  hearing  of  the  case  the  Chief 


Justice  of  the  High  Court  of  Allahabad  is  requested  to  place 


the  writ  petitions  before  a  Division  Bench  of  the  High  Court 


for  an  early  hearing  and  disposal  as  far  as  possible  before 


the 1st December, 2011.
61
(7)     Pending disposal of the writ petitions by the High Court 


the selected candidates shall be entitled to receive their pay 


and      allowances     including     increments     etc.     otherwise 


admissible  to  the  post  of  Principal  as  if  the  appointments 


were  made  on  a  valid  and  substantive  basis.  Such  benefits 


flowing  from  the  same  shall,  however,  be  subject  to  the 


outcome  of  the  writ  petitions  before  the  High  Court  and  the 


undertakings  furnished  by  the  appointed  candidates  to  this 


Court  which  undertaking  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been 


continued till such time the writ petitions are finally disposed 


of.
54.     The parties shall bear their own costs.
...................................J.

                                          (V.S. SIRPURKAR)
62
...................................J.

                       (T.S. THAKUR)

New Delhi

March 8, 2011
63