[Cites
11
, Cited by
17
]
Supreme Court of India
Ajit Kumar vs State Of Jharkhand & Ors on 10 March, 2011
Equivalent citations: 2011 AIR SCW 1769, 2011 (11) SCC 458, 2011 LAB IC 2093, 2011 (2) AIR JHAR R 441, (2011) 129 FACLR 255, (2011) 3 MAD LJ 209, (2011) 2 PAT LJR 108, (2011) 2 SCT 337, (2011) 3 MAD LW 136, (2011) 2 SERVLR 701, (2011) 3 SCALE 438, (2011) 2 JCR 153 (SC), (2011) 2 SERVLJ 37, (2011) 2 ESC 292, (2011) 3 KCCR 1858, (2011) 3 ALL WC 2913, (2011) 1 CURLR 978, 2011 (1) KLT SN 153 (SC), 2011 (8) ADJ 65 NOC
Author:
Mukundakam Sharma
Bench:
Anil R. Dave
,
Mukundakam Sharma
REPORTABLE


                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION




                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2420    OF 2011

             [Arising out of S.L.P (C) No. 12141 of 2008]




Ajit Kumar                                                          .... Appellant




                                     Versus




 State of Jharkhand & Ors.                                    ...Respondents





                                 JUDGMENT
Dr. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, J.
1.    Leave granted.
2.    This   appeal   is   directed   against   the   judgment   and   order 



dated   02.11.2007   passed   by   the   Jharkhand  High   Court 



dismissing the writ petition filed by the appellant.
3.    The  appellant  herein  was working  as sub-ordinate   Judge 



in   Garhwa,   Jharkhand   when   an   order   was   issued   by   the 



Governor of Jharkhand removing him from service by an order 



issued   on   31.07.2003   on   the   basis   of   a   resolution   of   the   Full
1
Court   of   the  High   Court  of   Jharkhand   recommending   his 



removal from service.
4.    The  appellant  herein   challenged   the   legality   of   the 



aforesaid   order   before   the   Jharkhand  High   Court  by   filing   a 



writ petition contending inter alia that the High Court does not 



have   any   power   to   dispense   with   an   enquiry   as   envisaged   for 



the   purpose   of   removal   of   a   judicial   officer   like   the   appellant 



and   therefore,   the   impugned   order   was   illegal   and   without 



jurisdiction.   It was also submitted that there was no evidence 



on   record   to   show   that   the   appellant   was   guilty   of   any 



misconduct and therefore the order of removal was illegal and 



particularly also because of the fact that no notice was issued 



to   the   appellant   before   his   removal   from   service   thereby 



violating   the   principles   of   natural   justice.     It   was   also 



submitted   that   there   was   a   total   non-application   of   mind   in 



passing   the   impugned   order   of   removal   by   exercise   of   power 



under proviso (b) to
Article 311(2)
of the Constitution of India.
5.    The   aforesaid   submissions   were   considered   by   the  High 



Court in the light of the material available on record.  The High 



Court  found  that  the   appellant   was  promoted   as sub-ordinate 



Judge,   Garhwa   and   that   on   05.05.2003,   the   then   Inspecting
2
Judge   inspected   the   Garhwa   Civil   Court   and   inspected   the 



records relating to the appellant and submitted his confidential 



report   to   the   then   Chief   Justice   of   the   Jharkhand   High   Court 



against the appellant stating that the appellant did not use to 



prepare   judgments   on   his   own,   rather   he   used   to   get   it 



prepared   through   some   body   else   before   delivering   the 



judgments.  It was also found that the then Chief Justice, after 



going through the report, referred the matter to the Full Court 



for considering the appropriate action. On 18.06.2003, the Full 



Court,   after   considering  the   confidential   report  and   the   report 



of   the   Inspecting   Judge,   resolved   that   the   appellant   can   be 



recommended   for   removal   from   the   service,   without   any 



enquiry as it was felt that it was not practicable in the interest 



of   the   institution   to   hold   an   inquiry   since   it   may   lead   to   the 



question of validity of several judgments rendered by him.
6.     Consequently the Full Court recommended for invocation 



of the proviso (b) to
Article 311(2)
of the Constitution of India to 


dispense   with   the   inquiry   as   against   the   appellant   to   remove 



him from service, following which the Governor while exercising 



his   power   issued   the   impugned   order   of   removal   of   the 



appellant   from   the   service   which   was   under   challenge   in   the
3
writ petition before the High Court. The High Court  upheld the 



order of removal passed by the Governor holding that the order 



was passed on the recommendation of the resolution of the Full 



Court   by   invoking   the   proviso   (b)   to
Article  311(2)
of   the 


Constitution   of   India   which   permits   the   dispensation   of   an 



enquiry   on   the   grounds   that   it   is   not   reasonably   practical   to 



hold an  enquiry.    The  High  Court  also held   that the  aforesaid 



exercise  of  power  under
Article  311(2) (b)
of the Constitution of 


India   is   permissible   and   therefore   the   action   taken   removing 



the appellant from service was legal and justified.
7.    Being aggrieved by the aforesaid order the present appeal 



was   filed   on   which   we   have   heard   learned   counsel   appearing 



for the parties.
8.    Within the scheme of the Constitution of India, provisions 



relating to public service may be found in Articles 309, 310 and
311. It is important to note that these provisions (namely Arts.
310   and   311)   afford   protection   to   public   servants   from   being 



dismissed,   removed   or   reduced   in   rank   without   holding   a 



proper inquiry or giving a hearing.
9.
Article   311
provides   for   the   protection   to   public   servant 



against   punitive   action   being   taken   against   them   by   an
4
authority subordinate to one who appointed him. Exceptions to
Article 311
has been provided in clause (a), (b) and (c) to clause 



(2) of
Article 311
itself, which provide that the said Article shall 



not   apply   to   such   employees   who   have   been   punished   for 



conviction in  a  criminal  case,  where  inquiry   is  not  practicable 



to   be   held   for   reasons   to   be   recorded   in   writing   or   where   the 



President or the Governor as the case may be is satisfied that 



such an inquiry is not to be held in the interest of the security 



of the State.
10.    In   order   to   appreciate   the   power   to   be   exercised   under
Article  311
of the Constitution of India it would be appropriate 


to   look   at
Article   310
of   the   Constitution   of   India.   Under   the 



doctrine   of   pleasure,   which   has   been   recognized   under   our 



Constitutional framework, all civil posts under the Government 



are  held   at  the   pleasure   of  the   Government   under   which  they 



are  held  and are  terminable at its will.  The aforesaid  power  is 



what the doctrine of pleasure defines, which was recognized in 



the   United   Kingdom   and   also   received   the   constitutional 



sanction   under   our   Constitution   in   the   light   of
Article   310
of 



the   Constitution   of   India.   However,   it   is   to   be   noticed   that   in 



India the same is subject to other provisions of the Constitution
5
which   include   the   restrictions   imposed   by
Article   310   (2)
and
Article  311(1)   (2).
Therefore,   under   the   Indian   constitutional 


framework,   dismissal   of   civil   servants   must   comply   with   the 



procedure laid down in
Article 311
and
Article 310(1)
cannot be 



invoked   independently   with   the   object   of   justifying   a 



contravention of
Article 311(2).
There is an exception provided 



by way of incorporation of
Article 311 (2)
with sub-clauses (a),
(b) and (c).  No such enquiry is required to be conducted for the 



purposes of dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of persons 



when the same related to dismissal on the ground of conviction 



or where it is not practicable to hold an enquiry for the reasons 



to   be   recorded   in   writing   by   that   authority   empowered   to 



dismiss or removed a person or reduce him in rank or it is not 



practicable   to   hold   an   enquiry   for   the   security   of   the   State.
These three exceptions are well recognized for dispensing with 



an enquiry, which is required to be conducted under
Article 311
of the Constitution of India when the authority takes a decision 



for   dismissal   or   removal   or   reduction   in   rank   in   writing.     In 



other   words,   although   there   is   a   pleasure   doctrine,   however, 



the same cannot be said to be absolute and the same is subject 



to   the   conditions   that   when   a   government   servant   is   to   be 



dismissed or removed from service or he is reduced in rank, a
6
departmental   enquiry   is   required   to   be   conducted   to   enquire 



into   his   misconduct   and   only   after   holding   such   an   enquiry 



and in the course of such enquiry if he is found guilty then only 



a person can be removed or dismissed from service or reduced 



in   rank.   As   stated   herein   such   constitutional   provision   for 



holding   an   enquiry   as   set   out   under
Article  311
of   the 


Constitution   of   India   could   also   be   dispensed   with   under   the 



exceptions provided to
Article 311(2)
of the constitution where 



clause (a) relates to a case where upon a conviction of a person 



by   a   criminal   court   on   certain   charges   he   could   be   removed 



from   service   without   holding   an   enquiry.     Similarly,   under 



clause   (c)   an   enquiry   to   be   held   against   the   government 



employee   could   be   dispensed   with   if   it   is   not   possible   to   hold 



such   an   enquiry   in   the   interest   of   the   security   of   the   State.
Sub-clause (b) on the other hand provides that such an enquiry 



could   be   dispensed   with   by   the   concerned   authority,   after 



recording   reasons,   for   which   it   is   not   practicable   to   hold   an 



enquiry.     The   aforesaid   power   is   an   absolute   power   of   the 



disciplinary   authority   who   after   following   the   procedure   laid 



down   therein   could   resort   to   such   extra   ordinary   power 



provided   it   follows   the   pre-conditions   laid   down   therein 



meaningfully and effectively.
7
11.    In the case in hand, the officer concerned was working as 



sub-ordinate Judge and during the course of inspection by the 



Inspecting   Judge   it   was   found   that   he   did   not   use   to   prepare 



judgments on his own, he used to get it prepared through some 



body   else   before   delivering   the   judgments.   Undisputedly,   the 



inspecting   Judge   submitted   his   report   to   the   Chief   Justice   of 



the High Court. The High Court considered the said report and 



thereafter was of the opinion that it is not possible to hold an 



enquiry   in   the   case   of   the   appellant   and   that   holding   of   such 



enquiry should be dispensed with in view of the fact that if an 



enquiry is held the same may lead to the question of validity of 



several   judgments   rendered   by   the   appellant.     The   aforesaid 



reason recorded by the High Court was a legal and valid ground 



for   not   holding   an   enquiry.   There   was   therefore   also   no 



necessity of giving him any opportunity of hearing as the scope 



of holding an enquiry and giving him an opportunity of hearing 



was specifically dispensed with.
12.    Consequently,   the   High   Court   recommended   the   removal 



of   the   appellant   from   service.     Subsequent   to   that,   the 



Governor decided to invoke the provisions of
Article 311(2) (b)
of 


the   Constitution   of   India   as   holding   of   enquiry   may   lead   to
8
question   of   the   validity   of   several   judgments   delivered   by   the 



appellant.  The procedure and the pre-conditions laid down for 



invoking   the   extra-ordinary   power   under
Article   311(2)   (b)
having   been   complied   with   and   properly   exercised   within   the 



parameters   of   the   provisions,   the   order   passed   by   the 



competent   authority   removing   the   appellant   from   the   services 



cannot be held to be without jurisdiction and power.
13.    The next contention raised by the appellant was that the 



aforesaid   power   under
Article   311(2)   (b)
of   the   Constitution 



could not have been invoked by the High Court.  The aforesaid 



submission   also   cannot  be  accepted  in   view   of  the   fact  that  a 



sub-ordinate   judge   is   also   a   judge   within   the   meaning   of   the 



provision   of
Article   233
of   the   Constitution   of   India   read   with 



the   provisions   of
Articles   235
and
236
of   the   Constitution   of 



India.
14.
Article   233
clearly   lays   down   that   appointments   and 



promotions of district judges in any State is to be made by the 



Governor   of   the   State   in   consultation   with   the   High   Court 



exercising jurisdiction in relation to such State.   The aforesaid 



provision, like Articles 234 - 236, have been incorporated in the 



Constitution   of   India  inter   alia  to   secure   the   independence   of
9
judiciary from the executive and the same deals with the scope 



of separation of power of the three wings of the State.
15.    It cannot be disputed that the power under the aforesaid 



Articles is to be exercised by the Governor in consultation with 



the  High Court.   Under the scheme of the Indian Constitution 



the  High   Court  is   vested   with   the   power   to   take   decision   for 



appointment of the sub-ordinate judiciary under
Articles 234
to 



236 of the Constitution.  The High Court is also vested with the 



power   to   see   that   the   high   traditions   and   standards   of   the 



judiciary  are  maintained  by  the   selection  of  proper  persons  to 



run the district judiciary.  If a person is found not worthy to be 



a   member   of   the   judicial   service   or   it   is   found   that   he   has 



committed a misconduct he could be removed from the service 



by following the procedure laid.   Power could also be exercised 



for such dismissal or removal by following the pre-conditions as 



laid   down   under
Article  311(2)   (b)
of   the   Constitution   of   India.
Even   for   imposing   a   punishment   of   dismissal   or   removal   or 



reduction   in   rank,   the  High   Court  can   hold   disciplinary 



proceedings and recommend such punishments. The Governor, 



alone   is   competent   to   impose   such  punishment   upon  persons 



coming under Articles 233 - 235 read with
Article 311(2)
of the
10
Constitution   of   India.     Similarly,   such   a   power   could   be 



exercised by the  High Court to dispense with an enquiry for a 



reason   to   be   recorded   in   writing   and   such   dispensation   of   an 



enquiry for valid reasons when recommended to the Governor, 



it   is   within   the   competence   of   the   Governor   to   issue   such 



orders   in   terms   of   the   recommendation   of   the   High   Court   in 



exercise  of  power  under
Article  311(2) (b)
of the Constitution of 


India.
16.    Therefore,   we   find   no   reason   to   interfere   with   the   action 



taken   against   the   appellant   nor   we   find   any   infirmity   in   the 



impugned   judgment   and   order   of   the   High   Court.     All   the 



contentions raised are found to be without merit.
17.    Accordingly,  we do not find any merit in this appeal and 



we dismiss the same but  leaving the parties to bear their own 



costs.
.............................................J

                                              [Dr. Mukundakam Sharma]





                                              .............................................J

                                              [Anil R. Dave]



New Delhi,

March 10, 2011.
11