[Cites
16
, Cited by
165
]
Supreme Court of India
B. Premanand & Ors vs Mohan Koikal & Ors on 16 March, 2011
Equivalent citations: AIR 2011 SUPREME COURT 1925, 2011 (4) SCC 266, 2011 AIR SCW 2546, 2011 LAB. I. C. 2166, (2011) 2 SCT 773, (2011) 1 CLR 860 (SC), (2012) 113 CUT LT 400, (2011) 129 FACLR 439, (2011) 2 SERVLR 706, (2011) 2 SERVLJ 56, (2011) 3 SCALE 598, 2011 (2) KCCR SN 128 (SC), 2011 (2) KLT SN 26 (KER)
Bench:
Gyan Sudha Misra
,
Markandey Katju
REPORTABLE

                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2684 OF 2007



B.Premanand & Others                                 ..Appellants

                          versus

Mohan Koikal & Others                                ..Respondents



                          O R D E R
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
This   Appeal   has   been   filed     against   the   impugned 

judgment/order of the Full Bench of the High Court of Kerala 

at Ernakulam dated 24th  May, 2006 passed in Writ Appeal No. 

1774 of 2003.  By that judgment the writ appeal filed by the 

appellants   against   the   judgment   of   a   learned   Single   Judge 

dated 24th September, 2003 has been dismissed.
The facts have been set out in the impugned judgment 

and hence we are not repeating the same here except wherever 

necessary.
The   dispute   in   this   appeal   is   about   the  inter   se 

seniority on the post of Block Development Officer between 

the general category candidates (the respondent Nos.1 to 5 

herein)   and  the   Scheduled  Caste/Scheduled   Tribe  candidates 

(the appellants herein).
The rule relevant for this purpose is Rule 27(c) of 

the Kerala State and Subordinate Services Rules, 1959 (for 


short 'the Rules'), which states:
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2684 OF 2007
-2-
"27(c) Notwithstanding   anything   contained   in 
      clauses   (a)   and   (b)   above,   the   seniority   of   a 
      person appointed to a class, category or grade in 
      a service on the advice of the Commission shall, 
      unless   he   has   been   reduced   to   a   lower   rank   as 
      punishment,   be   determined   by   the  date   of   first 
      effective advice made for his appointment to such 
      class,   category   or   grade   and   when   two   or   more 
      persons   are   included   in   the   same   list   of 
      candidates   advised,   their   relative   seniority 
      shall   be   fixed   according   to   the   order   in   which 
      their names are arranged in the advice list."
A perusal of the above rule shows that seniority is 

to be determined by the date of first effective advice made 

by the Public Service Commission to the State Government for 

appointment.
Admittedly, in the present case, the first effective 

advice   for   the   appellants   was   made   by   the   Kerala   Public 

Service   Commission   on   8.7.1992,   and   they   joined   between 

13.8.1992   and   22.10.1992   whereas   the   advice   for   the 

respondent Nos. 1 to 5 was made on 6.4.1993, and they were 

appointed   as   B.D.O.   On   28.9.1993   and   they   joined   between 

6.10.1993   and  17.11.1993.     Hence,   it  is   obvious  from   Rule 

27(c)   of   the   Rules   that   the   appellants   are   senior   to   the 

private   respondents.     However,   both   the   learned   Single 

Judge   and   Full   Bench   have   held   in   favour   of   the 

respondents.
We have carefully perused the judgments of the Full 

Bench and the learned Single Judge, and we regret we cannot 

agree with them.
The Full Bench and Single Judge have relied on 



CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2684 OF 2007
-3-
equity,   justice  and   good  conscience,   rather  than   law.    We 

are of the opinion that this approach is incorrect.   When 

there is a conflict between law and equity, it is the law 

which   is   to   prevail.     Equity   can   only   supplement   the   law 

when there is a gap in it, but it cannot supplant the law.
In   the   present   case,   Rule   27(c)   clearly   makes   the 

appellants   senior   to   the   respondents   as   the   advice   for 

their   appointments   were   made   prior   to   that   for   the 

respondents.
Mr. V.Shekhar, learned senior counsel, appearing for 

the   private   respondents,   however,   submitted   that   due   to 

certain obstructions for which the private respondents are 

not   to   be   blamed,   their   first   effective   advice   was   sent 

later.     Mr.   Shekhar   submitted   that   the   rank   list   for   the 

respondents was prepared after due selection on 25.11.1987, 

but   the   advice   was   not   sent   by   the   Public   Service 

Commission   till   1993   because   of   a   letter   dated   30.11.1988 

issued by the Chief Secretary, Kerala Government directing 

the Commissioner of Rural Development to start applying the 

ratio in respect of cadre strength instead of the practice 


being   followed.     Since   the   respondents'   rank   list   was 

expiring   on   24.11.1990,   they   apprehended   that   they   would 

not get appointment, and hence they filed writ petition No. 

9161   of   1989   in   the   High   Court.   Ultimately,   the   writ 

petition   was  allowed   and  the   order  of   the  Chief   Secretary 

set aside, but in the meantime, the State Government issued 





CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2684 OF 2007
-4-
notification   dated   5.12.1989   inviting   applications   from 

SC/ST   candidates   for   appointment   as   B.D.Os.   under   the 

special recruitment as per Rule 17A of the Rules. The rank 

list with regard to these SC/ST candidates was published on 

20.6.1992,   and   hence   they   were   appointed   before   the 

candidates   whose   rank   list   was   published   in   1987   (the 

respondents herein).  However, under Rule 27(c) what has to 

be seen for determining seniority is not the date when the 

rank   list   was   published   but   the   date   when   the   advice   was 

sent.
Mr. Shekhar has relied on the decision of this Court 

in Dalilah Sojah vs. State of Kerala & Others, (1998) 9 SCC
641.        That   decision,   in   our   opinion,   is   clearly 

distinguishable   as  it   makes  no   reference  to   Rule  27(c)   of 

the   Rules.     Moreover,   the   observation   therein   that   "when 

two vacancies arose on 6.10.72 the appellant had a right to 

be   appointed   against   one   of   the   vacancies"   is   clearly 


against   the   settled   legal   position   that   even   a   selected 

candidate   has   no   indefeasible   right   to   be   appointed   vide 

Constitution Bench decision in
Shankarsan Dash vs. Union of  

India
, AIR 1991 SC 1612, and several decisions thereafter.
In our opinion, Rule 27(c) of the Rules is plain and 

clear.     Hence,   the   literal   rule   of   interpretation   will 

apply   to   it.     No   doubt,   equity   may   be   in   favour   of   the 

respondents   because   they   were   selected   earlier,   but   as 

observed earlier, if there is a conflict between equity and 

the law, it is the law which must prevail.  The law, which 



CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2684 OF 2007
-5-
is   contained   in   Rule   27(c),   is   clearly   in   favour   of   the 

appellants.
Hence,   we   cannot   accept   the   submission   of   the 

learned   senior   counsel   for   the   private   respondents.     The 

language of Rule 27(c) of the Rules is clear and hence we 

have to follow that language.
In M/s. Hiralal Ratanlal vs. STO, AIR 1973 SC 1034, 

this Court observed:
"In   construing   a   statutory   provision   the   first 
      and foremost rule of construction is the literaly 
      construction.    All  that  the  Court  has  to  see  at 
      the   very   outset   is   what   does   the   provision   say. 
      If   the   provision   is   unambiguous   and   if   from   the 
      provision   the   legislative   intent   is   clear,   the 
      Court  need  not  call  into  aid  the  other  rules  of 
      construction   of   statutes.     The   other   rules   of 
      construction   are   called   into   aid   only   when   the 
      legislative intent is not clear."
(emphasis supplied) 




         It   may   be   mentioned   in   this   connection   that   the 

first and foremost principle of interpretation of a statute 

in   every   system   of   interpretation   is   the   literal   rule   of 

interpretation.  The other rules of interpretation e.g. the 

mischief   rule,   purposive   interpretation   etc.   can   only   be 

resorted to when the plain words of a statute are ambiguous 

or   lead   to   no   intelligible   results   or   if   read   literally 

would nullify the very object of the statute.     Where the 

words   of   a   statute   are   absolutely   clear   and   unambiguous, 

recourse cannot be had to the principles of interpretation 





CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2684 OF 2007
-6-
other   than   the   literal   rule,   vide
Swedish   Match   AB  vs. 

Securities and Exchange Board, India
, AIR 2004 SC 4219.
As 

held   in
Prakash   Nath   Khanna  vs.  C.I.T.
2004   (9)   SCC   686, 

the   language   employed   in   a   statute   is   the   determinative 

factor   of   the   legislative   intent.     The   legislature   is 

presumed to have made no mistake.   The presumption is that 

it intended to say what it has said.
Assuming there is a 

defect or an omission in the words used by the legislature, 

the   Court   cannot   correct   or   make   up   the   deficiency,   vide 

Delhi   Financial   Corporation  vs.  Rajiv   Anand  2004   (11)   SCC
625.     Where   the   legislative   intent   is   clear   from   the 

language,   the   Court   should   give   effect   to   it,   vide
Government   of   Andhra   Pradesh  vs.  Road   Rollers   Owners  

Welfare   Association
2004(6)   SCC   210,   and   the   Court   should 

not seek to amend the law in the garb of interpretation.
As stated by Justice Frankfurter of the U.S. Supreme 

Court   (see   'Of   Law   &   Men   :   Papers   and   Addresses   of   Felix 

Frankfurter') :
"Even within their area of choice the courts are 
      not   at   large.     They   are   confined   by   the   nature 
      and   scope   of   the   judicial   function   in   its 
      particular   exercise   in   the   field   of 
      interpretation.   They   are   under   the   constraints 
      imposed   by   the   judicial   function   in   our 
      democratic   society.     As   a   matter   of   verbal 
      recognition   certainly,   no   one   will   gainsay   that 
      the   function   in   construing   a   statute   is   to 
      ascertain   the   meaning   of   words   used   by   the 
      legislature.  To go beyond it is to usurp a power 
      which   our   democracy   has   lodged   in   its   elected 
      legislature.     The   great   judges   have   constantly 
      admonished   their   brethren   of   the   need   for 
      discipline in observing the limitations.  A judge 




CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2684 OF 2007
-7-
must   not   rewrite   a   statute,   neither   to   enlarge 
      nor   to   contract   it.     Whatever   temptations   the 
      statesmanship   of   policy-making   might   wisely 
      suggest,   construction   must   eschew   interpolation 
      and evisceration.   He must not read in by way of 
      creation.     He   must  not   read  out   except  to   avoid 
      patent nonsense or internal contradiction."
As observed by Lord Granworth in Grundy v. Pinniger, 

(1852) 1 LJ Ch 405:
"   'To   adhere   as   closely   as   possible   to   the 
      literal meaning of the words used, is a cardinal 


      rule from which if we depart we launch into a sea 
      of difficulties which it is not easy to fathom."
In   other   words,   once   we   depart   from   the   literal 

rule,   then   any   number   of   interpretations   can   be   put   to   a 

statutory   provision,  each   Judge  having   a  free   play  to   put 

his   own   interpretation   as   he   likes.     This   would   be 

destructive   of   judicial   discipline,   and   also   the   basic 

principle   in   a   democracy   that   it   is   not   for   the   Judge   to 

legislate   as   that   is   the   task   of   the   elected 

representatives   of   the   people.  Even   if   the   literal 

interpretation results in hardship or inconvenience, it has 

to   be   followed  (see   G.P.   Singh's   Principles   of   Statutory 

Interpretations, 9th Edn. pp 45-49).   Hence departure from 

the   literal   rule   should   only   be   done   in   very   rare   cases, 

and   ordinarily   there   should   be   judicial   restraint   in   this 

connection.
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2684 OF 2007
-8-
As the Privy Council observed (per Viscount Simonds, 

L.C.):
"Again and again, this Board has insisted that in 
      construing   enacted   words   we   are   not   concerned 
      with   the   policy   involved   or   with   the   results, 
      injurious   or   otherwise,   which   may   follow   from 
      giving  effect   to  the   language  used."(see
Emperor 
      v. Benoarilal Sarma
, AIR 1945 PC 48, pg. 53).
As observed by this Court in
CIT vs. Keshab Chandra 

Mandal
, AIR 1950 SC 265:
"Hardship   or   inconvenience   cannot   alter   the 
      meaning   of   the   language   employed   by   the 
      Legislature if such meaning is clear on the face 
      of the statute".
Where   the   words   are   unequivocal,   there   is   no   scope 

for   importing   any   rule   of   interpretation   vide
Pandian  

Chemicals Ltd. vs. C.I.T.
2003(5) SCC 590.
It   is   only   where   the   provisions   of   a   statute   are 

ambiguous   that   the   Court   can   depart   from   a   literal   or 

strict   construction   vide  Narsiruddin  vs.  Sita   Ram   Agarwal 

AIR 2003 SC 1543.
Where the words of a statute are plain 

and   unambiguous   effect   must   be   given   to   them   vide
Bhaiji 

vs. Sub-Divisional Officer, Thandla
2003(1) SCC 692.
No doubt in some exceptional cases departure can be 

made   from  the   literal  rule   of  the   interpretation,  e.g.   by 

adopting a purposive construction, Heydon's mischief rule, 





CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2684 OF 2007
-9-
etc.   but   that   should   only   be   done   in   very   exceptional 

cases.     Ordinarily,   it   is   not   proper   for   the   Court   to 

depart   from   the   literal   rule   as   that   would   really   be 

amending   the   law   in   the   garb   of   interpretation,   which   is 

not permissible vide
J.P. Bansal  vs.  State of Rajasthan &  


Anr.
AIR   2003   SC   1405,  State   of   Jharkhand   &   Anr.    vs. 

Govind   Singh    JT   2004(10)   SC   349   etc..     It   is   for   the 

legislature to amend the law and not the Court vide
State  

of Jharkhand & Anr.   vs.   Govind Singh JT
2004(10) SC 349.
In
Jinia   Keotin  vs.  K.S.   Manjhi
,   2003   (1)   SCC   730,   this 

Court observed :
"   The   Court   cannot   legislate.....under   the   garb 
      of interpretation.......".
Hence,   there   should   be   judicial   restraint   in   this 

connection,   and   the   temptation   to   do   judicial   legislation 

should   be   eschewed   by   the   Courts.     In   fact,   judicial 

legislation is an oxymoron.
In
Shiv   Shakti   Co-operative   Housing   Society  vs. 

Swaraj Developers
AIR 2003 SC 2434, this Court observed:
"It   is  a   well  settled   principle  in   law  that   the 
      Court   cannot   read   anything   into   a   statutory 
      provision   which   is   plain   and   unambiguous.     A 
      statute   is   an   edict   of   the   legislature.     The 
      language   employed   in   a   statute   is   the 
      determinative factor of legislative intent."
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2684 OF 2007
-10-
Where   the   language   is   clear,   the   intention   of   the 

legislature has to be gathered from the language used vide 

Grasim Industries Limited vs. Collector of Customs 2002 (4) 


SCC   297   and  Union   of   India  vs.  Hamsoli   Devi  2002   (7)   SCC
273.
In
Union of India and another  vs.  Hansoli Devi and 

others
2002(7)SCC (vide para 9), this Court observed :
"It is a cardinal principle of construction of a 
        statute that when the language of the statute is 
        plain   and   unambiguous,   then   the   court   must   give 
        effect   to   the   words   used   in   the   statute   and   it 
        would   not   be   open   to   the   courts   to   adopt   a 
        hypothetical   construction   on   the   grounds   that 
        such   construction   is   more   consistent   with   the 
        alleged object and policy of the Act."
The function of the Court is only to expound the law 

and not to legislate vide
District Mining Officer  vs.  Tata  

Iron and Steel Company
2002 (7) SCC 358.   If we accept the 

interpretation   canvassed   by   the   learned   counsel   for   the 

private respondents, we will really be legislating because 

in   the  guise   of  interpretation   we  will   be  really   amending 

Rule 27(c) of the Rules.
In
Gurudevdatta   VKSSS   Maryadit              vs.  State   of  

Maharashtra
AIR 2001 SC 1980, this Court observed :
"It is a cardinal principle of interpretation of 


CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2684 OF 2007
-11-
statute   that   the   words   of   a   statute   must   be 
        understood   in  their   natural,  ordinary   or  popular 


      sense   and   construed   according   to   their 
      grammatical   meaning,   unless   such   construction 
      leads   to   some   absurdity   or   unless   there   is 
      something in the context or in the object of the 
      statute   to   suggest   to   the   contrary.     The   golden 
      rule   is   that   the   words   of   a   statute   must   prima 
      facie be given their ordinary meaning.  It is yet 
      another rule of construction that when the words 
      of the statute are clear, plain and unambiguous, 
      then the Courts are bound to give effect to that 
      meaning, irrespective of the consequences.  It is 
      said   that   the   words   themselves   best   declare   the 
      intention   of   the   law-giver.     The   Courts   are 
      adhered   to   the   principle   that   efforts   should   be 
      made to give meaning to each and every word used 
      by   the   legislature   and   it   is   not   a   sound 
      principle of construction to brush aside words in 
      a statute as being inapposite surpluses, if they 
      can   have   a   proper   application   in   circumstances 
      conceivable   within   the   contemplation   of   the 
      statute".
The   same   view   has   been   taken   by   this   Court   in
S.  

Mehta  vs.  State of Maharashtra
2001 (8) SCC 257 (vide para
34)   and  Patangrao   Kaddam  vs.  Prithviraj   Sajirao   Yadav  

Deshmugh AIR 2001 SC 1121.
The literal rule of interpretation really means that 

there   should   be   no   interpretation.     In   other   words,   we 

should   read   the   statute   as   it   is,   without   distorting   or 

twisting its language.
We   may   mention   here   that   the   literal   rule   of 

interpretation is not only followed by Judges and lawyers, 

but   it   is   also   followed   by   the   lay   man   in   his   ordinary 

life.  To give an illustration, if a person says "this is a 





CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2684 OF 2007
-12-
pencil", then he means that it is a pencil; and it is not 

that   when   he   says   that   the   object   is   a   pencil,   he   means 

that it is a horse, donkey or an elephant.  In other words, 

the   literal   rule   of   interpretation   simply   means   that   we 

mean   what   we   say   and   we   say   what   we   mean.     If   we   do   not 

follow the literal rule of interpretation, social life will 

become   impossible,   and   we   will   not   understand   each   other. 

If we say that a certain object is a book, then we mean it 

is a book.   If we say it is a book, but we mean it is a 

horse,   table   or   an   elephant,   then   we   will   not   be   able   to 

communicate with each other.   Life will become impossible. 

Hence, the meaning of the literal rule of interpretation is 

simply that we mean what we say and we say what we mean.
In this connection, we may also refer to the Mimansa 

Rules   of   Interpretation   which   were   our   traditional 

principles of interpretation used for thousand of years by 

our   jurists.     It   is   deeply   regrettable   that   in   our   law 

courts today these principles are not cited.  Today, our so 

called educated people are largely ignorant about the great 

intellectual   achievements   of   our   ancestors,   and   the 

intellectual   treasury   which   they   have   bequeathed   to   us. 

The Mimansa Rules of Interpretation are one of these great 

achievements, but regrettably they are hardly ever used in 

our law courts.
It may be mentioned that it is not stated anywhere 

in the Constitution of India that only Maxwell's Principles 

of Interpretation can be utilised. We can utilise any 


CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2684 OF 2007
-13-
system   of   interpretation   which     can   help   to   resolve   a 

difficulty.          Principles   of   interpretation   are   not 

principles of law but are only a methodology for explaining 

the   meaning  of   words  used   in  a   text.    There  is   no  reason 

why we should not use Mimansa Principles of Interpretation 

in appropriate occasions.
In   Mimansa,   the   literal   rule   of   interpretation   is 

known   as   the   'Shruti'   or   Abhida'   Principle.     This   is 

illustrated by the Garhapatya nyaya (In Mimansa Maxims are 

known   as   nyayas).     There   is   the   vedic   verse:   "Aindrya 

garhapatyam   upatishthate",   which   means   "By   the   Mantra 

addressed   to   Indra   establish   the   household   fire."     This 

verse   can   possibly   have   several   meanings   viz.   (1)   worship 

Indra   (2)   worship   Garhapatya   (the   household   fire)   (3) 

worship both, or (4) worship either.
However,   since   the   word   'Garhapatyam'   is   in   the 

objective   case,   the   verse   has   only   one   meaning,   that   is, 

'worship Garhapatya'.  The word 'Aindrya' means 'by Indra', 

and hence the verse means that by verses dedicated to Indra 

one should worship Garhapatya.   The word 'Aindrya' in this 

verse   is   a   Linga,   (in   Mimansa   Linga   means   the   suggestive 

power   of   a   word),   while   the            words   'Garhapatyam 

Upatishthate'   are   the   Shruti.     According   to   the   Mimansa 

principles, the Shruti (literal meaning) will prevail over 


the Linga (suggestive power).
It   is   not   necessary   to   go   into   details,   but 

reference   can   be   made   to   the   Book   'Mimansa   Rules   of 

Interpretation' by K.L.Sarkar which is a collection of 

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2684 OF 2007
-14-
Tagore Law Lectures delivered by him in 1909.  According to 

the Mimansa Principles, the Sruti Principle or literal rule 

of   interpretation   will   prevail   over   all   other   principles, 

e.g., Linga, Vakya, Prakarana, Sthana, Samakhya etc. 

         As a result of the above discussion, this appeal is 

allowed and the impugned judgment of the Full Bench of the 

High Court as also the judgment of the learned Single Judge 

are   set   aside   and   the   writ   petition   filed   by   the   private 

respondents before the High Court is dismissed.  No costs.
...........................J.
                                         [MARKANDEY KATJU]




NEW DELHI;                               ...........................J.
MARCH 16, 2011                           [GYAN SUDHA MISRA]