[Cites
3
, Cited by
16
]
Supreme Court of India
R.S. Singh vs U.P. Malaria Nirikshak Sangh & Ors on 9 March, 2011
Bench:
Markandey Katju
,
Gyan Sudha Misra
REPORTABLE

                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5600 OF 2006



R.S.Singh                                            ..Appellant

                          versus

U.P.Malaria Nirikshak Sangh & Others                 ..Respondents




                          O R D E R
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
This   appeal   has   been   filed   against   the   impugned 

interim  orders   dated  13th  November,  2003   and  18th  December, 

2003  passed   by  the   High  Court   of  Judicature   at  Allahabad, 

Bench at Lucknow.
We have perused the said orders.
A direction has been given in the said orders that 

the   Principal   Secretary,   Finance   along   with   the   Principal 

Secretary,   Medical   &   Health,   U.P.   Government   shall   appear 

personally before the High Court on the next date for non-

compliance   of   the   judgment   of   the   High   Court   dated 

15.11.1989/13.12.1989.
This   Court   has   been   repeatedly   observing   that   the 

High   Courts   ordinarily   should   not   summon   the   senior 

officials of the government and that should only be done in 

very   rare   and   exceptional   cases   when   there   are   compelling 


circumstances to do so.
In
State of Gujarat vs. Turabali Gulamhussain 



CIVIL APPEAL NO.
5600 OF 2006
-2-
Hirani, AIR 2008 SC 86, this Court observed:
"6.  A   large  number   of  cases   have  come   up  before 
      this   Court   where   we   find   that   learned   Judges   of 
      various High Courts have been summoning the Chief 
      Secretary, Secretaries to the government (Central 
      and   State),   Director   Generals   of   Police, 
      Director, CBI or BSF or other senior officials of 
      the government.
7.   There   is   no   doubt   that   the   High   Court   has 
      power   to   summon   these   officials,   but   in   our 
      opinion   that   should   be   done   in   very   rare   and 
      exceptional   cases   when   there   are   compelling 
      circumstances   to   do   so.   Such   summoning   orders 
      should  not   be  passed   lightly  or   as  a   routine  or 
      at the drop of a hat.
8. Judges should have modesty and humility. They 
      should  realize   that  summoning   a  senior   official, 
      except   in   some   very   rare   and   exceptional 
      situation,   and   that   too   for   compelling   reasons, 
      is counter productive and may also involve heavy 
      expenses   and   valuable   time   of   the   official 
      concerned.
9.   The   judiciary   must   have   respect   for   the 
      executive   and   the   legislature.   Judges   should 
      realize  that   officials  like   the  Chief   Secretary, 
      Secretary   to   the   government,   Commissioners, 
      District   Magistrates,   senior   police   officials 
      etc.   are   extremely   busy   persons   who   are   often 
      working   from   morning   till   night.   No   doubt,   the 
      ministers lay down the policy, but the actual
      implementation   of   the   policy   and   day   to   day 
      running  of   the  government   has  to   be  done   by  the 
      bureaucrats,  and   hence  the   bureaucrats  are   often 
      working round the clock. If they are summoned by 
      the Court they will, of course, appear before the 
      Court,   but   then   a   lot   of   public   money   and   time 
      may be unnecessarily wasted. Sometimes High Court 
      Judges   summon   high   officials   in   far   off   places 


      like   Director,   CBI   or   Home   Secretary   to   the 
      Government of India not realizing that it entails 
      heavy   expenditure   like   arranging   of   a   BSF 
      aircraft,  coupled   with  public   money  and   valuable 
      time   which   would   have   been   otherwise   spent   on 
      public welfare.
10.   Hence,   frequent,   casual   and   lackadaisical 
      summoning   of   high   officials   by   the   Court   cannot 
      be appreciated. We are constrained to make these 

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5600 OF 2006
-3-
observations because we are coming across a large 
      number   of   cases   where   such   orders   summoning   of 
      high   officials   are   being   passed   by   the   High 
      Courts   and   often   it   is   nothing   but   for   the   ego 
      satisfaction of the learned Judge.
11.   We   do   not   mean   to   say   that   in   no 
      circumstances   and   on   no   occasion   should   an 
      official   be   summoned   by   the   Court.   In   some 
      extreme   and   compelling   situation   that   may   be 
      done,   but   on   such   occasions   also   the   senior 
      official   must   be   given   proper   respect   by   the 
      Court   and   he   should   not   be   humiliated.   Such 
      senior   officials   need   not   be   made   to   stand   all 
      the  time   when  the   hearing  is   going  on,   and  they 
      can be offered a chair by the Court to sit. They 
      need   to   stand   only   when   answering   or   making   a 
      statement in the Court. The senior officials too 
      have   their   self-respect,   and   if   the   Court   gives 
      them respect they in turn will respect the Court. 
      Respect begets respect.
12.   It   sometimes   happens   that   a   senior   official 
      may   not   even   know   about   the   order   of   the   High 
      Court.   For   example,   if   the   High   Court   stays   the 
      order of the Collector of suspension of a class-
      III   or   class   IV   employee   in   a     government 
      department,   and   certified   copy   of   that   order   is 
      left   with   the   Clerk   in   the   office   of   the 
      Collector, it often happens that the Collector is 
      not   even   aware   of   the   order   as   he   has   gone   on 
      tour and he may come to know about it only after 
      a  few   days.  In   the  meantime   a  contempt   of  court 
      notice   is   issued   against   him   by   the   Court 
      summoning him to be personally present in Court. 
      In our opinion, this should not be readily done, 
      because   there   is   no   reason   why   the   Collector 
      would   not   obey   the   order   of   the   High   Court.   In 


      such circumstances, the Court should only request 
      the   government   counsel   to   inform   the   concerned 
      Collector   about   the   earlier   order   of   the   Court 
      which may not have been brought to the notice of 
      the   Collector   concerned,   and   the   High   Court   can 
      again  list   the  case   after  a   week  or   two.  Almost 
      invariably  it   will  be   found  that   as  soon   as  the 
      Collector   comes   to   know   about   the   stay   order   of 
      the High Court, he orders compliance of it.
13.  In   the  present   case,  we   find  no   occasion  or 
      reason for the learned Judge to summon the Chief 
      Secretary   or   the   Law   Secretary   by   the   impugned 
      order.   If   the   learned   Judge   was   concerned   about 
      the lack of enough Stenographers in the office of 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5600 OF 2006
-4-
the   Public   Prosecutor   he   could   have   called   the 
      Advocate General or Govt. Advocate to his chamber 
      and   have   asked   him   to   convey   the   Court's 
      displeasure to the government, but where was the 
      need   to   summon   the   Chief   Secretary   or   Law 
      Secretary   ?   Hence,   we   set   aside   the   impugned 
      interim   order   dated   11.4.2007   and   condone   the 
      delay of 25 days in filing the appeal before the 
      High   Court.   The   High   Court   may   now   proceed   to 
      hear the Criminal Appeal in accordance with law. 
      The appeal is allowed."
Following
the above decision
, this Court in
State of 

U.P. & Ors.   vs.   Jasvir Singh & Ors
, JT 2011(1) SC 446, 

observed :
"7. It is a matter of concern that there is 
      a   growing   trend   among   a   few   Judges   of   the   High 
      Court   to   routinely   and   frequently   require   the 
      presence,   in   court,   of   senior   officers   of   the 
      government   and   local   and   other   authorities, 
      including   officers   of   the   level   of   Secretaries, 
      for perceived non-compliance with its suggestions 
      or   to   seek   insignificant   clarifications.   The 
      power   of  the   High  Court   under
Article   226
is   no 
      doubt   very   wide.   It   can   issue   to   any   person   or 
      authority   or   government,   directions,   orders, 
      writs   for   enforcement   of   fundamental   rights   or 
      for   any   other   purpose.   The   High   Court   has   the 
      power to summon or require the personal presence 
      of   any   officer,   to   assist   the   court   to   render 


      justice or arrive at a proper decision. But there 
      are   well   settled   norms   and   procedures   for 
      exercise of such power.
8.    This court has repeatedly noticed that 
      the   real   power   of   courts   is   not   in   passing 
      decrees   and   orders,   nor   in   punishing   offenders 
      and contemnors, nor in summoning the presence of 
      senior   officers,   but   in   the   trust,   faith   and 
      confidence   of   the   common   man   in   the   judiciary. 
      Such trust and confidence should not be frittered 
      away   by   unnecessary   and   unwarranted   show   or 
      exercise   of   power.   Greater   the   power,   greater 
      should   be   the   responsibility   in   exercising   such 
      power. The normal procedure in writ petitions is 
      to hear the parties through their counsel who are 
      instructed in the matter, and decide them by 



CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5600 OF 2006
-5-
examining                                                 the 
      pleadings/affidavit/evidence/documents/material. 
      Where   the   court   seeks   any   information   about   the 
      compliance   with   any   of   its   directions,   it   is 
      furnished   by   affidavits   or   reports   supported   by 
      relevant documents. Requiring the presence of the 
      senior officers of the government in court should 
      be   as   a   last   resort,   in   rare   and   exceptional 
      cases,   where   such   presence   is   absolutely 
      necessary, as for example, where it is necessary 
      to   seek   assistance   in   explaining   complex   policy 
      or   technical   issues,   which   the   counsel   is   not 
      able   to   explain   properly.   The   court   may   also 
      require   personal   attendance   of   the   officers, 
      where   it   finds   that   any   officer   is   deliberately 
      or with ulterior motives withholding any specific 
      information   required   by   the   court   which   he   is 
      legally bound to provide or has misrepresented or 
      suppressed the correct position.
9.       Where the State has a definite policy 
      or   taken   a   specific   stand   and   that   has   been 
      clearly explained by way of affidavit, the court 
      should   not   attempt   to   impose   a   contrary   view   by 
      way of suggestions or proposals for settlement.  A 
      court   can   of   course   express   its   views   and   issue 
      directions through its reasoned orders, subject to 
      limitations   in   regard   to   interference   in   matters 


      of   policy.   But   it   should   not,   and   in   fact,   it 
      cannot   attempt   to   impose   its   views   by   asking   an 
      unwilling party to settle on the terms suggested 
      by   it.   At   all   events   the   courts   should   avoid 
      directing   the   senior   officers   to   be   present   in 
      court   to   settle   the   grievances   of   individual 
      litigants   for   whom   the   court   may   have   sympathy. 
      The   court   should   realize   that   the   state   has   its 
      own priorities, policies and compulsions which may 
      result in a particular stand.  Merely because the 
      court does not like such a stand, it cannot summon 
      or   call   the   senior   officers   time   and   again   to 
      court or issue threatening show cause notices. The 
      senior officers of the government are in-charge of 
      the   administration   of   the   State,   have   their   own 
      busy   schedules.   The   court   should   desist   from 
      calling them for all and sundry matters, as that 
      would   amount   to   abuse   of   judicial   power.   Courts 
      should   guard   against   such   transgressions   in   the 
      exercise of power."........
(emphasis supplied)




CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5600 OF 2006
-6-
We   are   pained   to   observe   that   despite   our   decision 

in
State   of   Gujarat     vs.     Turabali   Gulamhussain   Hirani
(supra)   many   High   Courts   are   persisting   in   summoning 

executive   officials   where   it   was   not   absolutely   necessary 

to   summon   them.
It   is   possible   that   our   judgment   in   the 

aforesaid   decision   has   not   been   brought   to   the   notice   of 

the   Hon'ble   Judges   in   many   of   the   High   Courts   and   it   may 

also be that the subsequent decision of this Court in
State  

of U.P.   vs.   Jasvir Singh
(supra) has not been brought to 

their   notice.     Consequently   we   are   coming   across   many 

orders   where   High   Court   Judges   are   summoning   executive 

officials   routinely,   casually,   and   sometimes   even   at   the 


drop of a hat.  This is most improper.
We   are   constrained   to   make   these   observations 

because   we  are   repeatedly  coming   across  a   large  number   of 

cases where such orders summoning high officials are being 

passed by the High Courts and often it is only for the ego 

satisfaction of the learned Judge.   Judges should not have 

any   ego   problems.     In   particular,   members   of   the   higher 

judiciary (High Court and Supreme Court) should have great 

modesty and humility. This is because the higher one moves 

in   the   hierarchy   the   greater   become   his   powers.     Hence, 

unless   one   has   modesty   and   humility,   he   may   play   havoc. 

High   Court   Judges   have   tremendous   powers,   but   the   beauty 

lies in not exercising those powers except where absolutely 





CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5600 OF 2006
-7-
necessary.     Flaunting   these   powers   unnecessarily   only 

brings   the   judiciary   into   disrepute.   Some   of   the   greatest 

Judges   have   been   the   most   modest,   e.g.,   Justice   Holmes, 

Judge Learned Hand, Justice Brandeis, Justice Cardozo, Lord 

Atkins, Lord Denning, Justice Venkatachaliah, etc.  

         At the same time, we make it clear that we have also 

come   across   cases   where   orders   of   the   Courts   are 

deliberately   ignored   by   government   officials   which   is   not 

proper.     Democracy   and   the   rule   of   law   requires   that   the 

orders   of   the   Courts   should   be   complied   with   by   the 


executive authorities promptly and with due diligence.   If 

the   executive   authorities   are   dissatisfied   with   a   High 

Court   order,   they   may   appeal   against   that   order   to   the 

Supreme court but it is not proper to ignore such orders.
In   our   opinion,   if   the   High   Court   finds   that   its 

order   has   not   been   complied   with,   it   shall   first   see 

whether   the   order   can   be   complied   with   without   summoning 

any official and for that purpose it can ask the Advocate 

General,   Additional   Advocate   General     or   Chief   Standing 

Counsel  or   some  other   counsel  of   the  State   to  communicate 

to the concerned official that there is some order of the 

Court  which   has  not   been  complied   with.    Ordinarily,  this 

will   suffice   because   we   see   no   reason   as   to   why   the 

executive   authorities   will   not   comply   with   the   orders   of 

the court.  It is only in some extreme case where the High 

Court is convinced that deliberately the order of the court 




CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5600 OF 2006
-8-
has been ignored in a spirit of defiance that it may summon 

the official to explain why the order of the court has not 

been complied with.
The system functions on mutual respect between the 

judiciary   and   the   executive.     While   the   judiciary   must 

respect the executive, at the same time, the executive must 

also   respect   the   judiciary.     If   we   do   not   respect   each 

other, the system will collapse.
In the present case, we are of the opinion that the 

High   Court   was   not   justified   in   summoning   the 

aforementioned officials.
Following the decision in
Turabali
's case(
supra) and  

Jasvir   Singh
's   case   (supra),  this   appeal   is   allowed   and 

consequently   the   direction   of   the   High   Court     summoning 

Principal   Secretary,   Finance   along           with   Principal 

Secretary,   Medical   &   health   is   set   aside.    The   Contempt 

Petition shall be decided on its own merits, in accordance 

with law, expeditiously.
A copy of this order will be sent to the Registrar 

Generals/Registrars   of   all   the   High   Courts,   who   shall 

circulate copies to the learned Judges of the High Courts. 

The Chief Justices of the High Courts, in particular, shall 

bring this judgment to the notice of all Hon'ble Judges of 

the Court, with the request that they follow this decision, 

in letter and spirit.
A copy of this order will also be sent to the 



CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5600 OF 2006
-9-
Cabinet Secretary, Union of India, New Delhi as well as to 

all the Chief Secretaries of all States/Union Territories.
.......................
...J.
                         [MARKANDEY KATJU]




NEW DELHI;        ..........................J.
MARCH 09, 2011    [GYAN SUDHA MISRA]