[Cites
15
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
National Campaign Commtt., C.L., ... vs Union Of India & Ors on 15 March, 2011
Bench:
S.H. Kapadia
,
K.S. Panicker Radhakrishnan
,
Swatanter Kumar
1


                                                                      REPORTABLE


                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                       CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


                CONTEMPT PETITION NOS.42 & 43 of 2011


                                           IN


                  WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.318 OF 2006




National Campaign Committee for Central

Legislation on Construction Labour                                 ... Petitioner


                                        Versus


Union of India & Ors.                                          ... Respondents



                                         WITH



                                 I.A. NO.6 OF 2011


                                           IN


                       WRIT PETITION NO.318 OF 2006





                                      O R D E R
By   this   common   order,   we   shall   deal   with   IA   No.6   in   WP   No.318   of 


2006 and Contempt Petition Nos.41 and 42 of 2011.
In this petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India the petitioner 


inter   alia  prayed   for   issuance   of   a   writ   of   mandamus   or   any   other 


appropriate   writ   or   direction   directing   the   respondents   to   forthwith
2
implement   the
Building   and   Other   Construction   Workers   (Regulations 


of   Employment   and   Conditions   of   Service)   Act,   1996
(hereinafter 


referred   to   as   `the
Act')   and   The   Building   and   Other   Construction 


Workers' Welfare Cess Act, 1996
(hereinafter referred to as `the
Cess 


Act
') in their entirety and, in particular, to establish the Welfare Boards, 


collect   cess,   complete   the   registration   and   grant   benefits   to   the 


beneficiaries   with   immediate   effect   as   per   the   provisions   of   the 


respective Acts.  Further, it is also prayed that the rules and regulations 


relating to the health, safety and welfare of the workers, particularly the 


workers   in   relation   to   building   and   construction   activity,   should   be 


framed and safety equipments including safety harness and safety nets 


should   be   provided   to   them   at   the   place   of   work.    The   petitioner   has 


impleaded the Union of India and all the 36 States/Union Territories as 


party-respondents to the present petition.
This Court, vide its order dated 28th  July, 2006 issued notice to all the 


respondents.  Some of the States and the Union of India had filed their 


replies and after hearing the learned counsel appearing for the parties, 


the Court  passed  various directions  as recorded  in different  orders of 


the   Court   from   time   to   time   and   the   respondents   were   required   to 


comply   with   these   directions.     Vide   order   dated   12th  May,   2008,   a 


direction   was   issued   by   this   Court   to   the   Secretary   of   the   Labour 


Department   of   each   State   requiring   them   to   submit   a   detailed   status 


report within eight weeks as to what steps have been taken by them to
3
implement the provisions of the aforesaid two Acts.  Some of the States 


had submitted their reports and it was evident from the content of those 


reports/affidavits   that   the   provisions   of   both   the   Acts   have   not   been 


substantially complied with.   This resulted in passing of detailed order 


by this Court dated 13th January, 2009.  In this order the Court noticed 


that   under
Section   6
of   the   Act,   the   appropriate   Government   has   to 


appoint   Registration   Officers   and   under
Section   7
of   the   Act   every 


employer   was   to   register   their   establishment   with   the   said   Officer. 


Reference was also made to the obligation on the part of the State to 


constitute the State Welfare Boards under the provisions of
Section 18
the Act.  After noticing that the petitioner had filed a chart indicating the 


steps taken by various Governments,  it was evident that many of the 


Governments   had   not   even   taken   steps   as   per   provisions   of   the   Act. 


The Court, thus, directed as under: -
"We direct the Chief Secretary of the respective States and 

       Secretary (Labour) of each States and the Union Territories 

       to take timely steps as per the provisions of the Act, if not 

       already done. We would like to have the appraisal report in 

       the first week of May as to what steps have been taken in 

       this  regard.     If any of the State  Government  has not done 

       anything  pursuant to the Act, urgent steps are to be taken 

       so   that   the   benefits   of   this   legislation   shall   not   go   waste. 

       Otherwise   the   unorganized   workers   of   the   construction 

       sector will be denied the benefit of the Act."
The   Court   thereafter   passed   various   orders   and   directions   requiring 


respective   States   to   implement   the   provisions   of   the   Act.     Vide   order 


dated 18th January, 2010, the Court noticed the object of the Act as well
4
as   made   reference   to   various   provisions   of   the   Act   and   issued   11 


directions.     These   directions   relate   to   the   constitution   of   the   State 


Welfare   Boards   by   the   respective   States,   holding   of   meetings   by   the 


said   Boards   at   regular   intervals   to   discharge   their   statutory   duties, 


creating   awareness   about   the   benefits   of   the   Act   amongst   the 


beneficiaries   through   media,   appointment   of   Registering   Officers   and 


setting up centres in each district for that purpose.   This Court further 


directed that all contracts with Government shall require registration of 


workers   under   the   Act   to   give   benefits   of   the   Act   to   the   registered 


persons, the CAG to conduct audit of the entire implementation of the 


Act   and   use   of   the   allocated   funds   and   finally   the   Boards   to   prepare 


detailed reports in regard to the implementation.  



Despite   passing   of   these   clear   orders   by   the   Court,   the   provisions   of 


the Act have not been implemented in their entirety.   Further, noticing 


the persisting default, the Court passed an order dated 10th September, 


2010 referring to various provisions of the Act as well as the fact that 


the   Central   Government   has   not   even   issued   any   directions   under
Section   60
of   the   Act,   despite   the   Court's   order   dated   18th  January, 


2010.     Noticing   the   incidences   in   that   regard   the   Court   directed   the 


Central   Government   to   issue   appropriate   directions   to   the   States   as 


well   as   furnish   the   status   report  of   Central   Advisory   Committee  as   to 


what  steps had been taken by them with  regard  to implementation of 


the   provisions   of   the   respective   Acts.         On   subsequent   dates,   the
5
petitioner   submitted   that   the   directions   of   the   Court   as   well   as   the 


provisions   of   the   Act   were   not   being   implemented   by   various   States. 


The   Court,   thus,   granted   liberty   to   the   petitioner,   vide   its   order   dated 


22nd November, 2010, to take out contempt motion State-wise.



The   petitioner   filed   IA   No.   6   of   2011   on   5th  January,   2011   primarily 


praying for filing of additional documents.  In the documents annexed to 


this application there were charts giving details of the States which had 


not   constituted   the   Welfare   Boards,   information   about   constitution   of 


the Cess Collecting Authority, number of workers registered with each 


State and the Schemes framed and implemented.   From the charts, it 


was obvious that most of the States had defaulted in complying with the 


provisions   of   the   Act   and   some   of   them,   in   fact,   had   not   even 


constituted   the   State   Welfare   Boards   despite   the   writ   petition   being 


pending in this Court since the year 2006 and the Court having issued 


various   directions   in   that   regard.     The   petitioner   then   filed   Contempt 


Petition Nos. 42 of 2011 and 43 of 2011.
In   Contempt   Petition   No.   42   of   2011,   the   petitioner   has   averred   that 


Respondent Nos.2 to 10 have failed to take even the preliminary steps 


to constitute the Welfare Boards under
Section 18
of the Act and that 


the   Central   Government   has   neither   issued   any   directions   nor   taken 


any steps in that behalf.  The defaulters, in this regard, are stated to be 


the   Union   Territories   of   Lakshadweep,   Government   of   the   State   of
6
Meghalaya,   Government   of   the   State   of   Nagaland   and   the   Union   of 


India.   The Labour Secretary of the respective States and the Director 


General of Inspection of the Government of India have been impleaded 


as respondents in this petition.
Contempt   Petition   No.   43   of   2011   has   been   filed   primarily   on   the 


ground that the respondents in that petition had willfully disobeyed the 


orders of this Court, particularly the order dated 18th January, 2010 and 


they have not implemented the provisions of the Act.   The Registering 


Officers   have   not   been   appointed   and   the   workers   are   not   being 


registered, resulting in non-implementation of the schemes for grant of 


benefits and the facilities to such workers.  Defaulters in this regard are 


the   States   of   Maharashtra,   Goa,   Himachal   Pradesh,   Rajasthan, 


Uttarakhand,   Uttar   Pradesh,   Manipur   and   the   Union   Territories   of 


Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Chandigarh, Andaman & Nicobar 


Island.     Their   Labour   Secretaries,   Chief   Inspector   of   Inspection   and 


Administrators   have   been   impleaded   as   respondents   in   this   petition 


along with the Director General of Inspection, Government of India.
Having  referred  to  the facts  on  record  and  the  orders  of  this 


Court   passed   from   time   to   time,   we   may   now   refer   to   some   of   the 


provisions of both the statutes which impose a statutory obligation upon 


the  respondents  to  carry   out  their  functions  and  duties  in  accordance 


with   those   provisions   and   the   directions   issued   by   this   Court.     Every
7
State is required to constitute a State Welfare Board in accordance with 


the   provisions   of
Section   18
of   the   Act   which   Board,   upon   its 


constitution, is required to discharge its functions under
Section 22
of 


the   Act.     Some   of   the   defined   functions   are   to   provide   immediate 


assistance to the beneficiaries, sanction loans, give financial assistance 


for education of children and even make payment of maternity benefits 


to   the   female   beneficiaries.     The   appropriate   Government   is   further 


required to appoint Registering officers in terms of
Section 6
of the Act 


and the establishments are required to be registered with that officer as 


per   the   provisions   of
Section   7
.     The   beneficiaries/workers   are   to   be 


registered   with   the   officer   authorized   by   the   Board   in   that   behalf   in 


accordance   with   the   provisions   of
Section   12
of   the   Act.     The 


beneficiaries   are   required   to   make   their   respective   contributions   in 


terms of
Section 16
of the Act.   The consequences of default  both of 


the   beneficiary   and   the   establishment   are   provided   under   the   statute 


itself   and   accordingly   appropriate   steps   are   to   be   taken   by   the 


Registering   Authority   and   the   appropriate   Government,   as   the   case 


may be.
There   shall   be   levy   and   collection   of   cess   at   the   rate   of   and   in   the 


manner specified under
Section 3
of the Cess Act and every employer 


has to furnish returns in accordance with
Section 4
of that Act.  After its 


assessment   in   accordance   with   law,   the   cess   is   to   be   paid   and 


collected.     The   default   in   payment   thereof   bears   the   penal
8
consequences as well as interest has to be paid on delayed payment of 


cess.     Offences   committed   by   the   company   and   other   defaulters   are 


punishable under the provisions of the
Cess Act
.
From the various status reports and the affidavits filed on behalf of the 


respondents,   it   is   clear   that   the   appropriate   Governments   have, 


admittedly,  not   complied   with  their   statutory  duties   and   functions.     All 


the   application/petitions,   subject   matter   of   the   present   order,   are 


supported   by   affidavit   filed   by   the   co-ordinator   of   the   petitioner 


organization.     Number   of   States,   particularly   Union   Territory   of 


Lakshadweep and States of Meghalaya  and Nagaland have not even 


constituted the Welfare Boards in terms of
Section 18
of the Act.   The 


State   of   Uttar   Pradesh   has   completed   the   formality   of   constituting   a 


Board but it is a one man Board instead of having a minimum of three 


or more members as required under
Section 18
of the Act.  The charts 


submitted   by   the   petitioner   further   show   that   no   worker   has   been 


registered   by the  States  of  Assam,  Mizoram,  Sikkim  and  Jammu   and 


Kashmir.     The   appropriate   Governments   and   Registering   Authorities, 


wherever constituted, particularly the respondent State Governments in 


these application/petitions have failed to either collect the requisite cess 


amount or have collected the same inadequately and in any case have 


failed to distribute the benefits and facilities to the beneficiaries.  In this 


manner   and   for   a   considerable   period,   the   respondents   in   these 


application/petitions have, on the one hand disobeyed the orders of this
9
Court   particularly   orders   dated   18.01.2010,   13.08.2010   and 


10.09.2010,   while   on   the   other   they   have   failed   to   perform   their 


statutory obligations under the provisions of the Act despite directions 


of   this   Court.     Default   on   the   part   of   these   respondents,   thus,   has 


persisted   over   a   long   period   and   the   Court   is   left   with   no   alternative 


except to pass appropriate directions/orders in accordance with law on 


these two contempt petitions.  In the Circumstances afore-referred, we 


hereby   issue   notice   to   show   cause   why   proceedings   under   the
Contempt   of   Courts   Act,   1971
be   not   initiated   against   all   the 


respondents in Contempt Petition Nos.42 and 43 of 2011.   Further we 


are   also   compelled   to   direct   the   following   officers   of   the 


respective/appropriate Governments to be present in the Court on the 


next date of hearing :
1.         The Labour Secretary, 

           Ministry of Labour,

           Sharam Shakti Bhavan,

           Rafi  Marg, New Delhi.
2.         The Labour Secretary Lakshadweep,

           U.T. of Lakshadweep,

           Karvarthi - 682 555.
3.         The Labour Secretary, Meghalaya,

           Government of Meghalaya,

           Department of Labour.
Rilang Building,

           Shillong - 793 001.
4.         The Labour Secretary, Nagaland,
10
Government of Nagaland,

         Department of Labour.
Civil Secretariat,

         Kohima - 797 001.
5.       Director General of Inspection,

         Government of India,

         Mansingh Road,

         New Delhi - 110 011.
With the above orders, we direct these application/petitions to 


be listed after four weeks.   Notice to all the respondents returnable on 


the same date.
..........................................CJI.





                                            ..............................................J.

                                            [K.S. Panicker Radhakrishnan]  





                                                                                     ....
.........................................J.

                                            [Swatanter Kumar]

New Delhi,

March 15, 2011