[Cites
21
, Cited by
67
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Karnataka & Ors vs G.V. Chandrashekhar on 25 February, 2009
Equivalent citations: 2009 AIR SCW 2346, 2009 LAB IC 1731, 2009 (3) AIR KANT HCR 363, (2009) 5 MAD LJ 612, (2009) 4 SERVLR 43, (2009) 1 CURLR 874, (2009) 3 SCALE 653, (2009) 121 FACLR 521, (2009) 2 LAB LN 405, (2009) 2 SCT 101, (2009) 3 ALLMR 424 (SC), (2009) 4 KCCR 2513, (2009) 3 SERVLJ 93, 2009 (4) SCC 342
Author:
S.B. Sinha
Bench:
Cyriac Joseph
,
S.B. Sinha
REPORTABLE

                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.1187 OF 2009
                 (Arising out of SLP(c) No.24124 of 2004)

STATE OF KARNATAKA & ORS.                        ... APPELLANTS

                                VERSUS

SRI G.V. CHANDRASHEKAR                           ... RESPONDENT

WITH
C.A. Nos.1190-1247/2009 @ SLP(C) No.24985-25042/2004
C.A. No.1265/2009 @ SLP(C) No.12223/2006
C.A. Nos.1266-1270/2009 @ SLP(C) Nos.15115-15119/2004
C.A. Nos1271-1274/2009 @ SLP(C) Nos.16273-16276/2004
C.A. Nos1275-1283/2009 @ SLP(C) Nos.17865-17873/2004
C.A. Nos1284-1291/2009 @ SLP(C) Nos. 16527-16534/2004
C.A. No1292/2009 @ SLP(C) No.11893/2006
C.A. No.1293/2009 @ SLP(C) No.11894/2006


                            JUDGM ENT

S.B. Sinha, J.
1.    Leave granted.
2.    These appeals involving similar questions of law and facts were taken

up for hearing together and are being disposed of by this common judgment.
2
The short question which arises for consideration herein is as to whether the

respondents herein having been appointed on an ad-hoc basis could be

treated to have been regularized in their services.
We may notice individual fact of the matters before us:-
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(C) No.24124/2004

      Respondent herein was appointed as a Typist on 5.9.1985 and worked

for more than ten years without break in service.                Under these

circumstances, he sought direction from appellants herein to regularize his

services with all consequential benefits.     His claim was denied by the

appellants. Aggrieved by the same, respondent approached the Karnataka

Administrative Tribunal which by its order dated 22.9.2003 directed that the

question of regularization of the services of the respondent be examined by

the appellants with reference to records and decision thereon be taken

within 90 days thereafter. Challenging the order of the tribunal, appellant-
State approached the High Court which by its order dated 9.8.2004

dismissed the same and directed the appellant to consider the claim of the

respondent in terms of the judgment in Premakala Shetty vs. Common

Cadre Committee.
3
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP(C) No.24985-25042/2006



      Respondents were working in the Forest Department for over ten

years as gate watchman, driver, wireless operator and computer operator

and sought for regularization of their services from the authorities of the

department with all consequential benefits. Their claim was denied by the

appellants. Aggrieved by the same, respondents approached the Karnataka

Administrative Tribunal which by its order dated 24.9.2003 directed that the

question of regularization of the services of the respondent be examined by

the appellants with reference to records and decision thereof may be taken

within 90 days.    Challenging the order of the Tribunal appellant State

approached the High Court which dismissed the writ petition by reason of

an order dated 21.7.04 and directed the appellant to consider the claim of

the respondents following the judgment in Premakala Shetty vs. Common

Cadre Committee.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(C) No.12223/2006
4
Respondents were appointed as sweepers on 1.4.1980 and 29.4.1978

respectively and sought for regularization of their services with all

consequential benefits as they had put in more than ten years of service.
Their claim was denied by the appellants. Aggrieved by the same,

respondents approached the Karnataka Administrative Tribunal which by its

order dated 10.1.2003 directed that regularization of the respondents be

made from the day they had completed 10 years of continuous service, as

against the posts on which they had been irregularly recruited, with all

consequential benefits. Challenging the order of the Tribunal, appellant

State approached the High Court, by filing a writ petition which dismissed

the writ petition by reason of an order dated 5.1.2004 directing it to consider

the claim of the respondents following the judgment in
State of Karnataka,

By Secretary Forest Department, Bagalore and Ors. vs. T.B. Manjunath

and Ors.
and Premakala Shetty vs. Common Cadre Committee.
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP(C) Nos.15115-15119/2004

      Respondents herein have been working as Forest Watchers for more

than 10 years, having been inducted as daily wagers. As their applications
5
for regularization was rejected by the appellants, they approached the

Karnataka Administrative Tribunal which by its order dated 19.12.2002

directed that in the event of respondents filing fresh application with

supportive evidence, their claim for regularization may be taken up and

appropriate orders thereon may be passed within three months from the date

of representation.   Challenging the order of the Tribunal, appellant State

approached the High Court by filing a writ petition which rejected the writ

petition by reason of an order dated 28.1.04 and directing it to consider the

claim of the respondents following the judgment in
State of Karnataka, By

Secretary Forest Department, Bangalore and Ors. vs. T.B. Manjunath and

Ors.
and Premakala Shetty vs. Common Cadre Committee.
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP(C) Nos.16273-16276/2004

      Respondents have been working as mazdoors and sought for

regularization of their services having completed more than 10 years of

service. As their applications for regularization was denied by the

appellants, they approached the Karnataka Administrative Tribunal which

by its order dated 24.7.2003 directed that the claim of the respondents be
6
examined and decided within 90 days from the date of receipt of the order

and in the event of having completed 10 years of service, on any subsequent

date, on any day prior to or after the date of filing of the application, the

appellants shall consider the claim for regularization.     Challenging the

order of the Tribunal, appellant State approached the High Court, by way of

writ which was rejected by reason of order dated 28.1.2004 and directing it

to consider the claim of the respondents following the judgment in
State of

Karnataka, By Secretary Forest Department, Bangalore and Ors. vs. T.B.

Manjunath and Ors.
and Premakala Shetty vs. Common Cadre Committee.
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP(C) Nos.17865-17873/2004



      Respondents were appointed as forest watcher, literate Assistant and

Board Driver and sought for regularization of their services with all

consequential benefits. As their applications for regularization was denied

by the appellants, they approached the Karnataka Administrative Tribunal

which ordered on 11.11.2002 that the appellants shall consider the claim of

the respondents but subject to verification of the claim of their having
7
completed ten years of continuous service be examined and decided within

90 days from the date of receipt of the order. Challenging the order of the

Tribunal, appellant State approached the High Court by way of a writ

petition which was rejected by reason of order dated 12.1.2004 and

directing it to consider the claim of the respondents in terms of judgment in
State of Karnataka, By Secretary Forest Department, Bangalore and Ors. vs.

T.B. Manjunath and Ors.
and Premakala Shetty      vs.   Common Cadre

Committee and directed to comply with the order within two months.
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP(C) Nos. 16527-16534/2004



      Respondents herein were appointed as first division assistant,

stenographer, watchman and have approached the KAT for their

regularization of their services. The Tribunal by way of order dated 23.9.03

allowed the application of the respondents herein and directed compliance

within 90 days from the date of receipt of the order. Challenging the order

of the Tribunal, appellant State approached the High Court by way of a writ
8
petition which was rejected by reason of order dated 17.3.2004 and

directing it to consider the claim of the respondents.

Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(C) No.11893/2006

      Respondent's husband was appointed a Driver on 30.5.1980 and he

died on 15.8.92. Respondent sought for regularization of his services with

all consequential benefits. The Tribunal on 10.7.2003 relying upon the

decision on Bidu vs. State of Karnataka (ILR 2000 KAR 2405) directed to

pass appropriate orders within 90 days, including consideration of claim for

compassionate appointment.
Challenging the order of the Tribunal the

appellants came up with a writ petition before the High Court which was

dismissed by reason of order dated 9.11.2004, placing reliance on
State of

Karnataka vs. Karnataka Casual and Daily
rated workers' Union (ILR 2001

KAR 1178), Himachal Pradesh vs. Suresh Kumar [(AIR 1986 SC 1565] and

Randhir Singh, D.S. Nakara, Dharwad etc.



Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(C) No.11894/2006

      Respondents herein were appointed as literate assistant, hand-pump

helper, typist and sought for regularization of services with all
9
consequential benefits from their authorities. The High Court dismissed the

writ petition filed by the State, which challenged the Tribunal's order dated

09.06.2003 and directed the appellant to consider the claim of the

respondents.
3.    Indisputably, a Constitution Bench of this Court in Secretary. State of

Karnataka & ors. vs. Umadevi (3) & ors. [(2006) 4 SCC 1] having regard to

the provisions contained in
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution of India

opined that any appointment made in contravention of any recruitment rules

framed in terms of the proviso appended to
Article 309
of the Constitution

of India would be wholly illegal and without jurisdiction, holding:
"26. With respect, why should the State be
               allowed to depart from the normal rule and indulge
               in temporary employment in permanent posts?
               This Court, in our view, is bound to insist on the
               State making regular and proper recruitments and
               is bound not to encourage or shut its eyes to the
               persistent transgression of the rules of regular
               recruitment. The direction to make permanent--
               the distinction between regularisation and making
               permanent, was not emphasised here--can only
               encourage the State, the model employer, to flout
               its own rules and would confer undue benefits on a
               few at the cost of many waiting to compete. With
               respect, the direction made in para 50 (of SCC) of
               Piara Singh [(1992) 4 SCC 118] is to some extent
               inconsistent with the conclusion in para 45 (of
10
SCC) therein. With great respect, it appears to us
that the last of the directions clearly runs counter
to the constitutional scheme of employment
recognised in the earlier part of the decision.
Really, it cannot be said that this decision has laid
down the law that all ad hoc, temporary or casual
employees engaged without following the regular
recruitment procedure should be made permanent.
33. It is not necessary to notice all the decisions
of this Court on this aspect. By and large what
emerges is that regular recruitment should be
insisted upon, only in a contingency can an ad hoc
appointment be made in a permanent vacancy, but
the same should soon be followed by a regular
recruitment and that appointments to non-available
posts should not be taken note of for
regularisation. The cases directing regularisation
have mainly proceeded on the basis that having
permitted the employee to work for some period,
he should be absorbed, without really laying down
any law to that effect, after discussing the
constitutional scheme for public employment.
43. Thus, it is clear that adherence to the rule of
equality in public employment is a basic feature of
our Constitution and since the rule of law is the
core of our Constitution, a court would certainly
be disabled from passing an order upholding a
violation of
Article 14
or in ordering the
overlooking of the need to comply with the
requirements of
Article 14
read with
Article 16
of
the Constitution. Therefore, consistent with the
scheme for public employment, this Court while
laying down the law, has necessarily to hold that
unless the appointment is in terms of the relevant
rules and after a proper competition among
qualified persons, the same would not confer any
right on the appointee. If it is a contractual
appointment, the appointment comes to an end at
the end of the contract, if it were an engagement or
appointment on daily wages or casual basis, the
same would come to an end when it is
discontinued. Similarly, a temporary employee
11
could not claim to be made permanent on the
expiry of his term of appointment. It has also to be
clarified that merely because a temporary
employee or a casual wage worker is continued for
a time beyond the term of his appointment, he
would not be entitled to be absorbed in regular
service or made permanent, merely on the strength
of such continuance, if the original appointment
was not made by following a due process of
selection as envisaged by the relevant rules. It is
not open to the court to prevent regular
recruitment at the instance of temporary
employees whose period of employment has come
to an end or of ad hoc employees who by the very
nature of their appointment, do not acquire any
right. The High Courts acting under
Article 226
of
the Constitution, should not ordinarily issue
directions for absorption, regularisation, or
permanent continuance unless the recruitment
itself was made regularly and in terms of the
constitutional scheme. Merely because an
employee had continued under cover of an order
of the court, which we have described as "litigious
employment" in the earlier part of the judgment,
he would not be entitled to any right to be
absorbed or made permanent in the service. In
fact, in such cases, the High Court may not be
justified in issuing interim directions, since, after
all, if ultimately the employee approaching it is
found entitled to relief, it may be possible for it to
mould the relief in such a manner that ultimately
no prejudice will be caused to him, whereas an
interim direction to continue his employment
would hold up the regular procedure for selection
or impose on the State the burden of paying an
employee who is really not required. The courts
must be careful in ensuring that they do not
interfere unduly with the economic arrangement of
its affairs by the State or its instrumentalities or
lend themselves the instruments to facilitate the
bypassing of the constitutional and statutory
mandates."
12
While saying so, however, the Constitution Bench with a view to give

some relief to those employees in respect of           whom the process of

regularization had been completed and by way of one time measure, held as

under :-
"53. One aspect needs to be clarified. There may be
           cases where irregular appointments (not illegal
           appointments) as explained in S.V. Narayanappa,
           R.N. Nanjundappa and B.N. Nagarajan and referred
           to in para 15 above, of duly qualified persons in duly
           sanctioned vacant posts might have been made and
           the employees have continued to work for ten years or
           more but without the intervention of orders of the
           courts or of tribunals. The question of regularisation
           of the services of such employees may have to be
           considered on merits in the light of the principles
           settled by this Court in the cases abovereferred to and
           in the light of this judgment. In that context, the
           Union of India, the State Governments and their
           instrumentalities should take steps to regularise as a
           one-time measure, the services of such irregularly
           appointed, who have worked for ten years or more in
           duly sanctioned posts but not under cover of orders of
           the courts or of tribunals and should further ensure
           that regular recruitments are undertaken to fill those
           vacant sanctioned posts that require to be filled up, in
           cases where temporary employees or daily wagers are
           being now employed. The process must be set in
           motion within six months from this date. We also
           clarify that regularisation, if any already made, but
           not sub judice, need not be reopened based on this
           judgment, but there should be no further bypassing of
           the constitutional requirement and regularising or
           making permanent, those not duly appointed as per
           the constitutional scheme."
13
4.    The question which arises for consideration herein is as to whether

having regard to the aforementioned law as laid down by the Constitution

Bench the respondents herein are entitled to any relief or not.
Mr. Sanjay R. Hegde, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

appellants and Mr. Girish Ananthamurthy, learned counsel appearing on

behalf of the respondents, on the other hand, relied upon two orders passed

by this Court; one dated 17.11.2006 in Civil Appeal No. 3956 of 2001 -

Madanbi vs. Director of Horticulture & Ors., wherein all appeals have been

allowed following Umadevi (supra), whereas in order dated 19.2.2007 in

Civil Appeal No.838 of 2007 - State of Karnataka & Anr. vs. S.K. Halappa

& Ors. another Division Bench of this Court directed as under::-
"We have perused the order passed by the High
             Court dated 29.3.2004 whereby the Division
             Bench has directed that Government will consider
             each case independently in accordance with law,
             within ten weeks from today for regularization.
             Suffice it to say that Respondent No.1 (herein)
             was appointed on a daily wages and he continued
             for quite some time and thereafter he filed writ
             petition before the High Court for regularization
             on permanent basis with all consequential benefits.
             The High Court directed the State to consider the
             case of Respondent No.1 in accordance with law
14
and within 10 weeks. Aggrieved against this
            order, the State is in appeal by way of special
            leave petition. We have heard learned counsel for
            the parties and perused the record. In our view,
            the point involved in this appeal has been decided
            by this Court in the case of Secretary, State of
            Karnataka and Others vs. Uma Devi(3) and
            Others, (2006) 4 SCC 1. The regularization has
            now been held to be bad in law. But certain
            observations have been made in the aforesaid
            judgment. Therefore, in the fitness of things, we
            set aside the order of the High Court and remit the
            matter back to the High Court for fresh
            consideration in light of the law laid down in Uma
            Devi's case (supra)"
5.    Our attention has also been drawn to the order dated 9.6.2003 passed

by the learned single judge of the High Court of Karnataka, Bangalore in

Writ Petition Nos. 10332-10342 of 2003 (S-Reg) by Mr. Anatha Murthy,

which reads as under:-
"1. The respondents are directed to consider the
            cases of the petitioners who have completed ten
            years of continuous service for regularization
            subject to the petitioners fulfilling the eligibility
            criteria for the posts to which they seek
            regularization.
2.    In the event of any of the petitioners being
            found not to have the qualification for
            regularization to the post in which they are
15
presently working, they may be considered for
               regularization to the next lower post for which
               they have qualification or they should be given a
               reasonable time for acquiring the qualification.
               The respondents may not dispense their services
               merely on the ground that they do not have
               necessary qualification.
3.     The respondents may also consider the
               request of the petitioners for extension of regular
               pay scales applicable to regular employees
               discharging the same functions, wherever such pay
               scales are not extended already.
4.    The respondents are given three months
               time from today to comply with the direction
               given above."
6.       Interpretation of Para 53 in Umadevi's case (supra) had come up for

consideration before this Court in a large number of decisions.
In
Mineral Exploration Corpn. Employees' Union vs. Mineral

Exploration Corpn. Ltd.
[(2006) 6 SCC 310] wherein this Court, while

following Umadevi (3) (supra), invoked para 53 of the said decision to

opine:
"39. We, therefore, direct the Tribunal to decide
               the claim of the workmen of the Union strictly in
16
accordance with and in compliance with all the
            directions given in the judgment by the
            Constitution Bench in
Secy., State of Karnataka v.
            Umadevi
(3) (supra) and in particular, paras 53
            and 12 relied on by the learned Senior Counsel
            appearing for the Union. The Tribunal is directed
            to dispose of the matter afresh within 9 months
            from the date of receipt of this judgment without
            being influenced by any of the observations made
            by us in this judgment. Both the parties are at
            liberty to submit and furnish the details in regard
            to the names of the workmen, nature of the work,
            pay scales and the wages drawn by them from time
            to time and the transfers of the workmen made
            from time to time, from place to place and other
            necessary and requisite details. The above details
            shall be submitted within two months from the
            date of the receipt of this judgment before the
            Tribunal."
However, in National Fertilizers Ltd. & ors. vs. Somvir Singh (2006)

5 SCC 493, this Court held:-
"23. The contention of the learned counsel
            appearing on behalf of the respondents that the
            appointments were irregular and not illegal, cannot
            be accepted for more than one reason. They were
            appointed only on the basis of their applications.
            The Recruitment Rules were not followed. Even
            the Selection Committee had not been properly
            constituted. In view of the ban on employment, no
            recruitment was permissible in law. The
            reservation policy adopted by the appellant had
17
not been maintained. Even cases of minorities had
             not been given due consideration.
xxx          xxx         xxx
25. Judged by the standards
laid down by
this
             Court in the aforementioned decisions, the
             appointments of the respondents are illegal. They
             do not, thus, have any legal right to continue in
             service.
26. It is true that the respondents had been
             working for a long time. It may also be true that
             they had not been paid wages on a regular scale of
             pay. But, they did not hold any post. They were,
             therefore, not entitled to be paid salary on a
             regular scale of pay. Furthermore, only because
             the respondents have worked for some time, the
             same by itself would not be a ground for directing
             regularization of their services in view of the
             decision of this Court in Umadevi(3)"
In
State of M.P. & Ors. vs. Lalit Kumar Verma
[(2007) 1 SCC 575],

this Court held:-
"20. The decision to implement the judgment
             was evidently subject to the decision of this Court.
             But, the Special Leave Petition is barred by
             limitation. The question, inter alia, which arises
             for consideration before us is as to whether we
             should condone the delay or allow the respondent
             to continue to occupy the permanent post.
18
21. The legal position somehow was uncertain
            before the decision rendered by the Constitution
            Bench of this Court in Uma Devi (3) (supra). It
            has categorically been stated before us that there
            was no vacant post in the department in which the
            respondent could be reinstated. The State had also
            adopted a policy decision regarding regularisation.
            The said policy decision has also no application in
            the case of the respondent. Even otherwise, it
            would be unconstitutional being hit by
Article 16
of the Constitution of India."
In
Punjab Water Supply & Sewerage Board vs. Ranjodh Singh
& ors.,

[(2007) 2 SCC 491], this Court held:-
"19. In the instant case, the High Court did not
            issue a writ of mandamus on arriving at a finding
            that the respondents had a legal right in relation to
            their claim for regularization, which it was
            obligated to do.      It proceeded to issue the
            directions only on the basis of the purported policy
            decision adopted by means of a circular letter and,
            as noticed hereinbefore, even a policy decision
            adopted in terms of
Article 162
of the Constitution
            of India in that behalf would be void. Any
            departmental letter or executive instruction cannot
            prevail over statutory rule and constitutional
            provisions. Any appointment, thus, made without
            following the procedure would be ultravires."
19
In
Postmaster General, Kolkata & Others vs.          Tutu Das (Dutta
)

[(2007) 5 SCC 317], this Court held as under:-
"20. The statement of law contained in para 53 of
            Umadevi (3)cannot also be invoked in this case.
            The question has been considered by this Court in
            a large number of decisions. We would, however,
            refer to only a few of them.
21.
In
Punjab Water Supply & Sewerage Board v.
            Ranjodh Singh
referring to paras 15, 16 and 53 of
            Umadevi (3) this Court: (SCC pp. 500-01 paras
            17-18)
                   "17. A combined reading of the
                   aforementioned paragraphs would clearly
                   indicate that what the Constitution Bench
                   had in mind in directing regularisation was
                   in relation to such appointments, which
                   were irregular in nature and not illegal ones.
18. Distinction between irregularity and
                   illegality is explicit. It has been so pointed
                   out in
National Fertilizers Ltd. v. Somvir
                   Singh
in the following terms: (SCC pp. 500-
                   01, paras 23-25)
                          `23. The contention of the learned
                          counsel appearing on behalf of the
                          respondents that the appointments
                          were irregular and not illegal, cannot
                          be accepted for more than one reason.
They were appointed only on the
                          basis of their applications. The
                          Recruitment Rules were not followed.
Even the Selection Committee had
                          not been properly constituted. In view
                          of the ban on employment, no
                          recruitment was permissible in law.
The reservation policy adopted by the
                          appellant had not been maintained.
20
Even cases of minorities had not been
given due consideration.
24. The Constitution Bench thought
of directing regularisation of the
services only of those employees
whose appointments were irregular as
explained in State of Mysore v. S.V.
Narayanappa, R.N. Nanjundappa v.
T. Thimmiah and B.N. Nagarajan v.
State of Karnataka wherein this Court
observed: [Umadevi (3) case, SCC
p. 24, para 16]

       "16.
In
B.N. Nagarajan v. State
       of Karnataka
this Court clearly
       held that the words `regular' or
       `regularisation' do not connote
       permanence and cannot be
       construed so as to convey an
       idea of the nature of tenure of
       appointments. They are terms
       calculated to condone any
       procedural irregularities and
       are meant to cure only such
       defects as are attributable to
       methodology       followed    in
       making the appointments."
25. Judged by the standards
laid down
by
this Court in the aforementioned
decisions, the appointments of the
respondents are illegal. They do not,
thus, have any legal right to continue
in service.' "
(See also State of M.P. v. Yogesh
Chandra Dubey and State of M.P. v.
Lalit Kumar Verma.)
21
The controversy, if any, in our opinion, has been given a quietus by a

three Judge Bench of this Court in Official Liquidator vs. Dayanand & ors.
[(2008) 10 SCC 1], holding:
"75. By virtue of
Article 141
of the Constitution,
            the judgment of the Constitution Bench in
            Secretary, State of Karnataka v. Uma Devi (3) is
            binding on all the courts including this Court till
            the same is overruled by a larger Bench.
The ratio
            of the Constitution Bench judgment has been
            followed by different two-Judges Benches for
            declining to entertain the claim of regularization of
            service made by ad hoc/temporary/ daily
            wage/casual employees or for reversing the orders
            of the High Court granting relief to such
            employees - Indian Drugs and Pharamaceuticals
            Ltd. v. Workmen [(
2007) 1 SCC 408], Gangadhar
            Pillai v. Siemens Ltd.
[(
2007) 1 SCC 533],
            Kendriya Vidyalaya          Sangathan      v. L.V.
            Subramanyeswara
[(
2007) 5 SCC 326], Hindustan
            Aeronautics Ltd. v. Dan Bahadur Singh
[(2007) 6
            SCC 207].
However, in
U.P. SEB v. Pooran
            Chand Pandey
(2007) 11 SCC 92 on which
            reliance has been placed by Shri Gupta, a two-
            Judges Bench has attempted to dilute the
            Constitution Bench judgment by suggesting that
the said decision
cannot be applied to a case where
            regularization has been sought for in pursuance of
Article 14
of the Constitution and that the same is
            in conflict with the judgment of the seven-Judges
            Bench in
Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India
[(1978)
            1 SCC 248]."
22
The Court noticed that in
U.P. SEB v. Pooran Chandra Pandey
(supra), this Court held:
"18. We may further point out that a seven-Judge
             Bench decision of this Court in
Maneka Gandhi v.
             Union of India
has held that reasonableness and
             non-arbitrariness is part of
Article 14
of the
             Constitution. It follows that the Government must
             act in a reasonable and non-arbitrary manner
             otherwise
Article 14
of the Constitution would be
             violated.
Maneka Gandhi
case is a decision of a
             seven-Judge Bench, whereas Umadevi (3) case is a
             decision of a five-Judge Bench of this Court. It is
             well settled that a smaller Bench decision cannot
             override a larger Bench decision of the Court.
No
             doubt,
Maneka Gandhi
case does not specifically
             deal with the question of regularisation of
             government employees, but the principle of
             reasonableness in executive action and the law
             which it has
laid down, in
our opinion, is of
             general application."
(Emphasis supplied)


      However, the said observations were not called for.


      The Bench noticed several judgments/orders of different Benches

taking a view contrary to Uma Devi (3) (supra) to opine that those cases
23
were illustrative of non-adherence to the rule of judicial discipline which is

sine qua non for sustaining the system. It was opined:
"90. We are distressed to note that despite
             several pronouncements on the subject, there is
             substantial increase in the number of cases
             involving violation of the basics of judicial
             discipline. The learned Single Judges and Benches
             of the High Courts refuse to follow and accept the
             verdict and law laid down by coordinate and even
             larger Benches by citing minor difference in the
             facts as the ground for doing so. Therefore, it has
             become necessary to reiterate that disrespect to
             constitutional ethos and breach of discipline have
             grave impact on the credibility of judicial
             institution and encourages chance litigation. It
             must be remembered that predictability and
             certainty is an important hallmark of judicial
             jurisprudence developed in this country in last six
             decades and increase in the frequency of
             conflicting judgments of the superior judiciary
             will do incalculable harm to the system inasmuch
             as the courts at the grass root will not be able to
             decide as to which of the judgments lay down the
             correct law and which one should be followed.
91. We may add that in our constitutional set up
             every citizen is under a duty to abide by the
             Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions.
             Those who have been entrusted with the task of
             administering the system and operating various
             constituents of the State and who take oath to act
             in accordance with the Constitution and uphold
24
the same, have to set an example by exhibiting
            total commitment to the Constitutional ideals. This
            principle is required to be observed with greater
            rigour by the members of judicial fraternity who
            have been bestowed with the power to adjudicate
            upon important constitutional and legal issues and
            protect and preserve rights of the individuals and
            society as a whole. Discipline is sine qua non for
            effective and efficient functioning of the judicial
            system. If the Courts command others to act in
            accordance with the provisions of the Constitution
            and rule of law, it is not possible to countenance
            violation of the constitutional principle by those
            who are required to lay down the law.
92.
In the light of what has been stated above,
            we deem it proper to clarify that the comments and
            observations made by the two-Judges Bench in
U.P. State Electricity Board v. Pooran Chandra
            Pandey
(supra) should be read as obiter and the
            same should neither be treated as binding by the
            High Courts, Tribunals and other judicial foras nor
            they should be relied upon or made basis for
            bypassing the principles
laid down by
the
            Constitution Bench."
We feel bound by the observations made therein. Initial recruitment

of the respondents being wholly illegal and contrary to the constitutional
25
scheme of this country, the impugned judgment of the High Court cannot be

upheld. It is set aside accordingly.
7.    In the light of the decision in Uma Devi (3) (supra) and the

interpretation given to Para 53 therein by this Court in the abovementioned

judgments, the appeals are allowed.            However, in the facts and

circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
.............................J.
                                                     [S.B. Sinha]


                                                     .............................J.
                                                    [Cyriac Joseph]
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY 25, 2009