[Cites
26
, Cited by
59
]
Supreme Court of India
Bhagyalakshmi And Ors vs United Insurance Co.Ltd. & Anr on 6 May, 2009
Equivalent citations: 2009 AIR SCW 5325, 2009 (7) SCC 148, (2009) 43 OCR 658, (2009) 4 TAC 393, (2009) 7 SCALE 550, (2009) 76 ALL LR 822, (2009) 4 PUN LR 760, (2010) 2 RECCIVR 384, (2009) 81 ALLINDCAS 237 (SC), (2009) 3 ALL WC 3000, 2009 (3) SCC (CRI) 321
Author:
S.B. Sinha
Bench:
Mukundakam Sharma
,
S.B. Sinha
REPORTABLE

                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3335            OF 2009
                 (Arising out of SLP (C) No.10136 of 2007)


Bhagyalakshmi and others                                 ... Appellants

                           Versus

United Insurance Co. Ltd. and another etc.               ... Respondents




                               JUDGMENT
S.B. SINHA, J.
Leave granted.
1.    Liability of an insurance company for death of a person travelling in a

private car arises for consideration in this appeal.
2.    Before, however, adverting to the said question, we may notice the

fact of the matter.
M.N. Lingappa (hereinafter referred to as `the deceased') while

travelling in a private car owned by one Shri K.N. Narayanajoshi,
respondent No.7 herein met with an accident and succumbed to the resulting

injuries. Appellants are his heirs and legal representatives.
They    filed   an   application    for   grant    of   compensation       of

Rs.1,50,00,000/- (Rupees one crore fifty lakhs) before the Motor Accident

Claims Tribunal, Tumkur (for short `the Tribunal') in terms of
Section 166
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (for short `the Act').
3.    The learned Tribunal by its order, awarded a compensation of

Rs.98,64,428/-.
4.    Respondent No. 1 preferred an appeal thereagainst before the High

Court of Karnataka at Bangalore. The claimants also filed cross-objections.
5.    The core question that arose for consideration before the High Court

was as to whether the insurance policy covered the risk of the passenger

travelling in the car. The High Court by its impugned judgment answered

the said question in favour of the 1st respondent.
6.    Mr. P.S. Patwalia, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the

appellants would contend :-
2
i)    The insurance policy being a comprehensive one, the High

            Court committed a serious error in opining that the risk of a

            passenger travelling in the car was not covered thereunder.
ii)   Having regard to the fact that the second proviso appended to
Section 95(1)(b)
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 was deleted

            by the Parliament in the 1988 Act, the liability of a passenger

            in a private vehicle must also be included in the policy in terms

            of the provisions of the 1988 Act.
7.    Mr. P.R. Sikka, learned counsel on behalf of respondent No.1-

Insurance Company would contend that the respondent having not paid the

requisite amount of premium, the High Court judgment is unassailable.
8.    The policy in question was in respect of a private car. It was valid for

the period 6.10.1995 and 5.10.1996, the relevant clauses whereof are as

under :
"SECTION       II   -   LIABILITY     TO     THIRD
            PARTIES
1. Subject to the limits of liability as laid down in
            the schedule hereto the company will indemnify
            the insured in the event of an accident caused by or
            arising out of the use of the vehicle against all
            sums which the insured shall become legally liable
            to pay in respect of:
3
i) death of or bodily injury to any person including
           occupants carried in the vehicle (provided such
           occupants are not carried for hire or reward) but
           except so far as it is necessary to meet the
           requirements of
Motor Vehicles Act
, the Company
           shall not be liable where such death or injury arises
           out of and in the course of the employment of such
           person by the insured.
(ii) Damage to property other than property
           belonging to the insured or held in trust or in the
           custody or control of the insured."
9.    We may notice the nature of the policy, which is Private Car `B'

Policy:
" PRIVATE CAR `B' POLICY

           Whereas the insured by a proposal and declaration
           dated as stated in the Schedule which shall be the
           basis of this contract and is deemed to be
           incorporated herein has applied to the Company
           for the insurance contained and has paid the
           premium mentioned in the schedule as
           consideration for such insurance in respect of
           accidental loss or damage occurring during the
           period of insurance.
NOW THIS POLICY WITNESSETH:
That subject to the Terms Exceptions and
           Conditions contained herein or endorsed or
           expressed hereon;
SECTION I. LOSS OR DAMAGE

           The Company will indemnify the insured against
           loss or damage to the vehicle insured hereunder
           and / or its accessories whilst thereon
4
a.   By fire explosion self ignition or lightning.

b.   By burglary housebreaking or theft.

c.   By riot and strike.
d.   By earthquake (fire and shock damage).

e.   By Flood, Typhoon, Tempest, Hurricane, Storm,
     Inundation, Cyclone, Hailstorm, and Frost.

f.   By accidental external means.

g.   By malicious act.
h.   By terrorist activity.
i.   whilst in transit by road, rail, inland, waterway lift,
     elevator or air.
j.   By landslide rockslide.
Subject to a deduction for depreciation at the rates
            mentioned below in respect of parts replaced :
1. For all rubber, nylon, plastic parts, tyres and
            tubes, batteries
- 50%
2. For all parts made of glass           - Nil
3. For all other parts
            Age of Motor Car            0% of depreciation
            Upto 6 months                           Nil
            Between 6 months and 1 year             5%
            Between 1 year and 2 years              10%
            Between 2 years and 3 years             15%
            Between 3 years and 4 years             25%
            Between 4 years and 5 years             35%
            Between 5 years and 6 years             40%
            Between 10 years                        50%
5
The company shall not be liable to make any
            payment in respect of :-
a) Consequential loss, depreciation, wear and tear,
            mechanical and electrical break down, failures or
            breakages;
b) Damage to tyres and tubes unless the Motor Car
            is damaged at the same time when the liability of
            the company shall be limited to 50% of the cost of
            replacement, and
c) any accidental loss or damage suffered whilst
            the insured or any person driving with the
            knowledge and consent of the insured is under the
            influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs.
In the event of the Motor car being disabled by
            reason of loss or damage covered under this Policy
            the Company will bear the reasonable cost of
            protection and removal to the nearest repairers and
            of redelivery to the insured but not exceeding in all
            Rs. 1000/- in respect of any one accident.
The insured may authorise the repair of the Motor
            car necessitated by damage for which the
            Company may be liable under this Policy provided
            that :
a) the estimated cost of such repair does not
            exceed Rs.500/-;
b) the Company is furnished forthwith with a
            detailed estimate of the cost; and
c) the insured shall give the Company every
            assistance to see that such repair is necessary and
            the charge reasonable."
10.   Indisputably the amount of premium paid was Rs.605/-. It is in two

parts. Part I refers to `Own Damage' - premium on vehicle and non-
6
electrical accessories wherefor a sum of Rs.400/- was paid, apart from the

basic premium for the liability `fire and thief' amounting to Rs.160/- In

addition a sum of Rs.15/- was paid towards `Increased Third Party Property

Limit'.
11.   Whereas the contention of Mr. Patwalia is that as the liability to third

party covers death of or bodily injury to any person including occupants

carried in the vehicle, the contention of Mr. Sikka is that only a sum of

Rs.15/- having been paid towards third party limit, the policy cannot be said

to have covered the life of passenger traveling in the car.
12.   The business of insurance is governed by the
Insurance Act, 1938
(for

short `the 1938 Act'), Section 64-VB whereof reads as under :-
"Section 64VB - No risk to be assumed unless
             premium is received in advance
                    (1) No insurer shall assume any risk in India
             in respect of any insurance business on which
             premium is not ordinarily payable outside India
             unless and until the premium payable is received
             by him or is guaranteed to be paid by such person
             in such manner and within such time as may be
             prescribed or unless and until deposit of such
             amount as may be prescribed, is made in advance
             in the prescribed manner.
(2) For the purposes of this section, in the
             case of risks for which premium can be ascertained
             in advance, the risk may be assumed not earlier
7
than the date on which the premium has been paid
            in cash or by cheque to the insurer.
Explanation.--Where the premium is tendered by
            postal money order or cheque sent by post, the risk
            may be assumed on the date on which the money
            order is booked or the cheque is posted, as the case
            may be.
(3) Any refund of premium which may
            become due to an insured on account of the
            cancellation of a policy or alteration in its terms
            and conditions or otherwise shall be paid by the
            insurer directly to the insured by a crossed or order
            cheque or by postal money order and a proper
            receipt shall be obtained by the insurer from the
            insured, and such refund shall in no case be
            credited to the account of the agent.
(4) Where an insurance agent collects a
            premium on a policy of insurance on behalf of an
            insurer, he shall deposit with, or despatch by post
            to, the insurer, the premium so collected in full
            without deduction of his commission within
            twenty-four hours of the collection excluding bank
            and postal holidays.
(5) The Central Government may, by rules,
            relax the requirements of sub-section (1) in respect
            of particular categories in insurance policies."
13.   Part II-B of the 1938 Act provides for Tariff Advisory Committee and

Control of Tariff Rates. Section 64-UC provides for power of the Advisory

Committee to regulate rates, advantages etc. Sub-section (4) of
Section 64-
UC makes the decision of the Advisory Committee final. Sub-section (5) of

Section 64-UC provides that where an insurer is guilty of breach of any rate,
8
advantage, term or condition fixed by the Advisory Committee, he shall be

deemed to have contravened the provisions of the Act.
14.   The policy in question is a package policy. The contract of insurance

if given its face value covers the risk not only of a third party but also of

persons travelling in the car including the owner thereof.
15.   The question is as to whether the policy in question is a

comprehensive policy or only an Act policy.
We may, however, notice that in
National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Jugal

Kishore
, [ (1988) 1 SCC 626 ], this Court opined :-
"6. We have accordingly perused the photostat
             copy of the policy to ascertain whether risk for any
             amount higher than the amount of Rs 20,000
             contemplated by clause (b) aforesaid was covered.
             Our attention was invited by learned counsel for
             the respondents to the circumstance that at the
             right-hand corner on the top of p.1 of the policy
             the words "Commercial Vehicle Comprehensive"
were printed. On this basis and on the basis that
             the premium paid was higher than the premium of
             an "act only" policy it was urged by the learned
             Counsel for the respondents that the liability of the
             appellant was unlimited and not confined to Rs
             20,000 only. We find it difficult to accept this
             submission. Even though it is not permissible to
             use a vehicle unless it is covered at least under an
             "act only" policy it is not obligatory for the owner
             of a vehicle to get it comprehensively insured. In
             case, however, it is got comprehensively insured a
             higher premium than for an "act only" policy is
             payable depending on the estimated value of the
9
vehicle. Such insurance entitles the owner to claim
reimbursement of the entire amount of loss or
damage suffered up to the estimated value of the
vehicle calculated according to the rules and
regulations framed in this behalf. Comprehensive
insurance of the vehicle and payment of higher
premium on this score, however, do not mean that
the limit of the liability with regard to third party
risk becomes unlimited or higher than the statutory
liability fixed under sub-section (2) of
Section 95
of the Act. For this purpose a specific agreement
has to be arrived at between the owner and the
insurance company and separate premium has to
be paid on the amount of liability undertaken by
the insurance company in this behalf. Likewise, if
risk of any other nature for instance, with regard to
the driver or passengers etc. in excess of statutory
liability, if any, is sought to be covered it has to be
clearly specified in the policy and separate
premium paid therefor. This is the requirement of
the tariff regulations framed for the purpose.
Coming to the photostat copy of the policy in the
instant case it would be seen that
Section 2
thereof
deals with liability to third parties. Sub-section (1)
minus the proviso thereto reads as hereunder:
"(1) Subject to the Limits of Liability the
   Company will indemnify the insured against all
   sums including claimant's cost and expenses
   which the insured shall become legally liable to
   pay in respect of--
(i) death or bodily injury to any person
   caused by or arising out of the use (including
   the loading and or unloading) of the motor
   vehicle
(ii) damage to property caused by the use
   (including the loading and/or unloading) of the
   motor vehicle." "
10
16.   There, however, the schedule of the policy indicated the limits of the

liability of the amount paid. However, in the present case the schedule of

the policy does not indicate the limits of liability. It does not indicate

exclusion of any person. It takes any person including `insured'. Such

person indisputably would come within the purview of the liability to third

party to which we have referred to heretobefore.
There being no limitation with regard to coverage, in terms of the

provisions of the Act, no upper limit is fixed. Liability of the insurer, thus

unlike the old Act, may not be limited.
17.
In
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Rajni Devi
, [ (2008) 5 SCC 736 , this

Court has held :-
"7. It is now a well-settled principle of law that in
             a case where third party is involved, the liability of
             the insurance company would be unlimited.
             Where, however, compensation is claimed for the
             death of the owner or another passenger of the
             vehicle, the contract of insurance being governed
             by the contract qua contract, the claim of the
             insurance company would depend upon the terms
             thereof. The Tribunal, in our opinion, therefore,
             was not correct in taking the view that while
             determining the amount of compensation, the only
             factor which would be relevant would be merely
             the use of the motor vehicle."
11
18.   Mr. Patwalia has relied upon the decision of this Court in
Amrit Lal

Sood v. Kaushalya Devi Thapar
, [ (1998) 3 SCC 744 ], wherein upon

considering the meaning of the terms, `comprehensive policy' and

`comprehensive insurance' it was held :-
"8. Thus under Section II(1)(a) of the policy the
            insurer has agreed to indemnify the insured against
            all sums which the insured shall become legally
            liable to pay in respect of death of or bodily injury
            to "any person". The expression "any person"
would undoubtedly include an occupant of the car
            who is gratuitously travelling in the car. The
            remaining part of clause (a) relates to cases of
            death or injury arising out of and in the course of
            employment of such person by the insured. In such
            cases the liability of the insurer is only to the
            extent necessary to meet the requirements of
Section 95
of the Act. Insofar as gratuitous
            passengers are concerned there is no limitation in
            the policy as such. Hence under the terms of the
            policy, the insurer is liable to satisfy the award
            passed in favour of the claimant. We are unable to
            agree with the view expressed by the High Court
            in this case as the terms of the policy are
            unambiguous."
19.   Even in
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Cheruvakkara Nafeessu
,

[ (2001) 2 SCC 491], a Division Bench of this Court distinguished
Jugal

Kishore
(supra) and following
Amrit Lal
(supra) held as under :-:
"9. The reliance of the learned counsel for the
            appellant on
New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v.
            Shanti Bai
and
National Insurance Co. Ltd. v.
            Jugal Kishore
is of no help to him inasmuch as in
12
those cases the effect of judgment in
Amrit Lal
            Sood
case has not been considered.
In
Shanti Bai
case the Court was dealing with the effect of a
            comprehensive policy vis-`-vis the liability of the
            insurer in respect of third-party risk on the basis of
            the estimated value of the vehicle and found that
            the limit of liability with regard to third-party risk
            does not become unlimited or higher than the
            statutory liability only on account of entering into
            a comprehensive policy. It was pointed out that the
            comprehensive policy only entitles the owner to
            claim reimbursement of the entire amount of loss
            or damage suffered up to the estimated value of the
            vehicle which did not mean the limit of liability
            with regard to third-party risk becoming unlimited
            or higher than the statutory liability.
In the case of
National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Jugal Kishore
this
            Court observed that the liability under the policy
            could not exceed the statutory liability under
Section 95
of the Act only on the ground that the
            insured had undertaken comprehensive insurance
            of the vehicle. The payment of higher premium on
            that score, however, did not mean that the limit of
            liability with regard to third-party risk became
            unlimited or higher than the statutory liability
            fixed under sub-section (2) of
Section 95
of the
            Act."
20.   We may also notice that in
New India Assurance Co. v. Satpal Singh
,

[ (2000) 1 SCC 237 ],this Court held as under :-
"10. The proviso to the said sub-section is not
            relevant here as it pertains to death or bodily injury
            to the employee mentioned therein. Sub-section (2)
            provides that a policy of insurance shall cover any
            liability incurred in respect of any accident, up to
            the following limits, namely:
"(a) save as provided in clause (b), the
                amount of liability incurred;
13
(b) in respect of damage to any property of a
               third party, a limit of rupees six thousand:
Provided that any policy of insurance issued
               with any limited liability and in force,
               immediately before the commencement of this
               Act, shall continue to be effective for a period
               of four months after such commencement or till
               the date of expiry of such policy whichever is
               earlier."
Hence, under sub-section (2), there is no upper
            limitation for the insurer regarding the amount of
            compensation awarded in respect of death or
            bodily injury of a victim of the accident. It is,
            therefore, apparent that the limit contained in the
            old Act has been removed and the policy should
            insure the liability incurred and cover injury to any
            person including owner of the goods or his
            authorised representative carried in the vehicle.
            The legislature has also taken care of even the
            policies which were in force on the date of
            commencement of the Act by specifically
            providing that any policy of insurance containing
            any limit regarding the insurer's liability shall
            continue to be effective for a period of four months
            from commencement of the Act or till the date of
            expiry of such policy, whichever is earlier. This
            means, after the said period of four months, a new
            insurance policy consistent with the new Act is
            required to be obtained."
21.   However, with regard to goods carriage vehicle
Satpal Singh
(supra)

was overruled in
New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Asha Rani
, [ (2003) 2

SCC 223 ], wherein it was observed :-
"23. The applicability of the decision of this Court
            in
Mallawwa v. Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd.2
in
14
this case must be considered keeping that aspect in
             view.
Section 2(35)
of the 1988 Act does not
             include passengers in goods carriage whereas
Section 2(25)
of the 1939 Act did as even
             passengers could be carried in a goods vehicle.
             The difference in the definitions of "goods
             vehicle" in the 1939 Act and "goods carriage" in
             the 1988 Act is significant. By reason of the
             change in the definitions of the terminology, the
             legislature intended that a goods vehicle could not
             carry any passenger, as the words "in addition to
             passengers" occurring in the definition of goods
             vehicle in the 1939 Act were omitted.
             Furthermore, it categorically states that "goods
             carriage" would mean a motor vehicle constructed
             or adapted for use "solely for the carriage of
             goods". Carrying of passengers in a "goods
             carriage", thus, is not contemplated under the 1988
             Act."
22.   Submission of Mr. Patwalia is that whereas carrying of passenger in a

goods carriage vehicle is prohibited, it is not so in a private car. Learned

counsel may be correct but we must notice that in a large number of

decisions rendered by this Court it has been held that a passenger would not

be a third party within the meaning of the provisions of the Act. We may

notice some of them.
23.
In
United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Tilak Singh
, [ (2006) 4 SCC

404], it was held :-
"21.
In our view, although the observations made
             in
Asha Rani
case were in connection with
             carrying passengers in a goods vehicle, the same
             would apply with equal force to gratuitous
15
passengers in any other vehicle also. Thus, we
            must uphold the contention of the appellant
            Insurance Company that it owed no liability
            towards the injuries suffered by the deceased
            Rajinder Singh who was a pillion rider, as the
            insurance policy was a statutory policy, and hence
            it did not cover the risk of death of or bodily injury
            to a gratuitous passenger."
This Court in
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Jhuma Saha
, [(2007) 9

SCC 263 ] has held :-
"10. The deceased was the owner of the vehicle.
            For the reasons stated in the claim petition or
            otherwise, he himself was to be blamed for the
            accident. The accident did not involve motor
            vehicle other than the one which he was driving.
            The question which arises for consideration is that
            the deceased himself being negligent, the claim
            petition under
Section 166
of the Motor Vehicles
            Act, 1988 would be maintainable.
11. Liability of the insurer Company is to the
            extent of indemnification of the insured against the
            respondent or an injured person, a third person or
            in respect of damages of property. Thus, if the
            insured cannot be fastened with any liability under
            the provisions of the
Motor Vehicles Act
, the
            question of the insurer being liable to indemnify
            the insured, therefore, does not arise."
In
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Sudhakaran K.V.
, [(2008) 7 SCC

428] this Court has opined :-
"17. This Court in a catena of decisions has
            categorically held that a gratuitous passenger in a
16
goods carriage would not be covered by a contract
             of insurance entered into by and between the
             insurer and the owner of the vehicle in terms of
Section 147
of the Act. (See
New India Assurance
             Co. Ltd. v. Asha Rani
."
It was held :-
"25. The law which emerges from the said
             decisions, is: (i) the liability of the insurance
             company in a case of this nature is not extended to
             a pillion-rider of the motor vehicle unless the
             requisite amount of premium is paid for covering
             his/her risk; (ii) the legal obligation arising under
Section 147
of the Act cannot be extended to an
             injury or death of the owner of vehicle or the
             pillion-rider; (iii) the pillion-rider in a two-wheeler
             was not to be treated as a third party when the
             accident has taken place owing to rash and
             negligent riding of the scooter and not on the part
             of the driver of another vehicle."
[See also
New India Assurance Company Ltd. v. Sadanand Mukhi

and others
, (2009) 1 SCALE 252 ].
24.   Before this Court, however, the nature of policies which came up for

consideration were Act polices. This Court did not deal with a package

policy. If the Tariff Advisory Committee seeks to enforce its decision in

regard to coverage of third party risk which would include all persons

including occupants of the vehicle and the insurer having entered into a

contact of insurance in relation thereto, we are of the opinion that the matter

may require a deeper scrutiny.
17
25.   We may notice that the effect of package policy in relation to three

wheelers, came up before the Delhi High Court in United India Insurance

Company,     (MAC App. No.980/2006 etc. decided on 31st May, 2007)

wherein it has been opined :-
"33.
Tilak Singh
's case (Supra) holds that the
            proposition of law in
Asha Rani
's Case (Supra) in
            relation to goods vehicle shall apply with equal
            force to 'gratuitous passenger' in any other vehicle
            also.
As noted herein above
Tilak Singh
's case
            (supra) related to a statutory policy.
It would be
            pertinent to mention here that
Tilak Singh
's case
            (supra) related to the death of a pillion rider on a
            two wheeler scooter and his legal representatives
            had claimed compensation against the registered
            owner of the scooter and the insurer. The two
            wheeler scooter was insured for third party risk for
            the period 07/03/1989 to 06/03/1990 and the
            accident had taken place on 31.10.1989. The Court
            found that the Insurance Policy covering the risks
            did not contain an endorsement of IMT 70
            covering liability to pillion riders and, therefore, in
            that context held that the Insurer Company was not
            liable to indemnify the insured and pay
            compensation to the legal representatives of the
            deceased. I may indicate here that IMT-70 is no
            longer in operation and as per
Section 3
of the
            present tariffs even a pillion rider is covered by
            Third Party risks unless he happens to be an
            employee of the insured for which extra premium
            is to be required to be paid.
34. To summarize, where the policy is a statutory
            policy or an act only policy, a gratuitous passenger
            in a private vehicle would not be covered for a
            bodily injury or death under the policy of
18
insurance. But, nothing prevents the insurance
             company from issuing a wider coverage i.e.
             assuming a greater risk liability. As in the instant
             case, where the policy is a Package
             Policy for Private Cars, terms of the policy and the
             applicable conditions as notified by the Tariff
             Advisory Committee would have to be looked into
             to determine the risk liability assumed by the
             insurer."
26.   The question as to whether gratuitous passengers travelling in a

private car or pillion riders carried on two-wheelers are automatically

covered under a package policy/comprehensive policy came up also before

The Madras High Court recently in
Royal Sundaram Insurance Co. Ltd. v.

V. A. Meenakshi and Ors. (C.M.A No.
312 of 2009). The Division Bench

of the Court, after observing the judgment of this court and various High

Courts on the subject, dismissing the appeal filed by the insurance company

and affirming the order of the Tribunal awarding compensation of Rs. 19.10

Lakh to the legal representatives of the deceased passenger of the insured

vehicle, held that:
"29. Therefore it is clear from the Act itself, the
            words of the policy and the decision in
Amritlal
            Sood
's case (supra) that a Comprehensive Policy
            covers the risk of a gratuitous passenger to the
            extent of the liability incurred. We may imagine
            what will happen in a case where the owner is
            driving his car covered by a Comprehensive Policy.
            He is accompanied by his wife and children. There
            is an accident as in this case. The wife and children
            are permanently disabled by the injuries. If we
19
agree with the appellant Insurance Company, those
            pathetic claimants will not get any compensation.
            The law never intended this to happen. That is why
            the TAC explicitly came out with the clarificatory
            Circular in 1978. We cannot forget that the words
            used are "third party" and "Comprehensive", so we
            cannot deny this relief to the third party occupant in
            a car covered by a Comprehensive Policy."
[See also the decisions of High Court of Karnataka in
National
Insurance Company Limited v. Pattabhi Ramaiah and Ors. (M.F.A No.
5921 and 7045 of 2006 (M.V)) and Delhi High Court in United India
Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Alka Mangla and Ors. (AIR 2008 Delhi 201)].
27.   We, therefore, are of the opinion that the matter requires consideration

by a Larger Bench. We order accordingly. Let the papers be placed before

the learned Chief Justice for appropriate orders.
...................................J.
                                              [ S.B. Sinha ]



                                              ...................................J.
                                              [(Dr.) Mukundakam Sharma]
New Delhi
May 06, 2009
20