[Cites
21
, Cited by
60
]
Supreme Court of India
Nawab Shaqafath Ali Khan & Ors vs Nawab Imdad Jah Bahadur & Ors on 5 March, 2009
Equivalent citations: 2009 AIR SCW 2289, 2009 (5) SCC 162, (2009) 1 MARRILJ 493, (2009) 3 SCALE 934, (2009) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 161, (2009) 3 ALL RENTCAS 639
Author:
S.B. Sinha
Bench:
S.B. Sinha
,
Cyriac Joseph
REPORTABLE

                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                CIVIL APPEAL NOs. 846-847 OF 2001


Nawab Shaqafath Ali Khan & Ors.                   ...Appellants

                                    Versus

Nawab Imdad Jah Bahadur & Ors.                    ...Respondents


                                  WITH

                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 848 OF 2001


Nawab Imdad Jah Bahadur & Ors.                    ...Appellants

                                    Versus

Nawab Shaqafath Ali Khan & Ors.                   ...Respondents



                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 849 OF 2001


Nawab Imdad Jah Bahadur & Ors.                    ...Appellants

                                    Versus

Hon. The Nizam Jewellery Trust & Ors.             ...Respondents
                                   2




                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 850 OF 2001


Nawab Imdad Jah Bahadur & Ors.                         ...Appellants

                                       Versus

Nawab Shaqafath Ali Khan & Ors.                        ...Respondents


                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 851 OF 2001


Nawab Imdad Jah Bahadur & Ors.                         ...Appellants

                                       Versus

Nawab Mirzamin Ali Khan & Ors.                         ...Respondents




                            JUDGMENT
S.B. SINHA, J :
INTRODUCTION


      The Nizam of Hyderabad executed a Trust Deed called "H.E.H. The

Nizam's Jewellary Trust" dated 29.3.1951 in respect of some of his private

properties, precious gems, jewels. Ornaments, articles of jewellary and

antique pieces.
3
The terms and conditions for discharging the trust are set out therein.
The trust deed has been specified in parts I, II, III of the third schedule.
Two sons of the Nizam, two sons of his elder son, two daughters of

his second son, the daughter of the Nizam through Dullan Pasha Begum

Saheba and his step brother have been mentioned in part I, the remaining

thirteen sons of the Nizam and the children of his deceased son, Kazim Jah

were mentioned in Part II and seventeen daughters have been mentioned in

part III of the third schedule.
The dispute is with regard to the terms `Remaining sons and

Remaining Daughters Fund' expressed in the Will. The children of some of

the deceased remaining sons and remaining daughters seek for a direction to

the trustees to execute the Trust Deed by giving the correct interpretation to

clauses 9 to 11 of the Trust Deed.
The dispute lies in the interpretation of some of the important clauses

of the Trust deed and particularly clauses 9 and 10 thereof.
TRUST DEED
4
The preamble of the Trust Deed dated 29.03.1951 states:
"AND WHEREAS the settler out of natural love
      and affection which he bears towards his relatives
      specified in the Third Schedule hereunder written
      and for diverse other good causes and
      considerations him there unto moving, is desirous
      of making a settlement of the said articles
      specified in the First Schedule hereunder written
      and of the said securities specified in the Second
      Schedule hereunder written in manner hereinafter
      appearing AND WHEREAS the trustees have
      agreed to become the first Trustees of these
      presents as is testified by their being parties to and
      executing these presents AND WHEREAS prior to
      the execution of these presents the said articles
      specified in the First Schedule hereunder written
      and the said securities specified in the Second
      Schedule hereunder written have been delivered
      by the Settlor to the Trustees, NOW THIS
      INDENTURE WITNESSETH as follows:-
1. in the consideration of the premises and of
             natural love and affection which the settler
             bears towards his relatives specified in the
             Third Schedule hereunder written and for
             divers other good causes and considerations
             him unto moving. He the settler doth hereby
             transfer unto the Trustees the said precious
             gems, jewels, ornaments and other articles
             of jewellery and antique pieces specified in
             the First Schedule hereunder written and the
             said securities specified in the Second
             Schedule hereunder written and all which
             articles and securities are hereinafter for
             brevity's sake referred to as "the Trust
             Property" (which expression shall include
             all other properties or investments or any
             kind whatsoever into which the same or nay
5
part thereof may be converted or varied
                  from time to time and such as relay be
                  acquired by the Trustees or come to their
                  hands by virtue of these presents) AND all
                  the right title interest claim and demand
                  whatsoever at law and in equity of the
                  Settlor in and to the Trust Property and
                  every part thereof TO HAVE, RECEIVE,
                  AND TAKE all and singular the Trust
                  Property unto the trustees UPON THE
                  TRUSTS and with subject to the powers,
                  provisions, agreements and declarations
                  hereinafter declared and contatined of and
                  concerning the same.
2. the Trust hereby created shall be called
                  "H.E.H. The Nizam's Jewellery Trust"."
The trustees shall divide the corpus of the principal into sixteen equal

parts and allocate them as following



   7 Four equal parts to and hold the same for Prince Azam Jha, the eldest

      son of the settler in the manner as mentioned in clause 5.

   7 Four such equal parts to and hold the same upon the trust for Prince

      Muazzam Jah, the second son of the settler in the manner as

      mentioned in clause 6.
7 One such equal part to and hold the same upon the trust for Shabzadi

      Begum, the daughter of the settler by Dulhan pasha Begum Prince
6
Muazzam Jah, the second son of the settlor in the manner as

   mentioned in clause 7.
7 One such equal part to and hold the same upon the trust for Shahbada

   Nawab Basalat Jha Bahadur the step brother of the settler in the

   manner as mentioned in clause 8.
7 Three such equal parts to and hold the same upon trust for the sons,

   grandsons and granddaughters of the settler as mentioned in Part II of

   the third schedule and as mentioned in clause 9

7 The remaining three equal parts to and hold the same upon trust for

   the daughters of the settler specified in Part III of the third schedule

   to the deed and as mentioned in clause 10.
Clause 9 of the Trust Deed reads as under:
"9. The Trustees shall hold the said three equal
         parts of the Principal Fund allocated to the sons,
         grandsons and grand daughters of the Settlor
         mentioned in part II of the Third Schedule
         hereunder written (hereinafter called "the
         Remaining Sons' Fund" UPON TRUST to divide
         the same or to treat the same as notionally divided
         into 126 (One hundred twenty six) equal units and
         to allocate such 126 units to the respective
         beneficiaries specified in part II of the Third
         Schedule hereunder written in the respective
         proportions set opposite their respective names in
         the second column of part II of the Third Schedule
         hereunder written and to hold the same upon the
7
respective Trusts hereinafter declared and
contained of an concerning the same respectively,
viz:
(a) To manage the respective units of the
Remaining Sons' Fund allocated to each
respective beneficiary as aforesaid and to collect
and to recover the interest and other income (if
any)...
(b) To pay out of the income of the respective
units of the Remaining Sons' Fund allocated to
each such beneficiary as aforesaid and if necessary
out of the corpus thereof (including the
remuneration payable to the Trustees under the
provisions hereof) which could not be met or
defrayed out of the income or corpus of the said
securities specified in the Second Schedule
hereunder Written.
(c) During the life time of the Settlor to
accumulate and invest the net income (if any)...
(d) From and after the death of the Settlor to
pay the net income of the respective units of the
Remaining Sons' Fund allocated to each such
beneficiary as aforesaid to each such beneficiary
absolutely for and during the terms of his or her
respective life.
(e) On the death of the survivor of the Settlor
and each Beneficiary leaving a child or children
and/or remoter issue him or her then surviving to
divide and distribute the units of Remaining Sons
Fund allocated to such beneficiary as aforesaid
amongst such child or children and/or remoter
issue of such Beneficiary per strips in the
proportion of two shares for every male child or
remoter issue of such Beneficiary to one share for
every female child or remoter issue of such
8
Beneficiary tending in the same degree of
relationship and so that no person shall take whose
parent entitled to share under this clause shall be
living and further so that persons standing in the
same degree of relationship shall take between
themselves in the same proposition as above the
share which their parent would have taken if living
provided, however, that if any of the first thirteen
beneficiaries specified in the Part II of the third
schedule hereunder written (i.e. Beneficiaries
other than 7(seven) grandchildren of the Settlor
specified in item 14 of Part II of the Third
Schedule hereunder written) shall die without
leaving any child or remoter issue him surviving
then the Trustees shall on his death hold the units
of the Remaining Sons' Fund allocated to such
beneficiary as aforesaid UPON TRUST to divide
the same into two equal parts and to allocate one
such equal part to the remaining beneficiaries
specified in Part II of the Third Schedule
hereunder      written   (    including     7(seven)
grandchildren of the Settlor specified in item 14 of
Part II of the Third Schedule hereunder written).
In the shares and the proportions mentioned
against their respective names in second column
thereof and to allocate the other such equal part to
the daughters of the Settlor specified in the part III
of the Third Schedule hereunder written in equal
shares and proportions and to hold and stand
possessed of the respective shares which on such
division and allocation shall go through respective
beneficiaries specified in Parts II and III of the
Third Schedule hereunder written Upon Trust to
add the same to and amalgamate the ame with the
respective units of the Remaining Sons' Fund or
the Remaining Daughters' Fund hereinafter
referred to (as the case may be) originally
allocated to them respectively under the provisions
of this clause and the next succeeding clause 10
hereof provided further that if any of the said
9
seven grandchildren of the Settlor specified in
            item 14 of Part II of the Third Schedule hereunder
            written shall die without leaving any child or
            remoter issue him or her surviving then the
            Trustees shall on his or her death hold the units of
            the Remaining Sons' Fund allocated to such
            grandchildren of the Settlor as aforesaid UPON
            TRUST to divide the same in the proportions in
            which the units of the Remaining Sons' Fund are
            allocated to the remaining grandchildren of the
            Settlor as specified against the respective names in
            the second column of the Part II of the Third
            Schedule hereunder written and to hold and stand
            possess of the respective shares which on such
            division shall go to the respective grandchildren
            specified in item 14 of Part II of the third Schedule
            hereunder written UPON TRUST to add the same
            and amalgamate the same with the respective units
            of the Remaining Sons' Fund originally allocated
            to them respectively upon the same respective
            trustees as those upon which the respective
            original units to which they are added and with
            which they are amalgamated as aforesaid or
            directed to be held under the provisions of this
            clause."
In terms of Clause 10 of the Trust Deed, remaining daughters' fund is

constituted and the manner in which the said fund is to be discharged is

contained therein; the relevant part whereof reads as under:
"(e) ...provided however, that if any daughter of
            the Settlor specified in Part III of the Third
            Schedule hereunder written shall die without
            leaving any child or remoter issue her surviving
            then the Trustees shall on her death hold the one
10
equal unit of the Remaining Daughters' Fund
             allocated to such daughter as aforesaid UPON
             TRUST to divide the same into two equal parts
             and to allocate one such equal part to the
             remaining beneficiaries specified in Part III of the
             Third Schedule hereunder written in equal shares
             and proportions and to allocate the other such
             equal part to the Beneficiaries specified in Part II
             of the Third Schedule hereunder written (including
             the 7 grandchildren of the Settlor therein
             specified) in the proportions in which the units of
             the Remaining Sons' Fund are allocated to the
             respective beneficiaries specified in Part II of the
             Third Schedule hereunder written as specified
             against their respective names in the second
             column thereof and to hold and stand possessed of
             the respective shares which on such division and
             allocation shall go to the respective beneficiaries
             specified in parts II & III of the Third Schedule
             hereunder written UPON TRUST to add the same
             to and amalgamate the same with the respective
             units of the Remaining Sons' Fund or the
             Remaining Daughters' Fund (as the case may be)
             originally allocated to them respectively under the
             provisions of the preceding clause (9) hereof and
             this Clause and to hold the same respectively upon
             the same respective units as those upon which the
             respective original units to which they are added
             and with which they are amalgamated as aforesaid
             are directed to be held under the provisions of the
             preceding clause 9 hereof and this clause."
Clause 11 is a residuary clause providing for the manner in which the

trust is to be applied in respect of the ultimate beneficiaries.
11
ENACTMENT

      The State enacted the Nizam's Trust Deeds (Validation) Act, 1950

(for short "the 1950 Act").        It received the Presidential Assent on

22.06.1950.    Section 3 of the 1950 Act provides that notwithstanding

anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, trust deed

mentioned in the Schedule shall be valid and effectual for all purposes and

shall have the force of law. The 1950 Act underwent an amendment in the

year 1951. The trust deed in question was inserted as Item No. 7 in the

Schedule of the 1950 Act.
BENEFICIARIES



      The trust deed mentions 13 beneficiaries in Part II. Indisputably,

beneficiaries at Sl Nos. 1 to 5, 7, 8, 11 and 12 have died and the corpus of

their respective shares, in terms of the deed of trust, have devolved upon

their heirs and successors including the appellants of Civil Appeal No. 846

of 2001, following stirpital succession. Beneficiaries at Sl Nos. 9, 10 and

13, however, are alive and the 6th beneficiary has died issueless.
12
So far as the beneficiaries specified in Part III are concerned, they are

17 in number. The beneficiaries at Sl Nos. 2, 4, 5, 7, 12 and 15 have died

and their heirs and legal representatives including the appellants herein have

succeeded to their units. Those at Sl Nos. 1, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13 and 14 have

died without any issue. The beneficiaries at Sl Nos. 3, 16 and 17 are alive.



PROCEEDINGS



      Indisputably, the appellants filed an original petition No. 173 of 1998

in the Court of Chief Judge, City Civil Court, Hyderabad purported to be

under
Sections 56
and
61
of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 praying for

directions to the trustees to execute the trust deed as per the correct

interpretation of clauses 9, 10 and 11 of the trust deed.
Respondent No. 1 also filed an original application before the Chief

Judge, City Civil Court which was marked as Original Petition No. 253 of

1998 seeking directions to the trustees to execute trust deed according to the

terms contained therein.
In the same year, some of the children of the remaining sons and

daughters who predeceased those remaining sons and daughters who died
13
issueless like the appellants herein filed a suit which was marked as O.S.

No. 383 of 1998 praying inter alia for the following reliefs:
"(1) Mandatory injunction against the Trustees
             to correctly interpret and apply the provisions of
             clause 8 of the Trust Deed by making all
             allocations and amalgamations of Trust funds
             concerned therein including in the same all
             beneficiaries named in the parties 2 and 3 of III
             Schedule irrespective of whether they pre-
deceased the beneficiaries dying issueless or not,
             and thereafter allocate their shares to their legal
             heirs in accordance with law,

             (2) Issue a perpetual injunction against the
             trustees restraining them mis-interpreting or
             wrongly applying the provisions of clauses 8 to 10
             of the Trust Deed, or

             (3) Restraining the trustees from making
             allocations or amalgamations of Trust Funds
             concerned and making any payments, without
             giving two weeks advance notice to plaintiffs."




      Forty similarly placed children of the deceased sons and daughters

filed another suit which was marked as O.S. No. 540 of 1998 for declaration

that they have vested rights in the corpus and accretion of the `remaining

sons fund' to the extent of Rs. 2,22,99,200/-.
14
In the aforementioned suit, heirs and legal representatives of the

grand children of the settler were impleaded as parties.
In the said suit, the following three issues were framed:
"1. Whether the plaintiffs are entitled for
             declaration in respect of the corpus fund as prayed
             for?
2.    Whether the plaintiffs are entitled for
             mandatory injunction against the defendants and
             their successor trustees and secretary of the
             defendant no. 1 Trust, as prayed for?
3.    Whether the plaintiffs are entitled for
             perpetual injunction against the defendants and
             their successor trustees and secretary of the
             defendant no. 1 Trust, as prayed for."
The aforementioned two original petitions as also the suits were taken

up for hearing together. In the said original petitions as also the said suits a

preliminary question was raised as to whether the surviving remaining sons

and daughters of the Settlor are alone entitled to the corpus allotted to the

remaining sons and remaining daughters who died issueless. The learned

Judge passed a common judgment on 21.07.1999.


FINDINGS
15
The principal findings of the learned Judge were:
(i)        "Coming back to the interpretation of sub-clause (e) of clauses 9
           and 10, it can be held that the Settlor intended that even the
           children of a pre-deceased remaining son of a remaining daughter
           are entitled to a share in the unit allocated to the remaining son or
           daughter who died issueless. The reason is that, an absurd
           situation would arise if the contentions of the Trustees that
           surviving remaining sons and remaining daughters are only
           entitled to a share is accepted, if the last person who die is a
           issueless a remaining son and remaining daughter..."
(ii)       "A reading of the said Clause discloses that the Settlor intended
           that the entire Principal Fund obtained by the sale of the jewellery
           should be handed over and transferred to the beneficiaries or
           ultimate beneficiaries named in the Trust Deed....In the same way,
           the children of the remaining sons and remaining daughters are
           ultimate beneficiares of the units allocated to the respective
           remaining sons or remaining daughters..."
(iii)      "The argument of the Trustees, that the children of the remaining
           sons and remaining daughters are not beneficiaries at all and that
           they are owners consequent upon the death of the remaining sons
           or remaining daughters, is not contemplated by the Settlor, as he
           referred to such grand children as "ultimate respective
           beneficiaries" who are entitled to receive the main corpus itself as
           per the directions in the Trust Deed in clause 11 of the Trust
           Deed."
(iv)       "...The Settlor directed in sub-clause 4 and 5 (numbered by me) in
           clause 9(e) that the units allocated to the remaining son who died
           issueless shall be divided into (2) parts and to allocate one such
           part to the remaining beneficiaries specified in Part - II of the 3rd
           Schedule including grandchildren in the shares and proportions
           mentioned against their respective names in the second column
           thereof and to allocate the other such part to the daughters of the
           settlor specified in part - III of the Third Schedule hereunder
           written, in the equal shares and proportions. Similarly, the
           direction is repeated for clause 10(e). This direction can be
16
implemented only if the contention of the children of deceased
               remaining sons and daughter is accepted. Then only the units
               allocated to the deceased remaining sons or remaining daughters
               can be distributed in shares and proportions as mentioned against
               their respective names in the second column thereof. If the
               interpretation of Trustees and surviving remaining sons and
               daughters is accepted, this direction of the Settlor cannot be
               implemented, for the reasons that consequent upon death, some of
               the remaining sons and daughters, there cannot be 126 units in
               Part II or 17 units in part - III".
(v)         "...The Settlor did not use the word "remaining daughters" in
               clause 9(e) or "remaining sons or grand children" in clause 10(e)
               ..."
On the plea that nothing is left to be amalgamated in case of units of

predeceased sons and daughters as the corpus was already given to them,

the learned Judge noted:
(a)      Some of the surviving sons and daughters have also taken the

         entire corpus by adopting the novel method by means of a

         compromise between the life estate holder and the remainder estate

         holder,
(b)      Few lakhs of rupees from out of the units allocated to each of

         the remaining son or daughter who died wereretained by the Trustees.
The learned Judge held:
17
"In the result, it is held that whenever anyone of
            the remaining sons or remaining daughters, dies
            issueless, the unit allocated to him or her, as the
            case may be, shall be distributed amongst the
            surviving remaining sons and remaining daughters
            as well as the respective children of the deceased
            remaining sons and remaining daughter and also to
            7 grandchildren shown in item 14 of the part II of
            third schedule or their children as per the units
            allocated to them. The surviving remaining sons
            and daughter and persons shown in item 14 can
            only receive net income on the amount
            amalgamated to their units whereas the respective
            children of the deceased remaining sons and
            remaining daughters, as the case may be, are
            entitled to receive the total amount, corpus and
            accretions allocated to their respective father or
            mother as the case may be , as per direction given
            in clauses 9 (e) and 10 (e) of the trust Deed."
The learned Judge issued the following directions:
"...This advice is given to the Trustees in OP
            173/1998 and OP 253/1998 and this finding is
            given on preliminary point in OS 383/1998 and
            OS 540/1998..."
Indisputably, pursuant to or in furtherance of the said directions, no

decree was prepared in the O.S. No. 540 of 1998.



PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE HIGH COURT
18
Aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the judgment and order dated

21.07.1999, Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in Civil Appeal No. 846 of 2001 and

Respondent No. 2 in Civil Appeal No. 847 of 2001 filed civil revision

petitions before the High Court under
Article 227
of the Constitution of

India and
Section 115
of the Code of Civil Procedure.          However, the

purported common order so far as it related to the preliminary issue in the

two suits was not challenged. The High Court by reason of the impugned

judgment held:
"(i) The impugned order is the common order
            passed in two O.Ps i.e., O.P. No. 173 of 1998 and
            O.P. No. 253 of 1998 and the two suits as
            preliminary issues. Although the order insofar as
            it relates to the two O.Ps. is bad for want of
            necessary jurisdiction, the order in so far as it
            relates to the preliminary issues in the two suits is
            concerned is unquestionable on the point of
            jurisdiction..."
(ii) "...The petitioners who preferred these two
            revision petitions have surprisingly not filed
            appropriate proceedings as against the order
            pertaining to the two suits. In that view of the
            matter, the common order becomes unassailable
            except holding that the original petitions are not
            maintainable."
Despite the aforementioned findings, the High Court proceeded to

consider the merit of the matter holding:
19
"(i) "...The various legal pleas thus raised by
        the learned counsel for the petitioners attacking
        the Trust deed and the Nizam's trust Deeds
        Validation Act and the Validation Amendment Act
        are therefore not tenable and cannot be
        countenanced".
(ii) "...In both these cases, suits ought to have
        been filed under
Section 9
of the Civil Procedure
        Code before the appropriate courts, but not the
        original petitions before the Principal Civil Court
        of original jurisdiction. The position is clear and
        both the petitions cannot be maintained under
Section 56
and
61
of the Trusts Act..."
(iii) "...The intention of the settler as discussed
        supra is not to allow the property to percolate to
        the other persons or to other successors either
        nearer or remoter except those specified..."
(iv) "...As discussed by me supra, in the
        absence of the words `specified in the schedule'
        there should have been some scope for any
        interpretation, but in the presence of the words
        `specified in the schedule', I do not think that
        there is any scope for any interpretation than the
        one, which is consistent with the view taken by me
        above...The view taken by the court below, for the
        above reasons, is not correct legal and proper and
        is, therefore, liable to be set aside..."
PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THIS COURT
20
Appellants preferred Special Leave Petition Nos. 4372-4373 of 2000

which came up for preliminary hearing on 27.03.2000, on which date a

Division Bench of this Court ordered:
"Adjourned for two weeks as learned senior
            counsel for the respondents says that he wants to
            challenge the impugned order of the High Court so
            far their O.P. is held to be not maintainable."
Pursuant to or in furtherance of the said observations, the respondents

in C.A. Nos. 846-847 filed special leave petitions against the order of the

High Court and they upon grant of leave were marked as C.A. No. 848 of

2001 and 849 of 2001.
Two special leave petitions were also filed before this Court by the

respondents, questioning the correctness or otherwise of the order dated

21.07.1999 passed by the learned Chief Judge, City Civil Court, Hyderabad.

These were eventually marked as C.A. Nos. 850-851 of 2001.



SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
21
The preliminary issue in O.S. No. 540 of 1998 having already been

decided, the other issues framed therein which appeared to be consequential

in nature were determined by the Chief Judge, City Civil Court by an order

dated 3.04.2000 decreeing the suit declaring that the plaintiffs have vested

rights in the corpus and accretion of the remaining sons fund and remaining

daughters fund.
Indisputably, an appeal, which was marked as CCA No. 114 of 2000,

was preferred thereagainst by the trustees. A Civil Miscellaneous Petition,

which was marked as CMP No. 11230 of 2000, has also been filed.
Concededly, the said appeal and the civil miscellaneous petition are

pending.
By an order dated 6.07.2000, the High Court directed that the

aforementioned decree dated 3.04.2000 of the City Civil Court shall not be

given effect to pending notice.
This Court by an order dated 10.04.2000 issued notices in the special

leave petitions filed by the respondents.
22
By an order dated 21.01.2000, special leave to appeal has been

granted, observing:
"pending the disposal of the appeal, the High court
may proceed to hear and dispose of CCA No. 114
of 2000 but it shall do so independently and
               uninfluenced by the judgment and order under
               challenge insofar as it deals with the merits."
SUBMISSIONS



          Mr. P.P. Rao, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the

appellant, would raise the following contentions:
(i)      Whether in view of the fact that the civil revision applications

            were filed against the order dated 21.07.1999 passed in original

            applications which having been found to be not maintainable, the

            High Court should have held that the civil revision petitions were

            also not maintainable.
(ii)     Respondents having not filed any appeal or civil revision

            application against the order dated 3.04.2000 passed in the
23
original suits filed by the appellants, the respondents would be

        deemed to have abandoned the remedies available to them.
(iii)   The High Court could not have entered into the merits of the

        matter as no appeal or civil revision application having been filed

        against the common order passed in original suit Nos. 348 and 540

        of 1999, they attained finality and, thus, the civil revision

        applications filed against the order dated 21.07.1999 passed

        against the applications were barred by the principles of res

        judicata.   Reliance in this behalf has been placed on
C.V.

        Rajendran and Another v. N.M. Muhammed Kunhi
[(2002) 7 SCC

        447].
(iv)    In any event, interpretation of the deed of trust being a question of

        law, the civil revision application under
Section 115
of the Code

        of Civil Procedure or under
Article 227
of the Constitution of

        India was not maintainable.
(v)     The preliminary issue having the force of a decree, an appeal lay

        thereagainst and, thus, a revision application under
Section 115
of

        the Code of Civil Procedure and/ or
Article 227
of the

        Constitution of India was not maintainable.
24
(vi)    As the civil revision application in terms of
Section 115
of the

        Code of Civil Procedure was not maintainable, the provisions of
Article 227
of the Constitution of India could not have been taken

        recourse to. Reliance in this behalf has been placed on
Ouseph

        Mathai and Others v. M. Abdul Khadir
[(2002) 1 SCC 319]
(vii)   No special leave petition is maintainable against the original order

        dated 21.07.1999 of the Chief Judge, City Civil Court, Hyderabad

        as by reason thereof the High Court has been by-passed. Reliance

        in this behalf has been placed on
Chandi Prasad Chokhani v. State

        of Bihar
[(1962) 2 SCR 276 and Taherakhatoon (D) By LRs.
v.
Salambin Mohammad [(1999) 2 SCC 635].
(viii) In view of the finding of the High Court that the original

        applications under the
Indian Trusts Act
were not maintainable, it

        acted illegally and without jurisdiction in entering into the merit of

        the matter and, thus, the impugned judgment is a nullity.
(ix)    On merits, the High Court committed a serious error in passing the

        impugned judgment insofar as it failed to construe the principles

        of construction of a trust deed by placing itself in the armchair of

        the settlor.
25
(x)    The settlor having intended to provide some property not only to

       the sons and daughters and the grand-children who are alive could

       not have intended to deprive heirs and legal representatives of

       those who had died issueless.
(xi)   The trustees in implementing the deed of trust could not have

       ignored a well thought of scheme of the settlor in terms whereof

       he intended to make no discrimination between the heirs and legal

       representatives and by reason whereof, he intended to make

       provisions not only for the children and grand-children who were

       then alive but also for the grand-children and great-grand children

       who were yet to be born.
(xii) From a perusal of the deed of trust, it would be evident that

       wherever the settlor intended to grant special benefit either to a

       heir or to a trust, he having specifically provided therefor. Having

       regard to the fact that the heirs and legal representatives of the

       deceased's son or daughter having not been excluded, the High

       Court could not have interfered with the well-reasoned findings of

       the Chief Judge, City Civil Court.
26
(xiii) The principle in the original applications as also the suits being

             primarily directed against the trustees, the heirs and legal

             representatives of the daughters were required to be impleaded.



          Mr. Dushyant A. Dave, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of

the respondents, and Mr. Rajendra Choudhary, learned counsel appearing

on behalf of the trustees, on the other hand, would contend:
(i)       the trust deed being a deed of gift based on inheritance or

             otherwise, the application before the City Civil Court was not

             maintainable.
(ii)      The settlor having executed the Will in three parts. Each part

             dealing with specific matters contained in the Second Schedule,

             the Third Schedule and the Residuary and having provided for the

             specific manner in which the benefit is to be conferred as also

             mode of discharge, the High Court must be held to have justified

             in arriving at a finding in regard to the intention of the settlor.
(iii)     The settlor having used the term "allocate" in a number of places,

             the construction which would be contrary to or inconsistent

             therewith should be avoided.
27
(iv)   The deed of trust having operated during the period 1952 to 1958

       to the satisfaction of all those beneficiaries who have died

       issueless after 1958, the heirs and legal representatives could not

       have been given any benefit as by that time the corpus of the trust

       had clearly been divided.
(v)    As clauses 9(e) and 10(e) of the deed specifically provided that

       when a beneficiary dies, his children would get the same; the

       children of beneficiaries who have already been pre-deceased

       cannot be held to have derived any interest in the corpus of trust or

       otherwise.
(vi)   So far as the daughters are concerned, the point of devolution of

       interest should be kept in mind as in case of death of one daughter

       her share goes to children but the same would not be the position

       when the daughter of a daughter dies.
(vii) Having regard to the rival contentions of the parties and the

       decisions of the Trial Judges whereby discretionary jurisdiction in

       terms of
Sections 56
and
61
read with
Section 34
of the Indian

       Trusts Act which have limited application having not been

       exercised, the High Court should not have interfered therewith.
28
(viii) The findings on the suit being subject to passing of a decree, a

       civil revision application against the order dated 21.07.1999 was

       maintainable.
(ix)   The trust deed should be construed in a manner so as to achieve a

       certainty, as provided for under
Section 6
of the Indian Trusts Act

       read with illustrations (c) and (d) appended thereto.
(x)    Respondents being the children of the predecessor-in-interest and

       daughters having got the benefits cannot claim any benefit once

       over again on the ground that they were also entitled as heirs and

       legal representatives of the pre-deceased sons and daughters who

       had died issueless.
(xi)   Special leave having been granted, in the peculiar facts and

       circumstances of this case, this Court should exercise its

       discretionary jurisdiction under
Article 139A
of the Constitution

       of India and render a final decision in the matter keeping in view

       the passage of time.
(xii)
Article 136
of the Constitution of India should be widely

       construed so as to take into consideration a situation of this nature

       where a litigation based on construction of a deed may finally be

       adjudicated upon by this Court.
29
(xiii) As no decree had been passed in the suit, it would not be correct to

           contend that the preliminary question raised would be a

           preliminary issue as envisaged under
Order XIV, Rule 1 of the

           Code of Civil Procedure
.
(xiv)   Once a leave has been granted, any decision rendered thereon

           could attract the doctrine of merger as has been held by this Court

           in
Kunhayammed and Others v. State of Kerala and Another
[(2000) 6 SCC 359].
OUR FINDINGS


      The learned Trial Judge and the High Court adopted two different

principles of interpretation of the trust deed. Whereas the learned Trial

Judge applied the principle of contextual interpretation, the High Court

applied the principle of literal interpretation.
It is, however, not in dispute that an appeal as also civil revision

application are pending before the High Court. We could have entered into

the merit of the matter to determine the question as regards interpretation of

the Will one way or the other but keeping in view the fact that the

aforementioned proceedings are pending before the High Court, we as at

present advised are not inclined to do so.
30
The High Court opined that the civil revision applications filed

against the order dated 21.07.1999 were not maintainable. It is also not in

dispute that no appeal was preferred against the order dated 3.04.2000.
The findings rendered in the order dated 21.07.1999 did not amount

to a decree. The suit was not finally disposed of thereby. No appeal lay

against a mere finding. An appeal would be maintainable only when a

decree is passed. The matter might have been otherwise if a decree was to

be recorded formally pursuant to the decision so rendered. It was not

considered to be even an order passed in terms of
Order XIV, Rule 2 of the

Code of Civil Procedure
.
Once the civil revision applications were held to be not maintainable

ordinarily the High Court should not have entered into the merit of the

matter.
It is true that preliminary issues were decided by an order dated

21.07.1999. It is, however, not in dispute that as several other issues were

framed including the additional issues, which we have noticed hereinbefore,
31
in terms whereof the suit was ultimately decreed by a judgment and order

dated 3.04.2000, an appeal thereagainst has been filed.               A civil

miscellaneous application has also been filed.
A decree was not passed pursuant to or in furtherance of the order

dated 21.07.1999. It may be true that in terms of
Section 105
of the Code of

Civil Procedure when an appeal against the final decree is passed, legality

of the said order could be challenged in the appeal. Only because a civil

revision application has not been filed, the same, in our opinion, would not

attract the principle of res judicata as an appeal from the final decree could

still be maintained.
In
C.V. Rajendran
(supra), while holding that the principle of res

judicata applies in different stages of the same proceedings, it was held:
"...Here what is sought to be reagitated is not
             really the order of remand but the order deciding a
             germane issue which was allowed to become final
             at an earlier stage of the same suit. The principle
             of res judicata applies as between two stages in the
             same litigation so that if an issue has been decided
             at an earlier stage against a party, it cannot be
             allowed to be reagitated by him at a subsequent
             stage in the same suit or proceedings. This
32
position is
laid down in
Hope Plantations Ltd. v.
             Taluk Land Board
to which one of us (Syed Shah
             Mohammed Quadri, J.) was a party."
However, as noticed hereinbefore, in this case, an appeal from a final

decree is maintainable.
Ordinarily again a special leave petition would not be entertained

directly from a judgment and order of the Chief Judge, City Civil Court,

Hyderabad. [See
Chandi Prasad Chokhani
(supra)]



      Maintainability of the civil revision application has been questioned

inter alia on the premise that an interpretation of a deed involves a question

of fact and not a question of jurisdiction.
Mr. Rao has placed strong reliance in this behalf on M/s. D.L.F.

Housing and Construction Company (P.) Ltd., New Delhi v. Sarup Singh

and Others [(1969) 3 SCC 807]. In that case, it was held:
"5. The position thus seems to be firmly
             established that while exercising the jurisdiction
             under Section 115, it is not competent to the High
33
Court to correct errors of fact however gross or
even errors of law unless the said errors have
relation to the jurisdiction of the Court to try the
dispute itself. Clauses (a) and (b) of this section on
their plain reading quite clearly do not cover the
present case. It was not contended, as indeed it
was not possible to contend, that the learned
Additional District Judge had either exercised a
jurisdiction not vested in him by law or had failed
to exercise a jurisdiction so vested in him, in
recording the order that the proceedings under
reference be stayed till the decision of the appeal
by the High Court in the proceedings for specific
performance of the agreement in question. Clause
(c) also does not seem to apply to the case in hand.
The words "illegally" and "with material
irregularity" as used in this clause do not cover
either errors of fact or of law; they do not refer to
the decision arrived at but merely to the manner in
which it is reached. The errors contemplated by
this clause may, in our view, relate either to breach
of some provision of law or to material defects of
procedure affecting the ultimate decision, and not
to errors either of fact or of law, after the
prescribed formalities have been complied with.
The High Court does not seem to have adverted to
the limitation imposed on its power under Section
115 of the Code. Merely because the High Court
would have felt inclined, had it dealt with the
matter initially, to come to a different conclusion
on the question of continuing stay of the reference
proceedings pending decision of the appeal, could
hardly justify interference on revision under
Section 115 of the Code when there was no
illegality or material irregularity committed by the
learned Additional District Judge in his manner of
dealing with this question. It seems to us that in
this matter the High Court treated the revision
virtually as if it was an appeal."
34
Reliance has also been placed by Mr. Rao on
Ouseph Mathai
(supra)

wherein it was held:
"...In fact power under this article casts a duty
             upon the High Court to keep the inferior courts
             and tribunals within the limits of their authority
             and that they do not cross the limits, ensuring the
             performance of duties by such courts and tribunals
             in accordance with law conferring powers within
             the ambit of the enactments creating such courts
             and tribunals. Only wrong decisions may not be a
             ground for the exercise of jurisdiction under this
             article unless the wrong is referable to grave
             dereliction of duty and flagrant abuse of power by
             the subordinate courts and tribunals resulting in
             grave injustice to any party."
A civil revision application although must necessarily having regard

to the terminologies used in
Section 115
of the Code of Civil Procedure

involve the question of jurisdiction, the question which would arise is as to

what are the jurisdictional questions. A jurisdictional question may arise

not only when a court acts wholly without jurisdiction but also in a case

where jurisdictional errors are committed while exercising jurisdiction.

There are various facets of `jurisdictional errors'. Taking into consideration

any irrelevant fact or non-consideration of a relevant fact would involve
35
jurisdictional issue. This aspect of the matter has also been considered in

Ajantha Transports (P) Ltd., Combatore v. M/s. T.V.K. Transports,

Pulampatti, Combatore District [(1975) 1 SCC 55] in the following terms:
"27. Relevancy or otherwise of one or more
            grounds of grant or refusal of a permit could be a
            jurisdictional matter. A grant or its refusal on
            totally irrelevant grounds would be ultra vires or a
            case of excess of power. If a ground which is
            irrelevant is taken into account with others which
            are relevant, or, a relevant ground, which exists, is
            unjustifiably ignored, it could be said to be a case
            of exercise of power under
Section 47
of the Act,
            which is quasi-judicial, in a manner which suffers
            from a material irregularity. Both will be covered
            by Section 115 of the Civil Procedure Code."
It is not correct to contend that even if the revisional jurisdiction is

not available, a remedy in terms of
Articles 226
and
227
of the Constitution

of India would also not be available in law. This aspect of the matter has

been considered by this Court in
Surya Dev Rai v. Ram Chander Rai and

Others
[(2003) 6 SCC 675] opining that not only the High Court can

exercise its supervisory jurisdiction for the purpose of keeping the

subordinate courts within the bounds of its jurisdiction as envisaged under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India; even a writ of certiorari can be
36
issued wherefor the subordinate or inferior courts would be amenable to the

superior courts exercising power of judicial review in terms of
Article 226
thereof.
Strong reliance has been placed by Mr. Rao on a decision of this

Court in Taherakhatoon (supra) wherein it was opined that the discretionary

jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 136
of the Constitution of India can

be denied even after grant of leave unless exceptional and special

circumstances exist that substantial and grave injustice has been done. It

was held:
"20. In view of the above decisions, even
            though we are now dealing with the appeal after
            grant of special leave, we are not bound to go into
            merits and even if we do so and declare the law or
            point out the error -- still we may not interfere if
            the justice of the case on facts does not require
            interference or if we feel that the relief could be
            moulded in a different fashion..."
There is no quarrel with the aforementioned proposition, but, as has

been noticed in that case itself the discretionary jurisdiction is to be
37
exercised keeping in view the fact and circumstance of each case and no

hard and fast rule can be laid down therefor.
There is another aspect of the matter which cannot also be lost sight

of. Applications were filed before the District Court also under
Sections 56
and
61
of the Indian Trusts Act praying for issuance of directions to the

trustees. Such directions if issued ordinarily would be binding on them.

The trustees, therefore, would be entitled to take recourse to a remedy

available before a superior court, if they are aggrieved by such direction. If

the High Court had the jurisdiction to entertain either an appeal or a revision

application or a writ petition under
Articles 226
and
227
of the Constitution

of India, in a given case it, subject to fulfillment of other conditions, could

even convert a revision application or a writ petition into an appeal or vice-

versa in exercise of its inherent power. Indisputably, however, for the said

purpose, an appropriate case for exercise of such jurisdiction must be made

out.
Furthermore, this trust deed is not an ordinary one. It is a part of a

statute.   In the case of a wrong interpretation of a statute relating to

jurisdiction of a court enabling it to issue a direction, it would amount to a
38
jurisdiction error. In that sense, the courts were required to exercise their

jurisdiction with more care and caution.
For the reasons aforementioned, we are of the opinion that interest of

justice would be subserved if the matters are directed to be considered

afresh by the High Court together with the pending appeal and

miscellaneous applications.    The special leave petitions filed before us

against the order dated 21.07.1999 shall be returned to the petitioners

thereof so as to enable them to re-file the same before the High Court which

may also be considered on its own merits. We pass these directions in

exercise of our power under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India. These

appeals are disposed of accordingly.
For the aforementioned observations and directions, we would

request the High Court to consider the desirability of disposing of the matter

as expeditiously as possible. No costs.
...............................J.
                                             [S.B. Sinha]



                                             ................................J.
39
[Cyriac Joseph]

New Delhi;
March 05, 2009