[Cites
0
, Cited by
96
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of U.P. & Ors vs Sandeep Kumar Balmiki & Ors on 18 September, 2009
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2009 SC 116, 2016 (14) SCC 787, (2010) 1 SCT 843, (2011) 1 SERV LJ 351, 2009 (17) SCC 555, (2009) 3 CUR LR 550, (2009) 123 FAC LR 1046
Bench:
R.M. Lodha
,
Tarun Chatterjee
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



               CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6517 OF 2009
           (Arising out of SLP (C) No.13319 of 2009)


State of U.P. & Ors.                            ...Appellants

VERSUS


Sandeep Kumar Balmiki & Ors.                    ...Respondents



                         ORDER
1.   Leave granted
2.   Heard learned counsel for the parties at length.
3.   This appeal by Special Leave is directed against an

interim order dated 23rd of October, 2008, passed by a Division

Bench of the High Court of Allahabad at Lucknow Bench at

Lucknow in a special appeal being SLP (C) 75 of 2009,

affirming an interim order passed by a learned Single Judge of

the High Court in a writ petition being W.P. No. 6516 (S/S) of

2008.
1
A writ application has been filed by the respondents

challenging the orders of termination of their service before the

High Court of Judicature at Allahabad at Lucknow Bench at

Lucknow. By an interim order, a learned Single Judge of the

High Court had stayed the order of termination of the

respondents. An appeal was carried by the State of UP against

that interim order before a Division Bench of the High Court,

which, however, affirmed the interim order passed by the

learned Single Judge in the pending writ application but

directed the learned Single Judge to dispose of the pending

writ application at an early date.
Feeling aggrieved, the State of UP has filed this Special

Leave Petition, which on grant of leave, was heard in presence

of the learned counsel for the parties.
We have heard Mr. S.R. Singh, learned senior counsel

appearing for the State of UP and Mr. P.S. Patwalia, learned

senior counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents.

Having heard the learned senior counsel for the parties and

after considering the impugned orders as well as the nature of

relief claimed in the writ petition by the respondents, we are of
2
the view that the High Court had fallen in grave error in

staying the order of termination during the pendency of the

writ petition.    In our view, the interim order granted by the

High Court staying the order of termination could not be

passed at this stage in view of the fact that if such relief is

granted    at    this   stage,   the   writ   petition   shall   stand

automatically allowed without permitting the parties to place

their respective cases at the time of final hearing of the writ

petition. In this case also, the appellants have not yet filed

counter affidavit to the writ petition of the respondents.
That being the position and in view of the fact that the

final relief could not be granted at the interim stage, we set

aside the impugned order and vacate the interim order passed

by the High Court.
We are informed that now the affidavits have already

been exchanged and the matter is ready for hearing.              That

being the position, we request the learned Single Judge of the

High Court to decide the writ petition at an early date,

preferably within three months from the date of supply of a

copy of this order to it.
3
For the reasons aforesaid, the impugned order is set

aside.   The appeal is allowed to the extent indicated above.

There will be no order as to costs.
We make it clear that we have not gone into the merits of

the appeal, which shall be gone into by the High Court at the

time of disposal of the writ petition.
.......................................J.
                                             [ TARUN CHATTERJEE ]




NEW DELHI:                            ......................................J.
September 18, 2009                             [ R.M. LODHA ]
4