[Cites
4
, Cited by
158
]
Supreme Court of India
Sushil Kumar Jain vs Manoj Kumar & Anr on 5 May, 2009
Equivalent citations: AIR 2009 SUPREME COURT 2544, 2009 (14) SCC 38, 2009 AIR SCW 4441, (2009) 4 RAJ LW 3562, (2009) 2 CLR 7 (SC), 2009 (2) CLR 7, 2009 (7) SCALE 103, (2009) 81 ALLINDCAS 212 (SC), (2010) 4 BOM CR 437, (2010) 1 CIVILCOURTC 446, (2009) 3 ALL WC 2658, (2009) 2 RENCR 179, (2009) 3 RECCIVR 899, (2009) 3 ICC 52, (2009) 7 SCALE 103, (2009) 76 ALL LR 138, (2009) 2 ALL RENTCAS 139, (2009) 3 CAL HN 182
Author:
Tarun Chatterjee
Bench:
H.L. Dattu
,
Tarun Chatterjee
REPORTABLE

               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                 CIVIL APPEAL NO.3236 OF 2009
             (Arising out of SLP(C) No. 20650 of 2008)

Sushil Kumar Jain                              ...Appellant

VERSUS

Manoj Kumar & Anr.                           ..Respondents

                          JUDGMENT
TARUN CHATTERJEE,J.
1.   Leave granted.
2.   This appeal is directed against the order dated 15th of July,

2008 passed by a learned Judge of the High Court of Punjab and

Haryana at Chandigarh in Civil Revision No. 3700 of 2008, by which

the Civil Revision case filed by the tenant/appellant was rejected,

affirming the order passed by the Rent Controller, Chandigarh, by

which the Rent Controller had rejected the application for

amendment of the written statement under
Order 6 Rule 17 of the

Code of Civil Procedure
(in short "
the CPC
") filed by the appellant.
3.    The landlords/respondents have filed an ejectment

           proceeding in respect of the Main Gate and Covered

           First Floor of Shed No. 771, Industrial Area, Phase-II,
1
Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as the "demised

           premises"). This ejectment proceeding has been filed

           under section 13 of the East Punjab Rent Restrictions

           Act (in short, the "Act"), in which under paragraph 2 the

           appellant has been described as a tenant in respect of

           the demised premises. In view of the controversy raised

           before us, it would be appropriate to produce paragraph

           2 of the said petition, which is, as hereinunder:
"Paragraph 2: Respondent is a tenant in respect of premises
describable as Main Gate and Covered First Floor of Shed No. 771,
Industrial Area, Phase II, Chandigarh."
4.   Be it mentioned herein that this is a paragraph, which has

sought to be amended that has resulted in controversy between the

parties. The appellant has entered appearance and filed a written

statement denying the material allegations made in the said petition

under Section 13 of the Act. So far as the statements made under

Paragraph 2 of the ejectment proceeding is concerned, the

appellant made the following averments:
"Paragraph 2: That Paragraph 2 of the petition is also admitted to
be correct. It is however submitted that the respondent is occupying
other areas of 771 Industrial Area, Phase II, Chandigarh as well
under different tenancies." So far as the other statements made in
the ejectment proceeding are concerned, the appellants denied the
2
allegation made therein and sought for rejection of the ejectment
proceeding.
5.    During the pendency of the ejectment proceeding under

Section 13 of the Act, more precisely, on 6th of June, 2008, an

application under
Order 6 Rule 17 of the CPC
was filed by the

appellant, praying for an amendment of the written statement stating

inter alia that there was inadvertently some confusion and

misstatement of facts which needed to be rectified and that the

proposed amendment was necessary for adjudication of the real

matter in controversy. The amendment sought for clearly stated that

there are three different portions under one tenancy and not

different portions under different tenancies, which can be evident

from the original written statement filed by the appellant. By filing the

application for amendment of the written statement, the appellant

sought deletion of the words "under different tenancies", what was

sought to be removed was the contradiction and confusion having

been raised in the written statement which was never intended to be

an admission. The appellant further alleged that by amendment he

sought to explain and adopt a different and inconsistent plea in the

written statement. However, it would be appropriate for us to
3
reproduce the amendment prayed for which is in the following

manner :
"4. That in para 2 of the reply the word "under different tenancies"
be deleted.
5. That para 3 of the reply be substituted with the following
paragraph :-
That para 3 of the petition as stated is not correct and is thus,
denied. It is, however, admitted that the respondent came in the
premises initially in an area of 15 X 45' facing main road on a
monthly rent of Rs.5000/-. Subsequently, in the year 2003 more
portion was added, i.e. main gate faving Taj Furniture and the First
Floor and the rent of all the three portion was agreed to be Rs.
7000/-. Rs. 5000/- per month had been paid through payee's
account cheques and Rs. 2000/- per month had been paid in cash
for which no receipt has been issued by Manoj Kumar. The total
rent up to December, 2007 has been paid in the above-said
manner. It is wrong and denied that the monthly rent was payable
in advance by 7th of each month or that it was required to be
increased by 5% each year. The respondent continued to pay Rs.
7000/- per month to Manoj Kumar who had been receiving the rent
each month till the month of December, 2007. It is respectfully
submitted that there has been very cordial relations between Manoj
Kumar and the Respondent and there was lot of trust and
confidence and because of the Trust and confidence, the
Respondent had been payment Rs. 2000/- per month in case
without obtaining the receipt and has paid the entire rent up to
December, 2007. The Respondent is ready and willing to pay the
rent @ Rs. 7000/- per month from 01.01.2008 onwards. The
petitioner has exploited the good relationship and after receiving the
rent in case till December, 2007, he has filed the present petition.
6. That para 4 of the reply be allowed to be amended and the word
"November" occurring in second line be substituted with the word
"December". In the 4th line, the word "December, 2007" be
substituted with 1st "January, 2008."
7. That likewise the word "November" 2007 be substituted with
word "December" 2007 occuring in sub-para (i) of para 5 and the
word "December, 2007" be substituted with "January, 2008".
8. That the proposed amendment is necessary for the adjudication
of the matter in controversy. The amended reply is filed herewith."
4
6.   The learned Rent Controller, Chandigarh, rejected the

application for amendment of the written statement inter alia holding

that if such amendment was allowed, the appellant would be

permitted to withdraw his admissions made in the original written

statement, which is not permissible in law. The High Court affirmed

the order of the Rent Controller similarly holding that the appellant

shall not be permitted to withdraw the admission made in the

original written statement and accordingly, rejected the Civil

Revision case.
7.   Feeling aggrieved, the appellant has filed a Special Leave

Petition, which on grant of leave, was heard in presence of the

learned counsel for the parties.
8.   We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and

examined the impugned order as well as the order of the learned

Rent Controller. We have also examined the pleadings in the

ejectment proceeding under section 13 of the Act, the original

written statement and the application for amendment of the written
5
statement. In our view, the High Court had acted illegally and with

material irregularity in the exercise of its jurisdiction in rejecting the

application for amendment of the written statement on the ground as

stated hereinabove. After going through the pleadings in the

amendment petition as well as the original written statement, we fail

to understand why such amendment should not be allowed. In our

view, having considered the averments made in the application for

amendment of the written statement, it cannot be said that in fact

neither any admission was made by the appellant in his original

written statement nor the appellant had sought to withdraw such

admission made by him in his written statement.
9.    That apart, a careful reading of the application for amendment

of the written statement, we are of the view that the appellant seeks

to only elaborate and clarify the earlier inadvertence and confusion

made in his written statement.        Even assuming that there was

admission made by the appellant in his original written statement,

then also, such admission can be explained by amendment of his

written statement even by taking inconsistent pleas or substituting or

altering his defence.
6
10.   At this stage, we may remind ourselves that law is now well

settled that an amendment of a plaint and amendment of a written

statement are not necessarily governed by exactly the same

principle. Adding a new ground of defence or substituting or altering

a defence does not raise the same problem as adding, altering,

substituting a new cause of action (See
Baldev Singh & Ors. vs.

Manohar Singh & Anr.
AIR 2006 SC 2832).
11.   Similar view has also been expressed in
Usha Balashaheb

Swami & Ors. Vs. Kiran Appaso Swami & Ors.
AIR 2007 SC

1663. It is equally well settled that in the case of an amendment of

a written statement, the Courts would be more liberal in allowing

than that of a plaint as the question of prejudice would be far less in

the former than in the latter and addition of a new ground of defence

or substituting or altering a defence or taking inconsistent pleas in

the written statement can also be allowed.
12.   Keeping these principles in mind, let us now take up the

question raised before us by the learned counsel for the parties. As

stated herein earlier, the admission made by a defendant in his

written statement can be explained by filing the application for
7
amendment of the same. This principle has been settled by this

Court in
Panchdeo Narain Srivastava Vs. K. Jyoti Sahay
AIR

1983 SC 462, while considering this issue, held that the admission

made by a party may be withdrawn or may be explained. It was

observed in paragraph 3 of
the said decision
as follows:-
"An admission made by a party may be withdrawn or may be
explained away. Therefore, it cannot be said that by amendment,
an admission of fact cannot be withdrawn.........."
13.
In view of our discussions made hereinabove and applying the

principles
laid down by
this court in the aforesaid decisions, we are

therefore of the view that the High Court as well as the learned Rent

Controller had acted illegally and with material irregularity in the

exercise of its jurisdiction in not allowing the application for

amendment of the written statement of the appellant.
14.   Before parting with this judgment, a short submission as

advanced by the learned counsel for the respondents may be dealt

with. Referring to the proviso to
Order 6 Rule 17 of the CPC
, the

learned counsel for the respondents argued that the proviso clearly

bars that any application for amendment either of plaint or of written

statement can be allowed after trial has commenced unless the
8
Court comes to the conclusion that in spite of due diligence, the

party could not have raised the matter before the commencement of

the trial.   Therefore, the learned counsel for the respondents

submitted that in view of the proviso to
Order 6 Rule 17 of the CPC
,

the High Court as well as the Rent Controller had acted within their

jurisdiction in rejecting the application for amendment of the written

statement on the ground that the trial has already commenced and,

therefore, no interference can be made in respect of the same.
15.   We are unable to agree with this submission of the learned

counsel for the respondents. In this case, in our view, the trial has

not yet commenced.
In para 17, of
Baldev Singh
(Supra), this

Court observed :-
"It appears from the records that the parties have yet to file their
documentary evidence in the suit. From the record, it also appears
that the suit was not on the verge of conclusion as found by the
High Court and the Trial Court. That apart, commencement of trial
as used in proviso to Order 6 Rule 17 in
the Code of Civil Procedure
must be understood in the limited sense as meaning the final
hearing of the suit, examination of witnesses, filing of documents
and addressing of arguments. As noted hereinafter, parties are yet
to file their documents, we do not find any reason to reject the
application for amendment of the written statement in view of
proviso to
Order 6 Rule 17 of the CPC
which confers wide power
and unfettered discretion to the Court to allow an amendment of the
written statement at any stage of the proceedings."
9
16.   In view of the aforesaid decision and in view of the admitted

fact that not even the issues have yet been framed, documents

have not yet been filed, evidence has not yet been adduced, we are

of the view that the proviso to
Order 6 Rule 17 of the CPC
has no

manner of application as the trial has not yet commenced.
17.   Accordingly, the impugned order of the High Court as well as

that of the Rent Controller, Chandigarh, is set aside.                    The

application for amendment of the written statement is thus allowed.

The Rent Controller, Chandigarh, is directed to permit amendment

of the written statement and, thereafter, proceed with the hearing of

the eviction proceeding.       The Rent Controller, Chandigarh is

directed to dispose of the ejectment proceeding within six months

from the date of supply of a copy of this order to it.
18.   Accordingly, the appeal is allowed to the extent indicated

above. There will be no order as to costs.
.................................J.
                                                [TARUN CHATTERJEE]
10
New Delhi;      ....................................J.
May 05, 2009.            [H.L. DATTU]
11