[Cites
1
, Cited by
66
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Haryana & Anr vs Dharam Singh & Ors on 6 February, 2009
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2009 SC 215, 1982 (2) SCC 53, (2009) 2 SCALE 308, (2009) 2 SCT 94, (2009) 4 ALL WC 3922, 2009 (4) SCC 340, (2009) 4 SERV LR 1, 1982 ALL CJ 269.1, 1982 SCC (L&S) 175
Author:
Arijit Pasayat
Bench:
Mukundakam Sharma
,
Arijit Pasayat
REPORTABLE



                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

               CIVIL APPEAL NO. 753                OF 2009
                (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No.6485 of 2004



State of Haryana and Anr.                                ....Appellants



                                  Versus

Dharam Singh & Ors.                                     ....Respondents



                            JUDGMENT
Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.
1.    Leave granted.
2.    Challenge in this appeal is to the order passed by a Division Bench of

the Punjab and Haryana High Court allowing the writ petition filed by the
1
respondents. The High Court relied on an earlier decision rendered by it in

Civil Writ Petition No.15157 of 1998.
3.    In support of the appeal learned counsel for the appellant submitted

that the directions given by the High Court to consider the case of the

respondents for grant of one increment on account of promotion to the next

higher rank has no legal basis. It is pointed out that the respondents claim

was for promotional increments. The writ petitioners claimed promotional

increments on the basis that they were working as J.B.T. teachers and were

promoted to the post of Headmaster on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.

They have already received the same higher pay scale of the Headmaster as

a personal measure, prior to being promoted and without performing the

dues of higher responsibility at that stage. Strong reliance was placed on a

decision of this Court in
State of Haryana and Anr. v. Partap Singh and Ors.
(2006 (10) SCC 251).
4.    The ratio in that decision is as follows:
"The respondents were already getting the

            functional pay of Masters while working as JBT

            teachers.    Because of regular promotion order being
2
issued for the post of Masters, it only amounted to

regularization of the pay scale which they were already

drawing i.e. pay scale of Masters. Thus, granting of one

more increment because of regularization of the

respondents by promoting them to the post of Masters,

would not entitle them to the double benefit; though they

have already got one increment on acquiring the higher

educational qualifications and now on regular promotion

being given in the Masters' pay scale in which they were

already working, they cannot claim another benefit.

Under Rule 4.4 it could have been possible to grant them

fixation if they were continuing in the old scale of JBT

teachers and on their promotion to the post of Master,

then certainly they would have been entitled to fixation

of pay giving them the initial pay the stage of timescale

next above their substantive pay in respect of the old

post.   But they are already fixed in the pay scale of

higher post of Master which though legitimately they

were not entitled to because of the change in the policy

but they continued in the higher pay scale despite the
3
change in the policy and the Government did not take

            any further steps to put the house in proper order. Be

            that as it may, since the respondents were drawing the

            higher pay scale on acquiring of higher educational

            qualifications i.e. the Master's pay scale, and now only

            regular orders have been passed, promoting them as

            Master, there is no question of again fixing them next

            above their substantive pay in respect of the old post.

            They are not holding the old post any more and they

            were not drawing the salary of JBT teachers i.e. the old

            post. Therefore, there is no question of granting them

            the initial pay the stage of timescale next above their

            substantive pay in respect of the old post. Judicial fiat

            cannot create anomalous position against the statute."
5.    Learned counsel for the respondent on the other hand submitted that
Pratap Singh
's case (supra) has no relevance and it is factually

distinguishable.
6.    The factual scenario has been spelt out above.
4
7.    The High Court came to an abrupt conclusion regarding entitlement

relying on an earlier decision without indicating as to how the factual

scenario was similar.
8.    In the aforesaid background, we deem it fit to remit the matter to the

High Court to consider the applicability and relevance of Pratap Singh's

case (supra) to the facts of the present case and to decide the matter afresh.
9.    We request the High Court to dispose of the matter as early as

practicable. The appeal is disposed of accordingly.
......................................................J.
                                        (Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT)


                                        .................................................J.
                                        (Dr. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
New Delhi
February 06, 2009
5