[Cites
33
, Cited by
17
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Uttarakhand (Prev.U.P.) vs Mohan Singh & Ors on 12 September, 2012
Equivalent citations: 2012 AIR SCW 6147, 2012 (13) SCC 281, 2012 (10) SCALE 360, (2014) 1 UC 90, AIR 2013 SC (CIVIL) 346, (2013) 118 REVDEC 9, (2012) 10 SCALE 360, (2013) 1 ALL WC 251, AIR 2013 SUPREME COURT 38
Bench:
Dipak Misra
,
K. S. Radhakrishnan
REPORTABLE
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6479…. OF 2012
               [Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 26423 of 2009]
State of Uttarakhand
(Previously State of Uttar Pradesh)                .. Appellant

                                   Versus

Mohan Singh & Others                         .. Respondents

                                    WITH

                       CIVIL APPEAL NO.6480…. OF 2012
               [Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 26426 of 2009]
                                     AND
                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6481…. OF 2012
               [Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 28585 of 2009]


                                  O R D E R
1.    Delay condoned.
2.    Leave granted.
3.    Heard learned counsel on either side.
4.    Respondents herein had filed a suit,  being  Revenue  Case  No.  22/45
Year 1989-90,  before  the  Sub  Divisional  Magistrate/Assistant  Collector
(SDM), under
Section 229B
of the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and  Land
Reforms Act,  1950  (for  short  ‘U.P.  Act’)  stating  that  they  were  in
continuous cultivation and in possession of land measuring 0.515 hectare  in
Plot No. 137 of Khata No. 44 in village  Itawa  Tehsil  Sitargunj,  District
Nainital, for over 20  years.   Despite  having  adverse  possession,  their
names had not been recorded as Bhumidars in the Revenue Records and hence  a
declaration was sought for to that effect.
5.    The Court of the SDM, however, dismissed the suit vide judgment  dated
19.03.1991 holding that the respondents  could  not  establish  adverse  and
continuous possession over the disputed land and that the land  in  question
belonged to Tharu tribe and the Bhumidar right could not be obtained by non-
Tharu tribe persons.   Aggrieved by the said judgment, the respondents  took
up the matter in  appeal  before  the  Additional  Commissioner  (Judicial),
Kumaon Division, Nainital under Section 331 of the U.P. Act.
6.    The appeal was elaborately considered by the Additional  Commissioner,
on law as well as on facts, and he recorded  a  finding  that  the  land  in
dispute belonged to original ‘Kashtkar’ (tillers) of the  land,  members  of
Tharu tribe and on their land the respondents could not claim  any  Bhumidar
rights.  Further, it was also  held  that  the  adverse  possession  of  the
respondents for prescribed period  before  3.6.1981  could  not  be  proved.
Holding so, the appeal was dismissed vide judgment dated 12.07.1991 and  the
order of the SDM was confirmed.
7.    The respondents again took up  the  matter  in  two  separate  appeals
before the Board of Revenue under Section 331(4) of the U. P. Act  and  both
the appeals were heard together.  The respondents claimed that their  rights
had been perfected before the Act 20 of 1982 came into force  by  which  the
provision prohibiting the perfection of  title  on  the  land  belonging  to
Scheduled Tribe was added.
8.    The Board of Revenue took the  view  that  the  Lakhpal,  examined  on
behalf of the State, had admitted the possession of  the  respondent’s  land
and they were in continuous possession for over twenty years on the date  of
the institution of the suit and had perfected their title under Section  210
of the U.P. Act, before incorporation of the proviso by Act No. 20 of  1982.
 The Board of Revenue, therefore, allowed the appeals and decreed  the  suit
vide its order dated 29.1.1992 and set aside the orders passed  by  the  SDM
and the Additional Commissioner.
9.    State of Uttarakhand (previously State of Uttar Pradesh), through  the
District Collector, preferred Writ Petition (M/S)  Nos.  4031  of  2001  and
4034 of 2001 etc., before the High Court of Uttarakhand  at  Nainital.   The
High Court dismissed both the writ petitions  vide  order  dated  21.11.2008
following its earlier order dated 07.08.2008 passed  in  Writ  Petition  No.
(M/S) 4035 of  2001.   Aggrieved  by  the  same,  these  appeals  have  been
preferred by the State of Uttarakhand.
10.   Smt. Rachana Srivastava, learned counsel appearing for  the  State  of
Uttarakhand, submitted that the High Court and the  Board  of  Revenue  have
committed an error in reversing the well considered  judgments  of  the  SDM
and the Additional Commissioner.  Learned counsel pointed out that they  had
come to the definite conclusion  on  facts  that  the  respondents  had  not
established any right under Section  210  of  the  U.P.  Act.   The  Revenue
record produced  would  clearly  establish  that  the  respondents  had  not
perfected their title by adverse possession or otherwise.  Further,  it  was
also pointed that the Board of Revenue had failed to frame  any  substantial
question of law as per Section 331(4) of the U. P.  Act  and  under
Section
100
C.P.C. as amended, consequently, committed a grave  error  in  reversing
the  concurrent  findings  rendered  by   the   SDM   and   the   Additional
Commissioner.
11.   Shri Somnath Padhan, learned counsel appearing  for  the  respondents,
on the other hand, contended that the Board  of  Revenue  had  come  to  the
right conclusion that the respondents had perfected  their  title  over  the
disputed land, since the documents produced by  them  had  established  that
they were in possession for more than 20 years, but  their  names  were  not
recorded in the Revenue records as Bhumidars.  Further, it was  also  stated
that the appeals filed by the respondents before the Board of  Revenue  were
not properly contested by the defendants.  Learned counsel also pointed  out
that Lakhpal, who was examined on behalf of the  State,  had  also  admitted
the possession of the respondents and that  the  respondents  had  perfected
their title under Section 210 of the U.P. Act before  the  incorporation  of
the proviso by Act 20 of 1982.  Learned counsel also pointed  out  that  the
High Court has, therefore, rightly dismissed the  writ  petitions  filed  by
the State.
12.   Let us first examine  whether  the  Board  of  Revenue  has  correctly
appreciated the nature and scope of its power while  entertaining  a  second
appeal under Section 331(4) of the U. P.  Act.   Learned  counsel  appearing
for the State, as already indicated, submitted that  the  Board  of  Revenue
ought to have framed questions of law, if it was  satisfied  that  the  case
involved substantial questions of law.  Since the Board  of  Revenue  failed
to frame any substantial question of law, as per
Section 100(4)
C.P.C.,  the
order passed by the Board of Revenue was  illegal,  consequently,  the  writ
petitions filed by the State should  have  been  allowed.   Learned  counsel
appearing for the respondents submitted that though  the  Board  of  Revenue
did not frame any question of law as such, it had considered all aspects  of
the matter and came to the  correct  conclusion  that  the  respondents  had
proved their possession for more than 20 years and, therefore,  entitled  to
get the benefit of Section 210 of the U.P. Act.
13.   In order to examine the contentions raised by the  counsel  on  either
side, it is necessary to first examine the scope of
Section 331 (3)
and  (4)
and those provisions are extracted below for our easy reference:
“331.  Cognizance of suits, etc. under this Act.-
xxx         xxx        xxx
                         xxx         xxx        xxx
(3)   An appeal shall lie from any decree  or  from  an  order  passed
      under
Section 47
of an order of the nature mentioned in
Section 104
of
      the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (V of 1908) or in Order XLIII,  Rule
      1 of the First Schedule to that Code passed by a  court  mentioned  in
      column No. 4 of Schedule II to this Act in  proceedings  mentioned  in
      column No. 3 thereof to the court or authority mentioned in column No.
      5 thereof.
(4) A second appeal shall lie on  any  of  the  grounds  specified  in
Section 100
of the Code of  Civil Procedure, 1908 (V of 1908) from the
      final order or decree, passed in an appeal under sub-section  (3),  to
      the authority, if any,  mentioned  against  it  in  Column  6  of  the
      Scheduled aforesaid.”
14.   Sub-section (4) of
Section 331
also refers to  Column  6  of  Schedule
II.   Hence,  the  relevant  portion  of  the  Schedule  is  also  extracted
hereunder:
“SCHEDULE II
                                (
Section 331
)

|Serial |Section   |Description of |Court of original|Court of            |
|No.    |          |proceedings    |jurisdiction     |First               |
|       |          |               |                 |Second              |
|       |          |               |                 |Appeal        Appeal|
|1      |2         |3              |4                |   5                |
|       |          |               |                 |6                   |
|xxx    |xxx       |xxx            |xxx              |  xxx               |
|       |          |               |                 |xxx                 |
|34.    |229,      |Suit for       |Assistant        |Commissioner  Board |
|       |229-B,    |declaration of |Collector, 1st   |                    |
|       |229-C     |rights         |Class            |                    |
15.   Sub-section (4) of Section 331  of  U.P.  Act  states  that  a  second
appeal shall lie on “any of the grounds” specified in
Section  100
C.P.C.,
1908.
Section 100
C.P.C., as it stood prior to 1.2.1977, reads as follows:
“(1) Save where otherwise expressly provided in the body of this
      Code or by any other law for the time being in force, an appeal  shall
      lie to the High Court from every decree passed in appeal by any  Court
      subordinate to a High Court on any of the following grounds, namely:
(a)  the decision being contrary to law or to some usage  having
                 the force of law;
(b)  the decision having failed to determine some material issue
                 of law or usage having the force of law;
(c)  a substantial error or defect in the procedure provided  by
                 this Code or by any other law for the time being in  force,
                 which may possibly have produced error  or  defect  in  the
                 decision of the case upon the merits.
(2)   An appeal may lie under this  section  from  an  appellate
      decree passed ex parte.”



      After
Section 100
was substituted by the Act 104 of 1976 with effect
from 1.2.1977, it reads as follows:
“100. Second appeal.-(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in
      the body of this Code or by any other law for the time being in force,
      an appeal shall lie to the High Court  from  every  decree  passed  in
      appeal by any Court subordinate to the High Court, if the  High  Court
      is satisfied that the case involves a substantial question of law.
(2) An appeal may lie  under  this  section  from  an  appellate
      decree passed ex-parte.
(3) In an appeal under this section, the  memorandum  of  appeal
      shall precisely state the substantial question of law involved in  the
      appeal.
(4) Where  the  High  Court  is  satisfied  that  a  substantial
      question of law is involved in  any  case,  it  shall  formulate  that
      question.
(5) The appeal shall be heard on the question so formulated  and
      the respondent shall, at the hearing of  the  appeal,  be  allowed  to
      argue that the case does not involve such question:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section  shall  be  deemed  to
      take away or abridge the power of the Court to hear, for reasons to be
      recorded, the appeal on any other substantial  question  of  law,  not
      formulated by it, if it is  satisfied  that  the  case  involves  such
      question.”
16.   U.P. Act received the assent of the President on  24.1.1951.   It  was
published in the U.P. Gazette (Extraordinary) dated 26.1.1951.   Sub-section
(4) of
Section 331
has incorporated the unamended
Section  100
C.P.C.   The
question that calls for consideration is whether sub-section (4) of
Section
331
carries with it the amended
Section 100
C.P.C.  as  well,  consequently,
making  it  obligatory  for  the  Board  of  Revenue  to  frame  substantial
questions of law.
17.   The question, therefore, calls for consideration is whether  reference
to
Section 100
in sub-section (4) of
Section 331
is by  way  of  referential
legislation or  legislation  by  incorporation.   A  subsequent  legislation
often makes a reference to earlier legislation so as to make the  provisions
of  the  earlier  legislation  applicable  to  matters  covered   by   later
legislation.   Such  a  legislation  may  either  be   (i)   a   referential
legislation which merely contains a reference to  or  the  citation  of  the
provisions of the earlier statute; or (ii) a  legislation  by  incorporation
whereunder the provisions of the earlier legislation to which  reference  is
made are incorporated into the later legislation by reference.
18.   The question  how  the  above  two  principles  operate  came  up  for
consideration in
U.P. Avas Evam Vikas Parishad v. Jainul Islam  and  Another
(1998) 2 SCC 467  before a three-judge Bench of this Court and it  was  held
as follows:
“17. A subsequent legislation often  makes  a  reference  to  an
      earlier legislation so as  to  make  the  provisions  of  the  earlier
      legislation applicable to matters covered by  the  later  legislation.
      Such a legislation may either be (i), a referential legislation  which
      merely contains a reference to or the citation of  the  provisions  of
      the earlier statute; or (ii) a legislation by incorporation whereunder
      the provisions of the earlier legislation to which reference  is  made
      are incorporated into the later legislation by reference. If it  is  a
      referential legislation the provisions of the earlier  legislation  to
      which reference  is  made  in  the  subsequent  legislation  would  be
      applicable as it stands on the date of  application  of  such  earlier
      legislation to matters referred to in the subsequent  legislation.  In
      other words, any amendment made in the earlier legislation  after  the
      date  of  enactment  of  the  subsequent  legislation  would  also  be
      applicable. But if it is a legislation by incorporation  the  rule  of
      construction  is  that  repeal  of  the  earlier  statute   which   is
      incorporated does not affect operation of the  subsequent  statute  in
      which it has been incorporated. So also any amendment  in  the  statue
      which has been  so  incorporated  that  is  made  after  the  date  of
      incorporation of such statute does not affect the  subsequent  statute
      in which it is incorporated and the provisions  of  the  statue  which
      have been incorporated would remain the same as they were at the  time
      of incorporation and the subsequent amendments are not to be  read  in
      the subsequent legislation.
In the words  of  Lord  Esher,  M.R.,  the
      legal effect of such incorporation by reference  "is  to  write  those
      sections into the new Act just as if they had been actually written in
      it with the pen or printed in it,  and,  the  moment  you  have  those
      clauses in the later Act, you have no occasion to refer to the  former
      Act at all." [See: Wood's Estate, Re, Ch D at 615.] As  to  whether  a
      particular  legislation  falls  in   the   category   of   referential
      legislation or legislation by incorporation depends upon the  language
      used in the  statute  in  which  reference  is  made  to  the  earlier
      legislation and other relevant circumstances. The legal  position  has
      been thus summed up by this Court in
State of Madhya Pradesh v. M.  V.
      Narasimhan
: (SCR p. 14 : SCC p. 385, para 15)


           "where a subsequent Act incorporates provisions  of  a  previous
           Act  then  the  borrowed  provisions  become  an  integral   and
           independent  part  of  the  subsequent  Act  and   are   totally
           unaffected by any repeal or amendment in the previous Act.  This
           principle, however, will not apply in the following cases:
(a) Where the  subsequent  Act  and  the  previous  Act  are
               supplemental to each other,
(b) where the two Acts are in pari materia;
(c) where the amendment in the previous Act, if not imported
               into the subsequent Act also, would  render  the  subsequent
               Act wholly unworkable and ineffectual; and
(d)  where  the  amendment  of  the  previous  Act,   either
               expressly or  by  necessary  intendment,  applies  the  said
               provisions to the subsequent Act."
19.   Law is, therefore, clear that a distinction has to be drawn between  a
mere reference or citation of one statute into  another  and  incorporation.
In the case of mere reference of citation, a  modification,  repeal  or  re-
enactment of the statute that is referred will  also  have  effect  for  the
statute in which it is referred; but in the latter case any  change  in  the
incorporated statute by way of amendment or repeal has  no  repercussion  on
the incorporating statute.
20.   We need not further  elaborate  this  point,  since  almost  identical
question came up for consideration before a three-judge Bench of this  Court
in
Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd. v. Union of India and  Another
(1979)  2  SCC
529, wherein  this  Court  dealt  with  the  scope  of
Section  55
of  the
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 read with
Section  100
C.P.C., which reads as follows:
“55. Appeals.-  Any person aggrieved  by  any  decision  on  any
      question referred to in clause  (a),  clause  (b)  or  clause  (c)  of
section 2A
, or any order made by the Central Government under  Chapter
      III or Chapter IV, or, as the case may be,  or  the  Commission  under
      section 12A or
section 13
or section 36D or
section  37
,  may,  within
      sixty days from the date of the order, prefer an appeal to the Supreme
      Court on one or more of the grounds specified in
section  100
of  the
      Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).”
21.   This Court in the above mentioned case examined the scope  of
Section
55
read with
Section 100
CPC,  both  amended  and  unamended.
Section  55
provides inter alia that any person  aggrieved  by  an  order  made  by  the
Commissioner under
Section 13
may prefer an appeal to this Court on “one  or
more of the grounds” specified in
Section 100
C.P.C.,  1908.   When
Section
55
was enacted, namely, 27.12.1969, being the day of coming  into  force  of
the Act,
Section 100
C.P.C.  specified  three  grounds  on  which  a  second
appeal could be brought to the High  Court on one of those grounds was  that
the decision appealed against  was  contrary  to  law.   Therefore,  if  the
reference in
Section 55
was to the grounds set  out  in  the  then  existing
Section 100
, there can be no doubt that an appeal would lie  to  this  Court
under
Section 55
on  a  question  of  law.  The  above  aspects  have  been
elaborately dealt with in
Mahindra  and  Mahindra
(supra).   The  relevant
portion of the judgment is as follows:
“8.  ……. It was sufficient under
Section 100
as  it  stood  then
      that there should be a  question  of  law  in  order  to  attract  the
      jurisdiction of the High Court in second appeal and, therefore, if the
      reference in
Section 55
were to  the  grounds  set  out  in  the  then
      existing
Section 100
, there can be no doubt that an appeal  would  lie
      to this Court under
Section 55
on a question of law. But subsequent to
      the  enactment  of
Section 55
,
Section 100
of  the  Code  of   Civil
      Procedure was substituted by a new section by
Section 37
of  the  Code
      of  Civil  Procedure  (Amendment)  Act,  1976  with  effect  from  1st
      February, 1977 and the new
Section 100
provided that a  second  appeal
      shall lie to the High Court only if the High Court is  satisfied  that
      the case involves a substantial question of law. The three grounds  on
      which a second appeal could  lie  under  the  former
Section 100
were
      abrogated and in their place only one ground was substituted which was
      a highly stringent ground, namely, that there should be a  substantial
      question of law. This was the new
Section 100
which was  in  force  on
      the date when the present appeal was preferred by  the  appellant  and
      the argument of the respondents was that the  maintainability  of  the
      appeal was, therefore, required to  be  judged  by  reference  to  the
      ground specified in  the  new
Section 100
and  the  appeal  could  be
      entertained only if there was  a  substantial  question  of  law.  The
      respondents leaned heavily on
Section 8(1)
of the General Clauses Act,
      1897 which provides:
Where this Act, or any Central Act or Regulation made after
           the commencement of this Act, repeals  and  re-enacts,  with  or
           without modification, any provision of a former enactment,  then
           references in any other enactment or in any  instrument  to  the
           provision  so  repealed  shall,  unless  a  different  intention
           appears, be construed as references  to  the  provision  so  re-
           enacted.
and contended that the substitution of the new
Section 100
amounted to
      repeal and re-enactment of the former
Section 100
and,  therefore,  on
      an application of the rule of interpretation enacted in
Section 8(1)
,
      the  reference  in
Section 55
to
Section 100
must  be  construed  as
      reference to the new
Section 100
and the appeal  could  be  maintained
      only on ground specified  in  the  new
Section 100
,  that  is,  on  a
      substantial question of law. We do not think this contention  is  well
      founded. It ignores the distinction between a  mere  reference  to  or
      citation of one statute in  another  and  an  incorporation  which  in
      effect means bodily letting a provision of one enactment and making it
      a part of another. Where there is mere reference to or citation of one
      enactment in another without incorporation,
Section 8(1)
applies  and
      the repeal and re-enactment of the provision referred to or cited  has
      the effect set out in that section and the reference to the  provision
      repealed is required to be construed as reference to the provision  as
      re-enacted. Such was the case in the
Collector of Customs,  Madras  v.
      Nathella Sampathu Chetty
(
1962) 3 SCR 786 and  the  New  Central  Jute
      Mills Co. Ltd. v. The Assistant Collector of Central Excise  and  Ors.
(1970) 2 SCC 820. But where a provision of one statute is incorporated
      in another, the repeal or amendment of the former does not affect  the
      latter.  The  effect  of  incorporation  is  as   if   the   provision
      incorporated were written out in the incorporating statute and were  a
      part of it. Legislation  by  incorporation  is  a  common  legislative
      device  employed  by  the  legislature,  where  the  legislature   for
      convenience of  drafting  incorporates  provisions  from  an  existing
      statute by reference to that statute instead of setting out for itself
      at  length  the  provisions  which  it  desires  to  adopt.  Once  the
      incorporation is made, the provision incorporated becomes an  integral
      part of the statute in which it is transposed and thereafter there  is
      no need to refer to the statute from which the incorporation  is  made
      and any  subsequent  amendment  made  in  it  has  no  effect  on  the
      incorporating  statute.  Lord  Esher,   M.R.,   while   dealing   with
      legislation in incorporation in In re. Wood's Estate (1886)  31  Ch.D.
      607 pointed out at page 615 :
If a subsequent Act brings into itself by reference some of
           the clauses of a former Act, the legal effect of  that,  as  has
           often been held, is to write those sections  into  the  new  Act
           just as if they had been actually written in it with the pen, or
           printed in it, and, the moment you have  those  clauses  in  the
           later Act, you have no occasion to refer to the  former  Act  at
           all.
Lord Justice Brett, also observed to  the  same  effect  in  Clark  v.
      Bradlaugh (1881) 8 Q.B.D. 63, 69 :
...there is a rule of construction that, where a statute is
           incorporated by reference into a second statute, the  repeal  of
           the first statute by a third statute does not affect the second.
22.  The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in Secretary of State  for
 India in
Council v. Hindustan Co-operative Insurance Society  Ltd.
58  I.A.
 259 also applied the same rule. The Judicial Committee pointed out that the
 provisions of the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
having  been  incorporated  in
 the
Calcutta Improvement Trust Act, 1911
and become an integral part of it,
 the subsequent amendment of the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
by the  addition
 of Sub-section (2) in
Section  26
had  no  effect  on  the
Calcutta  Land
 Improvement Trust Act, 1911
and could not  be  read  into  it.  Sir  George
 Lowndes delivering the opinion of the Judicial Committee observed  at  page
 267:
In this country it is accepted  that  where  a  statute  is
           incorporated by reference into a second statute, the  repeal  of
           the first statute does not affect the second  :  see  the  cases
           collected in Craies on Statute Law, 3rd edn. pp. 349, 350.   …….
           The  independent  existence  of  the  two  Acts  is,  therefore,
           recognized; despite the death of the parent Act,  its  offspring
           survives in the incorporating Act. x x x


                 It seems to be no less logical to hold that  where  certain
           provisions from an existing Act have been  incorporated  into  a
           subsequent Act, no addition to the  former  Act,  which  is  not
           expressly made applicable to the subsequent Act, can  be  deemed
           to be incorporated in it, at all events if it  is  possible  for
           the subsequent Act to function effectually without the addition.
23.   This Court in Ramswarup v. Munshi and Others  (1963) 3 SCR 858 ,  held
that since the definition of "agricultural land' in  the
Punjab  Alienation
of Land Act, 1900
was bodily incorporated in  the
Punjab  Pre-emption  Act,
1913
, the repeal of the former Act had no effect on the continued  operation
of the latter. Rajagopala Ayyangar, J., speaking for the Court  observed  at
pages 868-869 of the Report:
Where the provisions of an Act are incorporated by reference  in
           a later Act the repeal of the earlier Act has,  in  general,  no
           effect upon the construction or effect of the Act in  which  its
           provisions have been incorporated.
In the  circumstances,  therefore,  the  repeal  of  the  Punjab
           Alienation of Land Act of 1900 has no effect  on  the  continued
           operation  of   the   Pre-emption   Act   and   the   expression
           'agricultural land' in the latter Act has to be read as  if  the
           definition in  the  Alienation  of  Land  Act  had  been  bodily
           transposed into it.
24.
In
Bolani Ores Ltd. v. State of Orissa
(1974) 2 SCC  777,  this  Court
proceeded on the same principle. There the question arose in regard  to  the
interpretation of Section 2(c)  of  the  Bihar  and  Orissa  Motor  Vehicles
Taxation Act, 1930 (hereinafter referred  to  as  the
Taxation  Act
).  This
section when enacted adopted the definition of 'motor vehicle' contained  in
Section 2(18)
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939. Subsequently,
Section  2(18)
was amended by Act 100 of 1956 but no corresponding amendment  was  made  in
the definition contained in
Section 2(c)
of the Taxation Act.  The  argument
advanced before the Court was that the definition in
Section  2(c)
of  the
Taxation Act was not a definition by incorporation but only a definition  by
reference  and  the  meaning  of  'motor  vehicle'  in
Section  2(c)
must,
therefore, be taken to be the same as defined from time to time  in
Section
2(18)
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939. This argument was  negatived  by  the
Court and it was held  that  this  was  a  case  of  incorporation  and  not
reference and the definition in
Section 2(18)
of  the  Motor  Vehicles  Act,
1939 as then existing was incorporation in
Section 2(c)
of the Taxation  Act
and neither repeal of the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1939
nor any amendment  in  it
would affect the definition of  'motor  vehicle'  in
Section  2(c)
of  the
Taxation Act. It is, therefore, clear that if there is mere reference  to  a
provision of one statute in another without incorporation,  then,  unless  a
different  intention  clearly  appears,  Section 8(1) would  apply  and  the
reference would be construed as a reference to the provision as  may  be  in
force from time to time in the former statute. But if  a  provision  of  one
statute is incorporated in another, any subsequent amendment in  the  former
statute or  even  its  total  repeal  would  not  effect  the  provision  as
incorporated in the latter statute. The question is to  which  category  the
present case belongs.
25.
In
Mahindra  and  Mahindra
(supra),  after  referring  to  the  above
mentioned judgment, this Court held as follows:
“We have no doubt that Section 55 is an instance of  legislation
      by incorporation and not legislation by reference. Section 55 provides
      for an appeal to this Court on "one or more of the  grounds  specified
      in Section 100". It is obvious that the legislature did  not  want  to
      confer an unlimited right of appeal, but wanted  to  restrict  it  and
      turning to Section 100, it found that the grounds there set  out  were
      appropriate  for  restricting  the  right  of  appeal  and  hence   it
      incorporated them in Section 55.  The  right  of  appeal  was  clearly
      intended to be  limited  to  the  grounds  set  out  in  the  existing
      Section 100. Those were the grounds which were before the  Legislature
      and to which the Legislature could have applied its  mind  and  it  is
      reasonable to assume that it was with reference to those specific  and
      known grounds that the Legislature intended to restrict the  right  of
      appeal. The Legislature could never have intended to limit  the  right
      of appeal to any ground or grounds which might from time to time  find
      place in Section 100 without knowing  what  those  grounds  were.  The
      grounds specified in Section 100 might be changed from  time  to  time
      having regard to the legislative policy relating to second appeals and
      it is difficult to see any valid reason  why  the  Legislature  should
      have thought it necessary that these changes should also be  reflected
      in Section 55 which deals with  the  right  of  appeal  in  a  totally
      different  context.  We  fail  to  appreciate   what   relevance   the
      legislative policy in regard to second appeals has  to  the  right  of
      appeal  under  Section 55 so  that  Section 55 should  be  inseparably
      linked or yoked to Section 100 and  whatever  changes  take  place  in
      Section 100 must be automatically read into  Section 55.  It  must  be
      remembered  that  the  Act  is  a  self-contained  Code  dealing  with
      monopolies and restrictive trade practices and it is not  possible  to
      believe that the Legislature could have made the right of appeal under
      such a code dependent on the vicissitudes through which a  section  in
      another statute might pass from time to time. The scope and  ambit  of
      the appeal could not have been intended  to  fluctuate  or  vary  with
      every change in the grounds set out in  Section 100.  Apart  from  the
      absence  of  any  rational  justification  for  doing  so,   such   an
      indissoluble linking of Section 55 with Section 100 could  conceivably
      lead to a rather absurd and  startling  result.  Take  for  example  a
      situation  where  Section 100 might  be  repealed  altogether  by  the
      Legislature-a  situation  which   cannot   be   regarded   as   wholly
      unthinkable. It the  construction  contended  for  on  behalf  of  the
      respondents were accepted, Section 55 would in such a case be  reduced
      to futility and the right of appeal would be wholly gone, because then
      there would be no grounds on which an appeal could lie. Could  such  a
      consequence ever  have  been  contemplated  by  the  Legislature?  The
      Legislature clearly intended that there should be a right  of  appeal,
      though on limited grounds, and it would be  absurd  to  place  on  the
      language of Section 55 an  interpretation  which  might,  in  a  given
      situation, result in denial of the right of appeal altogether and thus
      defeat  the  plain  object  and  purpose  of  the  section.  We  must,
      therefore, hold that on a proper interpretation the grounds  specified
      in the then existing Section 100 were incorporated  in  Section 55 and
      the substitution of the new Section 100 did not affect or restrict the
      grounds as incorporated and since the present appeal admittedly raises
      questions of law, it is clearly maintainable under Section 55. We  may
      point out that even if the  right  of  appeal  under  Section  55 were
      restricted to the ground specified in the new Section 100, the present
      appeal would still be maintainable, since it  involves  a  substantial
      question of law  relating  to  the  interpretation  of  Section 13(2).
      …………..…”
26.   We are of the view that  the  principle
laid  down  in
Mahindra  and
Mahindra and the  judgments  referred  to  earlier  clearly  apply  when  we
interpret sub-section (4) of Section 331 of the U.P. Act.  Sub-section  (4),
as we have already indicated,  has  used  the  expression  “on  any  of  the
grounds” specified in
Section 100
of  the  C.P.C.   Consequently,  the  then
existing Section 100 (i.e. section 100, as it  existed  in  1908  unamended)
was incorporated in sub-section (4) of Section 331 and substitution  of  the
new Section 100 does not affect or restrict  the  grounds  as  incorporated.
The right of appeal to  the  Board  of  Revenue  under  sub-section  (4)  of
Section 331 clearly intended to be limited to the grounds  set  out  in  the
then existing Section 100, since those were the grounds  which  were  before
the Legislature and to which the Legislature could  have  applied  its  mind
and it is reasonable to assume that it was with reference to those  specific
and known grounds that the  Legislature  intended  to  limit  the  right  of
appeal.
27.   The appeal before the Board of Revenue  would,  therefore,  lie  on  a
question of law.  This legal aspect was not considered  properly  either  by
the Board of Revenue or by the High Court.  Further,  we  also  notice  that
the Board of Revenue has not examined the provisions of the land record  and
Lekhpal Diary No., date and  P.A.  10.    The  Additional  Commissioner  had
specifically noticed that P.A.10 which had been  filed  pertaining  to  year
1976 did not bear any signature and the same was found to  be  doubtful,  as
to whether  the  original  ‘Kashtkar’  (tillers)  of  the  land  in  dispute
belonged to Tharu tribe, was  also  not  properly  examined.   Further,  the
Board of Revenue also should have examined  whether  the  land  belonged  to
Tharu tribe and the plaintiff could claim the benefit of Section 210 of  the
U.P. Act.   All  these  aspects  are  very  vital  for  a  proper  and  just
adjudication of the dispute, which has not been done.
28.   In such circumstances, we are inclined to allow the  appeals  and  set
aside the order passed by the High Court as well as that  of  the  Board  of
Revenue and the matter is  remanded  to  the  Board  of  Revenue  for  fresh
consideration, in accordance with law.  However, we are not  expressing  any
opinion on the merits of the case, since we are remitting the matter to  the
Board of Revenue.  The Board of Revenue will pass the final orders within  a
period of three months from the date of receipt of this order.
……………………..…………….J.
                                        (K. S. Radhakrishnan)






                                        …………………………………….J.
                                        (Dipak Misra)
New Delhi,
September 12, 2012