[Cites
29
, Cited by
128
]
Supreme Court of India
Bhartiya Seva Samaj Trust Tr.Pres.& Anr vs Yogeshbhai Ambalal Patel & Anr on 14 September, 2012
Equivalent citations: AIR 2012 SUPREME COURT 3285, 2012 AIR SCW 5125, 2012 LAB. I. C. 3971, (2012) 3 SERVLJ 412, (2012) 5 MPHT 411, (2013) 1 SERVLR 533, 2012 (8) SCALE 698, AIR 2012 SC (CIVIL) 2728, (2012) 4 LAB LN 513, (2012) 3 CURLR 423, (2012) 135 FACLR 554, (2012) 7 MAD LJ 127, (2012) 4 SCT 378, (2012) 8 SCALE 698
Author:
B.S. Chauhan
Bench:
Fakkir Mohamed Ibrahim Kalifulla
,
B.S. Chauhan
Reportable


                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6463 OF 2012




      Bhartiya Seva Samaj Trust Tr. Pres. & Anr.
      ..Appellants




                                   Versus




      Yogeshbhai Ambalal Patel & Anr.                      … Respondents








                               J U D G M E N T
Dr. B.S. CHAUHAN, J.
1. This appeal has been preferred against the impugned judgment and order
      dated 26.7.2012 passed by the High  Court  of  Gujarat,  Ahmedabad  in
      Letters Patent Appeal No.1367 of 2008  in  Special  Civil  Application
      No.6346 of 2006.
2. Facts and circumstances giving rise to this appeal are that:
A. The appellant Trust runs a Primary School wherein a  large  number  of
      students are getting education and a  large  number  of  teachers  are
      imparting education.  Respondent No.1 was appointed  as  an  Assistant
      Teacher on 1.7.1993 alongwith a large number of persons  in  pursuance
      of the advertisement inviting application for the posts.
      B.     The appellant Trust issued a show cause notice dated  26.3.1998
      to the respondent No.1 as why his services should  not  be  terminated
      and alongwith the said notice he was also  given  the  cheque  towards
      salary for the month of March 1998. He was asked to  submit  reply  to
      the said notice within 15 days.  The notice was issued on  the  ground
      that he did not possess the eligibility for the said post  and  proper
      procedure had not  been  followed  for  making  the  appointment.   C.
      The respondent No.1 did not submit any reply to the aforesaid  notice.
      Thus, the appellant Trust passed the order dated 30.4.1998 terminating
      his services on the ground that his appointment was  in  contravention
      of the statutory  provisions  of  Bombay  Primary  Education  (Gujarat
      Amendment) Act, 1986  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  ‘Act’)  and
      particularly,  in  violation  of  the   Schedule   attached   thereto.
      Alongwith the order of termination, he was also served a cheque for  a
      sum of Rs.1710/- towards the salary for the month of  April  1998  and
      was directed to hand over the charge to the Principal.
   D. Aggrieved, the respondent  No.1  challenged  the  aforesaid  order  by
      filing Application  No.69/98  before  the  Gujarat  Primary  Education
      Tribunal on 11.5.1998 and asked for quashing of the said order and for
      reinstatement with all back wages.  The appellant contested  the  said
      application and submitted the written statement etc.     Parties  were
      given the liberty by the Tribunal to  examine  and  cross-examine  the
      witnesses examined by the parties.  The  Tribunal  vide  judgment  and
      order dated 21.1.2006 allowed the application of the  respondent  No.1
      directing the appellant to reinstate him and also to pay him the  back
      wages.
E.    Aggrieved, the appellant filed Special Civil Application No.6346
      of 2006 before the High Court of Gujarat challenging the said order of
      the Tribunal dated 21.1.2006.
F.    The learned Single Judge vide order dated  13.11.2008  dismissed
      the said application filed by the appellant Trust on various  grounds,
      inter-alia, that  the  termination  was  in  utter  disregard  of  the
      statutory provisions of Section 40B of the Act which requires to serve
      a show cause notice to  the  employee  and  seeking  approval  of  the
      statutory  authorities  before  giving  effect   to   the   order   of
      termination.
G.    Aggrieved, the appellant challenged the said judgment and  order
      by filing Letters  Patent  Appeal  No.1367  of  2008  which  has  been
      dismissed by order dated 1.12.2008.
Hence, this appeal.
3.    Shri Percy Kavina, learned Senior Advocate appearing  on  behalf
      of the appellant, has submitted that the respondent No.1 possesses the
      qualification of B.Sc.; B.Ed., but the required  qualification  for  a
      Primary School  Teacher  is  Primary  Teachers  Certificate  (PTC)  as
      provided in Clause (6) of Schedule F to the Act as applicable  to  all
      Primary Schools in the State of Gujarat.  Thus, the respondent did not
      possess the qualification making him eligible for the post.  Once  the
      order is bad in its inception, it cannot be  sanctified  by  lapse  of
      time. The order of termination ought not to have been interfered  with
      as the order setting aside the same had revived  the  wrong  order  of
      appointment, which is not permissible in law.  The courts  below  must
      have ensured strict compliance of the statutory provisions of the  Act
      and have swayed with unwarranted sympathy with  the  respondent  No.1.
      Thus, the appeal deserves to be allowed.
4.    On the contrary, the respondent No.1 appeared  in  person  as  a
      Caveator and has submitted that he had  applied  in  pursuance  of  an
      advertisement wherein the eligibility i.e. qualification was shown  as
      B.Sc.;B.Ed/B.A.;B.Ed.  The vacancies  had  been  advertised  in  local
      newspaper having wide circulation.  Most of the teachers in the School
      run by the appellant had been appointed though they possessed the same
      qualification  i.e.,  B.Sc.;B.Ed./B.A.;B.Ed.   A   large   number   of
      candidates  had  applied  for  the  post  alongwith  respondent   no.1
      possessing the same qualification and they had been selected.  None of
      them has been removed.  The respondent No.1  had  been  given  hostile
      discrimination as the teachers  having  the  same  qualification  duly
      appointed  alongwith  respondent  No.1  are  still  working   in   the
      appellant’s School.  Respondent No.1 had been chosen to be removed for
      extraneous reasons and had been deprived of his legitimate dues.   His
      selection was made by the Committee consisting of the  representatives
      of the appellant Trust as well as  Government  officials  after  being
      fully satisfied regarding the eligibility of the respondent No.1.  The
      appellant Trust cannot be  permitted  either  to  make  discrimination
      amongst employees or to take the benefit of its own mistake  and  that
      too at such a belated stage.  The appeal lacks merit and is liable  to
      be dismissed.
5.    We have considered the rival submissions made by learned counsel
      for the parties and perused the record.
Section 40B of the Act reads as under:-
Section 40B: Dismissal removal or reduction in rank of teachers:-
(1)(a) No teacher of a recognized private primary school  shall
           be dismissed or removed  or  reduced  in  rank  nor  service  be
           otherwise terminated until –
i) he has been given by the manager an opportunity of  showing
                 cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard  to
                 him; and
ii) the action proposed to be taken in regard to him  has  been
                 approved in writing by the administrative  officer  of  the
                 school board in  the  jurisdiction  of  which  the  private
                 school is situated.
(b)    The  administrative  officer  shall  communicate  to  the
           manager of the school in writing  his  approval  of  the  action
           proposed, within a period of forty five days from  the  date  of
           receipt by the administrative officer of such proposal.
(2)   Where the  administrative  officer  fails  to  communicate
           either approval or disapproval within a  period  of  forty  five
           days specified in clause (b) of sub-section  (1),  the  proposed
           action  shall  be  deemed  to  have   been   approved   by   the
           administrative officer on the expiry of the said period.”
6.    The Tribunal as well as the High Court, after  appreciating  the
      evidence on record, recorded the findings to the effect that there had
      been two fold violation of Section 40B of the Act, firstly, no  notice
      was issued to the respondent No.1 and secondly, no approval  from  the
      competent authority was sought for by the School management.
7.    Shri Percy Kavina, learned Senior Advocate appearing  on  behalf
      of the appellant, has fairly conceded to  the  effect  that  the  said
      statutory provisions of Section 40B of the Act had  been  violated  on
      both counts.
In view of the above, the facts and circumstances of the case do
      not warrant review of the orders passed by the High Court as  well  as
      by the Tribunal.  However, Shri Percy Kavina has  insisted  that  this
      Court should not permit an illegality to perpetrate as the  respondent
      No.1  had  been  appointed  illegally  and  he  did  not  possess  the
      eligibility for the post.  The Primary  School  children  have  to  be
      taught by qualified persons and this Court has consistently held  that
      B.Sc.; B.Ed./B.A.;B.Ed. is not equivalent to PTC which is the required
      qualification in clause (6) of Schedule F attached to the Act.  Clause
      (6) of Schedule F reads as under:-
“Clause 6. Qualification – The  Management  shall  appoint  only
           trained teacher who have passed the Secondary School Certificate
           Examination  and   also   the   Primary   Training   Certificate
           Examination.
For special  subjects,  teachers  shall  be  recruited  in
           accordance with the qualification laid down  by  the  Government
           for such teacher under the vacancies in the  District  Education
           Committees or Municipal School Boards in the State from time  to
           time.”




                Thus, it has been submitted by Shri  Percy  Kavina  that  in
      order to enforce the statutory  requirement,  this  Court  should  set
      aside the impugned judgment and order as it has  revived  the  illegal
      appointment of the respondent No.1.
8.    It is a settled legal proposition that the court should not  set
      aside the order which appears to be  illegal,  if  its  effect  is  to
      revive another illegal order. It is for the reason  that  in  such  an
      eventuality the illegality would perpetuate and it would put a premium
      to the undeserving party/person.  (Vide:
Gadde  Venkateswara  Rao  v.
      Government of Andhra  Pradesh  &  Ors.
,  AIR  1966  SC  828;
Maharaja
      Chintamani Saran Nath Shahdeo v. State of Bihar & Ors.
,  AIR  1999  SC
      3609;
Mallikarjuna Mudhagal Nagappa & Ors. v.  State  of  Karnataka  &
      Ors.
, AIR 2000 SC 2976;
Chandra Singh v.  State of Rajasthan
, AIR 2003
      SC 2889; and State of Uttaranchal & Anr. v. Ajit Singh Bhola  &  Anr.,
      (2004) 6 SCC 800).
9.
In
State of Orissa & Anr. v. Mamata Mohanty
, (2011) 3 SCC  436,
      this Court while considering the similar issue where teachers had been
      appointed without possessing the eligibility  has  held  that  if  the
      appointment order itself  is  bad  in  its  inception,  it  cannot  be
      rectified and a person lacking eligibility cannot be appointed  unless
      the statutory provision provides for relaxation of  eligibility  in  a
      particular statute and order of relaxation has been passed in terms of
      the said order.
10.
In
Andhra  Kesari  Education  Society  v.  Director  of  School
      Education  &  Ors.
,  AIR  1989  SC  183,  this  Court  recognised  the
      importance of eligibility fixed by the Legislature in the said   case,
      pointing out that, as those persons have to handle with the tiny tods,
      therefore,  the  teacher  alone  could  bring  out  their  skills  and
      intellectual activities. He is the engine of the  educational  system.
      He is a superb  instrument  in  awakening  the  children  to  cultural
      values. He must possess potentiality to deliver enlightened service to
      the society. His quality should be such as could inspire and  motivate
      into action the benefiter. He  must  keep  himself  abreast  of  ever-
      changing conditions. He is not to perform in wooden and  unimaginative
      way; he must eliminate unwarranted tendencies and attitudes and infuse
      nobler and national ideas in younger generation; and  his  involvement
      in national integration is more important; indeed, indispensable.
11.   IN
BANDHUA MUKTI MORCHA V. UNION OF INDIA & ORS.
, 1984  SC  802,
      THIS COURT HELD THAT
ARTICLE 21
READ  WITH
ARTICLES  39
,  41
AND
42
PROVIDES FOR PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION OF HEALTH AND  STRENGTH  ALSO
      OF TENDER AGE CHILDREN AGAINST  ABUSE  OF  OPPORTUNITIES  AND  FURTHER
      PROVIDES FOR PROVIDING THE EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES.
12.   In Miss.
Mohini Jain v. State of Karnataka & Ors.
, AIR  1992  SC
      1858, this Court while dealing  with  this  issue  held  that  without
      making “right to education” under
Article 41
of  the  Constitution  a
      reality, the fundamental rights under Chapter III shall remain  beyond
      the reach of the large majority which are  illiterate.  The  State  is
      under an obligation  to  make  an  endeavour  to  provide  educational
      facilities at all levels to its  citizens.  The  right  to  education,
      therefore, is concomitant to the fundamental  rights  enshrined  under
      Part III of the Constitution to provide  educational  institutions  at
      all  levels  for  the  benefit  of  the  citizens.   The   Educational
      Institutions must function to the  best  advantage  of  the  citizens.
      Opportunity to acquire education cannot  be  confined  to  the  richer
      section of the society.
13.
In
Unni Krishnan, J.P. & Ors. v. State of Andhra Pradesh & Ors.
,
      AIR 1993 SC 2178, this Court considered a large number of judgments on
      this issue and came to the conclusion that the right to  education  is
      contained in as many as three Articles in Part IV, viz.,
Articles  41
,
      45
and
46
, which shows the importance attached to it by the  founding-
      fathers. Even some of the Articles in Part III, viz.,
Articles 29
and
30
speak of education. The
Court further held
that right to compulsory
      and free education up to the age of 14 years is a fundamental right of
      every child.
14.   In view to have greater emphasis,  the  86th  Amendment  in  the
      Constitution of India was made in 2002 introducing  the  provision  of
Article 21-A
, declaring the right to free and compulsory education  of
      the children between the age of 6 to 14 years as a fundamental  right.
      Correspondingly, the provisions of
Article 45
have been amended making
      it an obligation on the part of the State to impart free education  to
      the children. Amendment in
Article 51-A
of the Constitution  inserting
      the clause-‘k’ has also been made making it obligatory on the part  of
      the parents to provide opportunities for education to  their  children
      between the age of 6 to 14 years.
15.   Thus, in view  of  the  above,  it  is  evident  that  imparting
      elementary and basic education is a constitutional obligation  on  the
      State as well as societies running educational institutions.  When  we
      talk of education, it means not only learning how to  write  and  read
      alphabets or get mere information but it means  to  acquire  knowledge
      and wisdom so that he may lead a  better  life  and  become  a  better
      citizen to serve the nation in a better way.
The policy framework behind education in India  is  anchored  in
      the belief that the values of equality, social justice  and  democracy
      and the creation of a just and humane society  can  be  achieved  only
      through provision of inclusive elementary education to all.  Provision
      of free and compulsory education of satisfactory quality  to  children
      from disadvantaged and weaker sections is, therefore, not  merely  the
      responsibility  of  schools  run  or  supported  by  the   appropriate
      Governments, but also of schools which are not dependent on Government
      funds.
Every generation looks up to the next generation with  the  hope
      that they shall build up a nation better than the present.  Therefore,
      education which empowers the future generation should  always  be  the
      main concern for any nation.
16.   Right to education flows directly from
Article 21
and is one  of
      the most important fundamental rights.
In
Ashoka Kumar Thakur v. Union
      of India
(2008) 6 SCC 1, while deciding the issue of reservation, this
      Court made a reference to the provisions of
Articles 15(3)
and
21A
of
      the  Constitution,  observing  that  without
Article  21A
the  other
      fundamental rights are rendered meaningless. Therefore, there  has  to
      be a need to earnestly on implementing
Article 21A.
Without education a citizen may never come to know of his  other
      rights. Since there is no corresponding constitutional right to higher
      education – the fundamental stress has to be on primary and elementary
      education, so that a proper foundation for  higher  education  can  be
      effectively laid.
Hence, we see that education is an issue, which has been treated
      at length in our  Constitution.  It  is  a  well  accepted  fact  that
      democracy cannot be flawless; but, we can  strive  to  minimize  these
      flaws with proper education.
Democracy depends for its  very  life  on  a  high  standard  of
      general,  vocational  and  professional  education.  Dissemination  of
      learning with search for new knowledge with discipline all round  must
      be maintained at all costs.
17.   This Court in
State of Tamil Nadu & Ors. v. K.  Shyam  Sunder  &
      Ors.
, (2011) 8 SCC 737 held as under:
“In the post constitutional era,  attempts  have  been  made  to
           create  an  egalitarian  society  by  removing  disparity  among
           individuals and in  order  to  do  so,  education  is  the  most
           important and effective means. There has been an earnest  effort
           to bring education out of commercialism/merchantilism.
The right of a child should not be restricted only to free
           and compulsory education but should be extended to have  quality
           education without any discrimination  on  economic,  social  and
           cultural grounds”.
18.   In view  of  the  above,  education  and  particularly  that  of
      elementary/basic education has to be  qualitative  and  for  that  the
      trained teachers are required. The Legislature  in  its  wisdom  after
      consultation  with  the  expert  body  fixes  the  eligibility  for  a
      particular discipline taught in a school.  Thus,  the  eligibility  so
      fixed require very strict  compliance  and  any  appointment  made  in
      contravention thereof must be held to be void.
19.   In ordinary circumstances, the instant case could be decided  in
      the light of the aforesaid backdrop.  However, the Division  Bench  of
      the High Court has given full details of the  teachers  who  had  been
      appointed alongwith the respondent  No.1  in  pursuance  of  the  same
      advertisement   and   possessing    the    same    qualification    of
      B.Sc.;B.Ed./B.A.;B.Ed. They are still working with the same management
      and some of them had been as under:
(i)   Mrs. Rekhaben Virabhai Patel
(ii)  Mrs. Urmilaben Chandrakantbhai Mistry
iii) Mr. Dilipbhai Naranbhai Patel
iv) Mrs. Ritaben Shaileshbhai Joshi
20.   The High Court further recorded a finding that the list of  such
      persons was merely illustrative and not exhaustive.
21.    A person alleging his own infamy cannot be heard at any  forum,
      what to talk of  a  Writ  Court,  as  explained  by  the  legal  maxim
      ‘allegans suam  turpitudinem  non  est  audiendus'.  If  a  party  has
      committed a wrong, he cannot be permitted to take the benefit  of  his
      own wrong. (Vide:
G. S. Lamba & Ors. v. Union of  India  &  Ors.
,  AIR
      1985 SC 1019;
Narender Chadha & Ors. v. Union of  India  &  Ors.
,  AIR
      1986 SC 638;
Molly Joseph @ Nish v. George Sebastian @ Joy
,  AIR  1997
      SC 109;
Jose v. Alice & Anr.
, (1996) 6 SCC 342; and
T.  Srinivasan  v.
      T. Varalakshmi (Mrs.
), AIR 1999 SC 595).
This concept is also explained by the legal maxims ‘Commodum ex
      injuria sua nemo habere debet’; and 'nullus commodum capere potest  de
      injuria sua propria'.  (See also:
Eureka   Forbes  Ltd.  v.  Allahabad
      Bank & Ors.
, (2010) 6 SCC 193; and
Inderjit Singh Grewal v. State  of
      Punjab & Anr.
, (2011) 12 SCC 588).
22.   Thus, it is evident that the appellant  has  acted  with  malice
      alongwith respondent and held  that  it  was  not  merely  a  case  of
      discrimination  rather  it  is  a  clear  case  of  victimisation   of
      respondent No.1 by School Management for  raising  his  voice  against
      exploitation.
23.   After going through the material on record and  considering  the
      submissions  made  by  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  and  the
      respondent No.1-in-person, we do not find any cogent reason whatsoever
      to interfere with the aforesaid findings of fact.
24.   The appeal lacks merit and is, accordingly, dismissed.
……………………………………………J.
                            (Dr. B.S. CHAUHAN)




                        ..……………………………………………………J.
                       (FAKKIR MOHAMED IBRAHIM KALIFULLA)




    New Delhi,
    September 14, 2012