[Cites
8
, Cited by
446
]
Supreme Court of India
Ramesh Ahluwalia vs State Of Punjab & Ors on 13 September, 2012
Author:
H.L. Gokhale
Bench:
H.L. Gokhale
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6634   OF  2012
                    (Arising out of SLP(C) No.7232/2011)


RAMESH AHLUWALIA                        Appellant(s)


                           :VERSUS:
STATE OF PUNJAB & ORS.                 Respondent(s)








                                  O R D E R
Leave granted.
We have heard the learned counsel for  the  parties  at  length  and
also perused the entire records.
The Appellant Ramesh Ahluwalia  was  working  as  an  Administrative
Officer in the DAV Public School,  Lawrence  Road,  Amritsar.  He  has  been
serving in that institution since 1st April, 1983.  At  the  relevant  time,
the Appellant was working as an Administrative Officer,  to  which  post  he
was promoted by order dated 1st August, 2005.   It  appears  that  one  lady
official Smt. Jaswinder Kaur made  a  complaint  to  the  Principal  of  the
School on 28th November, 2006 about the alleged misconduct of the  Appellant
on 17.11.2006. On the basis of the aforesaid misconduct, the  Appellant  was
issued a warning letter by the Principal Smt. Neera Sharma on 9th  December,
2006. On 21st December, 2006,  Smt.  Jaswinder  Kaur  made  another  written
complaint addressed to the Manager.
The Appellant complains that without  granting  any  opportunity  of
being heard, on 1st February, 2007 he  was  downgraded  and  transferred  to
another school to work as an Assistant.   This  order  was  also  passed  by
Principal Smt. Neera Sharma.  Again, on 8th February, 2007,  Smt.  Jaswinder
Kaur submitted a further affidavit regarding  her  complaint.  Therefore,  a
Memorandum/  Charge-sheet  dated  17th  March,  2007  was  served  upon  the
Appellant under Bye-law 47 of  the  Central  Board  of  Secondary  Education
Affiliation Bye-Laws. After obtaining the explanation of the Appellant,  the
Manager of the Managing Committee of  the  school,  being  the  Disciplinary
Authority, appointed an Inquiry Officer  and  a  regular  inquiry  was  held
against the Appellant.
We may notice here that the Principal  Smt.  Neera  Sharma  appeared
before the Inquiry Officer  as  Management  Witness  No.2.  Ultimately,  the
charges were said to have been proved against the  Appellant.  Subsequently,
the Inquiry Report  was  served  on  the  Appellant  and  he  was  given  an
opportunity to  make  a  representation  against  the  same.  The  Appellant
submitted  his  representation  detailing  his  various  contentions.   Upon
consideration of  the  entire  matter,  it  appears  that  the  Disciplinary
Authority passed an order on 8th January, 2008 directing  the  Appellant  to
be removed from service.
Against the aforesaid order of removal, the Appellant  submitted  an
appeal before the Disciplinary  Committee  under  Bye-Law  49  of  the  CBSE
Affiliation Bye-Laws.  Bye-Law 49 of the said Bye-Laws provides as under:
“49. Disciplinary Committee
1) In case the employee wishes to appeal against  the  order  of
           the Disciplinary Authority, the appeal shall be  referred  to  a
           Disciplinary Committee. The Disciplinary Committee shall consist
           of the following:
(a) The Chairman of the School  Managing  Committee  or  in  his
           absence any member of the Committee, nominated by him.
(b) The Manager  of  the  school,  and  where  the  disciplinary
           proceedings is against him/her any other person of the Committee
           nominated by the Chairman.
(c) A nominee of the Board appropriate  authority.  H/she  shall
           act as an adviser.
(d) The Head  of  the  school,  except  where  the  disciplinary
           proceeding is against him/her, the  Head  of  any  other  school
           nominated by the CBSE or Director of Education in case  the  Act
           so provides.
(e) One teacher who is a member of SMC of the  school  nominated
           by the Chairman of the Committee.
2)  The  Disciplinary  Committee  shall  carefully  examine  the
           findings of the inquiry officer  reasons  for  imposing  penalty
           recored by the Disciplinary Authority and the representation  by
           the employee and pass orders as it may deem fit.”

        A perusal of the aforesaid Bye-Law clearly shows that  an  order  of
the  Disciplinary  Authority  can  be  challenged  before  the  Disciplinary
Committee by way of filing an appeal. The constitution of  the  Disciplinary
Committee includes, amongst others, Head of the school. In  accordance  with
the aforesaid Bye-law, the Appellant duly submitted an appeal but  the  same
was rejected by the Disciplinary Committee on 18th/19th of  December,  2008.
Aggrieved by the aforesaid decision, the  Appellant  challenged  the
order of the Disciplinary Committee before the  High  Court  by  filing  CWP
No.11691/2009. The  aforesaid  writ  petition  has  been  dismissed  by  the
learned Single Judge in limine, but by passing a speaking order. Relying  on
the judgment of this Court in
Zee Telefilms Ltd. & Anr. vs. Union  of  India
& Ors.
, (2005) 4 SCC 649, the Appellant had submitted that he  was  entitled
to invoke the extraordinary jurisdiction of the  High  Court  under
Article
226
of the Constitution of India as the  respondent  school  was  performing
public functions  by providing education to young  children.  The  aforesaid
submission of the Appellant has been rejected by the  learned  Single  Judge
with the following observations:
“After hearing counsel, for the Appellant, I  do  not  find  any
           force in the contention raised by him.  The  respondent  school,
           being an unaided  and  a  private  school  being  managed  by  a
           Society, is not an instrumentality of the State, in my  opinion,
           the Appellant  has  the  efficacious  remedy  to  challenge  the
           impugned orders before the Civil Court.  In  the  instant  case,
           while challenging the impugned orders, the Appellant has  raised
           certain disputed questions of facts.  Thus,  in  the  facts  and
           circumstances of the case, I am not inclined to  entertain  this
           petition and the same is accordingly, dismissed with liberty  to
           the Appellant to avail his alternative remedy.”


        Against the order passed by the learned Single Judge, the  Appellant
filed Letters Patent Appeal No.368 of 2010 before the Division Bench of  the
High Court. The Division Bench, vide its order  dated  25th  October,  2010,
dismissed the LPA filed by the Appellant  by  observing  that  there  is  no
infirmity in the order passed  by  the  learned  Single  Judge.  Hence,  the
present special leave petition by the Appellant.
Mr. Parikh, learned counsel appearing on  behalf  of  the  Appellant
submitted that the judgment of the learned  Single  Judge  as  also  of  the
Division Bench of the High Court are contrary to the law
laid down  by
this
Court in a catena of judgments.
He has made a reference to the judgments  of
this Court in
Andi  Mukta  Sadguru  Shree  Muktajee  Vandas  Swami  Suvarna
Jayanti Mahotsav Smarak Trust and Ors. Vs. V.R. Rudani and  Ors.
,  (
1989)  2
SCC 691, Unni Krishnan J.P. and Ors. Vs. State of Andhra  Pradesh  and  Ors.
(
1993) 1 SCC 645 and Zee Telefilms Ltd. & Anr. Vs. Union  of  India  &  Ors.
(2005) 4 SCC 649 and submitted that even though the respondent School  would
not    fall    within    the    definition    of    “State”     or     other
authority/instrumentality of the State under
Article 12
of the  Constitution
of India, yet the writ  petition  would  be  maintainable  as  the  Managing
Committee of the  School  is  running  schools  throughout  India  and  thus
performing very important public functions.
On the other hand,  Mr.  S.S.  Ray,  learned  counsel  appearing  on
behalf of respondent Nos.2-4  submitted  that  no  writ  petition  would  be
maintainable against  the  respondent  -  institution.
In  support  of  his
submission, learned counsel has placed  reliance  in  the  case  of
Pradeep
Kumar Biswas Vs. Indian Institute of Chemical Biology & Ors.
, (2002)  5  SCC
111,  particularly  making  reference  to  paragraph  40  of  the  aforesaid
judgment. Paragraph 40 of the aforesaid judgment is extracted hereunder:
“The picture that ultimately emerges is that the tests formulated
           in Ajay Hasia are not a rigid set of principles so that if a body
           falls within any one of them it must, ex hypothesi, be considered
           to be a State within the meaning of
Article 12.
The  question  in
           each case would be whether in the light of the  cumulative  facts
           as  established,  the  body  is  financially,  functionally   and
           administratively  dominated  by  or  under  the  control  of  the
           Government. Such control  must  be  particular  to  the  body  in
           question and must be pervasive. If this is found then the body is
           a State within
Article 12.
On the other hand, when the control is
           merely regulatory whether under statute or  otherwise,  it  would
           not serve to make the body a State.”


        We have considered the submissions made by the learned  counsel  for
the parties.
In our opinion, in view of the judgment rendered by this  Court
in the case of
Andi  Mukta  Sadguru  Shree  Muktajee  Vandas  Swami  Suvarna
Jayanti Mahotsav Smarak Trust
(supra), there can be no  doubt  that  even  a
purely private body, where the  State  has  no  control  over  its  internal
affairs, would be amenable to the  jurisdiction  of  the  High  Court  under
Article 226
of the  Constitution,  for  issuance  of  a  writ  of  mandamus.
Provided, of course, the private body is performing public  functions  which
are normally expected to be performed  by  the  State  Authorities.  In  the
aforesaid case, this Court  was  also  considering  a  situation  where  the
services of a Lecturer had been terminated who was working  in  the  college
run by the Andi Mukta Sadguru Shree Muktajee Vandas  Swami  Suvarna  Jayanti
Mahotsav Smarak Trust.  In  those  circumstances,  this  Court  has  clearly
observed as under :
“20. The term “authority” used in
Article 226
, in  the  context,
           must receive a liberal meaning unlike the term  in
Article  12.
Article 12
is relevant only for the purpose  of  enforcement  of
           fundamental rights under
Article 32.
Article 226
confers  power
           on the High  Courts  to  issue  writs  for  enforcement  of  the
           fundamental rights as well as non-fundamental rights. The  words
           “any person or authority” used in
Article  226
are,  therefore,
           not  to  be  confined  only   to   statutory   authorities   and
           instrumentalities of the State. They may cover any other  person
           or body performing public duty. The form of the  body  concerned
           is not very much relevant. What is relevant is the nature of the
           duty imposed on the body. The duty must be judged in  the  light
           of positive obligation owed by the person or  authority  to  the
           affected party. No matter by what means the duty is imposed,  if
           a positive obligation exists mandamus cannot be denied.
22. Here again we may point out that mandamus cannot  be  denied
           on the ground that the duty to be enforced is not imposed by the
           statute. Commenting on the development of this law, Professor de
           Smith states: “To be enforceable by mandamus a public duty  does
           not necessarily have to be one imposed by  statute.  It  may  be
           sufficient for the duty to have been imposed by charter,  common
           law, custom or even contract.” We share this view. The  judicial
           control over the fast expanding maze  of  bodies  affecting  the
           rights  of  the  people  should  not  be  put  into   watertight
           compartment. It should remain flexible to meet the  requirements
           of variable circumstances. Mandamus is a very wide remedy  which
           must be easily available “to  reach  injustice  wherever  it  is
           found”. Technicalities should not come in the  way  of  granting
           that  relief  under
Article  226.
We,  therefore,  reject  the
           contention urged for the appellants on  the  maintainability  of
           the writ petition.”




        The aforesaid observations have  been  repeated  and  reiterated  in
numerous judgments of this Court including the  judgment  in
Unni  Krishnan
and Zee Telefilms Ltd.
(supra), brought to our notice by the learned  counsel
for the Appellant Mr.Parikh.
In view of the law
laid down  in
the  aforementioned  judgments  of
this Court, the judgment of the learned Single Judge as  also  the  Division
Bench of the High Court cannot be sustained  on  the  proposition  that  the
writ petition would not be maintainable  merely  because  the  respondent  –
institution  is  a  purely  unaided  private  educational  institution.  The
appellant had specifically taken  the  plea  that  the  respondents  perform
public  functions,  i.e.  providing   education   to   children   in   their
institutions throughout India.
We must, however, notice that the learned Single  Judge  has  dismissed  the
writ petition also on the ground that  it  involves  disputed  questions  of
fact. Mr.Ray, learned counsel appearing on behalf  of  the  respondents  has
submitted that the appellant actually has not been able  to  contradict  any
of the proven facts. According to the learned counsel,  the  remedy  of  the
appellant is to file a civil suit,  if  so  advised.   Therefore,  the  writ
petition has been rightly dismissed by the High Court.
Mr. Parikh, learned counsel  for  the  appellant,  however,  submits
that civil suit would not be an alternative efficacious remedy in the  facts
of this case.
In support of  this  submission,  he  brought  to  our  notice
certain observations made by a Constitution Bench of this  Court  in
T.M.A.
Rai Foundation and Ors. vs. State of Karnataka and Ors.
, (2002) 8  SCC  481.
Learned counsel pointed out that, in the  aforesaid  case,  this  Court  had
directed that the Appellate Tribunal should be set up in  each  district  of
each State to hear appeals over the  decisions  taken  by  the  Disciplinary
Bodies of even purely private educational institutions.  It  was  emphasised
that speedy  resolution  of  the  disputes  between  the  teachers  and  the
management is in the interest of all, i.e. students, management as  well  as
the concerned teachers. It appears that at the time when the appeal  of  the
appellant was heard, such a tribunal had not been set up  in  the  State  of
Punjab. The appeal filed before the  Disciplinary  Committee  was  also  not
referred to the District Judge by the Disciplinary Committee.
We are of the  considered  opinion  that  since  the  writ  petition
clearly involves disputed questions of fact,  it  is  appropriate  that  the
matter should be decided by an appropriate Tribunal/Court.
At this stage, we are informed that the State of Punjab has  set  up
a tribunal, namely, Punjab  School  Education  Tribunal,  Mohali,  which  is
empowered to entertain  appeals  even  where  orders  have  been  passed  by
unaided private educational institutions. In that view of  the  matter,  the
remedy  of  appeal  is  clearly  available  to  the  appellant.  It   would,
therefore, be appropriate for the appellant to avail the  remedy  of  appeal
before the aforementioned Education Tribunal.
Mr. Parikh, learned counsel for the appellant has pointed  out  that
the appellant’s appeal having already been decided  under  the  Bye-Law  49,
the observations made  by  the  aforesaid  Disciplinary  Committee  may  not
influence the proceedings before the Appellate Authority.  In  our  opinion,
such an eventuality will not arise.
In the petition before the High Court as well as the  appeal  before
this Court,  the  appellant  has  submitted  that  the  entire  disciplinary
proceedings are vitiated due to the participation of the Principal, who  was
biased against the appellant. In  our  opinion,  the  order  passed  by  the
Disciplinary Committee cannot be sustained on the  short  ground  that  Smt.
Neera Sharma was a member of the aforesaid Disciplinary  Committee.  In  our
opinion,  she  was  clearly   disqualified   from   participating   in   any
deliberations  of  the  Disciplinary  Committee  as  she  had  appeared   as
Management Witness No.2. It is well settled principle of law that no  person
can be a  Judge  in  his  own  cause.  Having  supported  the  case  of  the
management, it was not appropriate for Smt. Neera Sharma to  participate  in
the proceedings of the Disciplinary Committee. Given the background  of  the
allegations made by the appellant at all stages  of  the  enquiry  not  only
against the principle, but also the Manager of the School, it was  necessary
for her to disassociate  from  the  proceedings,  to  nullify  any  plea  of
apprehended bias. Furthermore, when the appeal  was  being  decided  by  the
Disciplinary Committee with regard to  the  legality  or  otherwise  of  the
order  passed  by  the  Disciplinary  Authority,   the   decision   of   the
Disciplinary Committee not only had to be fair but it also  had  to  appear,
to be fair. This is in conformity with the principle that justice  must  not
only be done, but must also appear to be done. Actual and demonstrable  fair
play must be the hallmark of  the  proceedings  and  the  decisions  of  the
administrative  and  quasi  judicial  tribunals.  In  particular,  when  the
decisions  taken  by  these  bodies  are  likely  to  cause  adverse   civil
consequences to the persons against whom such decisions are taken.  For  the
aforesaid reasons, the order dated 18th/19th December, 2008  passed  by  the
Disciplinary Committee is hereby quashed and set aside.
At  this  stage,  learned  counsel  appearing  on  behalf  of   the
respondents submits that, in fact, the appeal filed by the  appellant  ought
to be remitted back to the Disciplinary Committee which  would  not  include
Smt.Neera Sharma as a member of the said committee.
Having noticed the entire fact situation above and  the  time  which
have elapsed since the order of removal was passed, we are  of  the  opinion
that it would be inappropriate at this stage to relegate the appellant  back
to the Disciplinary Committee. In the interest of  justice,  we  permit  the
appellant to challenge the order of the  Disciplinary  Authority  dated  8th
January, 2008 before Punjab School Education Tribunal,  Mohali.  The  appeal
shall be filed by the appellant within thirty days  from  today.  Since  the
order of the Disciplinary Authority was passed on  8th  January,  2008,  the
appeal may well be beyond limitation period.
Keeping in view the peculiar facts and circumstances of  this  case,
we direct that the appeal filed by the appellant shall  be  decided  by  the
aforesaid Education Tribunal on merits and the same shall  not  be  rejected
on the ground of limitation. If the appeal is filed by the appellant  within
the period  stipulated  above,  the  Education  Tribunal  shall  take  final
decision thereon within a period of three months.
It is made clear  that  the  Education  Tribunal  shall  decide  the
appeal on the assumption that no opinion has been expressed  by  this  Court
on   the   merits   or   the   controversy   raised    by    the    parties.
With the aforementioned observations  and  direction,  the  impugned
judgments passed by the learned Single Judge as also the Division  Bench  of
the High Court are set aside and the appeal is disposed of.
……………………………………………………J.

                               (SURINDER SINGH NIJJAR)


                                                     ………………………………………………………J.
                               (H.L. GOKHALE)

New Delhi;
September 13, 2012.