[Cites
1
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Rajeev Gandhi Memorial College Of ... vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh on 14 July, 2020
Author:
R.F. Nariman
Bench:
B.R. Gavai
,
Navin Sinha
,
Rohinton Fali Nariman
1

                                                                                   REPORTABLE

                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2739 OF 2020
                                      (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 20049/2019)


                      RAJEEV GANDHI MEMORIAL COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING
                      AND TECHNOLOGY & ANR.                                        Appellant(s)

                                                         VERSUS

                      THE STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH & ORS.                           Respondent(s)

                                                          WITH

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2740 OF 2020
                                     (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 20148/2019)



                                                 J U D G M E N T
R.F. Nariman, J.
1)    Leave granted.

                      2)    Applications for Intervention are allowed.

                      3)    The Andhra Pradesh Educational Institutions (Regulation
of Admission and Prohibition of Capitation Fee) Act, 1983

                      (for short “the Act”), inter alia, deals with fee fixation

                      insofar    as    unaided      institutions   like      the    present      two

                      institutions are concerned.
4)    For the years 2016-2019, so far as the petitioner in
Signature Not Verified
the   first     matter   is    concerned,    the      fee    was   fixed   at
Digitally signed by
SUSHMA KUMARI
BAJAJ
Date: 2020.07.16
14:21:01 IST
Rs.86,800/-, and so far as the Petitioner in the second
Reason:
matter    is    concerned,    it   was   fixed   at    Rs.    59,500/-     per

                      student.       Thereafter for the next block of two years i.e.
2
2019-2020, proposals were made by both the petitioner in the

first matter and in the second matter asking for an increase

up to Rs. 1.35 lakhs and Rs.72,000/- respectively.
5)   Rule 4 which is made under the said Act provides as

follows:-
“4. FEE FIXATION:
(i)     The AFRC shall call for, from each
       Institution, its proposed fee structure well in
       advance   before   the   date   of   issue   of
       notification for admission for the academic
       year along with all the relevant documents and
       books of accounts for scrutiny.
(ii)    The AFRC shall decide whether the fees
       proposed by the Institution is justified and
       does not amount to profiteering or charging of
       capitation fee.
(iii) The AFRC shall be at liberty to approve
       or alter the proposed fee for each course to be
       charged by the Institution.
Provided that it shall give the Institution
       an opportunity of being heard before fixing any
       fee or fees.
(iv)    The AFRC shall take into consideration
       the following factors while prescribing the
       fee:
(a) the location of the professional
          institution.
(b) the nature of the professional course,
(c) the cost of available infrastructure,
(d) the expenditure on administration and
          maintenance,
(e) a reasonable surplus required for
          growth    and development     of     the
          professional Institution.
(f) the revenue foregone on account of
          waiver    of fee, if any,     in respect of
          students belonging to the Schedule Caste,
          Schedule Tribes     and wherever applicable
          to the Socially and      Educationally
          Backward Classes and other    Economically
          weaker    Sections of the society, to   such
          extent as shall be notified by the
          Government from time to time.
3
(g)   Any other relevant factor.
Provided that, no such fees, as may be fixed
           by   the    AFRC,    shall   amount   to
           profiteering   or   commercialization  of
           education.
(v)     The AFRC shall communicate     the   fee
       structure   as  determined    by it,   to    the
       Government, for notification.
(vi)    The fee or scale of fee determined by
       the AFRC shall be valid for a period of three
       years.
(vii)The fee so determined shall be applicable
       to   a  candidate   who   is  admitted   to  an
       institution in that academic year and shall not
       be altered till the completion of his course in
       the institution in which he was originally
       admitted.    No     Professional    Educational
       Institution shall collect at time a fee which
       is more than one year’s fee from a candidate.”
6)   Instead of following the drill of Regulation 4, the

State, by an order dated 23.07.2019, fixed, as an interim

measure, that the earlier fee that was prescribed for the

years 2016-19 would govern the block period of 2019 onwards

as well.   A writ petition was filed dated 29.07.2019 by the

petitioners in which this interim fixation was challenged as

being violative of the aforesaid Regulation 4 set out by us

herein above.
7)   After hearing all concerned parties, the learned Single

Judge’s order dated 31.07.2019 prima facie found that the

contentions of the petitioners were correct, and therefore

passed the following order:
“Having regard to the facts and circumstances
       of the case considering the submissions of the
4
learned counsel for the petitioners, and on
       perusal of the record, in the interest of
       justice, this Court felt it appropriate to
       grant interim direction, as the petitioners
       have shown prima facie case, balance of
       convenience and irreparable loss.
Therefore, the impugned G.O.Ms.No.38 dated
       23.07.2019 is suspended, pending disposal of
       the writ petition.
Further, the respondents are directed to
       permit the petitioners to collect the Fee
       determined and submitted by the 2nd respondent,
       pending adjudication of the writ petition.”
8)   The      Division   Bench,    by        the   impugned   order    dated

08.08.2019,    interfered   with       the    aforesaid   Single      Judge’s

interim order and “modified” the aforesaid order as follows:
“20.    For the aforesaid reasons, the order of
       the   learned  Single   Judge  suspending   the
       impugned G.O. is modified as follows:
The writ petitioners herein are permitted to
       collect the fee fixed for the block period
       2018-2019 for the engineering and other courses
       and obtain a bank guarantee from the students
       admitted in those professional courses to an
       extent of 50% of the difference of fee claimed
       by the writ petitioners-colleges or the fees
       recommended   by   AFRC  to   the   Government,
       whichever is less, for the block period, 2019-
       2020 to 2021-2022, which will be in force till
       the new fee structure is notified by the
       Government. The Advocate General informs that
       the State Government will inform to the
       colleges as    well as    to the    appropriate
       authorities about the fees claimed by the
       colleges and recommended by AFRC.      Students
       shall be informed about the pendency of the
       writ petition before this Court regarding fees
       structure and they are not entitled to claim
       any equities thereafter. We hope that the new
       fee structure taking care of the students and
       management shall be notified at the earliest
       preferably by the end of this year. In case,
5
the fee recommended and notified by the
          Government is more than the fee collected
          pursuant to this order, the petitioners-
          educational institutions are at liberty to
          invoke the bank guarantee to the extent of
          difference between fee paid and in case it is
          less, the petitioners shall return the amount
          to the students or adjust the same, if
          permissible.”
9)    We have been informed that the
Andhra Pradesh Higher

Education Regulatory and Monitoring Commission Act, 2019
has

since come into force on 14.08.2019, under which a Commission

is set up to determine fees, inter alia, relating to unaided

institutions. This Commission, we are reliably informed, has

been constituted with effect from October, 2019.
10)   Mr.    K.V.     Viswanathan,      learned    Senior    Advocate,

appearing on behalf of the Intervenor, has pointed out that a

learned   Single    Judge,   by   an   order   dated   07.05.2020,   has

stayed the operation of fees that has been fixed by the

Government under this Act relating to the year 2019-20.
11)   Mr. Mahfooz Nazki, learned counsel for the Respondent,

points out that the Single Judge’s order has since been

clarified to exclude a number of institutions.           Be that as it

may, we are not today directly concerned with the 2019 Act,

which appears to be prospective in nature.             The interim fee

fixed by the Andhra Pradesh Government without following the

drill of Rule 4 has correctly been found to be prima facie

illegal and has therefore correctly been suspended by the
6
learned Single Judge’s order of 31.07.2019.       The Division

Bench ought not to have interfered with the aforesaid order

by the impugned order dated 08.08.2019.        The appeals are

allowed and the impugned order is set aside and the learned

Single Judge’s order will now continue to operate insofar as

the period of 2019 onwards is concerned until a final fee is

fixed in accordance with the requisite Act and Rules.
.........................J.
                                 (ROHINTON FALI NARIMAN)



                                 .........................J.
                                 (NAVIN SINHA)



                                 .........................J.
                                 (B.R. GAVAI)

New Delhi;
July 14, 2020.