[Cites
0
, Cited by
125
]
Supreme Court of India
Mohan Lal & Ors vs State Of Himachal Pradesh Throughits ... on 17 March, 1997
Equivalent citations: AIR 1997 SUPREME COURT 3775, 1997 (4) SCC 416, 1997 AIR SCW 1854, 1997 LAB. I. C. 1921, (1997) 2 SCR 1160 (SC), 1997 (2) SCR 1160, 1997 (3) SCALE 349, (1997) 4 JT 197 (SC), 1997 (4) JT 197, 1998 (1) SERVLJ 9 SC, (1997) 2 SCT 371, (1997) 2 SERVLR 610, (1997) 3 SCALE 349, (1997) 1 CURLR 846, (1997) 4 SUPREME 370, 1997 SCC (L&S) 969
Bench:
K. Ramaswamy
,
G.T. Nanavati
PETITIONER:
MOHAN LAL & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH THROUGHITS SECRETARY, EXCISE AND T

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	17/03/1997

BENCH:
K. RAMASWAMY, G.T. NANAVATI




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
O R D E R
     Leave granted.  We have  heard learned  counsel on both
sides.
This appeal,  by special leave arises from the order of
the H.P.  Administrative Tribunal,  made on October 28, 1996
in O.A. No. 788/95.
The determination	of inter-se  seniority of the direct
recruits is  the only  question in this case. The appellants
and  the   respondents	came   to  be	selected  by  direct
recruitment against  vacancies in  the	permanent  posts  of
Excise and  Taxation  Inspectors  in  the  H.P.	 Excise	 and
Taxation Department (Inspectorate staff, Class III) Service.
The question relates to the interpretation of Rule 11 of the
(Seniority) Service Rules read with Rule 4 (Examination ) of
the Rules.  It is:  whether examination	 has  to  be  passed
within two  years from the date of appointment and joins the
duty,  indisputably  under  Rule  11(3)	 of  the  Rules,  on
confirmation on	 the  Expiry  of  probation,  the  seniority
relates back to the date of appointment. The situation where
a candidate  does not  pass the examination within two years
but within  the extended  period of four years is dealt with
under proviso to sub rule (3) of Rule 11 which reads thus:
"11(3) On	the  completion	 of  the
     period of	probation a  person  and
     passing the  prescribed examination
     the appointment authority may
(a) if  his  work	and  conduct  is
     found satisfactory.
(i) confirm  such person  from  the
     date   of	  his	appointment   if
     appointed	 against   a   permanent
     vacancy; or
(ii) confirm  such person	from the
     date from which a permanent vacancy
     occurs;  if   appointed  against  a
     temporary vacancy ; or
(iii) declare that he has completed
     his probation vacancy; or
(b) if  his work or conduct has not
     been, in  its opinion, satisfactory
     and in  the case  of non-passing of
     prescribed		    departmental
     examination.
(i)  dispense with his services, if
     appointed by  direct appointment or
     if appointed  otherwise revert  him
     to his  former post, or deal within
     such other	 manner as the terms and
     conditions	   of	 his	previous
     appointment; permit; or
(ii) extend his period of probation
     and thereafter, pass such orders as
     it could  have passed on the expiry
     of the  first period  of probation.
This  shall   also	 apply	 mutatis
     mutandis	to    the   departmental
     examinations;
Provided that  the total  period of
     probation and  the time allowed for
     passing	  the	    departmental
     examinations, including  extension,
     if	 any   shall  not   exceed  four
     years."
It appears	 that series  of orders came to be passed by
the administrative  Tribunal and  one arising  therefrom was
decided by  this court.	 In the first round of litigation in
which one  Sud was the applicant, the Tribunal had held that
the seniority  would be	 coferred on those who passed within
two years from the date of joining the service and those who
passed subsequently  would rank juniors to them. In the case
of Mohan lal & Ors., in the second set of litigation, it was
held that  those who passed the test within two years, would
get seniority  from the	 date of  joining the post and those
who passed  within the	extended period of four years, would
rank inter-se  seniority from the date of the passing of the
test. In  case of  those who  did not  pass the examinations
within the  extended period  of four years, it would be open
to the state Government to have their services terminated or
to take	 such action  as would	be open	 to them.  The first
litigation had	reached this  Court. This  Court in  Ishwari
Kumar &	 Ors. vs.  state of H.P. [CA No. 4258/92] decided on
March 24,  1994 had  held that	such of	 the candidates	 who
passed the  examinations within two years and were confirmed
after passing  the departmental	 tests, would  get seniority
from the  respective dates of their joining the post and the
date of	 passing the  departmental test	 relates back to the
date  of   the	appointment.   But  those   who	 passed	 the
examination after  the said  two years,	 would get seniority
from the  date of passing and would rank junior to those who
passed the examination within two years. In this appeal, the
third set  of litigation,  the question	 arises; whether the
third set  of litigation,  the question arises ; whether the
period of  passing the	test within two years by taking four
chances is mandatory or not? In that behalf, it is necessary
to read Rule 11 of the Rules which reads as under:
"11.(1) Persons  appointed	 to  the
     service shall  remain on  probation
     for a period of two years.
     Provided that-
(a) the incumbents shall within two
     years of  the appointment, pass the
     departmental	    examinations
     prescribed by  the Government  from
     time to time and;
(b) the  Government may  exempt  in
     exceptional cases	any person  from
     passing	any    or    all    such
     departmental examinations.
     Provided further that -
(a)   any	  period,   after   such
     appointment, spent on deputation on
     a	corresponding	or  higher  post
     shall count  towards the  period of
     probation.
(b)  any	period	of   officiating
     appointment to the Service shall be
     reckoned	as   period   spent   on
     probation, but  no person	who  has
     officiated shall,	on completion of
     the prescribed period of probation,
     be entitled  to be confirmed unless
     he is appointed against a permanent
     post/vacancy.
(2)  If,  in  the	opinion	 of  the
     appointing authority,  the work  or
     conduct  of  a  person  during  the
     period   of    probation	is   not
     satisfactory  or	  conduct  of  a
     person   during   the   period   of
     probation is not satisfactory or he
     fails  to	 pass	the   proscribed
     departmental examination within two
     years of his appointment, it may-
(a) if  such person is recruited by
     direct appointment,  dispense  with
     his services and
(b) if such person is recruited
     otherwise-
(i) revert	 him to his former post;
     or
(ii) deal	with him  in such  other
     manner as	the terms and conditions
     of the previous appointment permit.
     (3) on the completion of the period
     of probation  a person  and passing
     the  prescribed   examination   the
     appointment authority may-
(a) if  his  work	and  conduct  is
     found satisfactory-
(i) confirm  such person  from  the
     date   of	  his	appointment   if
     appointed	 against   a   permanent
     vacancy; or
(ii) confirm  such person	from the
     date from which a permanent vacancy
     occurs;  if   appointed  against  a
     temporary vacancy; or
(iii) declare that he has completed
     his probation satisfactory if there
     is no permanent vacancy; or
(b) if  his work or conduct has not
     been, in  its opinion, satisfactory
     and in  the case  of non passing of
     prescribed departmental examination
(i) dispense  with his services, if
     appointed by  direct appointment or
     if appointed  otherwise revert  him
     to his  former post, or deal within
     such other	 manner as the terms and
     conditions	   of	 his	previous
     appointment; permit; or
(ii) extend his period of probation
     and thereafter, pass such orders as
     it could  have passed on the expiry
     of the  first period  of probation.
This  shall   also	 apply	 mutatis
     mutandis	to    the   departmental
     examinations;
Provided that  the total  period of
     probation and  the time allowed for
     passing	  the	    departmental
     examinations, including  extension,
     if	 any   shall  not   exceed  four
     years."
A reading	of this	 Rule would  clearly indicate that a
person appointed  to a service shall remain on probation for
a period of two years. The appointment letters issued to the
parties indicate  the conditions.  One	of  the	 conditions,
namely condition No.(vi) envisaged as under:
(iv) He  shall  have  to  pass  the
     departmental examination in respect
     of	 both	the  Excise  &	Taxation
     within two years of his joining the
     duty failing which his services are
     liable to termination."
Therefore, it  specifies that  a candidate appointed to
the post  on probation	shall have  to pass the departmental
examination in	respect of  both  the  Excise  and  Taxation
within two years of his joining the duty.
Rule 4  of	 the  Rules  provide  as
     under:
"4. Conduct of Examinations:
(i)  The  Departmental  Examination
     for   the	 Excise	  and	Taxation
     Inspectors	 of   the   Excise   and
     Taxation	 Department,	Himachal
     Pradesh shall  be held twice a year
     about the	third week  of the April
     and first	week of	 November, or on
     such other dates as are notified by
     the     Excise	and	Taxation
     Commissioner.  The	 dates	and  the
     place of  the examination	will  be
     notified	before	 hand	in   the
     himachal Pradesh Rajpatra.
(ii) The deputy Excise and Taxation
     Commissioner,  (  North  and  South
     Zones) shall  forward to Excise and
     Taxation	Commissioner,	Himachal
     Pradesh  before  15th  January  and
     15th August,  each year  or  within
     one month	after the publication of
     the results of the last examination
     whichever is later the names of the
     officers who  intend to sit for the
     examination   together   with   the
     subjects in  which they  wish to be
     examined.
(iii)  The	  examination  will   be
     conducted by  the HP  Institute  of
     Public Administration,  Fair Lawns,
     Shimla."
A	reading	  of  this   rule  relating  to	 conduct  of
examination would  indicate that  the Government  shall hold
the examinations  twice a year between 3rd week of April and
1st week of November, or on such other dates as are notified
by the Excise and Taxation. Commissioner. The examination so
conducted by  the Institute of Public Administration, Shimla
shall be  in the manner prescribed in paragraph (ii) of Rule
4 of  the Rules. It is, therefore, clear that the Government
is required to conduct the examinations twice a year and the
candidates are	required to pass the examinations within two
years from  the date  of joining  the post on probation. The
Rule does  not give  four chances  to every  candidate. They
shall pass the departmental examination within two years. On
successful completion  of probation and declaration thereof,
his seniority would relate back to the date of appointment.
We are not concerned with the action to be taken by the
Government for	such of those candidates who did not pas the
examinations within  the  prescribed  two  years  period  or
extended period	 of four  years of  the	 probation.  We	 are
concerned with a case of two sets of persons, i.e. those who
passed the  examinations within two years and another set of
officers who  sat for  the examination	within two years but
passed the  examination beyond two years. It is a case where
the respondents	 themselves sought  for the relief in the OA
that their  seniority would be reckoned themselves made that
their seniority	 should be  declared from  the date of their
passing the  examination and  in the light of the conditions
of service  and operation  of the  Rule , we hold that their
seniority will	be reckoned  from the  date of their passing
the examination.
The proforma  respondents sought  to contend  that they
are governed  by the  Rules operating  in the years 1963 and
1964 and  that these  Rules have  no application to them. We
need not  express any opinion on that . We are informed that
the matter  is pending	in the Tribunal. It would be for the
Tribunal to consider their claims in accordance with law.
The appeal is accordingly allowed. No costs