[Cites
2
, Cited by
92
]
Supreme Court of India
Madanlal Sethi & Ors. Etc vs State Of M.P & Ors. Etc on 27 March, 1997
Equivalent citations: 1997 (5) SCC 141, AIR 1997 SUPREME COURT 2264, 1997 AIR SCW 2134, (1997) 3 SCR 404 (SC), 1997 (3) SCR 404, (1997) 4 JT 629 (SC), (1997) 2 JAB LJ 179, (1997) 5 SUPREME 117
Author:
K. Ramaswamy
Bench:
K. Ramaswamy
PETITIONER:
MADANLAL SETHI & ORS. ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF M.P  & ORS. ETC.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	27/03/1997

BENCH:
K. RAMASWAMY, G.B. PATTANAIK




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
WITH
       CIVIL APPEAL NO.2740 OF1997
 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 2104 of 1993)
 O R D E R
     Leave granted  in SLP  (C)No.  2104/93. We	 have heard
learnedcounselfor theparties.
These appeals  by special leave arise fromthe judgment
of theHigh Court  of Madhya Pradesh, made on 29.1.1986 and
14.11.1992 in M.P No. 2107 and M.P No. 3764/92.
The primary  question  inthis  case  relates  to the
validity of  the Madhya Pradesh Kashtha	 Chiram (Viniyaman)
Adhiniyam, 1984 (for short,  the `Act') and Rule 27  of the
M.P. (Transit  (forest Produce) Rules,1961 (for short, the
`Rules'). The  appellants have challenged the valiity of the
aboveprovisions of  the Actand the Rules on the ground
that they  require them to maintain proper records andduly
enter in  the registercertainspecifications of the forest
wood  purchased by  them  under	 public	 auction  from the
Governemnt timber  depots. After sawingand cutting thewood
into differentsizes, they  appellantsare required tomake
proper entriesinto the	relevant register.  When consumers
take out  the wood  from the  timber depot,  they  arealso
required to submit a transit permit. Thereby, they havebeen
made accountable to give particulars ofthe forest woodthey
purchase from the respective Governmentdepots.It is stated
that the  licensees of the saw mills are being unnecessarily
harassed by being askedto makenumerous needless entries in
the relevant  register ,  like Forms D-1 and D-2 and thereby
gettingsubjected  to  confiscation  of the  wood  lawfully
purchased by  them. Itis stated	 that cumbersome  process
hinderstheir  business. The  prescription  ofthe  details
required of  them alsoimpinges upon  and  restricts  their
business. Thus, it isclaimedthat  the Act  and the Rules
are  arbitrary and  unreasonable   as they  offend  their
fundamental right  of fredom  to carryon thebusiness and
trade  under
Article  19(1)(g)
of  the	 Constitution. The
Division Bench, it is argued, has not correctly appreciated
the grievance of the appellants. When the matter had come up
for consideration  before us inthe first instance, by order
dated December 19, 1996, we observed asunder:
"Shri  S.S. Ray, the learned senior
     counsel appearing in this batch has
     concentrated on one aspect, namely,
     that  theForestofficers,  by  a
     written undertaking  haveabsolved
     themselvesof  their  liability  to
     deliver  the   logs  withspecific
     measurements but  will be delivered
     only in  the lots as they are, When
     they entered  in the  Form-D  under
     Rule  6(1)	   Extract   from  M.P.
     Kashtha Chiran	(Viniyaman)
     Adhiniyam,1984  read  with section
     8 of  the Adhiniyam,  it enumerates
     entry on open stock of thespecies,
     its Cmt..Sawan Cme.,  date,  T.P.
     No. ,  Name of  species Depot  from
     which it  was purchased  logs, Nos,
     Omt. SawnCmt. received  from Cmt.
     the  Forest  Department  and  other
     than  Forest   Department. Various
     grounds have been raised in the SLP
     (C) No.  2104/93 arising out of the
     order dated November 14, 1992  made
     inM.P. No. 3764/92 stating that it
     would be  impracticable for the saw
     mill   owners or  merchantto  make
     necessary entrieswhen  they  were
     not  delivered   with   the   above
     specifications   and    the    non-
compliancerenders them  forfeited
     their   stock    and   liable    to
     prosecution. Shri Gulabe Gupta, the
     learned  senior  counsel  appearing
     for the  respondents states that in
     each depot various	 types of  the
     logs would be stocked  instore of
     different sizes atdifferent places
     separately.  Intending   purchasers
     were  kept on  notice  of Various
     sizes. A  willing purchaser  in the
     open auction  fromthe  above  lots
     each lot contains not onlyspecies,
     the  length   of  the   timber,  it
     contains etc.  thedetails will be
     available on   verification   and
     satisfaction.  On theirpurchase
     once theytake possession of  the
     logs, they require to  enter these
     details  in   Form-D1.   Similarly,
     after taking  overto the saw mill,
     they require  to fill  in detail in
     Form-D2. He  further explains Form-
D2with  referenceto  Rule 6(2) of
     the rulesrelate to	 the owner  of
     the saw  mill whoreceives it into
     the Saw  Mill andopening balance
     received during  the  dayand  the
     quantum  sawn   during   the   day,
     delivered to the owners (purchasers
     the balance  on the date require to
     the  entered.   Similarly, Form-D3
     relates to monthly abstract of the
     receipt and  disposal of  the  wood
     purchasedor  brought  for	sawing
     during that  monthand disposed of.
Accordingly, there is no in actual
     practice.	Unfortunately,	   the
     Government havenot	 filed	 any
     counter not  produced anymaterial
     in support	  of  the   contentions
     learned counsel  seeks  to impress
     upon us.  It is  necessary in  the
     circumstances   that   acounter-
affidavit by  a  competent officer
     requires to  be filed  andalso the
     materialin	   support thereof
     requires to  be produced before the
     Court. Learned  counsel  seeks  for
     and  granted  onemonth  time  for
     filing  the  counter-affidavit  and
     producingthe   record.  One  week
     thereafter	 for rejoinder	  is
     granted. List after five weeks".
Pursuant thereto,Dr. M.SRana, Conservator of Forest,
Government of  Madhya Pradesh,Sagar has	 filed a  counter-
affidavit explaining  in  detail  the  position rightfrom
identification of  theworking plan,demarcation	of the
coupe-wise   felling of the trees,  stacking of	 the trees,
numbering of  the trees,  putting of  hammer marks and their
aligning for  measurement at  the timber depotsfor auction.
It is  stated that the logs arestackeddepending upon their
length,girth  etc. atrelevant places in	  the depot. The
intending purchasers  are given liberty to inspect thelogs
of thelength ,	girthand  measurement  in  cubic  meters,
speciesetc.  Thereafter, on  their  purchase  in  auctions,
possession of  the purchased logs is given possession to the
successful bidders.  Necessary entriesare bemade in the
certificate ofpossession as  given in Annexure XI  to the
said counter-affidavit finding place ofpage 98of the paper
books; the  details thereof  being not materialare omitted.
Once   they take  possession of the timber,  they are given
necessary transit  permits fortransportation thereofwith
truck number  etc. as  specified  in  AnnexureXIV  to the
counter-affidavit and the officer who gives delivery thereof
enters the  factum of  the delivery,  of the  quantum of the
wood  with  all specifications enumerated  therein.  After
carriage of thelogs from the various depots tothe premises
of saw-mills  or saw-pits,  they are  required to  enter the
specifications in  FromD-1   as	 per Rule  6(1). Whenthey
disposeof  thewoods,they are  required to make necessary
entriesin  Form D-2  read with Rule 6(2)  of the Rules. In
addition, theyare also	required to submit monthly returns
in FormD-3  read with Rule 8 of the Rules.
Thus, it is the case of the respondents that everycare
is taken  to ensure that the licensee or personin charge of
the Sawmill  orsaw   pit  is given  possessionof  thewood
purchased fromthe Governmentdepots and	arerequired  to
enter the  specified details ofthe wood in Form No. D-1 and
of thefinished product	in Form D-2 so that at every point
of time the officer  on duty  of inspection  would bein a
position to  verify whether  the wood in possession hasbeen
purchased by  the licensee  from lawful source; is properly
accounted for;is in  their lawful  possession; and  to see
that the disposal of the same is done in accordance with the
Rules.
Shri D.D  Thakur, learnedsenior counseland Mr.A.K.
Sanghi, learned	  counsel  appearing  for  the appellants,
contendthat though theRules require that specifications of
the forest woodkept insaw-mill and saw-pit berecorded, in
realitywhen  the woodis taken  to the saw-mill and is cut
into logs  of different sizes,there  would beconsiderable
wastageand  the finished  woodrealised	by sawing thelogs
would be less than the originallength and girth etc.  It is
really impossible  forthe  licensee  to	 enter	all  those
specifications in  the relevantentriesin FormD-1, D-2 and
D-3 etc.  and  to  account  for the  wood  they	 purchased.
Therefore,  it hinders	their  peaceful	 conduct  of the
business. As one of theillustrations, it is stated that one
of theDivision Forest Officers even meticulously measured
zero point of the differential wood in the possession of the
saw mill  and on  failure to  account for it, Look action by
confiscating the  entire  wood. That  would  show  that	 by
operation  of  the  Act,  licensees  are  being arbitrarily
prevented fromexercising theright of freedom to carry on
trade and  business and are  being  subjectedto	 needless
harassment.
Shri   D.D.  Thakur  has  also  stated  that  necessary
guidelines are lacking in this case. Therefore,observations
may bemade bythis Court to stop arbitrary exercise of the
power or  unlawful hinderance  in carrying  outthe trade by
the licensees;and topermit High rank officers to inspect
the premises.
Shri G.C.Gupta, learnedsenior counsel appearing for
the respondents, contends that the contentions raised by the
appellants areimaginary. Every	minute procedure  hasbeen
provided in  detail, viz.  the cuttingof  the trees; the
markingof  thetrees;the delivery  of the  wood purchased
from the  Government depots;  and transportingthem,  which
would indicatethat the	object of theAct andthe Rules is
only toensure that thelicensee is inlawful possession of
the wood  obtained from the Government depots to  prevent
illicitfelling of the trees and	 unlawful purchase of the
forest wood  . The  Act and  the  Rules	 provide  that the
licensee should account for  the  wood purchased  and the
finished wood;that cuts pieces are appropriately accounted
for, as specified in Form D-1,D-2 andD-3 respectively. As
an illustration,  he has  placed beforeus the record of the
appointment ofan Expert	 Committee on the  basis  of the
returns	 received andspecifications of the grading of the
wood, their  lengths, girth  and the  marginal variations in
that behalf;  and categorisation  of the respective woods in
that behalf. Asa result , evenif there is anyfaulty entry
in thetransitRules,they can  be easily	identifiedwith
reference to  the length,  girth and the quantum of thewood
purchased by  the licensee.  Ifthere is any further defect,
it is always open to them to bring the same to the notice of
the  Government wouldalwayssolve  the  problem	of the
parties.
Inview  of the  respective contentions,  the  question
arises:whether the High	 Court has  committedany manifest
error of  law warranting  interference;It  is seen that the
Act deals  withvarious steps involved starting rightfrom
the cutting  ofthe  trees upto the delivery of the logs to
the purchasers. Thereafter it deals with the requirement of
being in  lawful possession of the woodso purchased and the
necessity to account for the same.
Section 8deals with  furnishingof	returns	 by the
licensee. It  postulates that  every licensee  shall  submit
such return relating tothe business ofthe saw-mill orsaw-
pit, as the case may be, in such form,to suchofficer, and
on such dates,as  maybe prescribed. Sections9 dealswith
maintenance of account of stockof woodin saw-mill andsaw-
pit. Itpostulates thus:
"All wood whether sawn or not found
     in	 or brought  to the saw mill or
     saw pit orat the site of sawing at
     any time  or during  any period  by
     any person in anymanner or by any
     means forpurposeof sawing or for
     any otherpurposeshall  always be
     properly  accounted   forand  all
     relevant evidence	   documents,
     receipts, order  and  certification
     asare  necessary to  showthat the
     wood is  legally obtainedshall be
     maintainedand  made  available  at
     time of  inspection.  It  shall  be
     presumed in respect of thestock of
     wood  which   is  not  account  for
     satisfactorily that  the  same  has
     been obtained  unlawfullyand  the
     stock of  wood shall  be liable for
     confiscation."
The object of Section  9 is  to ensure  that thewood
obtained by  the licensee  and found insaw mill	 or saw pit
is theone obtained  from a lawful source and the person in
possession of  the wood or in control of the saw-mill is to
accountfor  and is  required to maintain the details of the
wood obtained,the source  andmanner in whichhe has dealt
with the  wood.It  postulates that it shall bepresumed, in
respect of  stock  ofwood  which  is not  accounted for
satisfactorily,that  the samehas been obtained unlawfully
and such  stockof  wood shallbe liable	for confiscation.
Section7 givespower to the authorisedofficerto enter and
inspectany  saw-mill and  saw-pit andexaminethe	 records
relating to  stock of  wood etc.  for that  purpose.  He  is
empowered to call upon the licensee  orperson in control of
or management  of the  business,  or  employedtherein,	to
producethe  required documents, books,registers or records
in thepossession. They	are also  entitled to search the
premises. Vehicles,  machine, tools  and equipments  used or
intended  to   be  used in  contravention  ofany  of the
provisions of  the Actand the Rules made thereunder.When
they are  satisfied that  any such  contravention has  taken
place, they  are entitled  to seize  any wood  etc. andtake
appropriate action  as has  been  laidunder  the  Act for
confiscation etc.  The rules  have beenmade inthat behalf,
Section13  prescribes the  penalties for contravention; the
detailsthereof are not	material forthe purpose	 ofthis
case. Rule  6 of  the Rules  provides that  thelicensee	 is
required to  submit the returns in  Form D-1,of thewood
purchased by  the  licensee  for  sawing  and  for  disposal
thereof, and  rule 6(2) postulates  the	 maintenance  of  a
register  meant	 for  recording	 the  arrival, sawing and
disposal of  the wood  received for  sawing  in	 FormD-2.
Thereafter, under  Rule6(3),  the licensee  isrequired	to
submit the  monthly returns of these accounts in Form D-3 to
the concerned Range officer, and to thelicensing officer by
a date not later than 10th of the following month.
Wehave  perused the  relevant forms  submitted by the
parties. Afterperusing the same, we are satisfied that the
details, as  have beenprovided for, are required onlywith
the object  of ensuring that  the  licensees  who  are the
personsin  thecontrol of  the  Saw-mill	 and Saw-pit  or
employee etc.  are in  lawful possession  of the wood and of
furtherensuring	 that the  wood	 in  their  possession was
obtained from  a lawful sourceand they have duly accounted
for such  a  wood.  Otherwise,unaccounted  wood	 would	be
presumed to  have beenobtained from  unlawful source and
therebythey  are liable	 to account  for, and on failure to
accountfor  the same,they should  face	theconsequences
ensuing thereunder,  viz.,  confiscation,  cancellation	 of
licenceor  prosecution. It  isalso  seen  that	an  Expert
Committee cameto be constituted to lay down modalities for
identificationsof  logs and wood purchased from the auction
depots in the forest area etc. it is true that these are the
administrative instructions andthey donot have the flavour
of statutory  rules. Itis stated by Mr. G.C. Gupta that the
Government  would   issue  necessary   orders  making  those
instructions as a part of the Rules so	thatit	will  be
operative as acontinuous process of  the identification of
the woods rightfrom the stage of purchase tillthe stage of
accounting for in Form D-3.
Itis  true, as  shown byMr. Sanghi,  that one of the
conditions of  the  auction  is that  the  authorities are
absolved of  their  liability  for  any deficiency  in the
quantity and  quality of  the timber and of themeasurements
when the  intending bidder  purchases the logs in the forest
timber depots. That is one of the conditions ofthe auction,
i.e. ,qualityand  quantity of	wood is notassured. The
government is  absolvedof the liability for any shortcoming
in thequalityand  quantity of  the  wood  the  appellants
purchase  from the  Government.	  Thereafter, there are
provisions that the empoweredofficer wouldinspect the
premises and verify thewood purchased to satisfy himself of
the source  of the woodfound in the depot and also purchase
of thelogs either  inauction and the mode of disposal of
the wood according to the Rules. However, that does notmean
that the licensees are kept in dark as to the details of the
wood  purchased	 by  them.  As seen  earlier, the  detail
procedure has  been prescribed in the relevant forms inthat
behalf from  the time  of felling  of  the  trees  till the
entrustment ofthe purchased logs to the auction purchaser.
The transit  permit issued to the purchaser does contain the
same details with the number ofthe truck carrying the wood.
The meticulousdetailsis	 required to be mentioned in the
required Forms.Thus, at the time of entrustment of thelogs
purchased by the auction purchaser, details aregiven to him
before the  transit ofthe wood	withthe	 transit  permit
issued by  the competent  officer. When the logs  reach the
destination, namely,  saw-mill or  saw-pit ,  the  necessary
entriesof  theforestwood are required to bemade inForm
D-1, of finished goods in Form	D-2 and monthly returns in
Form D-3.  Thus, Rulesare consistentwith the  meticulous
detailsand  there is  no gap.The Rules cannot be declared
ultra vires  the Constitution  as offending
Article 19(1)(g)
or
Article  14
simply  because some shortfall or discripancy
is noticed  by the officer in the quantity or quality of the
wood. Equally,when officers  take action for the violation
of thestatutory provisions, an individual case is required
to be  considered on  the fact-situation.  The Act and Rules
cannot be declared ultra vires on account thereof.
Thus  considered, we  do  not  find  any  illegality
committed by  the HighCourt  in	 itsjudgment  warranting
interference.
The appeals are accordingly dismissed. No costs.