[Cites
7
, Cited by
40
]
Supreme Court of India
Mohmoodkhan Mahboobkhan Pathan vs State Of Maharashtra on 3 February, 1997
Equivalent citations: 1998 AIR SCW 2334, 1997 (10) SCC 600, 1998 CRI. L. J. 3635, (1997) 1 ALLCRILR 621, (1996) CRILT 123, (1997) 2 ALLCRILR 725, (1996) 3 RECCRIR 400, (2001) 3 TAC 461, (1997) 1 SCJ 309, (1997) SC CR R 782, (1997) 1 CURCRIR 184, (1997) 1 SCR 830 (SC), (1998) 4 ALLMR 78 (SC), (1997) 1 SCALE 689, (1998) 1 SERVLJ 122, 1997 CALCRILR 119, 1997 CHANDLR(CIV&CRI) 309, 1997 CRILR(SC&MP) 231, (1997) 1 CRIMES 186, 1997 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 231, (1997) 2 SUPREME 414, (1997) 34 ALLCRIC 558, (1998) 3 APLJ 21(1), (1997) 2 BLJ 203, 1997 SCC (CRI) 894, (1997) 2 JT 232 (SC), 1997 (1) KLT SN 60 (SC), AIR 1998 SUPREME COURT 2360
Bench:
Madan Mohan Punchhi
,
K.T. Thomas
PETITIONER:
MOHMOODKHAN MAHBOOBKHAN PATHAN

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	03/02/1997

BENCH:
MADAN MOHAN PUNCHHI, K.T. THOMAS




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
THOMAS. J.
Appellant	was   a	 Sub-Register  in  the	Registration
Department under  Maharashtra Government.  The Special judge
at Latur  convicted him	 under
Section	161
IPC	 and
Section
5(2)
read   with
Section  5(1)(d)
of	 the  prevention  of
corruption Act,	 1947 ('the  act' for short) for receiving a
sum of	Rs. 60/- as illegal gratification from one Shesherao
Patil (PW-1).  Appellant was  sentenced to  undergo rigorous
imprisonment for  one year  and to pay a fine of Rs.200/- on
each count. High Court of Bombay (Aurangabad Bench confirmed
the conviction	and sentence  and dismissed the appeal filed
by the appellant.
The official  duties  of  the  Sub-Registrar  included,
among other  things, receiving	applications  for  certified
copies of  registered documents and issuance of such copies.
Appellant was  Sub-Registrar of Nilanga Sub Registry office.
PW-1 Shesherao	Patil, an employee of postal department, was
sin need  of certified	copies of  three sale deeds. When he
approached the	appellant he  was told	to submit  necessary
applications on	 stamp paper and to pay an amount of Rs.20/-
for each  certified copy.  PW-1 reported  the matter  to the
Anti Corruption	 Bureau. A  trap was  arranged to  catch the
appellant red-handed. On 8.8.1986 PW-1 went to the office of
the appellant  and presented  the applications for copies of
the sale deeds which he required and then he paid Rs.60/- to
the appellant.	As soon	 as appellant  put the amount in his
shrift pocket  PW-1 transmitted a signal to the waiting anti
corruption squad  and they  rushed to  the office and caught
him red-handed.	 These	are  the  facts	 found	against	 the
appellant.
There is  no  scope  for  any  dispute  that  appellant
received the  amount of	 Rs.60/- from  PW-1. In fact learned
counsel for  the appellant  did not  dispute  the  aforesaid
finding. The  stand of the appellant is that he received the
amount as  advance money which he was required to collect as
per the	 Rules in  force. His further case is that before he
could make  any entry in the books he was caught by the anti
corruption officials on the premise that he received illegal
gratification from PW-1.
Appellant, when  questioned by  the trial	judge  under
section 313
of the code of criminal Procedure stated, inter
alia, thus: "On 7.8.1986 the  complainant came to may office
and told  me that  he required copies of three sale deeds. I
had asked  him to  submit three	 applications in writing and
bring Rs.20/-  for each	 copy to  be  paid  in	advance.  On
8.6.1986  the  complainant  gave  me  application  and	paid
Rs.20/- for  each copy.	 Thus in  all he paid Rs.60/-. I was
about to  issue receipt but just then people rushed into may
office and  therefore  I  could	 not  issue  receipts".	 His
contention was repelled by the trial judge as well as by the
High Court.  Learned single  Judge of  the High	 Court while
confirming the	conviction and sentence has mainly relied on
the presumption of law envisaged in Section 4(1) of the Act.
Learned counsel  for the  appellant contended that both
courts	failed	 to  take   into   account   certain   broad
probabilities in  this case  and it  resulted in  the  wrong
conclusion  that   he  received	  the  amount	as   illegal
gratification.
The presumption  of law  contemplated n Section 4(1) of
the Act is in para materia the same as the legal presumption
mentioned in
Section 20(1)
of the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988.
Section 4(1)
of the Act enjoins that upon proof
of a  certain premise  "it shall  be  presumed,	 unless	 the
contrary is  proved that" he accepted the gratification as a
motive or  reward etc. If the primary condition specified in
the sub-section is satisfied by the prosecution the court is
legally bound  to proceed  on the  footing that	 the  public
servant/accused has  accepted the  gratification as a motive
or reward   for	 doing any  official  work  in	exercise  of
official functions.  The burden	 stands	 shifted  would	 not
become necessary  until prosecution  proves  that  what	 the
accused has  accepted was gratification. Of course the court
can draw  presumption on  premises even de hors
section 4(1)
of the	Act because
Section 114
of the Evidence Act empowers
the  court   to	 do  so.  But  the  difference	between	 the
presumption under  Section 114	of the	Evidence act and the
legal presumption  under
Section  4(1)
of  the Act  is	that
under former  it is only discretionary for the court to draw
presumptions as the court can as well decline from doing so,
but under
section 4(1)
it is	incumbant on  the  court  to
proceed on  the presumption as the burden stands transferred
to the	accused to  prove the  contrary.  (
Vide	 Dhanvantrai
Balwantrai Desai vs. State of Maharashtra
, AIR 1964 SC 575).
The  primary   condition  for  acting    on  the  legal
presumption under
Section 4(1)
of  the  Act  is  that	 the
prosecution  should   have  proved  that  what	the  accused
received was  gratification. The word "gratification" is not
defined in  the Act.  Hence it	must be	 understood  in	 its
literal meaning. In the Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary
of Current  English, the  work "gratification"	is shown  to
have the  meaning "to give pleasure or satisfaction to". The
word "gratification"  is used  in
Section  4(1)
to  denote
acceptance of  something to  the pleasure or satisfaction of
the recipient.	If  the	 money	paid  is  not  for  personal
satisfaction  or   pleasure  of	 the  recipient	 it  is	 not
gratification in  the sense  it is  used in  the section. In
other words  unless the	 prosecution proves  that the  money
paid  was   not	 towards  any  lawful  collection  or  legal
remuneration  the   court  cannot   take  recourse   to	 the
presumption of	law contemplated in
Section 4(1)
of the Act,
though the  court is  not precluded from drawing appropriate
presumption of	fact as	 envisaged in
Section	114
of	 the
Evidence Act at may stage.
Here the  crucial question, in the light of the defence
adopted, is  whether the  amount of Rs.60/- paid by PW-1 was
for the	 personal satisfaction or pleasure of the appellant.
If there  is reason  to doubt whether the money was received
as lawful  collection the  benefit of it cannot be denied to
the appellant.
In dealing	 with that  crucial question we have to bear
in mind	 certain broad	aspects in  this case. First is that
appellant has  been consistently  maintaining the stand that
as per the Rules governing issuance of certified copies from
a sub  Registry office	an applicant has to pay some charges
the amount  of which depends on the length of manuscripts to
be  copied,   besides  a  fee  for  search.  Secondly,	PW-1
Shesherao Patil	 himself admitted  that	 when  he  submitted
application for	 certified copies he was not aware about the
charge s  required for each copy. In his own words - "when I
submitted application  for copies  I was  not ware about the
charges required  for each copy. As the accused demanded Rs.
20/- for each copy I felt that he was demanding a bribe". So
it was	only the  surmise  of  PW-1  and  it  was  not	what
appellant told	him. The third feature is, when applications
were presented	the appellant asked PW-1 to pay Rs.20/- each
copy an when the money was given the appellant counted it in
the presence  of all those who were present then and he kept
it in his pocket.
In the  above context we may examine the relevant Rules
of the	Maharashtra Registration  Manual. Rules	 345 to	 355
pertain to  "Searches and  inspections, and  grant of copies
etc." The  material words  in Rule  346 are  these: "when an
applicant for  copy is	tendered, the  application should be
required to deposit in advance an amount sufficient to cover
the search  fee	 for  the  whole  period  mentioned  in	 the
application." Rule  347(iv) reads thus: "When an application
for copy  is tendered,	the applicant  should be required to
deposit in  advance an amount sufficient to cover the search
fee for	 the who  period mentioned in the application." Rule
347(iv)	 reads	thus:  "When  an  application  for  copy  is
presented personally  and the  fees are	 paid, the  probable
date on	 which the  copy will b e ready for delivery and the
serial No.  of application should be endorsed on the receipt
and on	the counterfoil."  Rule 348(i) - "A Register of fees
paid or	 of deposit  or payment	 in lump  made by applicants
either personally  or by  Money Order on account of searches
and copies  should be  maintained in  form Appendix XXXIX in
every office."
A	reading	  of  the  above  rules	 indicates  that  if
appellant had  made entries  regarding amount collected from
PW-1 in	 the Register  prescribed and  if he  had prepared a
receipt acknowledging  payment of  the amount of Rs.20/- per
copy, there  would not	have been any scope for a contention
that the amount paid was for gratification of the appellant.
Learned single  Judge of  the  High  court	 highlighted
three main  reasons for repelling the plea of the appellant.
First is, there is no evidence to show that appellant talked
anything to PW-1 about any advance. Second is, appellant put
the amount  in his  pocket instead  of	keeping	 it  in	 the
drawer. Third  is. appellant  did not issue any receipt, and
on the contrary appellant told PW-1 to come to the office on
the next  Monday or  Tuesday to	 collect the  copies. On the
above reasons learned single Judge concluded that the amount
was not paid towards any legal charges.
A closer  scrutiny of  the evidence unfurls a different
profile on every one of those three reasonings. When ht sub-
registrar told the applicant that he had to bear Rs.20/- per
copy, the  mere fact  that he did not use the word "advance"
is hardly  sufficient to  conclude that what he required was
not the	 advance amount	 which he  was	legally	 obliged  to
collect from the applicant. Similarly the act of keeping the
amount in his pocket is not decisive to conclude that it was
intended for  himself. Perhaps that could have been the mode
of his	keeping the   money  safe till that day's amount was
closed.	 The   third  reason  cannot  be  used	against	 the
appellant because  as soon as appellant collected the amount
the signal  was transmitted  by PW-1  which was	 immediately
followed up  as members of the anti corruption squad rounded
him up.	 Hence there would not have been sufficient interval
for the	 appellant to  made entries  in the  Register or  to
prepare the  receipt. Evidence shows that appellant told PW1
to come	 to the	 office again  on the next Monday or Tuesday
only as	 an answer  to the  querry made by PW1 as to when he
was to go there again for collecting the certified copies.
For the  above reasons we entertain a reasonable doubt,
on the	admitted facts,	 that what  appellant collected from
PW-1 could  have been  the charges  which  he  was  lawfully
obliged to collect from any person applying for three copies
of the	sale deeds.  In such a situation it is only just and
fair that  benefit of the aforesaid doubt is extended to the
appellant albeit the last stage of this litigation.
We, therefore, upset the conviction and sentence passed
on the appellant and acquit him of the offences charged. His
bail bond will stand discharged.