[Cites
1
, Cited by
79
]
Supreme Court of India
Prahlad Singh vs State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 August, 1997
Equivalent citations: AIR 1997 SUPREME COURT 3442, 1997 AIR SCW 3529, (1997) 7 JT 381 (SC), 1997 (7) JT 381, 1997 CRILR(SC&MP) 715, 1998 CALCRILR 37, 1998 SCC(CRI) 123, 1997 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 715, 1997 CRIAPPR(SC) 298, 1997 (8) SCC 515, 1997 UP CRIR 596, 1997 (5) SCALE 484, (1998) 1 EASTCRIC 319, (1997) 7 SUPREME 262, (1997) 21 ALLCRIR 797, (1997) 5 SCALE 484, (1997) 35 ALLCRIC 459, (1997) 3 CRIMES 167, (1998) 1 JAB LJ 84, (1997) 3 CURCRIR 115, (1997) 3 RECCRIR 181, 1997 CHANDLR(CIV&CRI) 504, (1998) SC CR R 140
Author:
G. N. Ray
Bench:
G. N. Ray
PETITIONER:
PRAHLAD SINGH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	13/08/1997

BENCH:
G. N. RAY, G. B. PATTANAIK




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
Present:
Hon'ble Mr Justice G.N. Ray
		Hon'ble Mr. Justice G.B. Pattanaik
		Manoj Prasad, Adv. for the appellant
K.N. Shukla, Sr. Adv.,	Mrs. Shushila Shukla  and  Uma	Nath
Singh Advs. with him for the Respondent,
		      J U D G M E N T
The following Judgment of the Court was delivered:
PATTANAIK, J.
This appeal  is directed  against the  judgment of	 the
Madhya pradesh	High Court  dated  7th	September,  1992  in
Criminal Appeal	 No. 34	 of 1986.  The	High  Court  by	 the
impugned judgment  set aside  the order	 of acquittal of the
appellant passed by the 2nd Additional Sessions Judge, Sagar
(MP), in  Sessions Trial  No. 185  of 1984 and convicted the
appellant under
section 376
I.P.C and sentenced to undergo
rigorous imprisonment for 10 years.
The  appellant   stood  charged   of  the	 offence  of
committing rape on the allegation that on 26th May,  1984 he
committed rape on a minor girl Kumari Sarvesh, PW-5 when the
girl was playing outside her house in the company of her two
younger sisters.  The prosecution  alleged  that  while	 the
prosecutrix PW-5  was playing, the appellant induced her and
then took her outside the military camp and subjected her to
sexual	assault	  on  account  of  which  the  girl  started
profusely bleeding. Her father, Siyaram, PW-9 went in search
of the	girl and  found her standing on the road and crying,
as the	accused had  left her near that place. The girl then
narrated the  incident to  her father  who lodged  a  report
which was  treated as  F.l.R. and  Police thereafter started
investigation. The  further  prosecution  case	is  that  on
suspicion  the	 appellant  prosecution	  case	is  that  on
suspicion the  appellant who  was also	an  army  jawan	 was
arrested and  his identification parade was held on 23.71984
by  PW-2   wherein  the	 appellant  was	 identified  by	 the
prosecutrix. On completion of investigation the charge-sheet
was submitted  and the	accused stood the trial. The learned
Sessions Judge	relying upon  the evidence of Doctor - PW-4,
prosecutrix PW	5 and  her parents  PWs 7  and 9 came to the
conclusion that	 on the	 relevant  date	 of  occurrence	 the
prosecutrix was	 raped. But  so far as the complicity of the
appellant  with	 the  incident	is  concerned,	the  learned
Sessions Judge	could not  find any  reliable  evidence	 and
acquitted him of the charge. On an appeal being carried, the
High Court  by the  impugned judgment  interfered  with	 the
order of  acquittal and	 relying upon  the evidence  of	 the
prosecutrix more  particularly	the  identification  of	 the
appellant by  the prosecutrix  convicted  the  appellant  as
already stated.
The learned  counsel for  the appellant  contended that
there is not an iota of acceptable evidence before the Court
which can  be said  to have  brought home the charge against
the appellant  and the	High Court  committed  an  error  in
altering an  order to acquittal to one of conviction by mere
surmises and  conjectures. The learned counsel urged that so
far as the so-called identification parade which was held on
23.7.1984 is  concerned no credence can be given to the same
as inasmuch  as the  same identification-parade was held two
months after  the incident and that the accuse was shown  to
the prosecutrix	 earlier to the identification in  question.
According to  the learned counsel the Sessions Judge rightly
did not	 give any  credence to	the identification.  In this
Court also  the counsel	 appearing, for the appellant stated
that  no   credence  can   be	given	to   the   so-called
identification that was held two months after the occurrence
wherein	  the prosecutrix  is alleged to have identified the
accused. It may be appropriate to extract in this connection
the  statement	of  the	 prosecutrix  in  crosss-examination
wherein she stated:
"The accused was kept in custody in
     the Quarter  Guard, where my father
     had taken	me and Major Raizada was
     also present  there. Thereafter, my
     father had	 taken me  again to  the
     camp for  re-identification of  the
     accused. My  father had  told me to
     move to the place of identification
     and to identify the accused."
It may be stated that though the prosecution had sought
to establish  a case  that the	accused had  been identified
even prior  to the  test   identification-parade before	 one
Major Raizada  but no  evidence was  laid in that regard and
even Major  Raizada was	 not  examined	as  a  witness.	 The
identification was  supposed to	 have been  made also in the
presence of  one Subedar  Harphool Singh  but said  Harphool
Singh also  was not  examined by  the  prosecution.  In	 the
aforesaid circumstances our opinion no credence can be given
to the identification said to have been made before the test
identification-parade on 23.7.1984.
The learned  counsel for  the appellant  further  urged
that the only other item of evidence to prove the complicity
of  the	 appellant  with  the  offence	is  the	 substantive
evidence of  the prosecutrix in the Court as inasmuch as she
identified the	appellant to be the person who committed the
sexual assault	on her	on the	date of occurrence. But that
evidence  is   also  wholly  unacceptable  in  view  of	 the
statement  of  the  prosecutrix	 in  the  cross	 examination
wherein she stated:
"Today,  I have  come alongwith my
     father. The  Police uncle	was also
     with  me	outside.  Now  when  the
     accused  entered  into  the  court,
     then the  Policewala and  my father
     had told  me that he is the accused
     and that  is why that I have stated
     that  he	is  the	  accused.   The
     Policewala	 uncle	had  tutored  my
     statement	 outside    today    and
     accordingly I  am deposing	 my same
     tutored statement."
In view  of the  aforesaid evidence of the prosecutrix,
in our	opinion the  learned counsel  for the  appellant  is
wholly	justified   in	making	 his  submission   that	 the
substantive evidence of the prosecutrix in court identifying
the accused  is absolutely  of no  relevance and  is  wholly
unacceptable and  no conviction can be based on the same Mr.
Shukla,	 the   learned	senior	counsel	 appearing  for	 the
respondent, however,  submitted that  the accused  belong an
army Jawan  and a colleague of the father of the prosecutrix
and  prosecutrix  having  been	sexually  assaulted  by	 the
accused,  there	  is  no   reason  for	the  prosecutrix  to
unnecessarily involve  an innocent man and since the fact of
rape  on   the	prosecutrix   has  been	 established  beyond
reasonable  doubt  the	High  Court  rightly  convicted	 the
appellant. We are. however, unable to accept this contention
since until  and unless	 there is  reliable  and  acceptable
evidence to  come to  a conclusion  that  it  is  accused  -
appellant who  committed rape he cannot he convicted even if
the factum  of rape on the prosecutrix is established beyond
reasonable doubt.  In our considered opinion, therefore, the
High Court  interfered with  an order  of acquittal  on mere
surmises  and	conjectures  without   having  an   Iota  of
acceptable evidence  bringing complicity  of the accused and
as such the said conviction and sentence cannot be sustained
in law. Accordingly we set aside the conviction and sentence
passed by  the High  Court of  Madhya Pradesh and acquit the
appellant of  the charges  leveled against him. The criminal
appeal is  allowed. The bail bond furnished by the appellant
shall stand discharged.