[Cites
24
, Cited by
56
]
Supreme Court of India
Associated Stone Industries (Kotah) ... vs Commissioner Of Income Tax, Rajasthan on 5 February, 1997
Equivalent citations: 1997 TAX. L. R. 212, 1997 (3) SCC 323, (1997) 90 TAXMAN 553, (1997) 224 ITR 560, (1997) 1 SCALE 763, (1997) 4 SUPREME 197, (1997) 1 SCR 957 (SC), (1997) 2 JT 401 (SC), (1997) 138 CURTAXREP 260, (1997) 137 TAXATION 172
Bench:
B.P. Jeevan Reddy
,
K.S. Paripoornan
PETITIONER:
ASSOCIATED STONE INDUSTRIES (KOTAH) LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX, RAJASTHAN

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	05/02/1997

BENCH:
B.P. JEEVAN REDDY, K.S. PARIPOORNAN




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
W I T H
       SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 10840 OF 1980)
		      J U D G M E N T
     Paripoornan, J.
The appellant  is a  public  limited  company.  It	 was
incorporated in	 the then Indian State of Kotah on 17.1.1945
for carrying  on the  business of quarrying stones. it is an
assessee to Income-tax. This appeal is filed in pursuance to
the certificate	 of fitness  granted by	 the High  Court  of
Rajasthan, Jaipur  Bench dated 26.11.1979 arising out of the
judgment and  order dated  30.7.1979 in Income-tax Reference
No. 24	of 1970. The said judgment is reported in (
1981) 130
ITR 868	 [CIT v.  Associated Stone Industries (Kotah) Ltd.
].
The High Court considered the validity of the re-assessments
made on	 the appellant	for the	 years 1950-51 to 1956-57 as
also the legality f the assessments made for the years 1957-
58 to  1961-62 in  its common  judgment dated 30.7.1979 (ITR
NO. 24	Of 1970).  In deciding	the legality and validity of
the re-assessments  for the  years 1950-51  to 1956-57	some
aspects were  decided in   favour of the assessee/appellant.
On a consolidated reference made by the Income-tax Appellate
Tribunal in respect of the assessment Years 1950-51 to 1961-
62, seven questions of law were referred for the decision of
the High Court. Out of the same the following 5 questions of
law, namely question Nos. 1,2,5,6 and 7, which were answered
against the assessee, are still in appeal before us:-
1. Whether, on the facts and in the
     circumstances of  the case, the re-
assessments for  the years	 1950-51
     to 1956-57, were validly made under
section 34(1)  (a)
of  the  Indian
     Income-tax Act, 1922?
2. Whether, on the facts and in the
     circumstances  of	 the  case,  the
     Revenue  was  entitled  to	 contend
     that reassessments	 for  the  years
     1954-55, 1955-56  and 1956-57  were
     validly made under
section 34(1)(b)
of the Act?
3.	 Whether   an  appeal	can  lie
     against  an   order  levying  penal
     interest under
section 18A
of the
     Act for  the assessment years 1957-
     58 to 1961-62?
4. Whether the assessee-company was
     entitled to  a credit of the amount
     of excess	royalty	 paid  which  is
     held to  be in  lieu of the income-
tax and  super-tax liability of the
     company?
5. Whether, on the facts and in the
     circumstances  of	 the  case,  the
     payment of	 royalty  in  excess  of
     Rs.1,50,000 paid under clause 18 of
     the lease granted by the Government
     of His  Highness the  Maharao Saheb
     of Kotah  on May 2, 1945, which has
     been held	to be in lieu of income-
tax,   super-tax	etc.,	by   the
     District	Judge,	 Kotah,	  is   a
     permissible   deduction	in   the
     assessment years  1957-58 to  1960-
     61?
2.   At this  stage, it should be mentioned that the assesee
has filed  special leave  petition No. 10840 of 1980, by way
of abundant  caution against  the very	same judgment of the
High Court  to be considered in case the certificate granted
by the High Court is found to be defective or unsustainable.
it  is	unnecessary  to	 consider  the	said  special  leave
petition on merits separately.
3.   We heard counsel.
4.   the  relevant   facts  for	  deciding  the	 controversy
involved in  this appeal  are not in dispute. The High Court
has summarised them correctly in its judgment as follows:
The then  Maharao of  Kotah State	granted a  lease  to
assessee-company on  May 2,  1945, for	a period of 15 years
beginning  from	 October,  1944.  clause  18  of  the  lease
agreement entered into by the assessee-company with the then
Maharao of  Kotah  for	quarrying  flooring  stones  was  as
under:-
18. (i)  In  consideration	 of  the
     concessions and  privileges granted
     by	 the  GRANTOR  and  in	lieu  of
     income-tax,  super-tax  and  excess
     profits tax,  the GRANTEE covenants
     to pay  to the  GRANTOR royalty  on
     the stone	excavated at the rate of
     rupee one	per 100 sq. ft., subject
     to	  the	 minimum    amount    of
     rs.1,50,000  per	financial  year,
     provided that the aforesaid rate of
     Re.1  per	100  sq.  ft.,	will  be
     operative so  long as  the	 selling
     rate of  unpolished slabs	does not
     exceed Rs.	 10 per	 100 sq. ft.; in
     the event of the selling rate going
     above this	 figure the  royalty per
     100 sq.  ft. shall	 be increased by
     25% of the excess over ten rupees.
(ii) The  minimum royalty	will  be
     payable in	 four equal  instalments
     in advance	 every quarter. Provided
     that if  in any quarter the royalty
     payable  calculated  tat  the  rats
     mentioned in  sub-para (i)	 exceeds
     the instalment  of minimum	 royalty
     paid in  advance for  that quarter,
     the balance shall be made up within
     the next quarter.
The  Kotah	 State	merged	with  the  United  State  of
Rajasthan and  the Indian  I.T. Act,  1922, was brought into
force in  the newly  formed State  of rajasthan	 with effect
from  April  1,	 1950.	The  assessee-company  submitted  an
application  to	  the  commissioner   of  Income-tax  for  a
declaration that  it was  exempt form  the payment of income
tax in	accordance with the terms of the lease granted to it
by the	then Maharao of Kotah. But the aforesaid application
was rejected. Thereafter, the assessee-company filed a civil
suit in	 the court of the District Judge, Kotah, against the
Union of  India	 and  the  State  of  Rajasthan,  seeking  a
declaration that  it was  exempt from  payment of income tax
and that  the royalty  paid by	it in  excess of the minimum
amount of 1,50,000 was in lieu of income-tax, super-tax etc.
The learned  District Judge  by his  decree and	 order dated
August 23, 1957, held that the royalty which was paid by the
assessee-company to  the State	of Rajasthan,  in accordance
with the  provisions of cl.18 of the grant, consisted of two
parts, namely,	the sum	 of Rs.1,50,000	 represented royalty
proper, while  the remaining  amount of	 royalty paid by the
assessee-company was  in lieu  of income-tax,  super-tax and
excess profits-tax. According to the learned District Judge,
the State  of Rajasthan	 was entitled to the minimum royalty
of Rs.	1,50,000 as,  according to  him, the said amount was
attributable to	 the concessions  and privileges  granted by
the Government	to the assessee-company, while the remaining
amount	paid   by  the	 assessee-company,  in	 excess	  of
Rs.1,50,000, was further divisible into two parts consisting
of the	amount paid  in lieu  o	 income-tax,  super-tax	 and
excess profits	tax, which was payable to the Union of India
by way	of federal  taxes on  incomes or  profits, while the
amount left by way of residue, out of the amount paid by the
assessee-company  under	 cl.  18  of  the  grant  after	 the
deduction of  the income-tax,  super-tax and  excess profits
tax, shall  be payable	to the State of Rajasthan. Thus, the
State of  Rajasthan was held entitled to the minimum royalty
amount of  Rs. 1,50,000	 while the  Union of  India was held
entitled to  the amount	 equal to  the tax  liability of the
assessee-company in  respect of the federal taxes out of the
excess royalty paid in that year, and the State of Rajasthan
was entitled  to the  residue left  out of  the total amount
paid by	 the assessee-company  under cl.18 of the grant. The
learned District  Judge, however, dismissed the suit against
the Union of India. The order passed by the learned District
Judge, Kotah,  had not binding effect so far as the Union of
India is  concerned.
The Income	 Tax Officer,  in the  assessments  for	 the
years 1950-51  to 1956-57,  disallowed the  deduction of the
minimum royalty	 amount	 of  Rs.1,50,000  from	the  taxable
income of  the assessee-company	 on the ground that the same
was capital  expenditure, while deduction of royalty paid by
the assessee-company  in excess	 of Rs.1,50,000 was allowed.
The same  position was	maintained by  him in respect of the
assessments for	 the assessment years 1957-58 to 1961-62. In
the year  1959,	 notices  for  reassessment  of	 tax,  under
Section 34(1)(a)
of the  Indian Income	 Tax Act, 1922, were
issued for  the assessment years 1950-51 to 1956-57. The ITO
reassessed the	income of the assessee-company for the years
1950-51 to  1956-57 and	 held that  as the amount of royalty
paid by	 the  assessee-company	in  excess  of	the  sum  of
Rs.1,50,000 was	 in lieu  of income-tax etc., the same could
not be	allowed as  deduction to the assessee-company and as
such  that  mount  of  excess  royalty	allowed	 earlier  as
deduction was disallowed and was added back to the income of
the assessee-company. the assessee-company preferred appeals
before the  AAC against the aforesaid orders of reassessment
passed by  the ITO,  Kotah, but	 the appeals were dismissed.
Then the  assessee-company filed  appeals before  the Income
Tax Appellate  Tribunal, which	disposed  of  seven  appeals
relating to  the reassessment proceedings made under
Section
34(1)(a)
of  the Act,  for the	assessment years  1950-51 to
1956-57, by  one consolidated order dated September 7, 1968.
the Tribunal  held that	 the proceeding	 under
Section 34
of
the Act	 could not  be initiated  in view of the decision of
the Supreme  Court in  Calcutta Discount  Com.
Ltd.  vs. ITO
[(1961) 41  ITR 191].  It was  held by the Tribunal that the
assessee-company had  disclosed	 all  relevant	or  material
facts and  as there  was no  failure  on  the  part  of	 the
assesee-company to  disclose fully  and truly  any  relevant
material necessary  for the  assessments in  respect  of the
years in  question, the	 necessary pre-requisite  conditions
for invoking the jurisdiction for reassessment under
Section
34(1)(a)
of  the Act  were absent. The Tribunal further held
that the  proceedings for  reassessment for  the  assessment
years  1954-55,	 1955-56  and  1956-57,	 although  initiated
within a  period of four years from the date of the original
assessment for	those years,  yet because  such	 proceedings
were initiated under
Section 34(1)(a)
of the Act, they could
not be	upheld as having been made under
Section 34(1)(b)
of
the Act.  The Tribunal	also held  that the  portion of	 the
excess royalty	paid by	 the assessee-company  to the  State
Government, which was equivalent to the tax liability of the
assessee-company,  could   not	be   held   as	 permissible
deduction, as the income-tax and other taxes were payable to
the Union  Government.
However, the remaining portion of the
excess royalty,	 which was left out by way of residue, after
deducting the  amount paid  in lieu  of tax liability by the
assessee-company, out of the excess royalty, was permissible
deduction on  the basis of the principles
laid down by
their
Lordships of  the Supreme  Court in
Gotan Lime Syndicate vs.
CIT
[(1966) 59 ITR 718]. It was further held by the Tribunal
that the royalty paid on polished stones, in accordance with
the provisions	of cl.	19 of  the agreement,  constituted a
part of	 the  cost  of	the  stones  and  is  a	 permissible
deduction, being  an  expenditure  of  revenue	nature.	 The
Tribunal lastly	 held that the assessee-company was entitled
to the	credit of the portion of the royalty, which was paid
by it  in lieu	of income-tax and super-tax liability of the
assessee-company.
By another	 order passed  on  September  7,  1968,	 the
Tribunal allowed  the appeals  preferred  by  the  assessee-
company in  respect of the assessment years 1957-58 to 1961-
62, holding that a sum of Rs.1,50,000, as the minimum amount
of royalty  payable by it, was expenditure of revenue nature
and was	 a permissible	deduction and that out of the excess
royalty paid  by the  assessee-company,	 the  residue  left,
after payment of the amount equivalent to income-tax, super-
tax,  etc.,  to	 the  Union  Government,  was  also  revenue
expenditure and	 was a	permissible deduction  although	 the
amount of  excess  royalty  representing  its  liability  in
respect of  income-tax, super-tax  and	other  direct  taxes
payable to the Union of India couldnot be deducted from the
taxable	 income	  of  the   assessee-company,  adopting	 the
reasoning given	 by it	in the	earlier order  passed on the
same day, which has been
referred to above
.
3.   We are  concerned only  with the  answers given  by the
High Court regarding questions Nos. 1,2,5,6 and 7, which are
against the assessee. On question No. 1, the High Court held
that the  re-assessment proceedings for the years 1950-51 to
1956-57 were  initiated and  concluded validly under
Section
34(1)(a)
of  the Act.  On question  No.	 2,  concerning	 the
assessment years  1954-55, 1955-56  and	 1956-57,  the	High
Court found on the alternate plea, that the reassessments of
the appellant-company  for the said years could be justified
under
Section  34(1)(b)
of  the Act.  On question No. 5, the
High court  held that  the  penal  interest  calculated	 and
charged	 under
Section	 18A(6)
or  18A(8)  could  only  be
challenged in  an appeal  against the order of assessment to
tax and the assessee would be entitled to deny his liability
to  payment   of  penal	 interest  also	 while	denying	 his
liability to  be assessed  to tax  under the  Act.  it	also
agreed with  the view  expressed by  the  Allahabad,  Andhra
Pradesh, Madras, Karnataka, Gujarat, Gauhati and Bombay High
Courts which  held that	 no appeal  lies against  the  order
levying penal  interest. The  matter was left vague, without
applying the  law
laid	down by
the High Court, to the facts
of the case. On question No. 6, the High Court held that the
assessee-company was  not entitled  to get  credit  for	 any
amount of the excess royalty. On question No. 7, it was held
that the  expenditure being  not one  of  a  revenue  nature
cannot be a permissible deduction in the relevant assessment
years.
4.   We shall  consider the  above questions of law answered
by the High Court (Questions 1,2,5,6 and 7) in seriatim.
Question No.  1 relates	 to the legality and validity of re-
assessments made  for the  years 1950-51  to  1956-57  under
Section 34(1)  (a)
of  the Income-tax  Act,  1922.
Sections
34(1)(a)
and (b) of the Act are to the following effect:
"34. Income  escaping assessment --
(1)  If   --  (a)	 the  Income-tax
     Officer has  reason to believe that
     by	 reason	  of  the   omission  or
     failure on	 the part of an assessee
     to make  a	 return	 of  his  income
     under
section 22
for and year or to
     disclose  fully   and   truly   all
     material facts  necessary	for  his
     assessment for  that year,	 income,
     profits  or   gains  chargeable  to
     income-tax have  escaped assessment
     for that  year, or have been under-
assessed, or  assessed at too low a
     rate, or have been made the subject
     of excessive  relief under the Act,
     or excessive  loss or  depreciation
     allowance has been computed, or
(b) notwithstanding  that there has
     been  no  omission	 or  failure  as
     mentioned in clause (a) on the part
     of the  assessee, in the Income-tax
     Officer  has   in	consequence   of
     information   in	his   possession
     reason  to	  believe  that	 income,
     profits  or   gains  chargeable  to
     income-tax have  escaped assessment
     for any  year, or	have been under-
assessed, or  assessed at too low a
     rate, or have been made the subject
     of excessive relief under this Act,
     or	  that	  excessive    low    or
     depreciation  allowance   has  been
     computed.
he	 may   in  cases  falling  under
     clause (a) at any time and in cases
     falling under  clause  (b)	 at  any
     time within  four years  of the end
     of	 that	year,	serve	on   the
     assessee.....a notice."
It is  evident that  two conditions should be fulfilled
to exercise  jurisdiction under
Section 34(1)(a)
of the Act.
(1) The	 Income Tax  Officer should  have reason  to believe
that income  has escaped  assessment, and  (2) he  must have
reason to  believe that	 such escapement is by reason of the
omission or  failure on	 the part  of the assessee to make a
return or  to disclose	fully and  truly all  material facts
necessary for  his assessment  for the	relevant year. It is
now well  settled by  the decisions  of this  Court that the
duty of the assessee is only to fully and truly disclose all
material facts. The expression "material facts" contained in
Section 34(1)(a)
of the  Act refers  only to Primary facts,
and the	 duty of  the assessee	is to  disclose such primary
facts. There  is no duty cast on the assessee to indicate or
draw the attention of the Income Tax Officer what factual or
legal, or  other inferences  can ben  drawn from the primary
facts disclosed. (see -
Calcutta Discount Co. Ltd. vs. ITO
-
41 ITR	191). In  this case, the Appellate Tribunal found in
paragraph 12 of its order (page 321 of the paper book) thus:
The primary  fact in  this case was
     the lease	agreement and  the terms
     and conditions  thereof.  This  was
     before the	 Income-tax Officer from
     the beginning.  He was aware of the
     triangular	 dispute   between   the
     assessee  company,	  the  State  of
     Rajasthan and  the Union Government
     pending before  the District Court,
     Kotah.  He	  was  served	with  an
     interim injunction	 to refrain from
     proceedings with  the  assessments.
He	 had  got  the	said  injunction
     modified. In  these  circumstances,
     the  charge  against  the	assessee
     company  that  it	had  omitted  or
     failed to	fully and truly disclose
     any material fact fails completely.
We are,  therefore, of  the opinion
     that the Income-tax Officer did not
     have  any	material  whatsoever  to
     have some reason to believe that as
     a reason  of omission or failure on
     the part of the assessee-company to
     fully  and	  truly	  disclose   any
     relevant material necessary for its
     assessments  for  the  years  under
     appeal,	income	  had	 escaped
     assessment. In other words, we hold
     that   the	   material    condition
     requisite for invoking jurisdiction
     under
section  34(1)(a)
was absent.
We,  therefore,   hold   that   the
     reassessments    completed	   under
section   34(1)(a)
are	 without
     jurisdiction  and	are,  therefore,
     liable to be cancelled."
On the other hand, the High Court has taken a different
view of	 the matter  by stating	 that the Income Tax Officer
was not	 a party  to the suit filed by the appellant, that a
copy of	 the plaint  filed in the court was not submitted to
him and	 the assessee-company  failed in  its duty to make a
pointed reference to the particular portion of the document,
namely, clause	18 of the lease agreement dated 2,5,1945 and
in this view of the matter held thus:-
Thus, we  are  satisfied  that  the
     Tribunal was not correct in holding
     that the  assessee-company did  not
     fail  to	disclose  all	material
     relevant or  primary facts	 and the
     mere  production	of   the   lease
     agreement or  some vague  awareness
     on the  part of  the ITO  about the
     triangular	 dispute   between   the
     assessee, the  State  of  Rajasthan
     and the  Union of	India before the
     District  Judge,	Kotah,	and  the
     service of	 the interim  injunction
     upon  him,	  cannot  lead	 to   an
     inference that the ITO was aware as
     a matter  of fact	that the  amount
     paid by  the assessee-company under
     the lease	agreement consisted  not
     only or  royalty  proper  but  also
     some amount  was paid  in	lieu  of
     income-tax and other taxes."
In this  view, it	was held  that the  assessee-company
failed to  disclose all material or primary facts and so the
proceedings under
Section 34(1)(a)
of 1922 Act were validity
initiated and  concluded.  We  are  of	the  view  that	 the
approach and  conclusion so  made  by  the  High  Court	 are
patently erroneous for the following reasons.
5.   The primary  fact in  this case  is the lease agreement
entered into  by the  appellant with  the Maharao  of  Kotah
State dated  2.5.1945. It  was placed  before the Income Tax
Officer at  the time  of original assessments. It is not the
duty of the assessee to draw the attention of the Income Tax
Officer to  any	 pa particular	clause	or  portion  of	 the
document and  invite him  to draw  any particular  inference
therefrom. Moreover,  in the suit the Union of India and the
State of  Rajasthan were  parties.  The	 interim  injunction
passed by the court from assessing or levying any income tax
against	  the	 assessee-company   was	   varied   on	 the
representation made  by the Union of lndia, by later orders.
Indeed, the  Union of  India and the Commissioner of Income-
tax have  filed written statements in the suit. The order of
injunction was	within	the  knowledge	of  the	 Income	 Tax
Officer, as could be seen from the original assessments. The
Income Tax  Officer was	 aware	of  the	 triangular  dispute
between the  assessee-company, State  of Rajasthan and Union
of India  pending before  the District	Court. What is more,
the order  of injunction to refrain from proceeding with the
assessments was	 served on  the Income Tax Officer which was
later modified.	 In view of these salient features, the High
Court totally  erred in	 holding that there was any omission
on the	part of	 the appellant-company	to fully  and  truly
disclose  material   or	 primary  facts	 necessary  for	 the
assessments for	 the years  in question. We, therefore, hold
that the  answer given	to question  No. 1 by the High Court
that the  reassessment proceedings  initiated under
Section
34(1)(a)
of  the Act  were valid  for the  years 1950-57, is
totally erroneous  in law. We set aside the said finding and
hold that  the re-assessment  proceedings for the assessment
years  1950-57	under
Section	34(1)(a)
of  the  Act	were
invalid.
6.   We shall  now consider question No. 2 as to whether the
Revenue could  contend or  defend the  reassessments for the
years 1954-55,	1955-56 and  1956-57 as	 validity made under
Section 34(1)(b)
of the Act?
The High  Court has  held on  question No.	 2 that	 re-
assessments of	the appellant-company  for  the	 said  three
years were  justified under
Section 34(1)(b)
of the Act. We
have noticed  in the  earlier portion of the judgment that a
civil suit  was filed  in the  Court of	 the District Judge,
Kotah by  the appellant-assessee  against the Union of India
and the State of Rajasthan seeking a declaration that it was
exempt from  payment of income tax and that the royalty paid
by it  in excess of the minimum amount of Rs. 1,50,000/- was
in lieu	 of income  tax, super-tax etc. Construing clause 18
of the	grant, the  District Judge held that the amount paid
by the	assessee consisted  of two parts, namely, the sum of
Rs.  1,50,000/-	  represented  royalty	 proper,  while	 the
remaining amount,  i.e., the  amount paid over and above Rs.
1,50,000/- represented	the amount  in lieu  of income	tax,
super-tax and excess profits tax. The State of Rajasthan was
held entitled  to Rs.  1,50,000/- which	 was attributable to
the concessions	 and privileges granted by the Government to
the appellant-company.	The amount  paid in  excess  of	 Rs.
1,50,000/- was	further divisible  into two  parts. One part
representing the  amount paid  in lieu	of income tax, super
tax and	 excess profits	 tax, which was payable to the Union
of India  and the  residue out	of the	amount paid  by	 the
assessee-company under	clause 18  of the  grant  after	 the
deduction of  the income  tax, super  tax and excess profits
tax shall be payable to the State of Rajasthan. The State of
Rajasthan will	be entitled  to the  residue.  The  District
Judge, however,	 dismissed the	suit against  the  Union  of
India. In the appeal filed by the State of Rajasthan, it was
held that  the agreement  dated 2.5.1945  became void on the
coming into  force of  the Constitution	 of India on January
26, 1950,  that the  amount paid  by the assessee-company in
excess of  the minimum	of Rs.	1,50,000/- was refundable to
it. The	 Income Tax  Officer held that the amount of royalty
paid by	 the appellant-company	in excess  of Rs. 1,50,000/-
being in  lieu of  income tax,	super tax and excess profits
tax could  not be allowed as deduction. In the re-assessment
proceedings, the amount of excess royalty allowed earlier as
deduction was disallowed and added back to the income of the
assessee-company.  The	 appeals  filed	 by  the  appellant-
assessee before	 the Appellate	Assistant Commissioner	were
dismissed. The	Appellate Tribunal held that the proceedings
are invalid  under
Section 34(1)(a)
of the Act for the years
1950-51 to  1956-57 and	 alternatively that  the proceedings
for re-assessment  for the years 1954-55, 19555-56 and 1956-
57 though  initiated within  a period of four years from the
date of	 the original  assessment for those years, could not
be sustained  under
Section  34(1)(b)
of  the Act, since the
proceedings were  initiated under
Section 34
(10(a)  of	 the
Act. The  Tribunal also	 held that the portion of the excess
royalty paid by the assessee-company to the State Government
which was  equivalent to  the tax liability of the assessee-
company is  not a  permissible deduction  as the  taxes were
payable to  the Union  Government. It  was further held that
however, the  remaining portion	 of the excess royalty which
was left  out by  way of residue, after deducting the amount
paid in	 lieu of tax liability by the assessee-company, (out
of the	excess royalty)	 was permissible  deduction. In	 the
High Court  it was  not disputed  that re-assessment for the
years 1954-55,	1955-56 and  1956-57  were  taken  within  a
period of  four years  from the	 date of  completion of	 the
original assessment  proceedings and so they could have been
validly made  under
Section  34(1)(b)
of  the Act.  Nor	 was
there any  dispute before  the High Court that the amount of
royalty paid  over and	above the  minimum royalty amount of
Rs. 1,50,000/- was paid in lieu of income tax, super tax and
excess profits	tax and	 the amount which was so paid cannot
be claimed  as exempt from payment of income-tax. It was the
income of the assessee-company and was chargeable to tax and
which had,  as a  matter of  fact, escaped assessment at the
time of	 the completion	 of the	 original assessment. In the
original assessment  order, the	 Income Tax  Officer allowed
deduction for the entire amount paid by the assessee-company
by way of royalty including the amount paid in lieu of taxes
as well	 as of the residue. The High Court held, on a resume
of  the	  above,  that	the  Income  Tax  Officer  had	some
"information" relating	to escapement  of income  or  under-
assessment of  income and since action was taken within four
years of  the  original	 assessment  such  action  could  be
sustained under
Section 34(1)(b)
of the  Act, even  if the
proceedings were  initiated under
Section 34(1)(a)
of	 the
Act.
7.   We are of the view that the reasoning and conclusion of
the High Court in this regard are justified in law. The plea
made in this behalf by the appellant's counsel was two fold.
(1) The  first plea  was  that  the
     proceeding initiated  under
Section
     34(1)(a)
of  the	Act,  which  was
     found  to	 be  invalid   for   the
     assessment years  1954-55,	 1955-56
     and  1956-57  cannot  be  sustained
     under
Section  34(1)(b)
of the Act.
Strong reliance  was placed  on the
     decision  of   the	 Allahabad  High
     Court in
Raghubar Dayal Ram Kishan
     v. C.I.T.
(63 I.T.R. 572).
(2) The  second plea  was that  the
     decision  of  the	District  Judge,
     Kotah rendered  in the  civil  case
     was only  based on	 the lease deed.
The  lease	 deed  as  well	 as  the
     decision of the District Judge were
     already available	at the	time  of
     original assessment  and cannot  be
     considered to  be fresh material or
     information sufficient  to	 attract
Section 34(1)(b)
of the Act.
8.   A look  at
Section	 34
, clauses  (a) and  (b) will show
that the  said clauses	deal with  two different situations.
Section 34
is only a machinery section. They cover different
contingencies and  situations, but they do not deal with two
distinct and separate jurisdictions.
Section 34
as a whole -
- clause (a) or clauses (b) deals with cases of reopening of
income	escapement   assessment.  Whereas
Section  34(1)(a)
requires the  formation	 of  a	belief	by  the	 Income	 Tax
Officer, that  there is a failure or omission on the part of
the assessee  to disclose fully and truly all material facts
and there  must be  some material  to form  such a facts and
there must  be some  material to form such a belief that the
failure or  omission on	 the part of the assessee has led to
the  escapement	  or  under-assessment	 of  income  of	 the
assessee,
Section  34(1)(b)
requires  that even if there was
no omission  or failure on the part of the assessee, but the
Income Tax  Officer has	 information and  he could  form the
belief that  the income	 has escaped assessment, he could do
so within  the period  of four	years. There are limitations
for the	 exercise of  power under
Section 34(1)(a)
, namely,
that the  Income Tax Officer is bound to record the reasons,
which led  to  the  formation  of  the	belief	and  further
sanction of the Commissioner of the Central Board of Revenue
is required.
Section 34(1)(b)
is of wider import covering a
larger class of cases. In ordinary civil actions, if a party
prays for a larger relief and the Court holds that he is not
entitled to  the same,	but it	is apparent  from the  facts
proved or  admitted that  the party  is entitled to a lesser
relief, it  is always open to the court to grant the latter.
Similarly,  if	 the  Income   Tax  Officer   has  initiated
proceeding under  the stringent	 and onerous  provisions  of
Section 34(1)(a)
which is found to be invalid, nothing could
prevent	 the   appellate  or  other  higher  authority	from
invoking
Section  34(1)(b)
if  the pre-requisite  conditions
for the	 application of	 clause (b)  are satisfied. In other
words,	if  the	 conditions  for  applicability	 of
Section
34(1)(b)
which	  only	provides   for	shorter	  period  of
limitation is  satisfied, the  assessment  though  initiated
under
Section 34(1)(a)
could be sustained or justified under
Section 34(1)(b)
of the  Act. On this aspect, the decisions
of various  High Courts	 are not uniform. The Allahabad High
Court in
Raghubar Dayal Ram Kishan v. C.I.T.
(63 I.T.R. 572)
has held  that it is not permissible.
On the other hand, the
Calcutta High  Court in Mriganka Mohan Sur v. C.I.T. (95 ITR
503) has  expressed dissent  from the  aforesaid decision of
the  Allahabad	 High  Court  has  held	 that  re-assessment
proceedings initiated  under
Section 34(1)(a)
of the Income-
tax Act,  1922 though  set aside  by the Appellate Tribunal,
can nevertheless  be sustained under
Section 34(1)(b)
of the
Act provided  that on  the  materials  on  record,  all	 the
requirements under
Section 34(1)(b)
are satisfied. The same
High Court  in Nirmala	Birla v. W.T.O. (105 ITR 483-FB) has
followed its  earlier decision.
To similar  effect  is	 the
decision of  the Delhi	High Court  in
Ganga Saran & Sons v.
I.T.O.
(130  ITR 212).
A Division  Bench of the Bombay High
Court in
Rajabally Hirji  Meghani v.  S. N. Sahane
(170 ITR
614 has	 concurred with the decision of the Delhi High Court
in
Ganga Saran
's case (130 ITR 212) in the context of a writ
petition filed	to strike  down notices issued under
Section
148
of	the Income-tax	Act.
The  other decisions which take
similar view  are
T.M.	Kousali v.  Sixth ITO
(
155 ITR 739),
CIT v.	Banwarilal &  Sons
(137	 ITR 91);
Mysore Tobacco Co.
Ltd. v.	 CIT
(
157 ITR 606) and CIT v. Surendra Kumar Bhadani
(164 ITR 323).
9.   Regarding the  second plea,  it is	 now fairly  settled
that the information obtained by the Income Tax Officer need
not be	one outside  the record; it may be one obtained from
the assessment	records already	 available. The	 law on this
point has  been
laid  down in
Salem Provident	Fund Society
Ltd. v.	 C.I.T.
(
42  ITR 547) and United Mercantile Co. Ltd.
v. C.I.T.
(64 ITR  218).
These	 decisions have	 been quoted
with approval  by a  Constitution Bench	 of  this  Court  in
Anandji Haridas	 & Co. v. S.P. Kasture (AIR SC 565). At page
573, the Court observed thus:
"In  Salem	  Provident  Fund  Society  Ltd.  Commr.  of
lncometax, Madras  (1961) 42  ITR 547 (Mad) a division Bench
of the Madras High Court interpreting the scope of the words
'information which  has come  into his	possession' found in
Sec. 34
of the Indian Income Tax Act, observed thus:
We are unable to accept the extreme
     proposition that  nothing that  can
     be	 found	in  the	 record	 of  the
     assessment which  itself would show
     escape  of	  assessment  or  under-
assessment,  can	be   viewed   as
     information which led to the belief
     that there	 has  been  escape  from
     assessment	  or   under-assessment.
Suppose a	mistake in  the original
     order   of	   assessment	is   not
     discovered	 by   the   Income   Tax
     Officer himself on further scrutiny
     but it  is brought to his notice by
     another  assessee	 or  even  by  a
     subordinate or  a superior officer,
     that would appear to be information
     disclosed	 to   the   Income   Tax
     Officer. If  the mistake  itself is
     not extraneous  to the  record  and
     the    informant	 gathered    the
     information from  the  record,  the
     immediate source  of information to
     the  Income  Tax  Officer	in  such
     circumstances  is	 in  one   sense
     extraneous to  the	 record.  It  is
     difficult to  accept  the	position
     that while	 what is seen by another
     in the record is `information' what
     is seen  by the  Incometax	 Officer
     himself is	 not information to him.
     In the  latter case he just informs
     himself. It will be information his
     possession within	the  meaning  of
section  34
.   In	such   cases  of
     obvious mistakes  apparent	 on  the
     face of  the record  of assessment,
     that record  itself can be a source
     of information, if that information
     leads to a discovery or belief that
     there  has	  been	an   escape   of
     assessment or under-assessment.
     The    meaning    of    the    word
     "information"  came  up  again  for
     consideration  before   a	division
     bench of  the Kerala High in
United
     Mercantile Co.  Ltd. v.  Commr.  of
     Income Tax
.  Kerala (1967)	 64  ITR
     218  (Ker).  Their	 Lordships  held
     that to  `inform' means  to "impart
     knowledge" and  a detail  available
     to the  Incometax	Officer	 in  the
     papers filed before him does not by
     its  mere	availability  become  an
     item   of	  information.	 It   is
     transmuted	  into	  an   item   of
     information in  his possession only
     if	 and   when  its   existence  is
     realised	and   its   implications
     recognised."
We hold  that though the proceedings of the three years
1954-55, 1955-56  and  1956-57	cannot	be  sustained  under
Section 34(1)(a)
of the  Act, they  could be  sustained  or
justified under
Section 34(1)(b)
of  the  Act,  since	 the
materials on record disclose that the conditions required to
be fulfilled  under
section  34(1)(b)
are  satisfied.	With
great respect,	we hold that the decision to the contrary of
the Allahabad  High Court  in
Raghubar	Dayal Ram  Kishan v.
C.I.T.
(63 ITR 572) is not good law.
We are  next concerned  with question No. 5 which deals
with appealability  of an order levying penal interest under
Section 18A
of the  Act for the assessment years 1957-58 to
1961-62. The  High Court has rightly answered question No. 5
stating that the penal interest calculated and charged under
Section 18A(6)
or 18A(8)  can be  challenged in  an  appeal
filed by the assessee against the order of assessment to tax
and the	 assessee would be entitled to deny his liability to
payment of  penal interest  also while denying his liability
to be  assessed to  tax under
Section 18A
of the Act. It was
opined that  no appeal	would lie  against the order levying
interest under
section 18A(6)
or 18A(8) of the Act. The law
so stated  by the High Court is not open to objection.
Under
the Income-Tax Act, 1922
there was no specific right against
an order  levying interest.  But, if  an appeal is preferred
against an order of assessment and interest is levied by the
assessment order itself, the assessee can raise the question
regarding the  exigibility of  interest. In this connection,
the High  Court has  concurred with the view so expressed by
the Allahabad  High Court  in Pt.  Deo Sharma v. Cit (23 ITR
226), the  Andhra Pradesh High Court in
Boddu Seetharmaswamy
v. CIT
(28 ITR	 156), the  Madras High Court in
South India
Flour Mills  Ltd. v.  CBDT
(70	ITR 863), the Karnataka High
Court in
National Products v. CIT
(108 ITR 935), the Gujarat
High Court  in
CIT v. Sharma Construction Co.
(100 ITR 603),
Gauhati High  Court in
K.B. Stores v. CIT
(103 ITR 505) and
the Bombay  High Court in
Keshardeo Shrinivas Morarka v. CIT
(48 ITR	 404). It  is submitted	 that in this case the penal
interest was  levied under
Section 18A(6)
or (18A(8) in the
assessment order  and it was objected to in the appeal filed
against the  order of  assessment. The assessee was entitled
to take	 the objection	regarding the levy of penal interest
in the	said appeal.  The High	Court has not dealt with the
facts of  this case  pointedly in the light of law
laid down
by
it  nor has	stated whether	and if	so  the	 relief	 the
assessee is  entitled to in the matter while concurring with
the view  expressed by	other High  Courts regarding the law
applicable in  the instant  matter. We direct the High Court
to pass	 appropriate orders  after ascertaining	 the factual
situation and  the consequential  order that is necessary to
give effect  to the finding that may be arrived at, may also
be passed. The matter shall stand remitted to the High Court
for that purpose.
10.  We are  next concerned  with questions  No. 6  and 7 --
whether the  appellant-company is  entitled to credit of the
amount of  excess royalty paid by it to the State Government
in lieu	 of income-tax,	 and super  tax liability  and	also
whether the  payment of	 royalty in excess of Rs. 1,50,000/-
paid under  clause 18  of the lease deed dated 2.5.1945 is a
permissible deduction  for the	assessment years  1957-58 to
1960-61.
11.  In answering  question No.	 6, the	 High Court has held
that the  amount of  excess royalty paid cannot be deemed to
have been  paid to  Union of  India in	respect of  the	 tax
liability of  the appellant-company,  since no amount at all
was paid  to the Union of India by the appellant-company. It
was also  held that  the excess	 royalty paid  to the  State
Government cannot  be said  to be  paid on  behalf or  as an
agent of  the Union  of India.	It was, therefore, held that
the assessee-company  was not entitled to get credit for any
amount of  the excess royalty, said to have been paid by the
assessee-company to the State Government.
12.  In answering  question No.	 7, the High Court held that
the amount  equal to  the tax  liability of  the  appellant-
company for  the relevant  years, out of the excess royalty,
was not	 a permissible	deduction. The	remaining portion or
residue out  of the excess royalty would partake of the same
character as  the minimum  royalty of R. 1,50,000/- and is a
permissible deduction.	It was	made clear  that the  amount
equal to  the tax  liability of the assessee-company, out of
the excess  royalty, said  to have  been  paid	in  lieu  of
income-tax, super tax etc., is not a permissible deduction.
13.  It was  argued before  us that  the High Court erred in
answering questions No. 6 and 7 in the above manner ignoring
the orders  passed by  the Court  wherein the Union of India
and State  Government were  parties and vital materials were
available in  that regard.  Counsel submitted  the arguments
thus:
The amount	 of excess  royalty was	 clearly towards the
payment	 of  income-tax	 and  super  tax  liability  of	 the
assessee-company. The  aforesaid amount	 was received by the
State of  Rajasthan on behalf of the Union of India with the
consent of  the Union  of India	 and under the orders of the
District Judge,	 Kotah dated  18.02.1956 on  the basis of an
undertaking given  to the  Court. In such circumstances, the
Tribunal had  rightly held  that the  payment to  the  State
Government was	a payment  by the  assessee-company  to	 the
Union of  India towards its tax liability and rightly gave a
direction to  the Income  Tax Officer to give credit thereof
to the	assessee-company. The Court of District Judge, Kotah
passed a decree dated 25th September, 1956 in Civil Suit No.
17/53 against  the State  of Rajasthan	and in favour of the
Union of India to the effect that since the assessee-Company
has paid  full royalty	and excess  royalty to	the State of
Rajasthan upto	1956-57, the  State Government should pay to
the Union  of India  out of  the excess	 royalty paid by the
assessee-company the  amount of	 income tax, super tax etc.,
that has been assessed and demanded and which may be further
assessed and  demanded	by  the	 Union	of  India  from	 the
assessee-company right	from the  assessment year 1950-51 to
1958-59. Accordingly,  the District  Judge, Kotah  passed  a
decree for  Rs. 23,99,474/-  in favour of the Union of India
and against the State of Rajasthan for payment to be made in
respect of  the income	tax,  super  tax  etc.,	 levied	 and
demanded from  the  assessee-company.  The  effect  and	 the
impact of  this decree has escaped notice of the High Court.
In the light of the aforesaid decree of a competent court in
favour of  the Union  of India	it will	 be deemed  that the
State of  Rajasthan  was  holding  the	money  paid  by	 the
assessee-company under	the orders of the District Court and
with the  consent of  the Union	 of India  on behalf  of the
Income Tax  Officer. The  High Court  has erred	 in ignoring
this fact  and in  answering  question	No.  6	against	 the
assessee-company. The entire amount of the royalty including
the  component	of  income  tax	 and  super  tax  etc.,	 was
deposited in  the court	 of District  Judge, Kotah under its
order in  Civil Suit  No. 17  of 1953  and when	 the  entire
amount was  withdrawn by  the State  of Rajasthan  under the
orders of  the District	 Court subject	to final decision of
the suit  and when  the	 Court	of  District  Judge  at	 the
conclusion of  the suit	 ordered the  State of Rajasthan for
the payment  of Rs.  23,99,474/- to  the Union	of India  in
respect of its income tax demand for the relevant assessment
years, the High Court ought to have held that payment of the
aforesaid amount  was made  to the  Union of  India and	 the
assessee company  was entitled	to the	credit of the amount
from the Income-tax authorities. It was also stated that the
High Court  has not  considered the matter from the point of
view of	 Section 10(2)(xv)  of the  Income-tax Act, 1961 nor
was  the   earlier  decision  of  this	Court  inter-parties
(Associated Stone Industries (Kotah) Ltd. v. C.I.T. - 82 ITR
896) adverted  to in  this  regard.  (The  earlier  decision
reported in  82 ITR 896 was relating to the assessment years
1948-49 and  1949-50, when there was no law imposing income-
tax, super-tax	etc., in  the State  of Kotah and this Court
held that  the excess  royalty paid  cannot be	in  lieu  of
income-tax, super  tax etc.,  and was a payment on the terms
of a  contract. This  is an  important aspect to be borne in
mind).
14.  The above aspects have not been adverted to by the High
Court in the judgment rendered. If, as a matter of fact, the
above materials	 were available before the High Court, along
with the  statement of the case submitted by the Tribunal to
the High  Court, we  should say	 that the High Court has not
considered questions  No. 6  and 7  in accordance  with law.
This is	 a matter  for verification from the records land it
is for the High Court to apply its mind to the above aspects
and render a proper decision. We decline to answer questions
No. 6 and 7, on the basis of the available records. However,
we remit  the matter to the High Court to consider questions
No. 6 and 7 afresh, in the light of the facts stated above.
15.  The appeal	 is disposed  of as  above and the matter is
remitted to  the High Court to consider and pass appropriate
orders regarding  questions No.	 5, 6 and 7, in the light of
the observations  contained in this judgment. There shall be
no order as to costs in this appeal.