[Cites
3
, Cited by
366
]
Supreme Court of India
Dattu Ramrao Sakhare And Ors vs State Of Maharashtra on 8 May, 1997
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 1997 SC 182, 1997 (5) SCC 341, (1997) 2 CUR CRI R 54, (1997) 2 CHAND CRI C 151, (1997) 2 SCJ 80, (1997) 4 SCALE 121, (1997) 3 REC CRI R 227, (1997) 2 MPLJ 267, (1997) 2 ALL CRI LR 746, (1997) 35 ALL CRI C 100, (1998) 1 EAST CRI C 280, (1997) 3 MAH LJ 452, (1997) 5 JT 370, (1997) 2 LS 18, 1997 SCC (CRI) 685, 1997 APLJ(CRI) 353, 1997 ALL CJ 2 1171, (1997) 5 JT 370 (SC), (1997) SC CR R 880
Author:
S.P. Kurdukar
Bench:
G.T. Nanavati
,
S.P. Kurdukar
PETITIONER:
DATTU RAMRAO SAKHARE AND ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	08/05/1997

BENCH:
G.T. NANAVATI, S.P. KURDUKAR




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
Present:
Hon`ble Mr. Justice G.T. Nanavati
     Hon`ble Mr. Justice S.P. Kurdukar
Umesh Bhagwat, Adv. forthe appellant No.1
C.N. Sree Kumar, Adv for the appellant Nos.2-3
G.B. Sathe, Adv. for S.M. Jadhav, Adv. for the Respondent
     The following Judgment of the Court was delivered:
JU D G ME N T
S.P. KURDUKAR, J.
The appellants/accused  have filedthis Criminal Appeal
challenging  the   Judgment  and  order of  conviction and
sentence passed against them  under Section  302 readwith
Section34
IPCby the Bombay High Court Bench at Aurangabad
on September  5, 1990. The first appellant is the husband of
third appellant and the	 second appellant is their son. The
prosecution case in brief is asunder:
(2)  Appa (since  deceased)  was  the  brotherof  A-1 and
Chandrakant. In a partition between these three brothers by
metes and bounds each one was cultivating the land fallen to
his share.  Their lands are situated  at village Khudawadi,
Taluka Tuljapur in District Osmanabad.There was, however a
disputebetween Appa and	 A-1 in respect of the location of
foot track.  OnSeptember  25, 1987 at about 5.00 p.m.,Appa
was working  inthis  field whereas  his	 daughter,  Sarubai
(P.W.2)was  grazing the	 cattle near  about  the  place	 of
incident. The  appellants were also doing theiragricultural
work in their own  land. According  tothe  prosecution the
appellants came to the land of Appa and started assaulting
him with axes and sickle. Sarubai (P.W.2) seeing the assault
caused by  appellants came  near the  place ofincident and
requested themnot toassaulther father. A-1and A-2were
assaulting with axes whereas  A-3  was assaulting  with	 a
sickle.Due to this assault Appa fell down and made a signal
to hisdaughter Sarubai	to go to the abadi and	call her
mother Ambubai(P.W.1). Sarubai	(P.W.2) wentto the house
but finding  that her  mother was  not there,  she left the
messagewith her aunt Muktabai,wife ofChandrakant that she
be informed to come to the field with abullockcart asAppa
was assaulted  by the  appellants. She then came back to the
place of  incident. Ambubai  (P.W.1) when returned homefrom
work, Muktabaiconveyed the  message to	her and thereafter
she requested  Shivaji (P.W.4)to geta cart.Shivajithen
broughtthe  cart fromMaruti and	 then they reached at the
place of  incident. At that time Appa was bleeding profusely
and was unableto  speak. Sarubai  (P.W.2) told	her mother
that the  appellants had  assaulted him. Ambubai and Shivaji
then put  Appa into  the cart and lift for the dispensary at
Naldurg. Doctor on duty	 declared him dead. Ambubai (P.W.1)
then went  to  the  police  station  and  lodged  the  first
Information  Report   (Ex.31)  at  about  10.15 p.m.  After
registering the FIR the	 investigatingofficerproceeded to
the hospital and thereafter to the place of incident. During
the course  of investigation,  statements of various persons
came to be recorded.  The accused  came to  bearrested	on
26.9.1987  and in  pursuance of	 their	 statements the
incriminated articles  were  seized.  After  completing the
investigation the  appellants were  putup  fortrial for an
offencepunishable under
Section 302
/34IPC.
(3)  The appellants  denied the chargeand  claimed  to	be
tried. According  to them  theyhave been falsely implicated
in present crime. They had neither goneto the field ofAppa
nor they  had assaulted him. They  pleaded  that  they are
innocent and beacquitted.
(4)  The prosecution  in support  of  its  case principally
relied upon  the evidence  of eye  witness  Sarubai  (P.W.2)
(minor)aged  about 10 year. Ambubai (P.W.1) Shivaji (P.W.4)
and Shanker  (P.W.5) were the  main witnesses to corroborate
the evidence  of Sarubai.  The prosecution  also reliedupon
the various  panchnamasincluding the panchnamas relating to
the recovery  of incriminatingarticles.	 Dr.Onkar  Swami
(P.W.3)performed the autopsy on the dead body of Appellants
did notlead any evidence in defence.
(5)  The Learned  Sessions Judge  Osmanabad onappraisal of
oral and  documentary evidence on record by hisjudgment and
order dated  1.7.1988 convicted the first  appellant  under
Section302
IPC for  committing the  murder  of	 Appa. The
appellants Nos.2  and 3,  however weregiven the benefit of
doubt and  cameto  be acquitted.  Aggrieved bythe judgment
and order  of conviction  and sentencethe first	 appellant
Dattu preferredCriminal AppealNo.352 of 1989 whereas State
of Maharashtrapreferred Criminal  Appeal  No.319  of1988
challenging the order of acquittal of A-2 and A-3. Both the
appealswere  heard together  and the  DivisionBench of the
High Court by its judgment and order dated September 5,1990
dismissed Criminal  Appeal No.352  of 1989  andallowed the
Criminal Appeal No.319of  1988 filled by  the  state and
convicted A-2  and A-3under
Section  302
/
34
IPC. It is the
judgment and  order passed  by the  High Courtwhich is the
subjectmatter of challenge in this appeal.
(6)  The entireprosecution case restedupon the evidence of
Sarubai(P.W.2) a child witness aged about 10 years. It is,
therefore, necessary  to find out as towhetherher evidence
is corroborated from other  evidence on	 record. A child be
the basis  of conviction. In other words even in the absence
of oath the evidence  of a  child witness can be considered
under
Section  118
of  the evidence  Act provided  thatsuch
witnessis  able to understand the question andable togive
rational answers  thereof. Theevidence of  a child witness
and credibility thereof would depend upon the circumstances
of each case. case.  The onlyprecaution which  the  court
should bear  inmind while assessing the evidence of a child
witnessis  that the  witness must  reliable one and his/her
demeanour must be like any other competent witness and there
is no likelihood of being tutored. There is no practicethat
in every case the evidence of such a witness becorroborated
before a  conviction can be allowed to stand but, however as
a ruleof prudence  the courtalways finds itdesirable to
have  the   corroboration  tosuch  evidence from  other
dependable evidence  onrecord. In the light of	thiswell
settledprinciple we may proceed to consider the evidence of
Sarubai(P.W.2).
(7)  The learned  trialjudge recorded his reasons and found
that Sarubai  was a  competent witnessand her evidence is
unblemished. The  High Court  also accepted  the evidence of
Sarubaias  reliable one.  We, therefore,  do  not  see any
reason to  disagree with  the observations  ofthe  learned
courts below  as regards  the evidenceof Sarubai  Wewere
taken through  the judgments  of the courts below as regards
the evidence  of Sarubai  We were takenthough the judgments
of thecourts below aswell asthe evidence ofSarubai. She
had stated  in her  evidence that  whenshe  was grazing the
cattle in  the field  at  about 5.00  p.m,  all	 the  three
appellants camein her land andstartedassaulting Appa(her
father). A-1  and A-2  had axesin their hands while A-3 was
having a  sickle in  her hand. On seeing a ghastly attack on
her father she was verymuch scared, Appa then made a signal
to herto go  the  abadi	 andinformthe  mother  Ambubai
(P.W.1). She then immediately proceededtowardsabadi and on
the way she saw	 Shanker (P.W.5)  who was  working  in his
field. After reaching home she found that her mother had not
returned from the work and, therefore, left themessagewith
Mukta, the aunt, about the assault on Appa and requested her
to askher mother Ambubai (P.W.1) to reach thefield with a
bullockcart. Sarubai (P.W.2)  then returned tothe place of
incident. In the mean time Ambubai (P.W.1) who returnedfrom
the work  got the  message andrequested Shivaji (P.W.4) to
get the cart. Shivaji(P.W.4)then  brought  the	cart  of
Maruti in  which they  reached at  theplace  of	 incident.
Sarubai(P.W.2) narrated the  entire  incident to  Ambubai
(P.W.1). Appa  was then kept in	 the chart andwas taken to
the dispensaryat Naldurg. Doctor on duty, however declared
him dead.  We have  carefully examinedthe evidence ofthis
witnessand we find that it is totally unblemished. There is
no challenge  to her  evidence that  she was inthe field at
the time  of incident. Her evidence finds corroborationfrom
Shanker(P.W.5)who hadstated that when he wasin his field
he heard  commotion inthe field	 of Appa  andafter  going
there he  saw sarubai  also in the field. Ambubai (P.W.1) in
her evidence  stated that  her daughter sarubai (P.W.2) had
gone to the field along with her father and she herself had
gone towork inanotherfield. When shereturned home in the
eveningshe  got a  message from	 Muktabai about the assault
and toget a bullock cart in the field. Shivaji (P.W.4) has
also stated  onoath  that when he received  amessagefrom
Ambubaito  geta	 carthe	 gotthe	 same  from Maruti and
thereafter he and Ambubai went to the field. Sarubai (P.W.2)
then narrated  the incident  toher  mother. Appa  wasthen
taken to the dispensaryat Naldurg in the bullock cart where
he wasdeclared dead  by	 theMedical officer.  From the
evidence of  these witnesses  it is  clear  that  all  these
movements tookplace in	a very	shortspan oftime because
they reached  the  dispensary  at  Naldurg  which  is  at  a
distance of  15kms., from Khudawadi  at about 9.30 p.m.	 or
10.00 P.m.  We,therefore,  seeno  hesitation in confirming
the findings ofthe courts below that Sarubai was present in
the field alongwith her fatherat the time of incident.
(8)  The second circumstance which  lends corroboration	 to
the evidence  of Sarubai  (P.W.2) is  that Ambubai(P.W.1) in
her First  information Report lodged at10.15 p.m. had given
out the names of  all the three appellants as assailants of
Appa. Althoughit was contended on behalf of the appellants
that the  evidence  ofSarubai (P.W.2)  is  concocted and
unreliable butwe seeno substance inthis contention. Dr.
Onkar Swami (P.W.3) whoheld the autopsy on thedead body of
Appa noted  16 injuries on thedead body of Appa. He stated
that these injuries were possible by three different weapons
and not by one weapon. It  is needless	to  set	 out the
evidence of  Dr. Onkar in detail since there isno challenge
to thefact that	 Appamet  with a  homicidal death  due to
injuries on  his person.  The evidenceof Dr. Onkar (P.W.3)
corroborates the evidence of Sarubai (P.W.2) when she stated
that A-1  and A-2 had assaultedher father withaxes and A-3
with asickle.Out  ofthese 16 injuries as many as 10were
incisedwoundsand injury	 No.3 was  curved lacerated wound
which was  attributableto A-3.Having regards to the nature
and the size of	 theseinjuries	we have no manner of doubt
that this  ghastly attack couldnot be caused by one person.
The High  Courtin our considered view rightly held that the
medical evidence   corroborates	 the  evidence of  Sarubai
(P.W.2).
(9)  Inaddition	 to  the  above	 substantive  evidence the
prosecution also  relied upon  the circumstantial  evidence,
namely,recovery	 of certain incriminating articles. Clothes
of theaccusedwere  seized under	 panchnama Ex.55 andthis
panchnama is  proved by panch witnesses	 Ajmoddin (P.W.10).
Dhoti and  cap of A-1 were sentto the chemicalanalyser and
his report  is at  Ex.28, wherein  it is statedthat the cap
had human  bloodstains of  blood groupA whichwas thesame
blood group  ofthe  deceased. The blood group of A-1 is AB.
This weapons  like axes and asickle were  claimed tohave
been recovered at the instance of appellants pursuant to the
statement made under Section 27of the EvidenceAct butthis
evidence was  not accepted  by the trial court and we do not
proposeto accept the same.
(10) After going  through the judgmentsof thecourts below
we are satisfied that the high Court  was fullyjustified in
reversing theorder of acquittal passed by the trial court
as regards  A-2and  A-3 .  Thehigh Court was also right in
upholding the conviction of A-1.
(11) Inthe   result  there isno substance inthe criminal
appeal and  it is  accordingly dismissed.  From the  office
reportdated25th	 January,1997  it  appears  that the
appellants arein jail and, therefore, no further order in
that behalf is called for.