[Cites
29
, Cited by
103
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of U.P.. & Anr. Etc vs C.O.D. Chheoki Employees' ... on 17 January, 1997
Equivalent citations: 1997 (3) SCC 681, AIR 1997 SUPREME COURT 1413, 1997 AIR SCW 1539, 1997 ALL. L. J. 576, (1997) 1 SCR 380 (SC), (1997) 2 JT 265 (SC), (1997) 29 ALL LR 520, (1997) 2 UPLBEC 793, (1997) 2 ALL WC 1042, (1997) 1 SCALE 697, (1997) 2 SCT 194
Bench:
K. Ramaswamy
,
S. Saghir Ahmad
PETITIONER:
STATE OF U.P.. & ANR. ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
C.O.D. CHHEOKI EMPLOYEES' CO-OP.SOCIETY LTD. & ORS. ETC.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	17/01/1997

BENCH:
K. RAMASWAMY, S. SAGHIR AHMAD




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
WITH
		CIVIL APPEAL NO. 605 OF 1997
	 (Arising out of SLP (C) No.12379 of 1995)
			 O R D E R
     Impleadment and Intervention allowed.
     Leave granted.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
     These appeals  raise an  interesting questions  of	 law
relating to  the validity of the Act and the Rules providing
reservation for	 or nomination	of weaker  sections into the
Co-operative  Societies	  registered  under   the  U.P.	 Co-
operative
Societies Act, 1965
(for short, the `Act') and the
U.P. Co-operative  Societies Rules,  1968  (for	 short,	 the
Rules `Rules'), as amended from time to time.
The question is: whether the U.P. Legislature has power
to make	 the law  to so	 amend the  Act and  the Rules as to
provide for  reservation to  the weaker	 sections? The	High
Court declared
Section	 130(2)(xii)
and  (xii-A)  and	 the
provisos and  the explanation to sub-rule 393-A, Rule 393-B,
clause (d)  of sub-rule (4) and part of sub-rules (6) to (8)
of Rules 440, so far as relating to reservation of seats for
weaker-sections, sub-rule  (3) of  Rule 444-A and clause (i)
of sub-rule  (5) of Rule 453 as ultra vires the Constitution
and accordingly	 quashed  them.	 Calling  in  question	this
judgment of the High Court of Allahabad dated March 10, 1995
in CMWP	 Nos.40006 and 40121 of 1994, these appeal have come
to be filed.
Due  to   absence	of   representation  of	  democratic
character in the management of the co-operative societies on
the basis  of election	by the	general body of the society,
the members of the weaker sections, namely, Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes women and other backward classes do not
find  place.   Consequently,   the   Government	  introduced
amendment to  the Act.	By adoption  of	 the  definition  of
"Other Backward	 Classes" contained  in U.P. Public Services
Reservation for	 Scheduled Castes  and Scheduled  Tribes and
Other backward	Classes Act,  1994, brought  Other  Backward
Classes within	the ambit of weaker sections and made all of
them members  of the  Committee of the Management of the Co-
operative Society  registered under.
The Act
so as to enable
them to be elected or nominated as members.
Section 4
of the
Act prescribes	the guidelines in the matter of formation of
the Co-operative Societies and reads as under:
"4.  Societies   which    may    be
     registered	  -   Subject	to   the
     provisions of  this Act,  a society
     which  has	  as  its   object   the
     promotion of  the economic interest
     of its  members in	 accordance with
     co-operative   principles	  or   a
     society established with the object
     of facilitating  the operations  of
     such a  society, may  be registered
     under this Act.
EXPLANATION     -	    Co-operative
     principles shall
     (a)  advancement	 of	economic
     interest	of    the   members   in
     accordance	 with	public	 morals,
decency and  the relevant directive
     principles	   of	 State	  Policy
     enunciated in  the Constitution  of
     India;
(b)  regulation and  restriction of
     profit notice;
(c)  promotion  of	 thrift,  mutual
     aid and self-help;
(d)  voluntary membership; and
(e)  democratic constitution of the
     society."
Section 29
of the	 Act envisages	the constitution  of
Committee of Management. Sub-section (1) reads as under:
'29(1)    The Management  of every,
     co-operative society  shall vest in
     a	  Committee	of    Management
     constituted in accordance with this
     Act, the  rules and  the  bye-laws,
     which shall  exercise  such  powers
     and perform  such duties  as may be
     conferred or  imposed by  this Act,
     the rules and the bye-laws."
(emphasis supplied)
     Other sub-sections	 are not  relevant;  hence  omitted.
Section 30(1)
to (4) deal with election of the Chairman and
Vice-Chairman of  the Society.
Section 130(1)
provides that
the  State   Government	 may  make  Rules.  Sub-section	 (2)
postulates that, in particular, and without prejudice to the
generality of  the power under sub-section (1), the rules to
be made under this section may provide for all or any of the
matters enumerated therein. In pursuance thereof, Rules came
to be amended. Clauses (xii) and (xii-A) read as under:
"(xii)    the   election	of   the
     members  and   Chairman  and  Vice-
Chairman  of   the	  Committee   of
     Management	  of	a   co-operative
     society, including	 delimitation of
     constituencies,   reservation    of
     seats   for   women   and	 members
     belonging	 to    weaker	sections
     settlement	 of  election  disputes,
     and levy  of fees in respect of any
     such matter;
(xii-A) the nomination of women and
     members   belonging    to	  weaker
     sections  in   the	  committee   of
     management	  of	a   co-operative
     society."
These amendments  were brought  on statue	by Amendment
Act 17 of 1977. Rule 393 (1) provides as under:
"Section 393(1)  :	 A  co-operative
     society may have as many persons on
     its committee  of Management as may
     e provided	 in its bye-laws subject
     to a  maximum of  fifteen	persons.
     Any   other   committee   or   sub-
     committee of  the society	shall be
     smaller  than   its  Committee   of
     Management	 and  in  no  case  such
     committee	or  sub-committee  shall
     consist of more than seven members;
     Provided that  in the  Committee of
     Management	 of  every  co-operative
     society  three   seats   shall   be
     reserved  of  which  one  shall  be
     reserved for  Scheduled  Castes  or
     Scheduled Tribes,	one for Backward
     Classes of	 citizens  and	one  for
     women:
Provided further  that in	case  of
     Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Consumer
     Federation,  Central   and	 Primary
     Consumer	Co-operative   Societies
     there seats  shall be  reserved for
     women and one for persons belonging
     to Scheduled  Castes  or  Scheduled
     Tribes  or	  Backward  Classes   of
     citizens.
EXPLANATION  -  In	 this  rule  the
     expression	 "backward   classes  of
     citizens" shall  have  the	 meaning
     assigned to  it in	 clause	 (b)  of
Section  2
of  the  Uttar	 Pradesh
     Public  Service   (Reservation   of
     Scheduled Castes,	Tribes and other
     Backward Classes) Act, 1994.
     (2)  Where a  co-operative	 society
     referred to in sub-rule (1)   for
     any reasons  whatsoever,  fails  to
     elect   on	   the	 Committee    of
     Management such  number of	 persons
     for whom  seats are reserved or the
     vacancy occurs the deficiency shall
     be made  good or filed, as the case
     may be,  by the State Government by
     nominating	 persons   belonging  to
     such  class  on  the  Committee  of
     Management	  of	such	society.
Expression	    "weaker	section"
     referred to  in these  rules  shall
     mean   a	 person	  belonging   to
     Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes,
     women  and	  Backward  Classes   of
     citizens referred to
in the explanation of sub-rule (1)."
The Preamble  of the  Constitution provides  for socio-
economic and  political justice	 to all citizens and dignity
of person,  with equality  of  status  and  of	opportunity.
Article 46
of the Constitution enjoins that "the State shall
promote with  special care,  the economic  interest  of	 the
weaker sections	 of the	 people". The object of
Section 4
of
the Act	 paves way  to promote	the  economic  interest	 and
status of  the members of the society in accordance with the
co-operative principles to facilitate opportunity to augment
the economic  improvement of  the members  of the society by
co-operative  principles   by	providing   facilities	 and
opportunities. The  advancement of  economic improvement  is
one of	the rights enshrined under the constitution.
Section
4
,  therefore,	intends	 to  effectuate	 the  constitutional
objective  in	accordance  with   co-operative	 principles,
morality, decency  and the relevant directive principles and
the State  Policy enunciated  in the  Preamble,	 Fundamental
Rights and  Directive Principles  of the  State	 Policy,  by
operation of  clause (a) of Explanation of
Section 4
, clause
(c) envisages  representation of all sections of the society
in a  democratic set up so that they all get the opportunity
to avail promotion of their economic interests in accordance
with co-operative principles by being members of the society
established and	 registered under the Act, rules or bye-laws
or  by	 being	elected	  to  the  management  thereof	when
representation	in   the  management  of  the  Committee  by
electoral process  of the weaker sections is not achieved on
account of  short fall in their nomination to the Committee.
Is one	of the principal programmes and the policy under the
Act. Clause  24 and  (25) of
Article 366
define "Scheduled
Castes" and  "Scheduled Tribes"	 and
Articles  341
and
342
envisage issue	of presidential	 notification specifying for
each State the list of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
respectively. As  far as  women are  concerned, there  is no
need for  specification.  The  Other  Backward	Classes	 are
identified  as	 those	specified  in  the  Public  Services
Reservation Act,  1994. The  application of this Act is only
for the	 purpose of identification of other Backward Classes
and no	more.
Under  the Act
,  all of them constitute weaker
sections for  the  purpose  of	the  representation  in	 the
management of  the  Committee  of  the	Society.  The  rules
provide for the principles for election or nomination.
Rules 393-A and 393-B of the Rules read as under:
"Notwithstanding anything contained
     in these  rules or	 the bye-laws of
     the society  but  subject	to  Rule
     453, if the Committee of Management
     of a  co-operative society referred
     to in  the proviso	 to sub-rule (1)
     of	 Rule	393,  on   the	date  of
     commencement of  this rule does not
     have  as	many  persons	as   are
     referred in  the above  sub-rule of
     weaker sections  or women,	 as  the
     case may  be, the State Government
     shall nominate  on the Committee of
     Management	 of  such  societies  as
     many persons as may be necessary to
     provide   representation	to   the
     extent  specified	 in   the   said
     proviso to	 sub-rule  (1)	of  Rule
     393, and  upon  the  nomination  so
     made, the	Committee of  Management
     of	 the   society	concerned  shall
     retire  the   required  number   of
     persons by	 draw  of  lots	 by  the
     authority of  the Registrar,  so as
     to accommodate such nominees on the
     Committee of Management.
     393-B.  Where   the  term	 of  the
     elected members of the Committee of
     Management of such society does not
     have  such	 number	 of  persons  as
     provided in the aforesaid rules the
     State	 Government	  shall,
     notwithstanding anything  contained
     in the  bye-laws of  such	society,
     nominate  on   the	  Committee   of
     Management thereof	 such number  of
     persons as	 may  be  necessary  for
     providing	representation	to  such
     person to	the extend  specified in
     the above	referred rule and on the
     nomination	 being	 so  made,   the
     Committee	of   Management	 of  the
     concerned society	shall retire the
     required number  of persons by draw
     of lots,  so as to accommodate such
     nominees."
Rule 440 sub-rule (1)(4)(d) reads as under:
"(4) For  purpose	of  election  of
     members of	 Committee of Management
     of	 a   co-operative  society,  the
     Registrar	shall,	 notwithstanding
     anything contained	 in the bye-laws
     of the Society, before the issue of
     notice under  sub-rule (2)	 of Rule
     441 for  election of a co-operative
     society or,  as the case may be, of
     a class  of co-operative  societies
     determine provisionally -
(a) ...
(b) ...
(c) ...
(d) the  number of	 seats	reserved
     for weaker section."
Rule 444-A(3) reads as under:
"The Registrar  or	 the  authorised
     officer shall,  under provisions of
     sub-rule (6)  of Rule  440, reserve
     constituencies/areas   for	  weaker
     section and  such reservation shall
     be made  to the extent of the seats
     reserved  by   rotation  in   Hindi
     alphabetical order	 of the names of
     constituencies/areas   from   which
     members   of   the	  Committee   of
     Management area to be elected."
Rule  453(1)(h)   provides	 that  no  person  shall  be
eligible to  be or  to continue as a member of the Committee
of Management  of any  co-operative society,  if he is not a
member of the General Body thereof.
These rules  demarcate the	 constituencies and  provide
for their  rotation,  notwithstanding  the  absence  of	 the
provisions  for	  election  of	weaker	sections  so  as  to
effectuate the	object of
Section 29(1)
read with
Section
130(2)(xii)
and	 (xii-a). A  conjoint and harmonious reading
of these  provisions would,  thus, clearly indicate that the
Management of  every co-operative Society whose object is in
conformity with
Section 4
of the Act, shall be vested in a
Committee of  management constituted in accordance with this
Act, the  Rules and  the bye-laws  with	 elective  component
inclusive of  weaker sections. In its absence, by nomination
of them.
Section 130(2) (xii)
and (xiii-A) states that rules
to be  made may	 provide for  election of  the members,	 the
Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the Committee of management of
a co-operative	Society including  reservation for women and
Other Backward	Classes. Therefore, the Rules have been made
to effectuate  the purpose  of	the  Act,  namely,  for	 the
election of  the Committee  of the  Management and under the
democratic process  of election	 as envisages  under the Act
and the	 Rules, they get elected. In case the members of the
weaker sections, namely, Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes,
other Backward	Classes	 and  women  are  not  elected,	 the
Government have	 been given  power to  nominate the  members
belonging to  weaker sections  and the women to an extent of
three seats  as envisages  thereunder, namely, one Scheduled
Caste, one  Backward Class  and one  women in  each  of	 the
Committee  of  the  Management	of  the	 every	co-operative
society..pa
     The question  is: whether	such a power is violative of
Article	  19(1)(c)
of   the	 Constitution?	 Shri	Raju
Ramachandran, learned  senior counsel  for the	respondents,
contends that  the Constitution has conferred right on every
citizen to  form a society or to be its member. Formation of
the Society  includes therein  inviolability of	 incorporate
character or enrolment of any member who fulfils the objects
of the	society as  per the  bye-laws. No  outsider would be
interposed or  thrust against  his/her wishes.	No outsider,
therefore, could  be brought  or nominated  as member of the
management Committee  without being  a member of the General
Body.
In
Daman Singh  & Ors.  vs. State  of Punjab  &	Ors.
[(1985) 2  SCC 670  at 681], the Constitution Bench had held
that the  creation, the	 constitution and  the management of
the  Society   is  a  creature	of  the	 statute.  They	 are
controlled by  the statute and so, there can be no objection
to statutory  interference with	 their	composition  on	 the
ground of  contravention of  the individual right to freedom
to form association. In para 11, this Court held that once a
person becomes	a member of a Co-operative Society, he loses
his individuality  qua the Society and he has no independent
rights except those given to him by the statute and the bye-
laws. He  must act  and speak through the Society or rather,
the Society  alone can	act and	 speak for him qua rights or
duties of  the Society	as a  body. The question whether the
Legislature  has  power	 to  enact  the	 law  providing	 for
nomination of the members of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Tribes and  women in the matter of election to the Committee
of to  the Co-operative	 Societies, was	 considered by	this
Court in  Babaji Kondaji  Garad etc.  vs. Nasik Merchants C-
operative Bank	Ltd., Nasik  & Ors.  [(1984) 2	SCC 50].  In
paragraphs 9 and 12, this Court stated as under:
"
The Act
was enacted in 1960 and it
     repealed  the  Bombay  Co-operative
     Societies	Act,  1925.
Section  73
provides for  the	vesting	 of  the
     management of  every society  in  a
     committee	to   be	 constituted  in
     accordance with  the Act, the rules
     and   the	  bye-laws.    At    the
     commencement of  the Act, there was
     no	 provision  for	 reservation  of
     seats in  favour of  the members of
     the  Scheduled   Castes   and   the
     Scheduled	Tribes	and  the  weaker
     section of the members. Section 73-
     B making observation obligatory was
     introduced in   the Act by
Amending
     Act
27   of  1969.  Why  was  this
     specific	amendment    made?   The
     working  of   the	Act   must  have
     disclosed a  sorry state of affairs
     that even	though the  co-operative
     movement was expanding by leaps and
     bounds,   the    members	of   the
     Scheduled	Castes	 and   Scheduled
     Tribes or the weaker section of the
     members  of  the  society	was  not
     represented in  the  committee  and
     had no  opportunity to  participate
     in	 the  decision	making	process,
     laying  down   broad  policies  and
     management of  the society.
Article
     43
of the Constitution set the goal
     that the  State shall  endeavour to
     promote cottage  industries  on  an
     individual or co-operative basis in
     rural areas. In our onward march of
     economic  independence,  India  was
     destined  to   be	a   co-operative
     commonwealth. Since activities were
     diversified, more especially in the
     rural areas.  Every activity  of  a
     person devoted  to agricultural  in
     the  rural	  area	is  considerably
     influenced	 by   the   co-operative
     movement,	   such	     as	    seed
     distribution, credit,  disposal  of
     agricultural   produce   etc.   The
     member of	the Scheduled Castes and
     Scheduled Tribes  predominantly  in
     rural   areas    did   not	  remain
     unaffected by  the gigantic  stride
     that  the	 co-operative	movement
     took.  They   were	  directly   and
     substantially affected  by	 it.  In
     order to  avoid that  those who are
     affected by  the movement	in their
     vital day	to day existence enjoy a
     second class status by being denied
     the opportunity  to be  represented
     in	 the   management  council   and
     decision making bodies, a provision
     like Section 73-B was introduced to
     ensure   representation   of   such
     persons  who   in	the  absence  of
     reservation may  find it  difficult
     to be  elected to	the Committee in
     which   the    entire   power    of
     management	  vests.    Absence   of
     representation	coupled	    with
     subjection to  the dictates  of the
     society  would   be  antithesis  of
     democratic	 process  reducing  such
     persons to	 serfdom. A co-operative
     society is	 to  be	 governed  by  a
     committee	elected	  by  democratic
     process.  This  democratic	 process
     must   permeate   in   filling   in
     reserved	seats	 otherwise   the
     committee	 would	 not   enjoy   a
     representative character.	One  can
     draw  light   from	 the   provision
     contained	in   Part  XVI	 of  the
     Constitution     and     especially
Articles 330
and
332
which provide
     for reservation  of  seats	 in  the
     House  of	 People	  and	in   the
     Legislative Assembly of every State
     for the  Scheduled Castes	and  the
     Scheduled	  Tribes.    The    felt
     necessities of  the  time	and  the
     historical	 perspective   of  class
     domination	    led	     to	     the
     constitutional	guarantee     of
     reservation so that India can truly
     be a  sovereign  socialist	 secular
     democratic republic.  A republic is
     made up  of men  and  institutions.
     That is why democratic institutions
     have to  be set up by providing for
     election and to make the democratic
     institutions truly	 representative,
     reservation of  seats for those who
     on account	 of their  backwardness,
     exploitation and  unjust  treatment
     both  social  and	economic  cannot
     obtain  representation  because  of
     the class	domination. This  is the
     genesis of	 reservation. Therefore,
     any    provision	  making     for
     reservation   must	  receive   such
     construction as  would advance  the
     purpose and  intendment  underlying
     the  provision  making  reservation
     and not  thwart it.  In the  part a
     method of	construction was used to
     extend a  remedial	 statute  called
     proceeding upon  `the equity of the
     statute'. In Hay v. Lord provost of
     Perth [(1863)  4 Macq. HL (SC) 535,
     544] Lord	Westbury  observed  that
     the mode  of construction	known as
     `the equity  of  the  statute'  was
     "very common  with	 regard	 to  our
     earlier	statutes,    and    very
     consistent with  the principle  and
     manner according  to which	 Acts of
     parliament	 were	at   that   time
     framed". Undoubtedly, nowadays this
     mode  of  construction  has  fallen
     into  disuse.   Even   though   the
     expression	 `the	equity	of   the
     statute' has fallen into disuse, it
     is	 still	 in  vogue  in	somewhat
     similar  form  in	that  if  it  is
     manifest  that  the  principles  of
     justice  require  something  to  be
     done   which   is	 not   expressly
     provided	for   in   an	Act   of
     Parliament, a court of justice will
     take into	consideration the spirit
     and meaning  of the  Act apart from
     the words. In this context, one can
     recall the	 words of Jessel M.R. in
     Re Bethlem	 Hospital [(1875)  LR 19
     Eq. 457],	that `the  equity of the
     statute' may  as well as mean "such
     a	thing	as  construing	 an  Act
     according to  its	intent,	 thought
     not  according   to   its	 words".
Alternatively,  one  can  bring  in
     Heydon's test more often noticed by
     this Court	 that in order to arrive
     at true  intendment of  a	statute,
     the court should pose to itself the
     questions	:   (1)	 what	was  the
     situation prior  to  the  provision
     under   construction,    (2)   what
     mischief  or   defect  was	 noticed
     before introducing	 the  provision,
     (3) whether it was remedial and (4)
     the reason for the remedy. Applying
     this test,	 the same  result  would
     follow inasmuch  as looking  to the
     position	and    the   plight   of
     Scheduled	Castes	 and   Scheduled
     Tribes and	 the weaker  section  of
     the members  of the society, though
     they  would   be  subject	 to  the
     dictate of	 the society they had no
     voice in  the  managerial	councils
     and that  to raise	 the stature and
     status of	such persons  so  as  to
     bring  them   on  the   footing  of
     equality with other segments of the
     society, reservation  was	provided
     in the  absence of	 which those  in
     whose favour  reservation was  made
     could  not	  get  elected	 to  the
     decision	making	 bodies.   While
     ascertaining  the	 true  canon  of
     construction applicable  to Section
     73-B, these aspects must start into
     our face.
When  statute  requires  a	 certain
     thing  to	be  done  in  a	 certain
     manner, it	 can  be  done	in  that
     manner  alone   unless  a	contrary
     indication is  to be  found in  the
     statute. If  the  Legislature  uses
     the expression  `if no such persons
     are   elected'    it    indubitably
     suggests	that	primarily    the
     reserved seats  are to be filled in
     by election.  Failing the election,
     one can  resort to	 appointment  or
     co-option. The  chronology	 of  the
     methodology by  which seats  are to
     be filled	in as set out in Section
     73-B    clearly	manifests    the
     legislative  intention.  The  first
     and the  foremost pride of place is
     accorded to  election, it	ought to
     be	 so   because  a  representative
     institution  ordinarily   must   be
     democratically	elected.     The
     section, therefore,  speaks `if  no
     such  persons  are	 elected'  which
     would  mean  that	the  authorities
     charged  with   a	duty   to   hold
     election must  proceed  to	 arrange
     for  holding   the	  election.   If
     election	is   held   giving   out
     information   that	  there	     are
     reserved seats  and no candidate is
     forthcoming  to   contest	for  the
     reserved seats,  the Legislature in
     its wisdom	 provided that the seats
     shall to  remain vacant  but can be
     filled in by two subsidiary methods
     such as  appointment  or  co-option
     which  cannot  be	put  on	 par  or
     equated with  election which  is  a
     universally  recognised  method  by
     which  representative  institutions
     are set up. Therefore, the language
     and   the	  chronology   of    the
     methodology of  filling in reserved
     seats  employed   in  Section  73-B
     provide  a	  clue	to  its	 correct
     construction and there should be no
     doubt  that   opportunity	must  be
     provided for  filing  in  seats  by
     election, it  is the failure of the
     election machinery	 to fill  in the
     seats  which   would   enable   the
     concerned authority  to fill in the
     seats by  appointment or co-option.
The condition  precedent to filling
     in reserved seats by appointment or
     co-option	 is   holding	of   the
     election and  failure to elect such
     person  should   permit  resort  to
     other methods  of	filling	 in  the
     reserved seats."
In the  case  of
Toguru  Sudhakar	 Reddy	&  Anr.	 vs.
Government of  A.P. &  Ors.
[1993  Supp. (4)  SCC 439], this
Court considered  the power  of the  Government to  nominate
women to  the Co-operative Societies under
Section 31
of the
A.P. Co-operative  Societies Act and the validity of the Act
and the	 power of  the Government for nomination of them was
upheld.
Thus,  it	is  settled  law  that	no  citizen  has  an
fundamental right  under
Article 19(1)(c)
to become a member
of a  Co-operative Society.  His right	is governed  by	 the
provisions of  the statute.  So, the  right to	become or to
continue being a member of the society is a statutory right.
On fulfilment  of the  qualifications prescribed to become a
member and  for	 being	a  member  of  the  society  and  on
admission, he  becomes a  member. His  being a member of the
society is  subject to	the operation  of the Act, rules and
bye-laws applicable  from time	to time.  A  member  of	 the
Society has  no independent  right qua the Society and it is
the society  that is  entitled to represent as the corporate
aggregate. No  individual member  is entitled  to assail the
constitutionality of  the provisions  of the  Act, rules and
the bye-laws  as he  has his  right under the Act, rules and
bye-laws and  is subject to its operation. The stream cannot
rise higher than the source.
So, the  society having  been formed is governed by the
provisions of  the Act.	 The individual	 members do not have
any fundamental	 right to  the management  of the  Committee
except in  accordance with  the provisions of the Act, rules
and bye-laws.  The management  of the Committee is regulated
by
Section  29
of  the Act.  The composition thereof is also
regulated by  the Act  and has	to be in accordance with the
Rules and the bye-laws. The Rules referred to here in before
have to	 be in	furtherance of	and in	conformity with	 the
provisions contained  in
Section 130(2)(xii)
and (xii-A) and
the Rules  providing for  reservation in the election of the
committee or  for nomination  to the Management Committee of
the members  belonging to  the	weaker	sections  and  women
should be to effectuate socio-economic and political justice
assured	 by   the  Preamble,
Articles	38
and
46
of	 the
Constitution.
Shri Raju	Ramachandran, relying  upon the	 judgment of
this Court in
Damyanti Naranga vs. The Union of India & Ors.
[(1971 3  SCR 840], has contended that in view of the ration
laid down  by
this  Court, the Government is devoid of power
to make	 law unless any of the restrictions as controlled by
clause (4)  of
Article	19
of  the Constitution of India are
infringed. The	Government has	no  power  to  enact  a	 law
incorporating the  reservation	to  the	 members  of  weaker
sections  and  women  thereof.	We  find  no  force  in	 the
contention. It	could be  seen that  therein, the Government
had enacted  the
Sahitya  Sammelan Act
exercising the power
under Entry  63, List  I of  the  Seventh  Schedule  to	 the
Constitution. This  Court pointed  out that  the Act did not
envisage  that	 the  Samiti   is  of  national	 importance.
Therefor, it  was held	that the Parliament had lacked power
to enact  the law  incorporating the  society and  inducting
outside members against the wishes of the founder members of
the Society registered under the
Societies Registration Act
.
This Court  also held  that the	 properties belonging to the
original Society  stood vested	in the	Society incorporated
under
Section	4
of  the  Act	 without  any  compensation.
Therefore,  it	 was  violative	  of
Article	31
of	 the
Constitution of	 India, as  it stood then. The ratio therein
has no	application to	the facts  in  this  case.  He	then
contended that	"Other Backward	 Classes" defined  under the
State Public  Services Reservation  Act	 applicable  to	 and
covering the  public services,	they are  being inducted  as
members of the society which are otherwise not eligible and,
therefore, the	induction of them by amendment of Rules made
on 15.7.1994  is unconstitutional.  In support	thereof,  he
contends that  though
Article 15(4)
of the Act provides that
it  is	 subject  to
Articles	 15(2)
and
29(2)
of	 the
Constitution, it  does not  envisage that it is also subject
to
Article  19(1)(c)
of	 the  Constitution.  Therefore,	 the
reservation   provided	  to   the    weaker   sections	  is
unconstitutional. We  find no  force in	 the contention. The
object of
Article 15(4)
is  to  lift	the  prohibition  of
general equality  guaranteed in
Article 15(2)
and
29(2)
of
the Constitution dealing with the right to admission into an
educational institution maintained by the State or receiving
aid from  the State. Therefore, their object is distinct and
different from
Article 19(1)(c).
Though
Article  19(1)(c)
gives freedom  to form	association, it is controlled by the
provisions of the Act. As held by this Court, once a society
has been  registered under  the Act,  the management  of the
society through
Section 29
and the Rules made thereunder, is
regulated by duly elected members. In the democratic set up,
all eligible  persons are  entitled to contest the election,
as held,  according to	the provisions of the Act and Rules.
In the	absence of  elected members  belonging to the weaker
sections and  women  elected,  nomination  of  them  by	 the
Government is  the alternative dispensation envisaged as one
of the	policies of  the Act.  Therefore, the  Court  cannot
interfere with the policy and declare it is unconstitutional
violating
Article 19(1)(c)
of the Constitution.
It is  then contended  that nomination  of the  members
belonging to the waker sections is arbitrary and uncanalised
and it is violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution. It is
seen that  the provisions  of the Act and the relevant Rules
provide necessary  guidelines. The  persons are	 identified.
The bye-laws  prescribe the  eligibility of  the members who
would be  eligible to be nominated as members of the society
and the	 disqualifications have been provided under Rule 393
of the Rules. Under those circumstances, these provisions do
indicate the  guidelines  under	 the  Act,  If	any  one  is
nominated in derogation of the guidelines provided under the
Act and	 rules, that  would be	an  individual	case  to  be
considered separately  but on  that count alone, the Act and
the Rules cannot be declared to be ultra vires.
Shri Raju Ramachandran relied upon the judgment of this
Court in  Lalit Narayan	 Mishra of  Economic Development and
Social Change,	Patna etc.  vs. State  of Bihar	 & Ors. [AIR
1988 SC	 1136] in  support of  his contention.	But far from
helping him,  the ratio	 therein also is consistent with the
law
laid down by
this Court.
It is  then contended  by Mr.  S.	Markandeya,  learned
counsel for  some  of  the  respondents,  that	the  Workers
Ordinance Co-operative	Society consists  of weaker sections
and further  induction of  weaker sections  by nomination or
women  who   do	 not   become  members	of  the	 society  is
unconstitutional. The  election of  nomination of the weaker
sections to  the Committee  of	Management  is	as  per	 the
provisions of  the Act,	 the Rules  and the bye-laws. If any
society	 consists  solely  of  those  segments	and  elected
Committee of  Management consists  of them,  the question of
nomination to represent them as that segment again would not
arise. In  the absence of elected members being there in the
Committee, necessarily,	 the Government	 have the  power  to
nominate the unfilled membership of the Committee.
Thus considered, we are of the view that the provisions
of the	Act and	 rules are  consistent with  the policy	 and
object of  the Constitution  and, therefore,  the High Court
was wholly incorrect in declaring the aforesaid provision to
be ultra vires the Constitution.
The appeals  are accordingly allowed. The writ petition
stands dismissed. No costs.