[Cites
9
, Cited by
108
]
Supreme Court of India
Dr. K. Ramulu And Anr. Etc vs Dr. S. Suryaprakash Rao And Ors on 15 January, 1997
Equivalent citations: AIR 1997 SUPREME COURT 1803, 1997 (3) SCC 59, 1997 AIR SCW 1152, 1997 LAB. I. C. 1451, (1997) 2 JT 80 (SC), 1997 (3) SERVLJ 67 SC, 1997 (1) SCALE 613, (1997) 3 SERVLJ 67, (1997) 1 SCR 287 (SC), 1997 (2) JT 80, (1997) 2 LAB LN 451, (1997) 1 SCT 763, (1997) 1 SCALE 613, (1997) 75 FACLR 709, (1997) 3 SUPREME 215, (1997) 2 SERVLR 195, 1997 SCC (L&S) 625
Bench:
K. Ramaswamy
,
S. Saghir Ahmad
PETITIONER:
DR. K. RAMULU AND ANR. ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DR. S. SURYAPRAKASH RAO AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	15/01/1997

BENCH:
K. RAMASWAMY, S. SAGHIR AHMAD, G.B. PATTANAIK




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
WITH
	      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 406-407 OF 1997
    (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 2281/87(CC 6799-6800/96)
			 O R D E R
     Leave granted.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
     These appeals  by special leave arise from the Order of
the Andhra  Pradesh administrative Tribunal, made on June 5,
1996 in	 O.A. No.  1224/96 and	Order made  on 19.8.1996  in
Review M.A. No. 2039/96 in O.A. No. 1224/96.
The facts	are, very fairly, not in dispute. Respondent
No.1 both  sets of appeals is a Veterinary Assistant Surgeon
in A.P.	 Animal Husbandry  Department. He filed O.A. seeking
direction for  preparation of  a  panel	 of  candidates	 for
promotion as  Assistant Director  under Rule  4 of  the A.P.
Subordinate Service  Rules [for short, the `General Rules'].
The Tribunal  directed the  respondent-Government to prepare
and operate the panel for the years 1995-96 for promotion to
the post  of Assistant Director in the A.P. Animal Husbandry
Service. Calling  that order in question, these appeals have
been filed  by the  contesting respondents as well as by the
State.
Shri  L.	Nageswara  Rao,	  learned  counsel  for	 the
appellants, have raised three-fold contention. It is firstly
submitted that	the respondent has no right to be considered
for promotion  as Assistant  Director. Secondly,  even if he
has got	 such a	 right	to  appointment	 to  the  post,	 the
Government have	 power to  revise its  policy of  accordance
with the revised policy. The direction given by the Tribunal
is contrary  to the policy decision taken by the Government,
namely, to reconsider the policy of promotion in the Service
and to make rules afresh in the place of the existing Rules.
In this	 premise, the  Tribunal has committed manifest error
in directing the Government to prepare, finalise and operate
the panel  for the  years 1995-96 for promotion as Assistant
Director of  the A.P. Animal Husbandry Department. Shri H.S.
Gururaja Rao, learned senior counsel appearing for the first
respondent, in	the main  appeals, has	contended  that	 the
first respondent  has a	 right to be considered to promotion
to the	post in	 accordance with  the Rules  existing in the
year 1995-96.  The Rules  made afresh  do not  take away the
right of the first respondent to be considered in accordance
with the  existing Rules.  Rule 4  read with  Rule 3  of the
General Rules gives mandate to the Government to prepare the
panel by September 30 of every year to be operative till the
end of December of the succeeding year or preparation of the
fresh panel,  whichever is  earlier. In this case, since the
process of  the preparation  of the  panel has	already been
commenced  for	 filling  up  the  existing  vacancies,	 the
Government is  required to  complete the  preparation of the
panel,	finalise  the  panel  and  operate  the	 panel.	 The
Tribunal,  therefore,  was  right  in  giving  the  impugned
direction. He  also contended  that the	 right given  by the
Tribunal  cannot   be  taken   away  by	  the	Rules	made
prospectively w.e.f.  June 12,	1996, the  date on which the
amended Rules  made in G.P. Ms. No. 54 of Animal Husbandry &
Fisheries Department, Government of A.P. came into force.
In view  of the  rival contentions,  the question	that
arises for  consideration is:  whether the view taken by the
Tribunal is  correct in	 law? It  is seen  that A.P.  Animal
Husbandry Service  Rules, 1996	made in	 G.O. Ms.  No. 54 of
Animal Husbandry  & Fisheries  Department dated June 6, 1996
[for short,  the `Rules']  came into  force with effect from
June 12, 1996. The Rules repealed the existing Rules made in
G.O. Ms.  No. 729  dated 24.9.1977. The Pules prescribe four
classes of  services.  Class  `A'  consists  of	 Category-I,
Director of  Animal Husbandry,	Category-II, the  Additional
Director, Category-III, the Joint Director, Category-IV, the
Deputy Director,  Category-V,  the  Assistant  Director	 and
Category-VI,  the   Veterinary	Assistant  Surgeons.  It  is
prescribed at  the end	that "all the posts in each category
are  inter-changeable	for  the   purpose   of	  seniority,
promotion, transfer and postings". It is not in dispute that
prior to  the Rules  came into time under the old Rules [for
short, the  'repealed Rules'],	for the purpose of promotion
in each	 category, each class of post was considered to be a
separate  unit.	  The  Government   had	 appointed   one-man
Commission headed  by Sri  V. Sundaresan,  I.A.S. to go into
the anomalies  into the	 operation of  the Rules. The report
was submitted  by Sundaresan Commission on June 25, 1990. It
would appear  from the	record that  even as on November 22,
1988, a	 decision was  taken by the Government in the Animal
Husbandry Department  to amend	the repealed Rules by making
necessary changes. While the process was going on, after the
receipt of  the report	of the	Sundaresaan Commission,	 the
Government had	called for the comments from the Director of
Animal Husbandry  Department. The Director had submitted his
comments on September 20, 1995. Thereafter, several meetings
were held  to follow  up the  matter  of  amendment  of	 the
repealed Rules.	 The Rules ultimately came to be made. It is
also clear  from the  record that  the Government  had taken
decision not  to fill  up any  of the  vacancies  until	 the
repealed Rules were duly amended. After the direction issued
by  the	  Tribunal,  the  Department  was  advised  to	make
temporary promotion  pending finalization  of the Rules. The
Director submitted  the proposal  to prepare  the penal	 and
several sittings  were fixed  to consider  the cases but the
same could not materialise.
In this  perspective, the	question arises; whether the
omission on  the part  of the  Government in  preparing	 and
finalizing  the	  panel	 for   promotion  of  the  Assistant
Veterinary Surgeons  to the  post of  Assistant Director  is
vitiated by  any inaction  on the part of the Government and
whether it  is in  violation of Rule 4 of the General Rules?
It is  seen and	 is not	 in dispute that under Rule 4 of the
General Rules all first appointment to the State Service and
all promotions/appointments  by transfer  shall be  made  on
grounds	 of   merits  and  ability  and	 shall	be  made  in
accordance with	 the special  Rules. It	 also envisages that
list of	 approved candidates  requires	to  be	prepared  in
accordance with	 the Rules.  It shall be prepared ordinarily
during the  month of  September every  year on	the basis of
estimated vacancies  sent in  terms of	sub-clause (iv)	 and
30th of	 September shall  be reckoned as the qualifying date
to determine  the eligibility  of  the	candidate  for	such
appointment, which  shall  cease  to  be  in  force  on	 the
afternoon of  the 31st	December of  the succeeding  year or
till the new panel is prepared, whichever is earlier. Second
proviso to  the Rule  provides that if the vacancies are not
available for  the particular  panel period,  subject to the
appointing authority recording a certificate to that effect;
or "where  the appointing  authority does  not	consider  it
necessary", it	is not	necessary to  prepare the  panel. At
this stage,  it is necessary to emphasis that the opinion of
the Government	by the	proviso would  not be  arbitrary. As
rightly pointed	 out by Shri L. Nageshwara Rao, the decision
not to	prepare the  panel should  be on  valid and relevant
considerations and it should not be arbitrary decision taken
by the Government. The object of Rule 4 is that all eligible
candidates should  be  considered  in  accordance  with	 the
Rules. Panel  should be finalized and operated so as to give
an opportunity	to the	approved candidates  to scale higher
echelons of  service which  would augment  the	efficacy  of
service,  inculcate   discipline  and  enthuse	officers  to
assiduously work  hard and  exhibit honesty and integrity in
the discharge  or their duties. Nonetheless, it is seen that
clause (ii)  of the  second proviso gives power to the State
Government not	to prepare  the panel  and to  consider	 the
cases though the vacancies are available, as stated earlier,
pending amendment  of  the  Rules  or  recasting  the  Rules
afresh. The  Government have taken conscious decision not to
fill up	 any of	 the pending  vacancy until  the process  is
completed  which   they	 had   started	on   "administrative
grounds". As  seen, the	 process was completed and the Rules
have come into force w.e.f. June 12, 1996.
In the  light of the above factual matrix and the legal
setting, the  question is: whether the Tribunal was right in
directing the Government to prepare and operate the panel in
accordance with	 its directions?  The Constitution  Bench  f
this Court  in
Shankarsan  Dash v.  Union of India
[(1991) 3
SCC  47],  had	considered  the	 question  in  an  analogous
situation. Therein,  pursuant to  the selection	 made by the
UPSC for appointment to the Civil Services, a list of I.P.S.
officers was  prepared and  the appellant  was	one  of	 the
candidates in  the waiting list. The Government of India had
taken a	 decision not to fill up the vacancies except to the
extent of  the Scheduled  Tribe candidates who were selected
and were  in the  waiting list.	 The appellant therein filed
O.A. which  was dismissed  by the  Tribunal. On appeal, this
Court held thus:
"It is not correct to say that if a
     number of	vacancies  are	notified
     for appointment and adequate number
     of candidates  are found  fit,  the
     successful	 candidates  acquire  an
     indefeasible right	 to be appointed
     which   cannot    be   legitimately
     denied. Ordinarily the notification
     merely amounts  to an invitation to
     qualified candidates  to apply  for
     recruitment and  on their selection
     they do  not acquire  any right  to
     the  post.	  Unless  the	relevant
     recruitment rules	so indicate, the
     State is  under no	 legal	duty  to
     fill  up	all  or	  any	of   the
     vacancies.	 However,  it  does  not
     mean that the State has the licence
     of acting	in an  arbitrary manner.
     The decision  not to  fill	 up  the
     vacancies has to be taken bona fide
     for appropriate reasons. And if the
     vacancies or any of them are filled
     up, the  State is	bound to respect
     the  comparative	merit	of   the
     candidates,  as  reflected	 at  the
     recruitment    test,     and     no
     discrimination  can  be  permitted.
     This  correct   position  has  been
     consistently   followed   by   this
     court,  and  we  do  not  find  any
     discordant note in the decisions in
State of Haryana v. Subhash Chander
     Marwaha
,
Neelima  Shangla v.  State
     of Haryana
,  or Jatendra  Kumar  v.
     State of Punjab".
In paragraph  8, this  Court considered  the  ratio  in
State of  Haryana V/s. Subhash Chander Marwaha [(1974) 3 SCC
220] wherein  though the  vacancies were existing and select
list   candidates    were   available,	 pursuant   to	 the
recommendation made  by the  High Court	 not to	 appoint any
candidate  who	 had  secured	less  than  55%	 marks,	 the
Government acted  upon it and did not appoint the candidates
in the	waiting list.  When  they  claimed  their  right  to
appointment, and  the order was issued by the High Court for
filling up  all the  vacancies from  persons in	 the waiting
list, this  Court had  laid that  though the candidates were
waiting in  the list,  they had no right to be appointed. It
was held that the plea of arbitrariness does not arise since
the Government	have taken  a decision not to appoint any of
the persons  who secured  less than  55% of  the marks. This
Court also has pointed out in
Shankarsan Dash
case that when
the Government have taken a conscious policy decision not to
fill up	 the vacancies,	 the decision must be reasonable and
not arbitrary.	Since it  was a policy decision it could not
be interfered  with. It	 was held that the vacancies for the
Scheduled Tribe	 candidates were  being filled	up  for	 the
reason that  vacancies reserved	 for  them  were  not  being
filled up  due to non-availability of the select candidates.
The decision to fill up the vacancies reserved for Scheduled
Tribe candidates  was justified	 on  the  ground  that	non-
filling	 up  of	 the  vacancies	 belonging  to	the  general
candidates cannot be characterized as arbitrary decision. It
was observed  that "the	 fact that it was not for the Public
Service Commission  to take  a decision	 in this  regard was
emphasised  in	this  judgment.	 None  of  these  decisions,
therefore, supports  the appellant".  Thus it  could be seen
that it the decision of the Government is supported by valid
reasons, it  cannot be stated that the decision taken by the
Government as arbitrary.
This position  was reiterated by this Court in
State of
Bihar &	 Ors. v.  Md. Kalimuddin  & Ors.
[(1996) 2  SCC 7].
Therein, the  Government of Bihar also have taken a decision
to revise the policy of reservation and pending decision the
appointments of	 the wait  listed candidates  were deferred.
The High  Court, however,  approached the  matter  and	gave
direction thus:
"The Panel	 thus does not appear to
     be	 violative  of	the  reservation
     policy of	the State.  So far s the
     proposed rules  of recruitment  are
     concerned,	 the  details  of  which
     have not  been furnished from which
     it could  be gathered as to whether
     any    substantial	   or	 drastic
     deviation is sought to be made from
     the existing  rules  regarding  the
     procedure	no   longer  to	  be   a
     necessary	   qualification      or
     condition of  eligibility I  do not
     want to  go into the correctness of
     the policy	 of the State dispensing
     with the  necessity of the training
     as	 a   condition	of  eligibility.
     However,  I   have	 serious   doubt
     whether  appointment  of  untrained
     teachers  in   preference	to   the
     trained ones  who	are  already  in
     panel and available for appointment
     can  be   said  to	  be  in  public
     interest."
This
Court further held
thus:
"The  ultimate   outcome  of   that
     exercise is  not fully  brought out
     on record	but it	is obvious  that
     the State Government was not acting
     mala fide and merely with a view to
     denying	appointment    to    the
     respondents herein.  Merely because
     notwithstanding the availability of
     trained   personnel    the	   State
     Government was  inclined to  change
     the rules	in that	 behalf does not
     appear  to	  be  valid  ground  for
     contending that  the Government had
     acted mala	 fide.	Without	 knowing
     the nature	 of change  it	was  not
     open   to	 the   High   Court   to
     anticipate the  policy and brand it
     as unreasonable."
In paragraph,  9 it  was observed	that "we  are of the
opinion that  even if it is assumed that the panel or select
list had  not expired  at the  date of	filing of  the	writ
petition, the  refusal on the part of the Government to make
appointment from  the panel or select list, vide letter date
27.5.1993, could  not be  condemned as arbitrary, irrational
and or mala fide.
The same  ratio was reiterated in
U.O.I. & Ors. v. K.V.
Vijeesh
[(1996) 3 SCC 139, paras 5 and 7]. Thus, it could be
seen  that   for  reasons   germane  to	 the  decision,	 the
Government is entitled to take a decision not to fill up the
existing vacancies  as on  the relevant	 date.
Shri  H.  S.
Guraraja Rao,  contends that  this Court  in
Y.V. Rangaiah &
Ors. v. J. Sreenivasa Rao & Ors.
[(1983) 3 SCC 284] had held
that the existing vacancies were required to be filled up as
per law	 prior to  the date  of the  amended Rules. The mere
fact that  Rules came  to be  amended subsequently  does not
empower the  Government not  to consider the persons who are
eligible prior	to the	date of	 appointment. It is sen that
the case  related to the amendment of the Rules prior to the
amendment of  the Rules.  Two  sources	were  available	 for
appointment  as	  sub-Registrar,  namely,   UDCs  and  LDCs.
Subsequently, Rules came to be amended taking away the right
of the	LDCs for  appointment  as  sub-Registrar.  When	 the
vacancies were	not being  filled up  in accordance with the
existing Rules, this court had pointed out that prior to the
amendment of the Rules, the vacancies were existing and that
the eligible  candidates were  required to  be considered in
accordance with	 the prevailing	 Rules. Therefore,  the mere
fact of subsequent amendment does not take away the right to
be considered  in accordance  with the	existing  Rules.  As
proposition of	law, there  is	no  dispute  and  cannot  be
disputed.
But	 the  question	is:  whether  the  ratio  in
Rangaiah
's case	 would apply  to the facts of this case? The
Government therein merely amended the Rules, applied amended
Rules without  taking any  conscious decision not to fill up
the existing vacancies pending amendment of the Rules on the
date the new Rules came into force.
It is true, as contended
by Mr.	H.S. Gururaja  Rao, that this Court has followed the
ratio therein  in many a decision and those cited by him are
P. Ganeshwar  Rao &  Ors. v.  State of	A.P. &	Ors.
[(1988)
Supp.
SCC  740],  P.  Mahendranath  v.	State  of  Karnataka
[(
1990) 1  SCC 411],  A.A. Caljon  v. Director	of Education
[(1983) 3  SCC 33],  N.T. Dev v. Karnataka PSC [(1990) 3 SCC
157, Ramesh  Kumar Choudha  & Ors.  v. State  of M.P. & Ors.
[(1996) 7  Scale 619]. In none of these decisions, situation
which has  arisen in  the  present  case  had  come  up	 for
consideration. Even  Rule 3  of the  General Rules is not of
any help  to the  respondent for  the  reason  that  Rule  3
contemplates making of an appointment in accordance with the
existing Rules.
It is  seen that  since the  Government  have  taken  a
conscious decision  not to  make any  appointment  till	 the
amendment of  the rules,  Rule 3 of the General Rules is not
of any	help to	 the appellant.	 The ratio  in the  case  of
Ramesh Kumar  Choudha & Ors. v. State of M.P. & Ors.
[(1996)
7 SCALE	 619] is  also not  of any  help to  the respondent.
Therein, this  Court had pointed out that the panel requires
to be  made  in	 accordance  with  the	existing  Rules	 and
operated  upon.	  There	 cannot	  be  any  dispute  on	that
proposition or	direction issued  by this  Court. As  stated
earlier, the  Government was  right in taking a decision not
to operate  Rule 4  of the General Rules due to their policy
decision to  amend the Rules. He then relies on paragraph 14
of the	unreported judgment  of this  Court made in Union of
India V/s. S.S. Uppal & Anr. [ (1996) 1 Unreported Judgments
(SC) 393].  Even that decision is not of any help to him. He
then relies  upon the judgment of this Court in Gajraj Singh
etc. v.	 The State  Transport Appellate Tribunal & Ors. etc.
[(1996) 7  SCALE 31]  wherein it  was held that the existing
rights saved  by the  repealed Act  would be  considered  in
accordance  with   the	Rules.	The  ratio  therein  is	 not
applicable because the existing Rules do not save any of the
rights acquired	 or accruing  under the	 Rules. On the other
hand, this court had pointed out in paragraph 23 thus:
"Whenever an  Act	is  repealed  it
     must be  considered, except  as  to
     transactions past and closed, as if
     it had  never existed.  The  effect
     thereof is	 to obliterate	the  Act
     completely from  the record  of the
     Parliament as  if it had never been
     passed it,	 (sic) it  never existed
     except for	 the  purpose  of  those
     actions   which   were   commenced,
     prosecuted and  concluded while  it
     was existing  law. Legal fiction is
     one which	is not an actual reality
     and which	the law	 recognises  and
     the court	accepts	 as  a	reality.
     Therefore, in case of legal fiction
     the  court	 believes  something  to
     exist which  in  reality  does  not
     exist.  It	  is   nothing	 but   a
     presumption of the existence of the
     state of affairs which in actuality
     is non-existent. The effect of such
     a legal  fiction is that a position
     which otherwise could not obtain is
     deemed   to    obtain   under   the
     circumstances.   Therefore,    when
     Section 217(1)  of the Act repealed
     Act 4  of 1939  w.e.f July 1, 1989,
     the law  in Act 4 of 1939 in effect
     came to  be non-existent  except as
     regards the  transactions, past and
     closed or save."
Re: Cauvery Water Disputes Tribunal [(1993) Supp. 1 SCC
96] also  does not  help the  appellant.  Therein  when	 the
judgment of this Court had become final, the Governor issued
an ordinance  not to  implement the  judgment of this Court.
The constitution  Bench, therefore,  had held that since the
judgment was  allowed to become final, it is not open to the
Government not	to implement  the  judgment  by	 issuing  an
ordinance holding  that it  amounts to interferes with power
of judicial review of this Court.
Thus,  we	hold  that  the	 first	respondent  has	 not
acquired any vested right for being considered for promotion
in accordance  with the repealed Rules in view of the policy
decision  taken	  by  the   Government	which	we  find  is
justifiable on the material available from the record placed
before us.  We hold  that the  Tribunal was  not  right	 and
correct	 in   directing	 the   Government  to  of  Assistant
Directors of  Animal Husbandry Department in accordance with
the repealed Rules and to operate the same.
The appeals  are accordingly  allowed. The order of the
Tribunal is  set aside	but, in	 the circumstances,  without
costs.