[Cites
2
, Cited by
48
]
Supreme Court of India
Sri Sanjoy Bhattacharjee vs Union Of India & Ors on 10 March, 1997
Equivalent citations: AIR 1997 SUPREME COURT 2179, 1997 ALL CJ 926 1997 SCC (L&S) 1069, 1997 SCC (L&S) 1069
Bench:
K. Ramaswamy
,
G.T. Nanavati
PETITIONER:
SRI SANJOY BHATTACHARJEE

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	10/03/1997

BENCH:
K. RAMASWAMY, G.T. NANAVATI




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
O R D E R
     Delay condoned.
This special  leave petition  has been filed against an
order of  the Central  Administrative Tribunal, made on July
8, 1996 made in O.A No. 879/93.
Admittedly, the  petitioner, having acquired Diploma in
Engineering,  had   applied  for   and	stood	selected  as
Technician. The	 vacancies notified were 480. His ranking on
merit is  779. Since  he was  not appointed  to the post, he
filed the  D.A in  the Tribunal. It was contended that while
he was	looking for  ward to  his appointment  in accordance
with the  selection, instead  of making	 the appointment the
authorities issued  notification for fresh recruitment, thus
, defeating the right of the petitioner and others similarly
situated. Therefore, direction to the respondent authorities
to appoint  him, as  per his  ranking in the select list for
the year 1989 was sought. stay of fresh recruitment till the
said list  got exhausted,  was also sought. The Tribunal has
dismissed the petition holding that mere putting a candidate
in the	select list  does not  confer on  him any  right  to
appointment. Selection	was made  only for  filling  up	 480
vacancies; after  the absorption   thereof, selection has to
be made	 for the  subsequent vacancies	from the open market
and,. therefore,  directions sought  could not	be given. We
find that the reasons given . We find that the reasons given
by the	Tribunal are  well  justified.	Merely	because	 the
petitioner has been put in the waiting list, he does not get
any vested  right to an appointment. It is not his case that
any one	 below his  ranking in	the waiting  list  has	been
appointed which could give him cause for grievance. Thus, he
cannot seek any direction for his appointment.
For subsequent  vacancies, every one in the open market
is entitled  to apply for consideration of his/her  claim on
merit in accordance with law and it would be consistent with
the provisions of
Articles 14
and
16(1)
of the Constitution.
Therefore, direction sought for not to fill up the vacancies
having arisen  subsequently  until  the	 candidates  in	 the
waiting list  are exhausted, cannot be granted. The Tribunal
rightly refused to grant any such direction.
The special leave petition is accordingly dismissed.