[Cites
3
, Cited by
76
]
Supreme Court of India
Kamleshwar Prasad vs Pradumanju Agrawal (Dead) By Lrs on 2 April, 1997
Equivalent citations: AIR 1997 SUPREME COURT 2399, 1997 (4) SCC 413, 1997 AIR SCW 2310, 1997 ALL. L. J. 1369, (1997) 3 SCR 508 (SC), 1997 SCFBRC 274, 1997 BOMRC 310, 1997 HRR 464, (1997) 4 JT 425 (SC), 1997 (4) JT 425, 1997 ALL CJ 2 930, (1997) 1 ALL RENTCAS 627, (1997) 2 PAT LJR 86, (1997) 30 ALL LR 307, (1997) 1 RENCR 591, (1997) 1 RENTLR 522, (1997) 2 APLJ 58, (1997) 3 SCALE 400, (1997) 3 SUPREME 597
Author:
K. Ramaswamy
Bench:
K. Ramaswamy
PETITIONER:
KAMLESHWAR PRASAD

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
PRADUMANJU AGRAWAL (DEAD) BY LRS....

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	02/04/1997

BENCH:
K. RAMASWAMY, G.B. PATTANAIK




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
PATTANAIK, J.
leave granted.
This appeal  by special  leave to	appeal	is  directed
against the  judgment dated  17.2.1997 of the Allahabad High
Court dismissing  the writ  petition filed by the appellant.
The respondent	landlord field	 a  petition for eviction to
the appellant under Section 21(1)(a) of the U.P. Act XIII of
1972 inter  alia on the ground at the bona fide requires the
premises for  carrying on  his own  business and  he has  no
other means  of livelihood.  The tenant	 -  appellant  filed
objections before  the prescribed authority stating there in
that the  application for  eviction has	 been filed on false
and baseless  allegation and in fact the respondent does not
need the  premises bona	 fide for starting his own business.
The prescribed	authority on  consideration of the materials
on record  came to the conclusion that the landlord does not
require the  premises for  his own  use bonafide.  The	said
prescribed authority  also came	 to the	 conclusion that the
tenant would  be comparatively	harrassed  if  an  order  of
eviction for  eviction having  been rejected,  the  landlord
preferred an  appeal. The appellate authority re-appreciated
the entire evidence on record and reversed the conclusion of
the prescribed	authority. The said appellate authority came
to the conclusion that in the facts and circumstances to the
case of	 the requirement  of the  landlord to  start a cloth
bushiness must	be a  bona fide requirement entitling him to
get an	order of eviction under Section 21(1)(a) of the Act.
The appellate  authority, therefore,  set aside the order of
the  prescribed	 authority  and	 directed  eviction  of	 the
appellant. Being  aggrieved by	the order  of the  appellate
authority, the	tenant carried	the matter to the High Court
by filing  a writ  petition. During the pendency of the writ
petition in  the  High	Court  the  landlord  died  and	 was
substituted by	his legal  heirs namely	 his widow, two sons
and the	 married daughter.  On behalf  of the tenant, it was
urged before  the High	Court that the landlord having died,
the bona fide requirement which was found to have existed by
the appellate  authority no  more survives,  and  therefore,
taking into  consideration the	subsequent  event  the	High
Court must  quash  the	order  of  eviction  passed  by	 the
appellate authority.  On  behalf  of  the  landlord  it	 was
contended that	the order  of the appellate authority in the
eviction proceeding,  is a  decree  and	 the  decree  having
become final,  In a  proceeding under
Article	226
of	 the
Constitution, the  High Court  will not	 be entitled to take
into consideration any subsequent event that had occured and
no that score it would not be appropriate for the High Court
to  interfere  with  the  decree  passed  by  the  appellate
authority. It  was also	 contended that	 the requirement  in
question must  exist on the day the application for eviction
was filed  and the  same requirement having been found to be
established by	the competent  forum who  was required to go
into the  said question,  it is	 no longer  open to the High
Court to  interfere with the said finding in exercise of its
supervisory  jurisdiction   under
Article   226
of	 the
Constitution. The  High Court  by the impugned judgment came
the conclusion that the decree for eviction has become final
and the said finality cannot be disturbed on the application
under
Article 226
of the Constitution by taking into account
the  facts  that  the  original	 landlord  died	 during	 the
pendency of the writ petition.
Mr. Manoj	Swarup, learned	 counsel appearing  for	 the
appellant in this Court urged that the person for whose bona
fide requirement  the order  of eviction  has been passed by
the appellate  authority having	 died during the pendency of
the writ  petition. The	 said bonafide requirement no longer
subsists and  consequently the	High Court should have taken
that fact into consideration and should have interfered with
the order passed by the appellate authority for the eviction
of the	tenant. The  learned counsel   further urged that no
doubt the  proceedings under
Article 226
of the Constitution
is not	a continuation of the eviction proceedings under the
Act, but  all the  same the  High Court while exercising its
power of  supervisions under
Article 226
of the Constitution
is not	denuded of  its power to take into consideration the
subsequent event  that had happened which is necessary to be
taken  into   consideration  in	 the  interest	of  justice.
Accordingly, The  High Court  committed serious error in not
taking into  account the  facts of the death of the landlord
for whose  bona fide  requirement the  order of eviction had
been passed  by the appellate authority, and therefore, this
Court should  interfere with  the said	order  of  the	High
Court.	Having	 given	and  anxious  consideration  to	 the
contention raised  by the  learned counsel for the appellant
and under the facts and circumstances of this case we are of
the considered	opinion that  this case	 does not  warranted
interference  by   this	 Court	under
Article	136
of	 the
constitution. Under  the Act  the  order  of  the  appellate
authority is  final and	 the said  order is  a decree of the
civil court  and decree	 to a  competent Court having become
final cannot  be  interfered  with  by	the  High  Court  in
exercise of  its power	of superintendence under
Article 226
and
227
of the	 Constitution by  taking  into	account	 any
subsequent event  which might have happened. That apart, the
fact that  the landlord	 needed the premises is question for
starting a  bushiness which  fact  has	been  found  by	 the
appellate authority.  In eye  of law, it must be that on the
day of	application for	 eviction which is the crucial date,
the tenant  incurred the liability of being evicted from the
premises. Even	if the	landlord died during the pendency of
the Writ  petition in  the High	 Court the  bona  fide	need
cannot be  said to  have lapsed	 as the business in question
can be	carried on  by his  widow or  any elder son. In this
view to	 the matter,  we find  no force in the contention of
Mr,  Manoj   Swarup,  learned	counsel	 appearing  for	 the
appellant and  we do  not find	any error  in  the  impugned
judgment  of  the  High	 Court	under
Article	136
of	 the
Constitution.  The   appeal,  accordingly,   fails  and	  is
dismissed but  in the  circumstances without any order as to
costs.