[Cites
13
, Cited by
60
]
Supreme Court of India
Tamilnadu Electricity Board vs M/S. Bridge Tunnel Constructions & Ors on 18 February, 1997
Equivalent citations: AIR 1997 SUPREME COURT 1376, 1997 (4) SCC 121, 1997 AIR SCW 1491, (1997) 2 CTC 178 (SC), (1997) 2 SCR 132 (SC), 1997 (2) ARBI LR 1, 1997 (2) CTC 178, 1997 (2) SCALE 653, 1997 (3) ADSC 458, (1997) 3 JT 467 (SC), (1997) 3 SUPREME 365, (1997) 2 RECCIVR 646, (1997) 2 SCALE 653, (1997) 2 ARBILR 1, (1997) 2 CIVLJ 816, (1997) 2 CURCC 105, (1997) 2 ICC 16, (1997) 2 MAD LJ 96
Author:
K. Ramaswamy
Bench:
K. Ramaswamy
PETITIONER:
TAMILNADU ELECTRICITY BOARD

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
M/S. BRIDGE TUNNEL CONSTRUCTIONS & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	18/02/1997

BENCH:
K. RAMASWAMY, S. SHAGGIER HAMMED




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
O R D E R
Leave granted. Substitution allowed.
These  appeals,   by  special  leave,  arise  from	 the
judgment of  the Madras High Court, dated December 20, 1990,
made i n O.S.A. Nos. 109 and 110 of 1988.
q    The admitted facts are that the respondents had entered
into an	 agreement with	 the appellant	to construct  inter-
connecting tunnels  for Suruliyar  Hydroelectric Project  as
per specification No. 1138- Schedule-B to the agreement. The
initial value  of the  tender to be awarded was Rs. 47 lakhs
and it	was revised  to Rs. 69 lakhs on January 16, 1975. In
the course  of execution  of the  contract, a  sum of Rs. 92
lakhs was  paid to  the respondent.  The contract  was to be
completed within  a period  of 24  months from	the date  of
taking over  of the  site, i.e.,  January 18, 1975; thus, it
was completed  after the  expiry of  the term, on August 25,
1978. Resultantly,  there had  arisen a	 dispute as  to	 the
entitlement to	further amount	towards the work done by the
respondent.
On a notice issued by the respondent for appointment of
an  arbitrator	in  terms  of  clause  50  of  the  contract
(arbitrator clause),  there was	 a delay  on the part of the
appellant  i  n	 nomination  of	 the  arbitrator.  When	 the
respondent exercised  the power,  after expiry	of the	time
prescribed in  the notice,  appointing	a  sole	 arbitrator,
proceedings under
Section 33
of the  Arbitrator Act,	1940
were initiated	by the	appellant.  One	 of  the  objections
raised by  the appellant in the proceedings under
Section 33
was that under the terms of the contract the claim sought to
be put	up in  the notice  given by  the respondent  was not
arbitrable. The	 question was  gone    into  and  the  court
recorded a finding as under:
"If the petitioner had come forward
     to	 raise	dispute	 and  if  it  is
     outside the scope of clause 50, the
     first respondent  itself would come
     forward with such a reservation. It
     is not  as if  all	 disputes  would
     come within  the cope  of clause 50
     and  only	those  that  would  come
     within the ambit of clause 50 alone
     can be  decided by	 the Arbitrators
     when such	is the clear position on
     this    aspect;	 enabling    the
     petitioner	  Board	  to   raise   a
     objection regarding  disputes which
     may not  come within  the scope  of
     clause 50	is not a concession, but
     a recognition  of a right, which is
     available	 not	only   to    the
     petitioner Board but also the first
     respondent	 in  the  event	 of  the
     Board  raising   any   dispute   as
     against it.  Therefore,  the  first
     stipulation is  dependent upon  the
     Arbitrators deciding  as to whether
     particular	  dispute   would   come
     within the	 scope of  Section 50 or
     not, and only if they consider that
     it	 falls	 within	 the   scope  of
     Arbitration clause, they would have
     the  jurisdiction	 to  decide  the
     same.   In	  the	event	of   the
     Arbitrators   holding    that   any
     particular dispute	 is outside  the
     Arbitration clause, it is not as if
     the first respondent is deprived of
     remedies by  agitating the	 same in
     Course."
It is also further held that :
"After the	 award is  made, as  the
     petitioner	  Board	   has	 already
     reserved its right, it would enable
     the Board	to raise  this point, in
     the event	of any	need arising for
     setting aside the award in Court."
Pursuant thereto, condoning the delay liberty was given
to the	appellant to  nominate an  Arbitrator on  its behalf
which accordingly  was done  and  dispute  was	referred  to
arbitration.  Arbitrability   of  some	of  the	 claims	 was
disputed as  part of no liability. Since the two Arbitrators
differed, an  umpire was  selected by the Arbitrators and he
had gone into the question. At this stage, it is relevant to
mention that  some of  the claims  made by  the	 respondents
relate to  excavation of   hard	 rock in  the tunnel and the
rate of claims.
The relevant clauses of the Contract postulate thus :
"22. Material to be excavated :
The  character   of  the	material
     through which  the tunnel	is to be
     excavated	is  indicated  i  n  the
     report  of	 the  Geologist	 of  the
     Geological	  Survey    of	  India,
     attached of  this specification  as
     an appendix. The probable nature of
     materials to  be excavated is given
     in	 the   above   report.	 It   is
     expressly	to   be	  under	  stood,
     however, that  the	 purchaser  does
     not guarantee  the accuracy  of the
     information    and	   should    the
     conditions be  found to differ from
     those  indicated,	 the  contractor
     shall have	 no  claim  against  the
     purchaser	 on   the   grounds   of
     misrepresentation.	 Moreover,   the
     price to  be given	 in the schedule
     of prices for excavation work is to
     be inclusive  and	to  be	held  to
     cover  excavation	 in  the  actual
     materials encountered.
23.  Tunnel Excavation:
a)	  The tunnel  is to be excavated
     to such  dimensions as  to give the
     minimum   thickness   of	concrete
     lining specified  and to  suit  the
     shape and	size of cross section of
     the tunnel shown on drawing.
b)	  Excavation is	 to  be	 carried
     out    as	  far	 as    feasible,
     simultaneously on	all fages. It is
     expected, that  more of  the ground
     alone the	tunnel will be hard rock
     requiring	the   supports.	  Except
     where the	materials penetrated  is
     hard rock	and will safely stand by
     itself, the  tunnel is  to be lined
     temporarily  with	timber	supports
     and shoring. The timbering is to be
     kept as  alose to	the face  of the
     heading as possible. Any shoring of
     protective arrangements  considered
     inadequate by the Engineer is to be
     strengthened immediately.
g)	  The type  of tunnel section to
     be constructed shall be as directed
     or	 approved   by	 the   Engineer.
Measurement for  payment of  tunnel
     excavation, will  be limited to the
     special  sectional	 dimensions  and
     will be  made along the established
     centre  line   of	the  tunnel  and
     payment therefore	will be	 made at
     the unit  bid in  the schedule  for
     excavation	 of   all   classes   of
     tunnel.  No   additional  allowance
     above the	unit price  bid	 in  the
     schedule  for   excavation	 of  all
     eclasses of  tunnel will be made on
     account of	 the  class,  nature  or
     condition of  any of  the	material
     encountered."
The rates	were  mentioned	 in  the  Schedule  and	 the
respondent had set up the claims raised at rates higher than
the contracted	rates and  twice the  rate for the work done
after the expiry of the contract period.
Against the  claims,  objections  were  raised  by	 the
appellant. They	 have disputed	the  claim  set	 up  by	 the
respondents and	 requested the	Arbitrators to decide on the
arbitrability of  the items  mentioned in  the claims of the
respondents. The  umpire, without going into the details, in
a non-speaking award as against the claim of Rs. 2 crores 10
lakhs, has  awarded a consolidated sum of Rs. 70.83 lakhs as
under :
"I	  hereby  award	 and  direct  as
     follows:
(1)  The Respondent  shall pay  the
     claimant a	 sum of	 Rupees	 Seventy
     Lakhs eighty  three thousand  seven
     hundred and  ninety three only (Rs.
70,83,793/-)   and	   release   the
     earnest  money   deposit  and  Bank
     Guarantees	  furnished    by    the
     claimant  in   lieu   of	Security
     Deposit, in  full settlement of all
     claims and counter-claims."
Calling the award in question, an application to set it
aside has been filed. The respondent filed an application to
make the  award the  rule of  the  court.  The	civil  Court
dismissed the  petition of  the appellant and made the award
the rule  of the court. On appeal, the Division Bench of the
High Court  has confirmed  the same.  Thus these appeals, by
special leave.
Shri  V.R.	 Reddy,	 the  learned  Additional  Solicitor
General, contends  that the  award is  illegal on account of
omission on  the part of the Umpire to give the findings and
reasons in  support thereof  of	 the  arbitrability  of	 the
claims.	 He  contends  that  arbitrability  of	claim  is  a
jurisdictional issue.  The arbitrator  cannot clothe himself
with  the   power,  in	a  non-speaking	 award	to  award  a
consolidated sum,  without deciding the arbitrability of the
claims set  up by  the respondents including those which are
not part of the contract.
Shri Poti,	 learned senior	 counsel for the respondents
has contended that the award being a non-speaking one in the
absence of  specific reference	directing the Arbitrators to
decide the  arbitrability of some of the items in the claims
set up	by the	respondent, Umpire  was not  called upon  or
obliged to  decide  the	 dispute  by  a	 speaking  order  on
arbitrability. He  reached the conclusion whether or not the
dispute or  the claim  is arbitrable and obviously he was of
the opinion  that all  the claims  are arbitrable  and he is
empowered to  decide it either rightly or wrongly. He may be
wrong in  not expressly giving his decision on arbitrability
of some	 of the	 claims. However, his decision is within his
jurisdiction. He  is not required to give any reasons in the
award for  reaching that  decision. When  the arbitrator had
given a	 consolidated sum  towards all	the claims, it would
mean that he had considered the arbitrability of some of the
claims in  terms of the contract and that, therefore, he has
not committed any error in reaching that conclusion which is
apparent on  the face  of the  record. In the absence of any
specific  reference  for  deciding  that  dispute,  even  if
incidentally  he   reaches  that   decision,  he   gets	 the
jurisdiction and  power to  decide the question, he gets the
otherwise also,	 the award cannot be assailed o n the ground
that he	 reached a  wrong decision  without any	 reasons  in
support thereof.  In that  event, it  must be deemed that he
had considered	the non-arbitrability of the items in a non-
speaking ward  given by him. He also further contends that i
n the  absence of any agreement between the parties that the
arbitrator would  give reasons in support of his decision on
the arbitrability  of the  dispute, he is not called upon to
decide the  dispute by	a speaking  award. What is required,
therefore, is  to be  considered is  whether the  arbitrator
reached	 the  decision	as  to	the  entitlement  to  for  a
specified sum  or disentitlement thereof, in his award. Once
he specifies the amount to which the respondent is entitled,
it must	 be deemed  that he had taken into consideration the
arbitrability of all the claims including the claim relating
to non- arbitrability of some of the items and had given the
award. Thereby, consolidated sum in the award is not subject
to attack  that the award made by the Arbitrator is vitiated
by any error of jurisdiction or error of law apparent on the
face of	 the record.  Shri Poti	 further contends  that	 the
contract of  arbitration is  not part  of the record and the
umpire had  not referred  to the  agreement as	part of	 the
award and  that, therefore,  it is  not open to the court to
look into  the contract	 to find  out whether the contractor
claimed at  the rates  higher than  what were contracted and
the umpire has omitted to consider the non- arbitrability of
the claims  in respect	of some	 of the	 items.
In  support
thereof, the  places strong reliance on the decision of this
Court in
Tarapore and	Co. v.	Cochin Shipyard Ltd., Cochin
[(1984) 2  SCC 680],  in particular,  paragraphs  10,  12,33
thereof, and
State of A.P. v. R.V. Rayanim
[(1990) 1 SCC 433
at 435, para 5].
In view  of the  respective contentions,  the  question
that arises  for consideration	is: whether  the Umpire	 was
required to give a decision supported by reasons on the non-
arbitrability of some of the items in terms of the contract.
It is  already seen  that the Court prior to the proceedings
under
Section  33
had gone into the question as to the right
of the	appellant to  question the  arbitrability of some of
the items  and had expressly recorded, as seen hereinbefore,
that if	 any objection	regarding  the	dispute	 is  raised,
either parties	is at liberty to raise the same and avail of
decision by the arbitrator and the arbitrator is required to
decide the  arbitrability of  the claim	 and if he considers
that  it   falls  within   the	scope	of  the	 arbitration
clause/arbitrability, then he would have the jurisdiction to
decide the  same. If  the decision  has been  reached by the
arbitrator against  the appellant,  it would  be open to the
Board to  raise that  point, in	 case any  need	 arises	 for
setting aside the said award in the court. Thus, it could be
seen that  prior to  the proceedings  under
Section  33
, the
court had left open the umpire had to decide the dispute. In
the event  of the decision going against the Board, the same
is also entitled to question the correctness of the award in
a court of law. That order has become final.
In the  light of  the above facts, the question arises;
whether the  arbitrator was  not obliged  to decide the non-
arbitrability  of   some  of   the  items   claimed  by	 the
respondents before/while  giving a  non-speaking  award	 and
whether a  deemed  decision  could  be	given  credence.  In
Tarapore Co.'s	case relied on by  Shri Poti, a Bench of two
judges	of   this  court  had  gone  into  the	question  of
jurisdiction of	 the arbitrator	 to decide the arbitrability
of the dispute. In para 10 thereof, it is stated thus :
"What is  the effect  of  referring
     the specific  question  of	 law  to
     arbitration  without  prejudice  to
     one's  right   to	contend	 to  the
     contrary	 will	 be    presently
     examined."
If this issue specifically raises a
     question as to jurisdiction  of the
     arbitrator to  arbitrate  upon  the
     dispute set  out in  Point No.2, it
     appears to	 have been  specifically
     referred to  the arbitrator for his
     decision.	  Parties,    therefore,
     agreed  to	  submit  the	specific
     question even  with regard	 to  the
     scope   ambit    width   and    the
     construction  of	the  arbitration
     clause  so	  as   to   define   its
     parameters and contours with a view
     to ascertaining  whether the  claim
     advanced  by   the	 appellant   and
     disputed by the respondent would be
     covered by	 the arbitration clause.
Whether upon  its true construction
     the   arbitration	  clause   would
     include  within   its  compass  the
     dispute  thus  raised  between  the
     parties  was  specifically	 put  in
     issue  because   parties  were   at
     variance about it."
"The arbitrator  was thus	required
     and called	 upon  first  to  decide
     whether the  dispute is  arbitrable
     as falling	 within	 the  width  and
     answer is	in the affirmative, then
     alone  the	 second	 point	need  be
     examined.	If  the	 answer	 to  the
     first point  of reference is in the
     negative in  that if the arbitrator
     were of he opinion that the dispute
     is not  arbitrable as  it would not
     fall within  the  scope,  width  an
     ambit of the arbitration agreement,
     it would  not be  necessary for him
     to determine  whether the appellant
     was entitled to recover anything by
     way of compensation. This aspect is
     being analysed  in depth  to  point
     out that  the parties  specifically
     referred	 the	 question     of
     constriction     of     arbitration
     agreement,	 its  width,  ambit  and
     parameters	 vis-a-vis  the	 dispute
     raised so	as to decide whether the
     dispute  would   fall  within   the
     purview	of    the    arbitration
     agreement,	 in   other  words   the
     jurisdiction of the arbitrator."
Thus, it  could be	 seen that  therein  that  when	 the
question is  specifically referred  to the  arbitrator,	 the
arbitrator is  required to  decide the	question referred to
him and	 decide the point on the question. Then only he gets
the jurisdiction  to go	 into the  merits. In para 12 of the
judgment that point was elaborated holding that :
"The    first    point    extracted
     hereinbefore  would   clearly  show
     that the  specific	 question  about
     the jurisdiction  of the arbitrator
     to arbitrate  upon the  dispute set
     out in  Point Nos.	 2, 3  and 4 was
     specifically   referred	to   the
     arbitrator.
On the  first point, the arbitrator
     had to  decide whether  the  claims
     made by  the appellant and disputed
     by the  respondent would be covered
     by clause	40, i.e. the arbitration
     clause.   In   other   words,   the
     specific question	referred to  the
     arbitrator	   was	   about     his
     jurisdiction to  arbitrate upon the
     disputes covered  by Points Nos. 2,
     3 and  4, if  and only  if, upon  a
     true    construction     of     the
     arbitration clause	 that  is  first
     paragraph of clause 40, would cover
     the disputed claim for compensation
     he can enter into the merits of the
     dispute and decide it."
This ratio clearly establishes that the arbitrator gets
jurisdiction to decide the dispute on merits only when he is
specifically called  upon to  decide the dispute in terms of
the contract.
In
Managing  Director, J  & K  Handicraft v.  Good Luck
Carpets
[(1990)	 4 SCC 740], the question arose: whether the
court could  look into	the arbitration	 agreement, find out
whether	 the  arbitrator  has  jurisdiction  to	 decide	 the
dispute though	it was not formed part of the award? In para
5, this Court had held that:
"... Here we may point out that the
     learned counsel  for the respondent
     has  urged	  that	 the   agreement
     containing the  arbitration  clause
     cannot be	looked into even to find
     out as  to what  was the  nature of
     the dispute contemplated by it with
     regard to	which a	 reference to an
     arbitrator was  contemplated,  more
     so when the ward was a non-speaking
     one. We  find it difficult to agree
     with  this	  submission   for   two
     reasons: Firstly,	the award is not
     a	 totally   non-speaking	     one
     inasmuch as  it gives  as resume of
     the     incentive	scheme	and  the
     agreement between	the  parties  as
     also the items of the claim made by
     the respondent.  Of  course,  while
     fixing the	 amount found payable by
     the  appellant,   no  reasons   are
     recorded. Secondly, if there is any
     challenge	to   the  award	 on  the
     ground that  the arbitrator  had no
     jurisdiction to make the award with
     regard   to   a   particular   item
     inasmuch as it was beyond the scope
     of reference,  the only way to test
     the correctness of such a challenge
     is to  look  into	the    agreement
     itself.  In  our  opinion,	 looking
     into the agreement for this limited
     purpose is	 neither  tantamount  to
     going into the evidence produced by
     the parties  nor  into  the  reason
     which weighted  with the arbitrator
     in making the award."
In fact  this Court had gone into merits while deciding
the question  as to  whether the arbitrator was justified in
making	the   award  in	 excess	 of  the  jurisdiction	with
reference to  the arbitration  agreement  and  deciding	 the
dispute on that basis.
In
U.P.  Rajkiya Nirman  Nigam Ltd. v. Indure Pvt. Ltd.
[(1996) 2 SCC 667] a Bench of three judges [to which both of
us were	 members] had  gone into  the question	whether	 the
arbitrator can	go into	 the question  whether there emerged
any concluded  contract and  whether he	 can  get  exclusive
jurisdiction to	 decide that  question	by  himself?  In  an
application under
Section 33
,	the learned  Single Judge of
the High  Court had  held that	the arbitrator has exclusive
jurisdiction  to   decide  that	  question.  Reversing	that
judgment  this	 Court	in   para  13  had  held  that	"the
arbitrability of  a claim depends on the construction of the
clause	 in    the   contract.	  The	finding	   of	 the
arbitrator/arbitrators on  arbitrability of the claim is not
conclusive as  under
Section  33
, ultimately it is the court
that decides  the controversy.	It  being  a  jurisdictional
issue, the  arbitrator/arbitrators cannot  clothe themselves
with jurisdiction to conclusively decide the issue." In para
15 it is held thus:
"The clear settled law thus is that
     the existence  or	validity  of  an
     arbitration  agreement   shall   be
     decided   by   the	  court	  alone,
     Arbitrators,  therefore,	have  no
     power of  jurisdiction to decide or
     adjudicate	    conclusively      by
     themselves the question since it is
     the very  foundation on  which  the
     arbitrators proceed  to  adjudicate
     the  disputes.   Therefore,  it  is
     rightly pointed  out by Shri Adarsh
     Kumar Goel, learned counsel for the
     appellant that  they had by mistake
     agreed  for   reference  and   that
     arbitrators  cold	not  decide  the
     existence	 of    the   arbitration
     agreement or  arbitrability of  the
     disputes without prejudice to their
     stand  that   no  valid   agreement
     existed.  Shri   Nariman  contended
     that having  agreed  to  refer  the
     dispute,	 the	appellant    had
     acquiesced to  the jurisdiction  of
     the  arbitrators	and,  therefore,
     they  cannot   exercise  the  right
     under
Section  33
of  the	Act.  We
     find no force in the contention. As
     seen,  the	 appellant  is	claiming
     adjudication under
Section 33
which
     the court	alone  has  jurisdiction
     and power	to  decide  whether  any
     valid agreement is existing between
     the  parties.  Mere  acceptance  or
     acquiescing to  the jurisdiction of
     the arbitrators for adjudication of
     the disputes as to the existence of
     the   arbitration	  agreement   or
     arbitrability of  the dispute  does
     not  disentitle  the  appellant  to
     have the  remedy under
Section 33
through   the    court.   In    our
     considered view  the  remedy  under
Section 33
is the only right royal
     way for deciding the controversy."
Accordingly,  it  was  held  that	the  controversy  of
arbitrability requires to be decided by the court and not by
the arbitrator himself.
In
Union  of India	 v.  G.S.  Atwal  &  Co.  (Asansole
)
[(1996) 3  SCC 568]  a Bench  of two Judges, to which one of
us, K.	Ramaswamy, J.  was a  member, was  to  consider	 the
question whether  the arbitrator. when he enlarged his scope
of award  in a	non-speaking award,  can conclusively decide
the dispute and give an award in that behalf? It was held in
paragraph 6 that :
"To   constitute	an   arbitration
     agreement,	  there	  must	 be   an
     agreement	that   is  to	say  the
     parties   must    be    ad	   idem.
Arbitrability of  a  claim	 depends
     upon  the	 dispute   between   the
     parties and  the reference	 to  the
     arbitrator.  On   appointment,   he
     enters  upon   that   dispute   for
     adjudication. The	finding	 of  the
     arbitrator on  the arbitrability of
     the claim	is  not	 conclusive,  as
     under
Section  33
ultimately  it is
     the   court    that   decides   the
     controversy.  It	can  hardly   be
     within	  the	    arbitrator's
     jurisdiction to  decide whether  or
     not a  condition precedent	 to  his
     jurisdiction  has	been  fulfilled.
     The   arbitrator	had   has   been
     fulfilled. The  arbitrator	 had  no
     power    to    decide    his    own
     jurisdiction.  The	  arbitrator  is
     always entitled  to inquire whether
     or	 not   he  has	jurisdiction  to
     decide the	 dispute. He  can refuse
     to deal  with the matter at all and
     leave the	parties	 to  go	 to  the
     court if he comes to the conclusion
     that he  has no  power to deal with
     the matter,  or he can consider the
     matter and	 if he	forms  the  view
     that the  contract upon  which  the
     claimant is  relying  on  and  from
     which, if established, he alone has
     jurisdiction, he can proceed to the
     decide  the   dispute  accordingly.
     Whether or	 not the  arbitrator has
     jurisdiction and whether the matter
     is referred  to or	 is  within  the
     ambit of  clause for  reference  of
     any difference of dispute which may
     arise between  the parties,  it  is
     for the  court to	decide	it.  The
     arbitrator	 by   a	 wrong	decision
     cannot enlarge  the  scope	 of  the
     submission. It  is for the court to
     decide finally the arbitrability of
     the claim	in dispute or any clause
     or a  matter or  a thing  contained
     therein   or    the    construction
     thereof.:
In
Champsey  Bhara &  Co. v.  Jivraj Balloo  Spinning &
Weaving Co. Ltd. (LR
(1922) 50 IA 324 : AIR 1923 PC 66] Lord
Dunedin had  laid down	the dictum  as to an error in law on
the face  of the  award, which	was accepted and followed by
this court  in Hindustan Construction Co. Ltd. v. State of J
& K. [(1992) 4 SCC 217]. Therein it was held that:
"An error in law on the face of the
     award means,  in  their  Lordships'
     view, that	 you  can  find	 in  the
     award  or	 a   document	actually
     incorporated   thereto,	as   for
     instance a	 note  appended	 by  the
     arbitrator stating	 the reason  for
     his    judgment,	  some	   legal
     proposition which	is the	basis of
     the award	and which  you can  then
     say is  erroneous. It does not mean
     that if  in a narrative a reference
     is made  to  a  contention	 of  one
     party,  that   opens  the	door  to
     seeing first  what	 the  contention
     is, and  then going to the contract
     on which  the parties' right depend
     to see if that contention is sound.
     Here it  is impossible to say, from
     what is  shown on	the face  of the
     award, what mistake the arbitrators
     made. The only way that the learned
     judges have arrived at finding what
     the  mistake   was	 is  by	 saying:
'inasmuch	 as    the   arbitrators
     awarded so	 and so, and inasmuch as
     the letter	 shows	that  the  buyer
     rejected	 the	 cotton,     the
     arbitrators can  only have	 arrived
     at	 arbitrators   can   only   have
     arrived at	 that result  by totally
     misinterpreting Rule  52'. But they
     were entitled  to	give  their  own
     interpretation to	Rule 52	 or  any
     other article,  and the  award will
     stand unless,  on	 the face of it,
     they have	tied themselves	 down to
     some  special   legal   proposition
     which then	 when examined,	 appears
     to be unsound."
The decision  has been  followed by  this Court  in all
subsequent judgments  and the precise scope of the law as to
error  apparent	  on  the   face  of   the  award  has	been
crystalised. But  there is  a distinction  between an  error
apparent on  the face  of the award and jurisdictional error
in passing  the award.
In that	 behalf,  in  M/s.
Sudarsan
Trading Co.  v. State  of Kerala
[(1989) 2  SCC 38] Justice
Sabyasachi Mukharji,  as he  then was,	had pointed  out the
distinction on the jurisdictional error and the error on the
face of the award.  It was stated thus:
"An award	may be	remitted or  set
     aside  on	 the  ground   that  the
     arbitrator	 in   making   it,   had
     exceeded  this   jurisdiction   and
     evidence of  matters not  appearing
     on the face of it, will be admitted
     in order  to establish  whether the
     jurisdiction had  been exceeded  or
     not,  because  the	 nature	 of  the
     dispute is	  something which has to
     be determined  outside  the  award-
     whatever might  be said about it in
     the award	or by the arbitrator. It
     has  to   be  reiterated	that  an
     arbitrator	  acting    beyond   his
     jurisdiction- is a different ground
     from the error apparent on the face
     of the award. In Halsbury's Laws of
     England II,  4th edn.,  Vol.2  para
     622   one	  of   the   misconducts
     enumerated, is  the decision by the
     arbitrator on a matter which is not
     included  in   the	  agreement   or
     reference. But  in such  a case one
     has to  determine	the  distinction
     between an	 error in  excess of the
     jurisdiction. Whether  a particular
     amount was	 liable to  be	paid  or
     damages liable to be sustained, was
     a decision within the competency of
     the arbitrator  in	 this  case.  By
     purporting to construe the contract
     the  court	  could	 not  take  upon
     itself the	 burden of  saying  that
     this was  contrary to  the contract
     and, as  such, beyond jurisdiction.
     It has  to be determined that there
     is a distinction between dispute as
     to	  the	 jurisdiction	of   the
     arbitrator and  the disputes  as to
     in	 what	way  that   jurisdiction
     should be exercised. There may be a
     conflict as  to the  power	 of  the
     arbitrator to  grant  a  particular
     remedy."
In "Russel	 on  Arbitration"  [Nineteenth	Edition]  by
Anthony Walton, page 99, it is stated as under:
"It  can,	 hardly	 be  within  the
     arbitrator's jurisdiction to decide
     whether or not a	precedent to his
     jurisdiction has been fulfilled. It
     has indeed	 several times been said
     bluntly that  an arbitrator  has no
     power    to    decide    his    own
     jurisdiction and  in one case where
     rules   of	  an   institution   the
     arbitrator such  power,  the  court
     will  ignore  this	 when  asked  to
     enforce the  award, and  decide the
     question	itself.	   However,   an
     arbitrator is  always  entitled  to
     inquire  whether	or  not	 he  has
     jurisdiction.. An umpire faced with
     a dispute	whether or not there was
     a contract	 from  which  alone  his
     jurisdiction, if any, can arise can
     matter at all and lease the parties
     to go  to Court, or he can consider
     the matter and if he forms the view
     that the  contract upon  which  the
     claimant  is     relying  and  from
     which, if	established,  alone  his
     jurisdiction can  arise is in truth
     the  contract,   he   can	 proceed
     accordingly."
In "Law  of Arbitration"  by R.S.	Bachawat [2nd (1987)
Edition] at pages 154-55, it is stated thus:
"An arbitrator  cannot  by	 mistake
     assume jurisdiction  over a  matter
     on which he has no jurisdiction. If
     it is  shown by  the terms	 of  the
     submission	 or   by  the  extrinsic
     evidence that  the	 arbitrator  has
     adjudicated  upon	matters	 outside
     the  scope	 of  his  authority  the
     award cannot  stand,  however  well
     meaning  and   honest  the	 mistake
     might  have   been.  An  arbitrator
     cannot give himself jurisdiction by
     a wrong  decision collateral to the
     merits as	to facts  on  which  the
     limits of his jurisdiction depends.
     Where it  was a condition precedent
     to	 his   jurisdiction   that   the
     dispute should have arisen during a
     tenancy between  the plaintiff  and
     the tenancy  between the  plaintiff
     and the  defendant or  in the event
     of a collusion if certain works had
     been  completed,	the   arbitrator
     could  not	  clothe  himself   with
     jurisdiction by  a wrong decision n
     the preliminary point. The question
     is	 not   preliminary  point.   The
     question is  not concluded	 against
     any  party	 by  a	finding	 of  the
     arbitrator	    that      he     has
     jurisdiction. It  is for  the court
     and  not	for  the  arbitrator  to
     decide finally  whether or	 not the
     arbitrator	 has   jurisdiction  and
     that is  the law  both in India and
     in England."
"....The	question   whether   the
     matters referred  were  within  the
     ambit of  the clause  for reference
     of "any difference or dispute which
     may arise	between the  partners is
     for the court to decide".
"....Dispute about the existence or
     validity of  the contract and as to
     the existence of facts which render
     it	  illegal must	be determined by
     the   court    and	  not	by   the
     arbitrator. The  arbitrator  cannot
     by his  own finding  clothe himself
     with  jurisdiction.   Supposing  he
     finds   that    the    jurisdiction
     agreement is  valid such  a finding
     cannot bind the parties".
It would  thus  be	 seen  that  the  arbitrator,  while
deciding  the	admitted     dispute,  subject	 matter	  of
adjudication, may  decide the  dispute in  reference to	 the
agreement. That	 would be  within his  jurisdiction. In such
jurisdictional issue,  even if	 an  error is committed that
may not	 be an	error apparent	on the	face of	 the  record
because the  arbitrator, the  chosen forum,  may  commit  an
error in  exercising his  jurisdiction. However, if he, by a
speaking award, decides it on a wrong proposition of law, it
will be	 an error  apparent on the face of record and liable
to correction.	If the arbitrator decides a dispute which is
beyond the  scope of  his reference  or beyond	the  subject
matter of  the reference  or he makes the award disregarding
the terms of reference or the arbitration agreement or terms
of the	contract, it  would jurisdictional  error beyond the
scope of  reference, he	 cannot	 clothe	 himself  to  decide
conclusively that  dispute as it is an error of jurisdiction
which requires	to be  ultimately decided by the court. This
Court has  pointed out	the distinction	 between latent	 and
patent error of jurisdiction in
Tarapore Co.
's case thus:
"It has  to  be  seen  whether  the
     terms of  the  agreement  permitted
     entertainment  of	 the  claim   by
     necessary implication.  It may   be
     stated that  we do	 not accept  the
     broad contention  of  Shri	 Nariman
     that  whatever   is  not	excluded
     specifically by the contract can be
     subject-matter  of	  claim	  by   a
     contractor. Such a proposition will
     mock  at  the  terms  agreed  upon.
     Parties cannot be allowed to depart
     from  what	  they	had  agreed.  Of
     course, if	 something  flows  as  a
     necessary concomitant  to what  was
     agreed upon  courts can assume that
     too  as  a	 part  of  the	contract
     between the parties."
It would  thus be	clear  that  the  arbitrator  cannot
clothe himself	conclusively with the jurisdiction to decide
or omit	 to decide the arbitrability of a particular item or
the claim made by the parties. When a specific reference has
been made  to the  arbitrator  and  the	 parties  raise	 the
dispute of  arbitrability, with	 the leave of the court/by a
direction of the court in a proceedings under
Section 33
, he
is to  decide the  arbitrability of  the dispute  and make a
decision of  the arbitrability	f the  dispute	and  make  a
decision  while	 giving	 reasons  in  support  thereof.	 The
decision of the arbitrator in granting a particular sum by a
non-speaking award, therefore, hinges upon the arbitrability
of a dispute arising under the contract or upon a particular
item claimed thereunder. He is required to give the decision
thereon. The  question of  decision by	implication does not
arise since  his jurisdiction to decide to dispute on merits
hinges upon  his jurisdiction to decide the arbitrability of
the dispute.  In this  case, in view of the finding recorded
by the	court,	which  has  become  final,  as	referred  to
earlier, the  arbitrator/umpire was  enjoined to  decide the
arbitrabilty of	 the claims  set up  by the  respondent	 and
disputed by  the appellant.  Admittedly, the  award  of	 the
umpire does not contain any decision on arbitrability of the
claims.
In
Gujarat	 Water Supply  and Sewerage  Board v. Unique
Erectors
[(1989)  1 SCC	 532] one  of the questions referred
was arbitrability  of a particular item. It was by the Court
stated thus :
"In   the	  instant   case,    the
     arbitrator by  virtue of  the terms
     mentioned	in  the	 order	of  this
     court had	to decide  which of  the
     disputes were  arbitrable and which
     were  not.	 It  is	 true  that  the
     arbitrator	 has   not  specifically
     stated in	the award that he had to
     decide	the	 question     of
     arbitrability. The	 arbitrator  has
     rested by stating that he had heard
     the  parties   on	the   point   of
     arbitrability of  the claim and the
     counter-claim.   He   has	 further
     stated that  after 'considering all
     the   above   aspects'   and   'the
     question of  arbitrability or  non-
arbitrability'  he	  had  made  the
     award on certain aspects."
It could  be seen	that if the arbitrator has indicated
his mind  in the  award that  he in  fact  adverted  to	 the
arbitrability or  non-arbitrability of	the claim  and	then
made the  award, it  would be indicative of the fact that he
had, in	 fact,	 applied his  mind, considered that question
and reached  the decision  in awarding	certain amounts by a
non-speaking award  including the  claim in respect of which
arbitrability was in issue.
In
Raipur    Development	  Authority   v.   Chokhamal
Contractors
[(1989) 2 SCC 721], a Constitution Bench of this
Court had  gone into  the question whether the arbitrator is
required to  give  reasons  in	a  non-speaking	 award.	 The
Constitution Bench had pointed out in para 35 thus:
"We   do	 not   appreciate    the
     contention, urged	on behalf of the
     parties who  contend that it should
     be made  obligatory on  the part of
     the arbitrator  to give  reason for
     the  award,   that	 there	 is   no
     justification to  leave  the  small
     area  covered   by	  the	law   of
     arbitration out of the general rule
     that the decision of every judicial
     and quasi-judicial	 body should  be
     supported by  reasons. But	 at  the
     same time	it has	to be  borne  in
     mind that what applies generally to
     settlement	   of	  disputes    by
     authorities governed  by public law
     need not  be extended  to all cases
     arising under  private law	 such as
     those  arising  under  the	 law  of
     arbitration which	is intended  for
     settlement of private disputes."
In para  37 thereof,  this Court emphasised the need to
make a	speaking award	and the terms in the contract should
postulate such	a need	when the contract is entered into by
the State or its instrumentalities. It was held thus:
"The  trappings  of  a  body  which
     discharges judicial functions and s
     required to  act in accordance with
     law    with    their    concomitant
     obligations for reasoned decisions,
     are  not  attracted  to  a	 private
     adjudication  of	the  nature   of
     arbitration as  the latter,  as  we
     have  noticed   earlier,	is   not
     supposed  to   exert  the	 State's
     sovereign	 judicial   power.   But
     arbitral  awards	in  disputes  to
     which    the    State    and    its
     instrumentalities	  are	 parties
     affect  public   interest	and  the
     matter  of	  the  manner  in  which
     government		and	     its
     instrumentalities	  allow	   their
     interest to  be  affected	by  such
     arbitral	adjudications	 involve
     larger  questions	 of  policy  and
     public interest. Government and its
     instrumentalities	 cannot	  simply
     allow large  financial interests of
     the  State	  to  be   prejudicially
     affected by non-reviewable - except
     in the  limited way  allowed by the
     statute  -	  non-speaking	arbitral
     awards. Indeed,  this branch of the
     system of	dispute resolution  has,
     of late,  acquired a certain degree
     of notoriety by the manner in which
     in	  many	 cases	 the   financial
     interests of  government have  come
     to	 suffer	 by  awards  which  have
     raised eyebrows  by  doubts  as  to
     their rectitude  and  property.  It
     will   not	  be   justifiable   for
     governments	or	   their
     instrumentalities	to   enter  into
     arbitration agreements which do not
     expressly stipulate  the  rendering
     of reasoned  and  speaking	 awards.
Government	       and	  their,
     instrumentalities	should,	  as   a
     matter   of   policy   and	  public
     interest- if not as a compulsion of
     law ensure that wherever they enter
     into agreements  for resolution  of
     disputes  by   resort  to	 private
     arbitrations,  the	 requirement  of
     speaking	awards	  is   expressly
     stipulated and ensured."
In
State  of A.P. & Ors. v. R.V. Rayanim & Ors.
[(1990)
1 SCC  433], relied  on by  Shri Poti,	the  question  arose
whether the  award of  escalation charges  in a non-speaking
award is  vitiated by  any error apparent on the face of the
record? Therein the question of jurisdictional issue had not
arisen. On  the other hand, on merits, it was contended that
there was  an error  in that  behalf. In  para 5 it was held
that "	it was	then contended, that the award has purported
to grant  damages on  the basis	 of escalation	of cost	 and
prices and  such escalation  was not  a	 matter	 within	 the
domain of  the bargain	between the parties and having taken
that  factor   into  consideration   the  award	  was  bad."
Therefore, the	ratio there  is an  authority supporting the
contention on  the need	 of an arbitrator to give a reasoned
decision on  arbitrability  of	the  contract  or  claim  in
dispute.
In this  regard,
Section  31(3)
of the  Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996, provides thus:
"(3) The arbitral award shall state
     the reasons upon which it is based,
     unless-
(a)  the parties  have  agreed
     that no reasons are to be given, or
(b)  the award  is an arbitral
     award on agreed terms under Section
30."
The Parliament  has expressed the legislative judgement
that the  award shall  state reasons  upon which it is based
unless parties have agreed otherwise or the award is covered
on agreed terms under
Section 30
of the new Act.
Thus, the law on the award, as governed by the new Act,
is other way about of the pre-existing law; it mandates that
the award  should state	 the reasons upon which it is based.
In other  words, unless	 (a) the parties have agreed that no
reasons are  to be  given or  (b) the  award is	 an arbitral
award on  agreed terms	under
Section 30
of the new Act, the
award should  state the	 reasons in support of determination
of the liability/non-liability. Thereby, legislature has not
accepted  the	ratio  of  the	Constitution  Bench  in	 the
Chokhamal Contractor's	case that  the award,  being in	 the
private law  field, need  not be a speaking award even where
the award  relates to  the contact  of	private	 parties  or
between	 person	  and  the   Government	 or   public  sector
undertakings. The principle is the same, namely the award is
governed by
Section 31(3)
.
We have  set out  the relevant  portions of  the award.
From a	reading thereof, it is clear that the arbitrator had
considered the	claims made  on the  basis of escalation and
damages, in  a non-speaking award of the disputes consisting
of  arbitrable	and  non-arbitrable  claims.  He  awarded  a
lumpsum amount	of  Rs.	 70,83,793/-.  It  is  difficult  to
discern as  to what  extent the	 umpire had  considered	 the
admissible and	inadmissible claims  which he  adjudged.  In
such a	situation, it  is not  possible to  discern to	what
extent he  had exercised  his jurisdiction  vis-a-vis of the
admissible claims  and disallowed the non-arbitrable claims.
So, it	is not	clear whether  he  exercised  his  authority
either beyond  his jurisdiction or in abdication thereof. In
either case,  it is  an	 error	of  jurisdiction,  the	very
foundation for his decision.
It is  well settled  that in the matter of challenge to
the award  there are  two distinct  and	 different  grounds,
viz., that  there is  an error	apparent on  the face of the
record	and   that   the   arbitrator	has   exceeded	 his
jurisdiction. In  the latter  case, the	 court can look into
the arbitration	 agreement but under the former it cannot do
so unless  agreement but  under the  former it	cannot do so
unless the agreement was incorporated or cited in  the award
or evidence  was made  part of the agreement. In the case of
jurisdictional error,  there is	 no embargo  on the power of
the court  to  admit  the  contract  into  evidence  and  to
consider  whether   or	not  the  umpire  had  exceeded	 the
jurisdiction because  the nature of the dispute is something
which has  to be  determined, outside  the  award,  whatever
might be said about it in the award or by the arbitrator. In
the case  of non-speaking award, it is not open to the court
to go  into the	 merits. Only  in a speaking award the court
can look  into the  reasoning in the award and correct wrong
proposition of	law or	error of law. It is not open to	 the
court to  probe the  mental process  of the  arbitrator	 and
speculate,  when   no  reasons	have  been  given    by	 the
arbitrator, as	to what impelled the arbitrator to arrive at
his conclusion.	 But in	 the  later  case  the	court,	with
reference to the terms of the contract/arbitrator/umpire has
exceeded his  jurisdiction in  awarding or refusing to award
the sum of money awarded or omitted a consolidated lumpsum.
In fact,  in
G.S.	Atwal &	 Co.
's case,  having noticed
that the  arbitrator had  exceeded his jurisdiction to grant
amount de  hors the  terms of  the contract and being a non-
speaking award, the court was unable to speculate as to what
extent the  award was  within the  terms of  the contract or
claims made  and to  what extent  the amount  awarded was in
respect of non-arbitrable dispute. Accordingly, the order of
the civil  court was set aside reversing the judgment of the
Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court.
Thus considered,  we hold	that the  arbitrator, having
been  invested	 with  the   jurisdiction  to	decide	 the
arbitrability of  certain claims,  has	committed  error  of
jurisdiction in	 not considering  the arbitrability  of	 the
claims and  passed a  non-speaking award,  awarding a sum of
Rs. 70.83  lakhs and odd. It is difficult to ascertain as to
what extent he has awarded the claims within the contract or
the claims  outside the	 contract, of  a total	claim of Rs.
2.10 crores.  Under those  circumstances, we are constrained
to hold that it is difficult to give acceptance to the award
made by	 the umpire  as upheld by the courts below. Equally,
we find	 it difficult to accept the contention that out of a
claim of  Rs. 2.10  crores, only  a sum of Rs. 70.83 and odd
was awarded.  So, it  is not  a fit case for interference on
the basis  of the  mere fact  that a  lesser  sum  than	 was
claimed has  been awarded. An illegal award cannot be upheld
to be valid or within jurisdiction.
The question then is : what procedure should be adopted
in this	 behalf? The  contention of Shri Poti is that it may
be remitted  to the  umpire for	 fresh consideration. On the
other hand, the contention of Shri V.R. Reddy is that in the
event of the conclusion that the arbitrator has exceeded his
jurisdiction, the  entire award	 would become invalid and it
has to	be set	at naught. Having given due consideration to
the respective	contentions, we find force in the contention
of Mr.	V.R. Reddy.  Mr. Poti  has stated  that though it is
found that  the award  is not valid in law, the party cannot
be made	 to suffer on account of the illegality committed by
the umpire.  We find  no force	in the	contention.  Once  a
finding recorded  that the  umpire/arbitrator has  committed
error of  jurisdiction, as  stated earlier,  two course	 are
open, viz.,  either to	remit the  award to  the umpire	 for
reconsideration or  to set aside the award in toto. We think
that the latter course would be appropriate in the facts and
circumstances in this case.
Accordingly, we  allow the	 appeals set aside the award
of the	arbitrator and	leave the  parties to bear their own
costs. If there are no outstanding dues recoverable from the
respondents, the  security deposit  and	 bank  guarantee  is
required to be refunded to the respondent.