[Cites
4
, Cited by
31
]
Supreme Court of India
Upper Ganges Sugar Mills Ltd. Etc vs Commissioner Of Income Tax,Calcutta on 4 August, 1997
Equivalent citations: AIR 1997 SUPREME COURT 3121, 1997 (6) SCC 602, 1997 AIR SCW 3166, 1997 (5) SCALE 338, (1997) 93 TAXMAN 645, (1997) 7 JT 208 (SC), 1997 (7) JT 208, 1998 (1) UPTC 489, (1997) 140 TAXATION 550, (1997) 227 ITR 578, (1997) 43 KANTLJ(TRIB) 222, (1997) 27 CORLA 38, (1997) 7 SUPREME 3, (1997) 141 CURTAXREP 384, (1997) 5 SCALE 338
Author:
S.P.Bharucha
Bench:
S.P. Bharucha
,
V.N. Khare
PETITIONER:
UPPER GANGES SUGAR MILLS LTD. ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX,CALCUTTA

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	04/08/1997

BENCH:
S.P. BHARUCHA, V.N. KHARE




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
THE 4TH DAY OF AUGUST, 1997
Present;
Honible Mr. Justice S.P.Bharucha
	       Hon'ble Mr. Justice V.N.Khare
H.N.Salve, Sr.Adv., Shri Narain, K V.Viswandhan,
D.Singh	 and   Suman  J.Khaitan,  Advs.	 with  him  for	 the
appellants.
Ranbir Chandra and B.K.Prasad, Advs. for the Respondent
		      J U D G M E N T
     The following Judgment of the Court was delivered :
WITH
		(Civil Appeal No. 10736/95)
		      J U D G M E N T
S.P.BHARUCHA. J.
A Division	 Bench of  the Calcutta	 High Court answered
the following  question in the negative and in favour of the
Revenue :
"Whether on  the facts  and in  the
     circumstances  of	 the  case   the
     Appellate Tribunal was justified in
     holding  that   the  assesses   was
     entitled  to   the	  relief   under
     section 80G  on the  donations paid
     to Vishwa Mangal Trust?"
The  assesses   is	 in   appeal  by
     certificate.
We	 are   concerned  in   the  first  appeal  with	 the
Assessment Year	 1973-74, the  relevant previous year having
ended on  30th June, 1972.  The assesses had made a donation
of RS.	25,000/- to  the Vishwa	 mangal	 Trust	(hereinafter
called 'the Trust').  The assessee claimed a deduction under
Section 80G  in respect	 of that  donation.   The claim	 was
allowed by  the Income	Tax Officer  on 27th December, 1976.
The assessment	was then  re-opened under
Section 147(b)
of
the Income Tax Act and on 30th December, 1977 the Income Tax
Officer disallowed  the	 claim.	   The	Appellant  Assistant
Commissioner dismissed	the assessee's	appeal.	  The Income
Tax Appellate  Tribunal allowed	 the appeal preferred by the
assessee  against  the	order  of  the	Appellate  Assistant
Commissioner.	Thereafter it  referred the question set out
above to  the High  Court.  The High Court reversed the view
of the Tribunal.
Much the  same thing  happened in a subsequent year and
the High Court followed its said judgment.
Section 80G
sets out  the deductions  to be  made,  in
accordance with	 and subject to its provisions, in computing
the total  income of  an assessee in respect of donations to
certain funds,	charitable institutions, etc.  It applies by
reason of  sub-section (5) thereof, to any other fund or any
institution  to	  which	 the  section  applies	(sub-section
(2)(a)(iv)) if	it is established in India "for a charitable
purpose" and  fulfils the condition, inter alia, that it "is
not expressed  to be  for  the	benefit	 of  any  particular
religious community  or caste".	  Explanation  3 states, "In
this Section,  'charitable purpose'  does  not	include	 any
purpose the  whole or substantially the whole of which is of
a religious nature".
The objects  of the  Trust are set out in clause (2) of
the trust deed.	 They are :
"2(a)  To	establish,  support  and
     maintain	  schools,     colleges,
     libraries, reading	 rooms,	 Lecture
     Halls, Public  Museums and to grant
     aids  to,	 support  and	maintain
     persons and  institutions	for  the
     promotion of  science or literature
     or Fine Arts or diffusion of useful
     knowledge or galleries of paintings
     and   other   works   of	art   or
     collection	 of   natural	history,
     economic and  scientific inventions
     and designs.
(b) To  establish and  maintain  or
     grant  aid	 to  Hospitals,	 Medical
     Schools   or    Colleges,	 Nursing
     Institutions   and	   such	   other
     institutions.
(c) To grant relief on the occasion
     of earthquakes and floods and other
     occasions of  calamities of similar
     nature  of	 to  give  donations  to
     other institutions or persons doing
     such relief works.
(d)  To   establish  and	maintain
     studentships, give	 prizes	 and  to
     grant aid to poor students.
(e) To  establish	Boarding  Houses
     and Hostels for students.
(f) To promote physical culture and
     education and to assist and promote
     sports and	 games and  generally to
     do all  acts for the improvement of
     general   health	 and	physical
     development.
(g) To  establish and  maintain and
     to	  grant	 aid   to  centres   for
     diffusion	 of   Indian   Art   and
     Culture.
(h) To  establish, maintain  and to
     grant and/or  aid to  public places
     of worship and prayer halls.
(i)  To   establish,  support   and
     maintain and/or  to  grant	 aid  to
     alms houses  and/or to  give relief
     to the poor and needy persons.
(j)  To   establish,  support   and
     maintain and/or  to  grant	 aid  to
     institutions for uplift of backward
     and depressed  classes irrespective
     of caste, creed or nationality."
(Emphasis supplied.)
     Clause (3)	 of the trust deed reads
     thus :
"The Trustees  shall from	time  to
     time collect funds which and/or the
     income thereof will be utilised for
     the   objects   aforesaid.	     All
     investments and  properties of  the
     Trust for	the time  being held  by
     the   Trustees    is    hereinafter
     referred to as the Trust Funds."
The High  Court did  not accept the assessee's argument
that the  establishment or  maintenance of  prayer-halls was
not a  religious object.  The High Court also did not accept
the assessee's	argument that  the object  of clause 2(h) of
the trust  deed should	not be	considered to be a religious
object because	the trustees  were not	empowered to  set up
places of worship and prayer halls of a particular community
or religion;   it took the view that even if a trust was set
up for the advancement of all the religions in the world, it
would be  a trust  of a	 religious nature.   The  High Court
rejected the  assessee's argument that the Trust was not set
up wholly  or substantially  for a  religious purpose; on of
the purposes, it said, was "to establish, maintain and grant
aid to public places of worship and prayer halls", which was
an entirely religious purpose.
Section 80G
applies to donations to any institution or
fund  established   in	India  "or  a  charitable  purpose".
"Charitable purpose,  for the  purposes of the section, does
not include any purpose the whole or substantially the whole
of which  is of	 a religious  nature".	(Emphasis supplied.)
Explanation 3,	which uses  this phraseology,  takes note of
the fact  that an  institution or  funds established  for  a
charitable prupose may have a number of objects.  If any one
of these  objects is  wholly, or  substantially wholly, of a
religious character,  the institution or funds falls outside
the scope  of
section  80G
a  donation to it does not secure
the advantage of the deduction that it gives.
The judgment  of this  Court in
Additional Commissioner
of Income-Tax, Gujarat vs. Surat Art Silk Cloth Manufactures
Association
, 121  I.T.R. 1, cited by learned counsel for the
assessee, was  delivered with  reference to the true meaning
of the	words "not involving the carrying on of any activity
for profit"  occurring at  the	end  of	 the  definition  of
"charitable purposes"  in
Section  2(15)
of  the Income	 Tax
Act.   This Court  said that  if  the  primary	or  dominant
purpose of the Trust was charitable, another object which by
itself may  not be charitable but which was merely ancillary
or incidental  to the  primary or dominant purpose would not
prevent the  trust or  the institution	from being  a  valid
charity.   The judgment	 is of	no assistance  in construing
Explanation 3 of
Section 80G
.
To	 reiterate,  explanation  3  does  not	require	 the
ascertainment of  whether the  whole  or  substantially	 the
whole of the institution or fund's charitable