[Cites
18
, Cited by
89
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Orissa vs B.N. Agarwalla Etc on 29 January, 1997
Equivalent citations: AIR 1997 SUPREME COURT 925, 1997 (10) SCC 197, 1997 AIR SCW 1942, (1997) 21 ALLCRIR 549, 1997 CRILR(SC&MP) 391, (1997) 1 CURCRIR 292, (1997) 3 RECCRIR 256, (1997) 2 ALLCRILR 396, (1997) 2 EASTCRIC 140, (1997) 34 ALLCRIC 528, (1997) 1 MADLW(CRI) 342, (1997) 2 SCALE 391, (1997) 3 SUPREME 63, 1997 ADSC 3 92, 1997 UP CRIR 230, 1997 SCC (CRI) 811, 1997 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 391, (1997) SCCRIR 703, (1997) 3 JT 226 (SC), (1997) 2 SCR 529 (SC), (1997) 1 CRIMES 264
Bench:
A.M. Ahmadi
,
S.P. Bharucha
,
B.N. Kirpal
PETITIONER:
STATE OF ORISSA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
B.N. AGARWALLA ETC.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	29/01/1997

BENCH:
A.M. AHMADI, S.P. BHARUCHA, B.N. KIRPAL




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
WITH
		CIVIL APPEAL NO. 472 OF 1997
	    (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 3630/87)
			    WITH
	    CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 9234, 9233 OF 1994
		      J U D G M E N T
KIRPAL, J.
The main  question which  arises for  consideration  in
these cases  relates to the power of the Arbitrator to award
interest.
The contention on behalf of the appellants against whom
interest has  been awarded  by the arbitrators, is that this
Court held  in
EXECUTIVE  ENGINEER (IRRIGATION) VS. ABHADUTA
JENA
(1988)  1 SCC  418 that  the arbitrator has no power to
award interest	in respect  of pre  reference period  in the
absence of the claimant having a right under the contract or
a provision  of substantive  law, to  get interest.
On	 the
other  hand,   it  is	the  submission	 on  behalf  of	 the
claimants/respondents that  the aforesaid  decision  in	 the
case of
Abhaduta Jena
(supra
)
has  been  overruled
by  a
Constitution Bench  of this  Court in the case of
SECRETARY,
IRRIGATION DEPARTMENT  GOVERNMENT OF  ORISSA AND  OTHERS VS.
G.C.ROY
. (1992)	 1 SCC	508 and	 it has	 been held  that the
arbitrator could  award pre  reference,	 pendente  lite	 and
future interest.
Before dealing  with the  facts of each case it will be
appropriate to	examine the relevant decisions of this Court
in order to determine the correct legal position with regard
to the	jurisdiction of	 the arbitrator to award interest in
respect of  the periods	 for which  interest can  be awarded
namely- (i)  for the  period commencing	 from  the  date  of
dispute till the date Arbitrator entered upon the reference,
or the	pre-reference period; (ii) for the period commencing
from the date the Arbitrator entered upon reference till the
date of making the award (pendente lite interest) and; (iii)
for the	 period commencing  from the  date of  making of the
award till  the date the award is made the rule of the court
or till the date of realisation, or the post award interest.
The question  with regard to power of the Arbitrator to
award interest	was considered at great length by this Court
in
ABHADUTA  JENA'S CASE
(SUPRA). Two questions which arose
for consideration  of the  Court  in  Abhaduta	Jena's	case
(supra) were  (i) the  power  of  the  Arbitrator  to  award
interest for the period prior to his entering upon reference
and; (ii)  the power of the Arbitrator to award interest for
the period the dispute remained pending before him.
Chinnappa Reddy.J..  speaking for the Court, considered
all the	 earlier decisions  of this  Court including that of
SETH THAWARDAS	PHERUMAL VS. UNION OF INDIA
, (1955) 2 SCR 48
and, with  regard to  pendente lite interest, concluded that
as the	arbitrator was	not a  court within  the meaning  of
Section 34
of Code  of Civil Procedure, therefore, he could
not award  pendente lite  interest, with  regard to claim of
interest for  the period  before the  reference, it was held
that the  arbitrator  could  not  award	 interest  for	pre-
reference  period   in	cases	which  arose  prior  to	 the
commencement of	 the
Interest  Act
. 1978 unless the claimant
had a substantive right to get interest under the terms of a
contract or under a provision of any law.
In coming	to this	 conclusion with  regard to interest
for pre-reference period, it was observed as follows:
"It is  important to notice at this
     stage that both the
Interest Act
of
     1839 and  the
Interest  Act
of 1978
     provide for  the award  of interest
     up to  the date  of the institution
     of	 the  proceedings.  Neither  the
     Interest  Act   of	 1839	nor  the
Interest Act
of 1978  provides for
     the   award    of	 pendente   lite
     interest. We  must	 look  elsewhere
     for the  law relating  to the award
     of interest pendente lite. This, we
     find, provided for in Section 34 of
     the Civil	Procedure  Code	 in  the
     case   of	 courts.   Section   34,
     however, applied to arbitrations in
     suit for  the  simple  reason  that
     where  a	matter	is  referred  to
     arbitration   in	 a   suit,   the
     arbitrator will have all the powers
     of	 the   court  in   deciding  the
     dispute.  Section	 34   does   not
     otherwise apply  to arbitrations as
     arbitrators are  not courts  within
     the meaning  of  Section  34  Civil
     Procedure Code. Again, we must look
     elsewhere to  discover the right of
     the arbitrator  to	 award	interest
     before  the   institution	of   the
     proceedings.  in  cases  where  the
     proceedings  had  concluded  before
     the commencement  of  the
Interest
     Act
of   1978.  While   under  the
Interest Act
of 1978 the expression
     `court' was  defined to  include an
     arbitrator, under	the
Interest Act
of 1839  it was not so defined. The
     result  is	  that	while  in  cases
     arising after  the commencement  of
Interest Act
of 1978 an arbitrator
     has the  same power as the court to
     award interest  up to  the date  of
     institution of  the proceedings, in
     cases  which  arose  prior	 to  the
     commencement of  the 1978	Act  the
     arbitrator has  no such power under
     the
Interest  Act
of  1839. It  is,
     therefore, necessary,  as we  said,
     to look  elsewhere for the power of
     the arbitrator to award interest up
     to the  date of  institution of the
     proceedings. Since	 the  arbitrator
     is required  to conduct himself and
     make the  award in	 accordance with
     law we must look to the substantive
     law for the power of the arbitrator
     to	 award	 interest   before   the
     commencement of the proceedings. If
     the agreement  between the	 parties
     entitles the  arbitrator  to  award
     interest no further question arises
     and  the	arbitrator   may   award
     interest. Similarly  if there  is a
     usage of  trade having the force of
     law  the	arbitrator   may   aware
     interest. Again  if there	are  any
     other    provisions     for     the
     substantive law  enabling the award
     of	 interest   the	 arbitrator  may
     award  interest.	By  way	  of  an
     illustration,   we	   may	 mention
Section  80
of	the   Negotiable
     Instruments Act  as a  provision of
     the substantive law under which the
     court may	award interest even in a
     case where	 no rate  of interest is
     specified in the promissory note or
     bill or exchange. We may also refer
Section 61(2)
of the Sale of Goods
     Act which provides for the award of
     interest to the seller or the buyer
     as the  case may  be under	 certain
     circumstances  in	suits  filed  by
     them.  We	 may  further  cite  the
     instance of  the non-performance of
     a contract	 of which  equity  could
     give specific  performance	 and  to
     award interest.  We may also cite a
     case where	 one of	 the parties  is
     forced to	pay interest  to a third
     party,   say   on	 an   overdraft,
     consequent on  the failure	 of  the
     other party  to  the  contract  not
     fulfilling the obligation of paying
     the amount	 due to	 them. In such a
     case also	equity	may  compel  the
     payment  of   interest.   Loss   of
     interest in  the place of the right
     to	 remain	 in  possession	 may  be
     rightfully claimed in equity by the
     owner of  a property  who has  been
     dispossessed from it."
The  decision  in	Jena's	case  (supra)  came  up	 for
consideration before  this Court in the case of GUJARAT W.S.
& S.B.	VS. UNIQUE  ERECTORS (GUJARAT) (P) LTD., AIR 1989 SC
973. In	 that case, the interest had been awarded in respect
of all the three periods namely; (i) from 6.8.1981, when the
Interest Act,  1978
came  into force, to 21.8.1984, the date
when reference	was  made  to  the  arbitration;  (ii)	from
22.8.1984 to 19.7.1985 pendente lite; and (iii) 19.7.1985 to
17.6.1986 (date	 of award  to  date  of	 decree).
Following
Jena
's case  (supra), it was held that the interest pendants
lite could  not be  awarded but with regard to pre-reference
interest, it was held that "since in this case the reference
to arbitration	was  made  after  the  commencement  of	 the
Interest Act,  1978
, the arbitrator under
Section 3(1)(a)
of
the said  Act was  entitled to	award interest from 6.8.1981
till 12.8.1984	in view of this Court's decision in
Abhaduta
Jena
's case".  This Court  also held  that  even  though  in
Abhaduta Jena's	 case (supra),	granting of interest for the
period from  the date  of  award  had  not  been  considered
nevertheless interest  should be  allowed for that period on
the principle  that this Court could, once proceedings under
Sections 15
to
17
of the  Arbitration Act  are  initiated,
grant interest	pending the  litigation before	it i.e. from
the date of award to the date of decree.
We may  now consider  the decision	 of the Constitution
Bench in
SECRETARY, IRRIGATION	 DEPARTMENT,  GOVERNMENT  OF
ORISSA AND  OTHERS VS.	G.C. ROY
,  (1992)  1  SCC  508.
The
contention of  the  counsels  appearing	 on  behalf  of	 the
respondents is	that the  decision in  Abhaduta Jena's	case
(supra) was  overruled in  its entirety	 and it	 was held in
G.C. Roy
's  case (supra)  that the  arbitrator	could  award
interest for  all the above-mentioned three periods, namely;
pre-reference, pendente	 lite and  post-award.
On  the other
hand, it  has been  submitted by  the  learned	counsels  on
behalf of  the appellants  that
G.C.  Roy
's  case  was	 not
concerned with	the interest  for the  period prior  to	 the
making of  the reference  and it  overruled the	 decision in
Jena
's case  (supra) only  insofar as award of pendente lite
interest was  concerned.
It  was submitted that the decision
of
Abhaduta  Jena
's case  (supra),  of	the  arbitrator	 not
having the  jurisdiction to  award  pre-reference  interest,
continues to  hold the field and
G.C. Roy
's case (supra) has
not ruled to the contrary in this regard.
A careful	reading of  G.C. Roy's	case (supra) clearly
shows that,  insofar as award of interest is concerned, this
Court was  only required  to consider whether the arbitrator
had jurisdiction to award pendente lite interest. This is so
stated in  the judgment	 at more places than one. Apart from
noting that  the appellants  had challenged  the validity of
the award  on two grounds, one of which was that "arbitrator
had no jurisdiction to award pendente lite interest", it was
noted that  the	 case  had  been  referred  by	order  dated
15.3.1991 by the Division Bench to the Constitution Bench as
"the learned Judges were of the view that the correctness of
the view  taken	 by  this  Court  in  Abhaduta	Jena's	case
(supra), insofar  as it held that arbitrator has no power to
award pendente	lite interest,	required consideration	by a
larger	Bench".	 This  Court,  accordingly,  considered	 the
various decisions  which had  been referred  to by Chinnappa
Reddy,	J.   in
Abhaduta   Jena
's  case  (supra)  and	also
considered other  decisions and	 at page 532 summarised it's
decision as follows:
"The question still remains whether
     arbitrator has  the power	to award
     interest pendente	lite, and  if so
     on	  what	  principle.   We   must
     reiterate that  we are dealing with
     the situation  where the  agreement
     does not  provide for grant of such
     interest nor  does it prohibit such
     grant.  In	  other	 words,	 we  are
     dealing  with   a	case  where  the
     agreement is  silent as to award of
     interest.	On   a	 conspectus   of
     aforementioned    decisions,    the
     following principles emerge:
(i) A person deprived of the use of
     money to  which he	 is legitimately
     entitled  has   a	 right	 to   be
     compensated  for  the  deprivation,
     call it  by any  name.  It	 may  be
     called  interest,	compensation  or
     damages. This  basic  consideration
     is as  valid  for	the  period  the
     disputes  is   pending  before  the
     arbitrator as  it is for the period
     prior to  the  arbitrator	entering
     upon the  reference.  This	 is  the
     principle	of   Section  34,  Civil
     Procedure	Code  and  there  is  no
     reason   or   principle   to   hold
     otherwise	 in    the    case    of
     arbitrator.
(ii)   An	  arbitrator	is    an
     alternative from  (sic  forum)  for
     resolution	 of   disputes	 arising
     between the parties. If so, he must
     have the  power to	 decide all  the
     disputes  or   differences	 arising
     between   the   parties.	If   the
     arbitrator has  no power  to  award
     interest pendente	lite, the  party
     claiming it  could have to approach
     the court	for that  purpose,  even
     though   he   may	 have	obtained
     satisfaction in  respect  of  other
     claims from  the  arbitrator.  This
     would  lead   to  multiplicity   of
     proceedings.
(iii) An arbitrator is the creature
     of an  agreement. It is open to the
     parties to	 confer	 upon  him  such
     powers and prescribe such procedure
     for him  to follow,  as they  think
     fit,  so	long  as  they	are  not
     opposed to	 law.  (The  proviso  to
     Section  41   and
Section	  3
of
     Arbitration  Act	illustrate  this
     point). All the same, the agreement
     must be in conformity with law. The
     arbitrator must  also act	and make
     his award	in accordance  with  the
     general law  of the  land	and  the
     agreement.
(iv) Over	the years,  the	 English
     and the Indian Courts have acted on
     the  assumption   that  where   the
     agreement does  not prohibit  and a
     party  to	the  reference	makes  a
     claim for	interest, the arbitrator
     must  have	  the  power   to  award
     interest pendente	lite.  Thawardas
     has not  been followed in the later
     decisions of  this	 Court.	 It  has
     been explained and distinguished on
     the basis	that
in	 that case
there
     was no  claim for interest but only
     a claim  for unliquidated	damages.
It has  been said	repeatedly  that
     observations in
the said	judgment
were not  intended to  lay down any
     such absolute  or universal rule as
     they   appear    to,    on	   first
     impression.
Until	Jena
case almost
     all the  courts in	 the country had
     upheld the	 power of the arbitrator
     to award  interest	 pendente  lite.
Continuity	 and   certainty  is   a
     highly desirable feature of law.
(v) Interest pendente lite is not a
     matter  of	 substantite  law,  like
     interest for the period anterior to
     reference	(pre-reference	period).
For doing	complete justice between
     the parties,  such power has always
     been inferred."
Applying  the   aforesaid	principles   the  conclusion
arrived at was as follows:
"Where the	 agreement  between  the
     parties does  not prohibit grant of
     interest and  where a  party claims
     interest and  that	 dispute  (along
     with the  claim of principal amount
     or independently)	is  referred  to
     the arbitrator,  he shall	have the
     power to  award  interest	pendente
     lite. This	 is for	 the reason that
     in such  a case it must be presumed
     that interest  was an  implied term
     of	 the   agreement   between   the
     parties  and   therefore  when  the
     parties refer  all their disputes -
     or refer the dispute as to interest
     as such  - to  the	 arbitrator,  he
     shall  have   the	power  to  award
     interest. This  does not  mean that
     in every case the arbitrator should
     necessarily award interest pendente
     lite. It  is a  matter  within  his
     discretion to  be exercised  in the
     light  of	 all   the   facts   and
     circumstances of  the case, keeping
     the ends of justice in view."
Finally it was observed that "for the reasons aforesaid
we must	 hold that  the decision  in
Jena
's  case  (supra),
insofar as it runs counter to the above proposition, did not
lay down the correct law".
The perusal  of the  aforesaid passages  clearly  shows
that
Abhaduta  Jena
's case  (supra) was not overruled in its
entirety by  the decision  in
G.C. Roy
's case (supra). It is
only with regard to the award of pendente lite interest that
the Constitution  Bench	 came  to  a  conclusion  which	 was
contrary to  the one  arrived at  in  Abhaduta	Jena's	case
(supra).
The  decision in
Abhaduta Jena
's case (supra) with
regard to award of interest for pre reference period was not
overruled in
G.C. Roy
's case (supra).
More recent  decisions of this Court also indicate that
G.C. Roy
's  case (supra) has been understood and followed as
having overruled
Abhaduta Jena
's  case	 (supra)  only	with
regard to  pendente lite interest and not with regard to pre
reference interest. We may now refer to these decisions.
In HINDUSTAN  CONSTRUCTION CO. LTD. VS. STATE OF J & K,
(1992) 4 SCC 217, the question which arose for consideration
was whether  the arbitrator  was competent to award interest
for the	 period from  the date	of the	award to the date of
payment.
It  was in  that connection that reference was made
to
G.C. Roy
's case (supra) and it was observed as follows:
"The question  of interest	 can  be
     easily disposed of as it is covered
     by recent	decisions of this Court.
     It is  sufficient to  refer to  the
     latest decision  of  a  five  Judge
     Bench of  this Court  in Secretary.
Irrigation	 Department,   Govt.  of
     Orissa V. G.C. Roy
. Though
the said
     decision
deals  with the  power  of
     the arbitrator  to	 award	interest
     pendente lite, the principle of the
     decision makes  it clear  that  the
     arbitrator is  competent  to  award
     interest for  the period commencing
     with the  date of award to the date
     of decree	or date	 of realisation,
     whichever is  earlier. This is also
     quite logical  for, while	award of
     interest for the period prior to an
     arbitrator	  entering    upon   the
     reference	 is    a    matter    of
     substantive  law,	 the  grant   of
     interest for  the post-award period
     is a matter of procedure."
Claim for	interest for pre-reference period again came
up for	consideration before  this Court  in
JUGAL  KISHORE
PRABHATILAL SHARMA  AND OTHERS	VS.  VIJAYENDRA	 PRABHATILAL
SHARMA AND  ANOTHER
, (1993)  1 SCC  114. It was contended
in
that case
that the  arbitrator could not award interest for
pre-reference period.  While Ranganathan,  J. with  whom  V.
Ramaswamy, J.  concurred, only	observed that "there is some
force in  this contention" but B.P. Jeevan Reddy, J. who was
one of	the Members  of the  Bench which  decided G.C. Roy's
case (supra),  in his  concurring judgment  dealt with	this
question at  some length.
After referring  to some  of	 the
observations in	 the judgment  of the  Constitution Bench in
G.C. Roy
's  case (supra),  it was  observed by	B.P.  Jeevan
Reddy, J. at page 139 as follows;
"In the circumstances. It would not
     be correct to read the first of the
     five principles  set out in para 43
     as overruling  Jena insofar  as  it
     dealt with	 the arbitrator's  power
     to	 award	interest  for  the  pre-
reference period. Principle No. (i)
     should be read along with principle
     No.  (v)	wherein	 it  is	 clearly
     stated that  the interest	for  the
     period anterior  to  the  reference
     (pre-reference period)  is a matter
     of substantive  law unlike interest
     pendente lite.  The  conclusion  in
     para 44  again deals  only with the
     power of  the arbitrator  to  award
     interest  pendente	  lite.	 It  is,
     therefore, not  right to  read
the
     said decision
as	overruling  Jena
     insofar as	 it dealt with the power
     of the arbitrator to award interest
     for the pre-reference period."
Again in
STATE OF	 ORISSA VS.  LAL CHAND	KAPANI
, 1994
SUPP. (1)  SCC 68  after referring to the decision in Jena's
and G.C.  Roy's cases (supra), it was observed at page 69 as
under:
"It is  thus clear	 that before the
     1978
Interest  Act
came  into force
     there was	no provision under which
     the interest  for the pre-reference
     period could  be granted.	In  this
     case, the	Supreme Court  also held
     that  the	interest  pendente  lite
     i.e. from the date for reference to
     the  date	 of   the   award,   the
     claimants would  not be entitled to
     the  same	 for  the   reason  that
     arbitrator is  not a  court  within
     the meaning of
Section 34
CPC since
     the reference was not by a court in
     a pending suit. This view regarding
     the interest  pendente lite however
     has  been	reversed  in
Secretary,
     Irrigation	 Department,  Government
     of Orissa	V. G.C.	 Roy,  Regarding
the  interest   during   the   pre-
reference period, the view taken in
Abhaduta	Jena
case   is    not
     disturbed. Therefore,  the interest
     during the pre-reference period can
     be awarded	 provided on the date of
     the award, 1978
Interest Act
was in
     force."
In
SUDHIR	BROTHERS VS. DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY AND
ANOTHER
, (1996)	 1 SCC	32,  the  question  with  regard  to
awarding interest  for pre-reference  period, but  in a case
arising after  the commencement	 of
Interest Act
.
1978, came
up for	consideration and the legal position, emanating from
earlier decisions  of this  Court including  G.C.Roy's	case
(
supra) and  Jena
's  case  (supra),  was  stated  to  be  as
follows:
"The Constitution Bench in
G.C. Roy
case was  dealing with the question
     relating to  the award  of interest
     pendente  lite  and  not  with  the
     question of  the award  of interest
     for the pre-reference period and it
     was  in   that  context   that  the
     Constitution Bench	 held  that  the
     view expressed  in
Jena
case  with
     regard to	award of  pendente  lite
     interest could  not be said to have
     laid down good law The Constitution
     Bench  did	  not  deal   with   the
     question of  pre-reference interest
     in	  cases	   coming   after    the
     enforcement of  the
Interest  Act,
     1978
,  which  came	 in  force  from
     19.8.1981.
In
G.C. Roy
case itself,
     it is  stated that the reference to
     the  Constitution	Bench  had  been
     necessitated only	for deciding the
     question whether  the  decision  in
Jena
case was correct insofar as it
     held that	arbitrator had	no power
     to award  interest pendent lite.
On
     a doubt  being raised  whether  the
     Constitution Bench in
G.C. Roy
case
     had overruled  the law
laid down in
Jena
Case	relating to the power of
     the arbitrator  to	 award	interest
     for the pre-reference period in the
     post-
Interest Act,	 1978
era,  the
     position was  clarified by a three-
     Judge  Bench   in
Jugal	 Kishore
     Prabhatilal  Sharma  V.  Vijayendra
     Prabhatilal Sharma
,  wherein it was
     specifically held that the decision
     in
G.C. Roy
case was concerned only
     with the  power  of  arbitrator  to
     award pendente lite and that it was
     not concerned  with  his  power  to
     award   interest	for   the   pre-
reference period."
In view  of the aforesaid decisions there can bow be no
doubt with  regard to  the jurisdiction of the arbitrator to
grant interest.	 The principles	 which can now be said to be
well-settled are that the arbitrator has the jurisdiction to
aware pre-reference  interest in cases which arose after the
interest Act,  1978 has	 become applicable.  with regard  to
those cases  pertaining to period prior to the applicability
of the interest Act. 1978, in the absence of any substantive
law, contract  or usage,  the arbitrator has no jurisdiction
to  award   interest.  For   the  period  during  which	 the
arbitration proceedings were pending in view of the decision
in G.C.	 Roy's	case  (supra)  and  Hindustan  Constructions
Limited Case  (supra), the arbitrator has the power to award
interest. The  power of the arbitrator to award interest for
the post  award period	also exists and this aspect has been
considered in  the discussion  relating to  Civil Appeal No.
9234 of 1994 in the later part of this judgment.
Keeping the  aforesaid principles	in mind,  we may now
refer to the facts in each case.
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9233 OF 1994
     In Civil  Appeal No.  9233 of  1994, the  appellant had
invited tenders	 for construction  of certain  quarters. The
respondent Durga  Parshad had submitted his tender which was
accepted. The  work was	 completed by  him on  31.5.1977. As
certain differences  had arisen	 between the  parties. Durga
Parshad, the  respondent herein,  requested the appellant to
make a	reference  of  the  disputes  to  an  arbitrator  as
provided by  the agreement.  AS no reference was made, Durga
Parshad	 filed	an  application	 under
Section	 20
of	 the
Arbitration Act	 whereupon the Court appointed an arbitrator
as per	the terms  of the agreement and disputes between the
parties were referred to the said arbitrator.
The  arbitrator   after   hearing	 the   parties	 and
considering the	 evidence adduced  before him made his award
whereby the  appellant was held to be liable to pay a sum or
RS. 2.73.130.82/-  to the  respondent  Durga  Parshad.	This
arbitrator further held that the appellant was liable to pay
simple interest @ 15% per annum from 31.8.1977 till the gate
of payment  on the  aforesaid amount  or the date of decree,
whichever is later.
On the  award being  filed in  the court, the appellant
filed  objections.   One  of  the  objection  was  that	 the
arbitrator had	awarded	 interest  but	there  was  a  clear
stipulation in the agreement that no interest was payable on
the amount withheld under the agreement. The objections were
not accepted  and with	regard to the claim of interest, the
trial court held that this was not a case where interest was
awarded on  any amount having been witheld. It was, however,
found that  the claim  for  interest  was  referred  to	 the
arbitrator and, therefore, the award of interest was held to
be valid.
In the  appeal before the High Court, with reference to
the award  of interest,	 the contention	 which was raised on
behalf of  the appellant  was that  the	 arbitrator  had  no
jurisdiction to	 award interest for the pre-reference period
and that  the rate  or interest	 granted was  excessive.
In
support of  this  contention,  reliance	 was  place  on	 the
decision of  this Court	 in the case of
Abhaduta Jena
's case
(supra).
The  High Court,  by  its  judgment  under  appeal,
relied upon the decision of this Court in the case of Unique
Erectors case  (supra)	and  came  to  the  conclusion	that
interest  for	the  period   prior  to	 initiation  of	 the
proceedings could  be granted in cases in which reference to
arbitration was	 made after the commencement of the
Interest
Act, 1978
.  The High  Court, therefore, restricted the grant
or  interest   for  the	 pre-reference	period	only  w.e.f.
19.8.1981, on  which date  the
Interest	 Act, 1978
had come
into force.  The Judgment  and decree  of trial	 court	was,
accordingly, modified  with the	 result that  the respondent
Durga Prashad  instead of  being awarded  interest for	pre-
reference period w.e.f. 31.8.77. was as a result of judgment
under appeal,  awarded interest	 w.e.f. 19.8.1981  till	 the
date of payment.
It was  contended by  Mr. Salve, learned Senior Counsel
appearing for  the appellant, that clause (4) of the Special
Terms and Conditions or the contract did not allow the award
of  interest.	He  submitted	that  neither  pre-reference
interest nor pendente lite interest could be awarded because
of the	special stipulation  in the  agreement to the effect
that no	 interest would	 be payable.  Clause (4),  on  which
reliance was placed, reads as under:
RATES, MATERIALS AND WORKMANSHIP
     The  rates	 quoted	 shall	be  fore
     finished  work   inclusive	 or  ail
     materials,	     labour,	  taxes,
     royalties, transportation etc.
     The Engineer  in charge  will  have
     full and  final authority to reject
     any material  or work  done due  to
     defect	therein	     and     the
     contractor/contractors	   shall
     forthwith	remedy	the  defects  at
     his/their	own   expense	and   no
     further  work   shall  be	done  in
     connection with  particular work or
     portion of	 the work till such time
     as the  defect is	removed	 to  the
     entire satisfaction of the Engineer
     in charge.
All  materials,  tools  and  plants
     brought	to     site    by    the
     contractor/contractors   shall   be
     deemed to	be held	 in lien  by the
     BCCL and the contractor/contractors
     shall not	have the right to remove
     the same  from the site without the
     written permission	 of the Engineer
     in charge.	 However, the BCCL shall
     not be  liable for	 any loss, theft
     or damage	due  to	 fire  or  other
     causes sustained during this period
     of lien.
No interest  is payable  on amounts
     with held	under the  item	 of  the
     agreement.
The BCCL  shall be	 at  liberty  to
     deduct from the security deposit or
     from any other sum due or to become
     due under	this contract  or  under
     any other	contract all  sums  that
     become due	 to the	 BCCL. All bills
     shall be per-audited before amounts
     and will be made by cheque only."
     From the  facts enumerated hereinabove it is clear that
the reference in this case was made to the arbitrator by the
court on  an application having been failed under
Section 20
of the	Arbitration Act.  As interest  was one of the claims
made by	 the respondent,  the said  dispute was	 referred to
arbitrator. The	 arbitrator, therefore, had the jurisdiction
to  decide   this  issue.   Inasmuch  as  reference  to	 the
arbitration was	 made after  the
Interest Act, 1978
had come
into force  w.e.f. 19.8.1981, the High Court rightly came to
the conclusion	that at	 least with  effect from  that date,
interest could be awarded for the pre-reference period under
Section 3
or the
Interest Act, 1978
. This conclusion of the
High Court  is in conformity with the decision of this Court
in the	cases of
Unique Erectors & Sudhir Bros
, (supra). The
only question,	therefore, is whether the aforesaid clause 4
of the	Agreement negates any claim for interest being made.
There can  be no  doubt that  if the  terms of	the Contract
expressly stipulate  that no interest would be payable then,
notwithstanding the provisions of the
Interest Act, 1978
, an
arbitrator would  not get the jurisdiction or right to award
interest. In  the present  case, however, no such contention
based on  clause 4  was raised	before the  High Court.	 The
judgment does  not show	 that any argument was raised before
the High  Court to  the effect	that the contract prohibited
the award of interest. It is no doubt true that reference to
this clause  was made before the trial court but, in appeal,
the only  contention which  was raised before the High Court
was  that  the	arbitrator  had	 no  jurisdiction  to  award
interest  for  pre-reference  period.  This  contention	 was
accepted and  the judgment  and decree	was modified  to the
effect that  interest was awarded not from 31.5.1977. as had
been granted by the award and the decree of the trial court,
but with  effect from 19.8.1981 from which date the
Interest
Act, 1978
came into force. The contention based on clause 4
having been  given up  before the  High Court  the appellant
would normally	not have been allowed to be agitated in this
appeal but we find that there is no merit in this contention
and the	 same had  been rightly rejected by the trial court.
According to  clause 4,	 interest was  not  payable  on	 the
amount which  was withheld.  The  learned  counsel  for	 the
respondent has rightly contended that the said clause refers
to the	amount withheld	 by the	 appellant towards retention
money for the defect liability period. It was submitted that
the appellant had received a sum of Rs. 30,000/- as security
for the	 fulfillment of	 the contract to the satisfaction of
the company  and the respondent Durga Parsad has not claimed
any interest  on this amount as under aforesaid clause 4, no
interest was  payable on  the amount  so withheld. The claim
which was made by Durga Parsad before the arbitrator was for
the non-payment	 of  the  full	amount	as  per	 final	bill
submitted by  him. The	claim on  this	account	 before	 the
arbitrator was	for a  sum of  Rs. 5.86.381.50/-  being	 the
balance amount	payable out  of the  final bill and interest
thereon was  claimed with effect from the date of completion
of work	 (31.5.1977) till  the date of payment. The claim of
the respondent	for a sum of Rs. 5.80.381.50/- was upheld by
the arbitrator	only to	 the extent of Rs. 2,73,136.82/- and
the respondent	was awarded  interest on  this	amount.	 The
interest so  awarded is clearly not covered by the aforesaid
clause 4 of the contract.
The decision  of the  High Court awarding pre-reference
interest with  effect from  the date  when the
Interest Act,
1978
had  come into  force i.e.	 19.8.1981 and	the award or
pendente   lite	   interest,   therefore,   calls   for	  no
interference. In  the result,  the appeals  of	M/s.  Bharat
Coking Coal  Ltd, are  liable to  be dismissed,	 but with no
order as to costs.
CIVIL APPEAL  NO. ......./96 (ARISING OUT OF S.L.P. (C)
NO. 3630  OF 1987  & CIVIL  APPEAL...../96 (ARISING  OUT  OF
S.L.P. (C) NO. 15995/1987.
Leave granted.
The parties  in both  these cases	are the same and the
material facts	are not	 very dissimilar.  In appeal arising
out of	S.L.P. (C) No. 3630/87, the respondent was entrusted
with some civil work by the agreement made in the year 1974-
75. Some disputes had arisen and an arbitrator was appointed
on 4.7.1979.  The arbitrator  on 11.3.1981 gave an award for
Rs. 1.82,860/-	including interest.  As is  evident from the
judgment of  the High Court the arbitrator had awarded a sum
of Rs.	99009/- as principal and interest of Rs. 68635/- for
the period 1.6.1975 to 10.3.1981 was also awarded.
This award	 of interest  has been	upheld by  the trial
court and the High Court.
The present  appeal is  confined only  to the  award of
interest by the arbitrator. As far as pre-reference interest
is concerned,  in view	of the	settled legal position, pre-
reference interest could not be awarded for the period prior
to coming  into force  of the
Interest Act,  1973
specially
when the  agreement between  the parties did not provide for
payment or interest. In other words, neither by contract nor
under law  was	the  respondent	 entitled  to  receive	pre-
reference interest  for the  period  1.6.1975  to  10.3.1981
which had  been awarded to him. As far as future interest is
concerned, it  was within  the jurisdiction of arbitrator to
award the same. The appeal is allowed to the extent that the
award of pre-reference interest to the sum of Rs. 68635/- is
set-aside and the decree will stand modified accordingly. In
appeal arising	out of	S.L.P. (C)  No. 15995  of  1987,  an
agreement between  the parties	was entered  sometime in the
year  1966-67.	 Work  was   completed	on   31.12.1970	 and
thereafter the	respondent gave	 notice t the Chief Engineer
raising some  claims.  On  19.10.1976,	the  Chief  Engineer
appointed a sole arbitrator. The arbitrator entered upon the
reference and  thereafter on  12.5.1981 gave an award of Rs.
1.56.073.74/- plus interest @ 7% from 1.4.1971 till the date
of payment  or decree.	The award  was made  the rule of the
Court and  the High  Court dismissed the appeal filed by the
appellant.  It	 is  clear  from  the  principle  enunciated
hereinabove that  pre-reference interest could not have been
awarded in  favour of  the respondent  in the  present	case
because the
Interest Act, 1978
was not applicable and there
was no	term in the contract and nor was it established that
under any  law or  usage any  interest was payable. Applying
the ration  of decisions  of this  Court in  Abhaduta Jena's
case (supra)  and other	 cases, the appeal is allowed to the
extent that  the award	of the	arbitrator,  insofar  as  it
awards interest	 for the  pre-reference period is set aside.
The decree would stand modified accordingly. Parties to bear
their own costs.
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9234 OF 1994
     On 27.5.1979, an agreement was entered into between the
State Government,  the appellant  herein, and the respondent
for improvement	 of Salai-Manoharpur Road. This was followed
by a  supplementary agreement  dated 30.4.1982	for  carting
earth. The  respondent made  claims against the appellant in
respect	 of   above  work  allegedly  done  under  the	said
agreements.  On	  19.5.1987,   the   respondent	  filed	  an
application  in	 the  trial  court  for	 appointment  of  an
arbitrator under Section 8 of the said Act. This application
was allowed  by the Court on 19.5.1987 and an arbitrator was
appointed who  entered upon  the reference on 10.6.1987. The
arbitrator gave	 an award  on  28.2.1988  and  directed	 the
payment of  Rs. 30.21.047/-  towards the principal claim and
interest @  6% from  2.1.1984 to  25.2.1988 amounting to Rs.
8,26,811/- ad  future interest	@ 13%  from the	 date of the
award till  the	 date  of  realisation.	 In  this  way,	 the
arbitrator awarded  interest in	 respect of  all  the  three
periods, namely;  pre-reference, pendente  lite	 and  future
interest.
When the  award was  filed in  the court, the appellant
herein,	 filed	objections  to	the  same.  With  regard  to
interest in  the objection  which was  filed, the  appellant
only challenged	 the decision  of the arbitrator in allowing
pendente interest.  The trial  court came  to the conclusion
that reference	to the	arbitration had	 been  made  in	 the
course of  a  suit  and	 the  arbitrator  was  justified  in
allowing pendente lite interest.
In appeal	filed before the High Court it was contented
that the claim of the respondent in respect of escalation of
price had not been referred to arbitrator and, therefore, he
could not have given the award in respect of the said claim.
The second  contention which  was raised,  with which we are
concerned in  the present  case, was that the arbitrator had
no power  to grant  pendente lite  interest. While upholding
the decision  of the  trial court,  in making  the award the
rule of	 the Court  and passing	 the decree in term thereof,
with  regard  to  pendente  life  interest  the	 High  Court
referred to  the decisions  of this  Court in  the cases  or
SANTOSH SINGH  ARORA VS. UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS
.
(1992) 1
SCC 492	 and LALCHAND  KAPANI'S CASE
(SUPRA) and came to the
conclusion that	 pendente lite	interest could be granted by
the arbitrator under the
Interest Act, 1978
.
Mr. Sanval,  the learned  counsel	for  the  appellant,
contended that	pre-reference interest could not be granted.
He further  submitted that  the arbitrator  had <??>Interest
also from the date or award till the date of payment. It was
submitted that this had the effect of awarding interest even
for the	 period after  the court passes a decree, making the
award the  rule of the court. Referring to
Section 29
of the
Arbitration Act	 the  learned  counsel	submitted  that	 the
arbitrator had	no jurisdiction	 to award  interest for	 the
period after  the passing  of the  decree till	the date  of
payment and,  therefore, the  award to that extent, at lest,
was liable to be set-aside.
From the Facts enumerated hereinabove. It is clear that
though the arbitrator had awarded interest in respect of all
the three  periods, the objections which were filed, and the
contentions raised  before the	trial court  as well  as the
High Court,  related only  to the  award  of  pendente	lite
interest. In  fact, the decision of the High Court upholding
the award  of  pendente	 lite  interest	 was  not  seriously
challenged by  Mr. Sanyal. obviously in view of the decision
of the	Constitution Bench  of this Court in
G.C. Roy
's case
(supra). Ordinarily,  we would	not be inclined to allow the
appellant to raise a new point relating to the grant of post
award interest for the first time in this Court, but as this
is a  pure question  of law  and in  order to finally decide
this issue we allowed the learned counsel to raise the same.
We, however, do not find any merit in this submission.
According to
Section 29
of the Arbitration Act, where
the award  is for  payment of  money the  Court may  in	 the
decree order  interest from  the date  or the  decree to the
date  of  payment.  This  Section  by  it's  plain  language
expressly gives	 the Court  the power to award interest from
the date  of the  decree till  the date of payment but would
this empty that the arbitrator when making the award, has no
jurisdiction to	 award interest	 from the  date of the award
till the date of payment.
When the arbitrator makes an award, it is not necessary
that in	 every case the award has to be filed in a court and
a decree,  in terms  thereof, is  based. It does happen that
when a award is made, the party against whom it is made, may
accept the award and comply with the same. It is rightly not
disputed that  from the date of passing of the award, future
interest can  be awarded  by the  arbitrator as held by this
Court in  the cases  of Unique	Erectors  Gujarat  (P)	Ltd.
(supra) and  Hindustan Construction  Co. Ltd.  (supra).	 The
correct procedure  which should be adopted by the arbitrator
is to  award future  interest till the date of the decree or
the date  of payment,  whichever is  earlier. The  effect of
this would  be that  if the  award is  voluntarily accepted,
which may  not result in a decree being passed, then payment
of interest  would be  made from  the date of award till the
date of payment. Where, however, as in the present case, the
award is  filed in the court and a decree is passed in terms
there or,  then Mr.  Sanyal has rightly contended that it is
for  the   Court  to  determine	 under
Section	 29
of	 the
Arbitration Act	 as to whether interest should be ordered to
be paid and if so at what rate.
Under
Section 29
of the Arbitration Act. The Court can,
even where the arbitrator has awarded interest from the date
of the	award till  the date  of payment,  disallow interest
from the date of the decree or determine a different rate at
which the  interest is	to be  paid or	confirm the grant of
interest as  awarded in	 the award.  When the Court does not
modify the  award with	regard to grant of interest from the
date of the award upto the date of payment, the effect would
be as if the court itself has granted interest from the date
of the decree till the date of payment at the rate which was
determined by  the arbitrator.	The future interest would be
regarded as  having been ordered to be paid under
Section 29
of the	Arbitration Act	 when the  Court does not modify the
award in this respect.
In the  instant case,  the claim  for interest even for
the pre-reference  period had arisen after the
Interest Act
.
1978 had came into force and, therefore the arbitrator could
award interest	for all	 the three periods. C.A. No. 9234 of
1994 is	 accordingly dismissed,	 but with  no  order  as  to
costs.