[Cites
5
, Cited by
32
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Punjab vs Justice .S. Dewan(Retired Chief ... on 25 April, 1997
Equivalent citations: AIR 1997 SUPREME COURT 2388, 1997 (4) SCC 569, 1997 AIR SCW 2298, 1997 LAB. I. C. 2333, (1997) 3 SCR 1027 (SC), 1997 (3) SCALE 708, 1997 (3) SCR 1027, 1997 (1) UJ (SC) 710, (1997) 5 JT 26 (SC), (1997) 2 SCT 745, (1997) 4 SUPREME 329, (1997) 2 LABLJ 357, (1997) 2 SERVLR 647, (1997) 3 SCALE 708, (1997) 4 LAB LN 549, 1997 SCC (L&S) 1153
Bench:
K. Ramaswamy
,
G.T. Nanavati
,
K.Venkataswami
PETITIONER:
THE STATE OF PUNJAB

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
JUSTICE	 .S. DEWAN(RETIRED CHIEF JUSTICE) & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	25/04/1997

BENCH:
K. RAMASWAMY, G.T. NANAVATI, K.VENKATASWAMI




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
JU D G ME N T
NANAVATI, J.
The respondent  who retired as thechief justice of the
High Court of Punjab and Haryana on 31.12.89 was enrolled as
an advocate  on27.1.59,	 appointed as Districtand Sessions
Judge on  20.11.68 and then as a judge and the Chief Justice
of Punjab  and HaryanaHigh Court  on 14.12.77 and 4.10.89
respectively. On  his retirement  he elected for computation
of hispensionunder  Part III of the 1st
Schedule to the
High  Court   Judges  (Conditions  of  Service) Act,  1954
.
According to  the provisions  containedin partIII, pension
of thejudge has	 to be	determined in accordance with the
rules of his service. The ruleswhich applied to him are the
punjab Superior Judicial Service  Rules, 1963. His pension
was, therefore, fixed in accordance with the said rules. On
20.2.90, Rule  16 of  the saidRules  was  amended  by the
Government of  Punjab and  it was provided thatin caseof a
direct recruitto thePunjab SuperiorJudicial Service the
actual period  of practice at the bar not exceeding 10 years
shall be  addedto his service qualifying for superannuation
pensionand  other retirement  benefits.	 In  view  ofthis
amendment the respondent claimed that being a direct recruit
to thePunjab Superior Judicial Service he was entitled to
addition of  actual  period  of practice  at  the  bar not
exceeding 10 years to his qualifying service and, therefore,
his  pension  and  other  retirement  benefitshave  to	be
refixed.  TheHigh  Court,  in  its  turn,  wrote  to the
Accountant General  on 5.6.90  for refixation of his pension
and other  retirement benefitsafter giving  him benefit of
the amendment  . The AccountantGeneral, it appears, was not
inclined to  agree with this claim and, therefore, referred
the   matter   to   the	 State	Government   for   correct
interpretation of  the rule. On25.2.91the State Government
decided thatthe	 notification  dated  22.2.90  hasonly
prospective effect  and, therefore,  benefit of the amended
Rule 16 cannotbe  given to  the respondent. He, therefore,
filed a writ petitionin the High Court interalia praying
that the Union of Indiaand theState Government be directed
to givebenefitof the amended Rule 16 to him and to compute
his pension  afresh inaccordance with the said provision.
The stand  taken by  the Unionof India was that it was not
really concerned with the subject-matter of thepetition and
that  it  pertained  to the  State  of Punjab.	The  State
contended thatthe amended  rule applies	 to those only who
retiredafter 22.2.90.
The learned singleJudge followingthe judgment ofthis
Court in
D.S. Nakara and others Vs. Union of India
1983 (1)
SCC 305 held that  allretired judgesirrespective  of the
date of retirement constituteone class	and the	 benefits
available under the amended  rule cannot be confined to the
judges who retired after the amendment.He, therefore, found
the action  of the  state of  Punjab asillegal, allowed the
petition and  directed the  State of Punjab to refix pension
of therespondent in  accordance with the amended rulewith
effect from  22.2.90 and to paythe arrears with interest at
the rate of 18 per centper annum. The State ofPunjab filed
a letters  patent appeal.  The Division Bench of  theHigh
Court dismissed it with	 a clarification  that the  prayer
being restricted only to pension and not to other retirement
benefits, the  order passed  by the  learned  Single  Judge
should be  readas  confined to grant of	 pension only. The
State has, therefore, filed this appeal.
The only controversy in this appeal is whether theHigh
Court was  right in  directing refixation  of pension of the
respondent  in accordance  with	  amended  Rule	  16. The
respondent, having  retired asa judge of a High Court and
having electedto receive pension payable under part
III of
the First Schedule to the Act
his below:-
"16.	  Death-cum-retirement
     benefits:-In respect of death-cum-
     retirementbenefits	 the members of
     the service  shallbe  governed  by
     the punjab CivilServices  Rules,
     Volume IIas amended  from time to
     time.
Provided thatin the case of a
     direct recruit to this service, the
     actual period  of practice at  Bar
     not exceeding  tenyears,shall be
     added to his service qualifying for
     superannuation  Pension  and  other
     retirementbenefits."
The change brought aboutby	 the amendment	isthat
whereasin  respect of death-cum-retirement benefits members
of the Punjab Superior Judicil Service were earlier governed
by theAll India	 Service (death-cum-retirement benefits)
Rules, now  they are  governed by  the Punjab  Civil Service
Rules, Moreover,  now in the case of a direct recruit to the
added to  hes service  for thepurposeof	 determining the
qualifying service.  Formerly, that  is, prior to 22.2.1990,
qualifying service  ofa	 member	 of  the  Punjab  Superior
judicial Service  and also  as a judge of the High Court, if
he waselevated to that position before retirement. Even in
case ofa direct recruit to that Service his standing at the
Bar was irrelvant butnow that  period has tobe added for
determining  the   qualifyingservice.	Obviously,this
enlargement ofthe Period  of qualifying service wouldlead
to an  Increasein  thequantum of pension.  This hasbeen
regarded  by   the  High  Court and  as	 contended  by the
respondent, liberalisation  of the  pension scheme. Forthat
reason,it  further held that benefit of a ruleliberalising
pension	 cannot	  berestricted	 to  persons   retiring
subsequently that  is after  the date of such liberalisation
otherwise  itwould  amountto  vicious	discrimination
violative of
Article 14
of theconstitution. The High Court
has also  held that  there is nothing in the language of the
Rule tosuggestthat the benefit conferred by it is confined
to the persons retiringafter February 22,1990.
Therefore,what  we have  to consider  is: What is the
nature of  the change made by the amendment? Isit by way of
upwardrevision	 of  the  existing  pension  scheme?Then
obviously the  ratio of the decision  in D.S. Nakara'scase
would apply.  If it is held to be a newretiralbenefitor a
new scheme  then the  benefit of  it cannot  beextended	 to
those who retired earlier.
Conceptually, pension  is a rewardfor past service. It
is determined on the basis of length ofserviceand last pay
drawn. Length of service is determinative of eligibility and
the quantum  ofpension. The formula adopted for determining
last average  emoluments drawnhas an impact on the quantum
of Pension.
InD.S. Nakara
's case (supra) the change in the
formulaof  determiningaverage emoluments byreducing  36
months'serviceto 10 months' service as measure of pension,
made with a view to giving a higher average, was regarded as
liberalisation or  upward revision  of the  existing pension
scheme,On  thebasis  of the  same reasoning it may besaid
that  any   modification   with	 respect   to the   other
determinative factor, namely, qualifying service made with a
view to make it	 more beneficial  in terms  of quantum	of
pensioncan  also be  regarded as  liberalisation or  upward
revision of  the existing  pension scheme.  If,however, the
change is  not confinedto the period of service but extends
or relates  to a  period anterior  to the joining of service
then it would assume adifferent character. Then	 it is not
liberalisation of the existing scheme but  introductionof a
new retiral  benefit. What has been done by amending Rule 16
is to  make the periodof  practice at the Bar,	which was
otherwise irrelevant for determining the qualifying service,
also relevant  for that purpose. It  is a new concept and a
new retiral  benefit. The  object of  the amendment does not
appear to be togo for liberalisation. The purpose for which
it appears  to have  been made is to make it more attractive
for those  who are  already inserviceso thatthey may not
leave it and for new entrants so that they may be tempted to
join it. ThoughRule 16does not specifically state that the
amendedrule  will apply	 only to  those who  retired  after
22.2.90, the  intentionbehindit clearly	 appears to be to
extend the  newbenefitto those only who retired afterthat
date.
For  these reasons  the principle laid down  inD.S.
Nakara
's case  (supra)that  if	pensioners  form  a  class
computation oftheir pension cannot beby different formula
affording unequal  treatment merely  onthe ground thatsome
retired earlier	 and  some  retired  later,  will  have	 no
application toa caseof thistype.
Therefore, on both the
groundsthe High Court was in error in applyingthe ratio of
the decision  in
D.S. Nakara
's case (supra) to this case. As
rightlycontended  on behalf  of the  State, benefit  of the
amendment would be available  to only those direct recruits
who retired after it has come into force.
The following  observations made by this court in
Union
of India  Vs. P.N.  Menon
1994(4) SCC 68 also to some extent
supportthe view that we are taking:
"Wheneverthe   Government	or  an
     authority,which  can be held to be
     aStatewithinthe  meaning  of
Article  12
of  the  Constitution,
     frames a  scheme  for  persons  who
     have  superannuated  fromservice,
     due to  many constraints, it is not
     always possible  to extendthe same
     benefitsto	   one	  and	 all,
     irrespective  ofthe   dates   of
     superannuation. Assuch any revised
     scheme   in    respect   of   post-
     retirementbenefits, if implemented
     with a  cut-off date,  which can be
     held to  be reasonable andrational
     inthe  light of
Article 14
of the
     Constitution, need not be held to
     beinvalid.	 It shall not amount to
     "picking out  a date from the hat",
     aswas  said by  this Court	 in the
     case of  D.R. Nim V. Unionof India
     in connection   with  fixation  of
     Seniority. Whenever   arevision
     takes place, a cut-off date becomes
     imperativebecause the benefit has
     tobe  allowed within the financial
     resources available    with   the
     Government."
We,  therefore,   allow  this  appeal,  set  aside the
judgment and  order passed by the High Court and dismiss the
writ petition filed by the respondents.In viewof the facts
and circumstances  of the case there shall be no order as to
costs.