[Cites
9
, Cited by
47
]
Supreme Court of India
Smt. Mehrunnisa & Ors vs Smt. Visham Kumari & Anr on 2 December, 1997
Equivalent citations: AIR 1998 SUPREME COURT 427, 1998 (2) SCC 295, 1998 AIR SCW 3, 1997 (2) REVLR 276, 1997 (7) SCALE 456, (1997) 9 JT 616 (SC), 1997 REVLR 2 276, 1997 (9) JT 616, 1998 SCFBRC 141, 1998 BOMRC 260, 1998 ( ) HRR 270, 1998 (1) UJ (SC) 393, (1998) 1 JAB LJ 132, (1997) 2 RENTLR 626, (1997) 7 SCALE 456, (1998) 2 MAD LJ 89, (1997) 2 RENCR 716, (1998) 1 SCJ 28, (1998) 1 RENCJ 67, (1998) 1 SUPREME 29
Author:
K. Venkataswami
Bench:
K. Venkataswami
PETITIONER:
SMT. MEHRUNNISA & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SMT. VISHAM KUMARI & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	02/12/1997

BENCH:
A.S. ANAND, K. VENKATASWAMI




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
THE 2ND DAY OF DECEMBER, 1997
Present:
Honb'ble Dr.Justice A.S.Anand
	       Hon'ble Mr.Justice K.Venkataswami
D.D. Thakur,  Sr. Adv.	and Vivek Gambhir, Adv. with him for
the appellants
Dr. Shankar  Ghosh, Sr.	 Adv.,	 S.S.Khanduja, B.K.  Satija,
Y.P.Dhingra, Advs. with him for the Respondents.
J U D G M E N T
     The following Judgment of the Court was delivered;
K. Venkataswami. J.
This appeal  by special leave is preferred by the legal
representatives of the deceased tenant against whom an order
of eviction  from the  suit premises  was passed by the High
Court.
The respondent-landlady  became the  owner of  the suit
premises under	a registered  sale deed	 dated 31.3.1975. On
12.7.1976, the	respondent issued  a notice  to	 the  tenant
terminating the	 tenancy stating  inter alia  that the	suit
premises, a  non-residential one,  was required for using it
as an  office for  her husband,	 a practising lawyer. It was
also stated  that the  tenant has default in payment of rent
and has	 sub-let the premises without written consent of the
landlady. However,  no action  was  taken  pursuant  to	 the
notice dated  12.7.1976.  The  respondent  issued  a  second
notice through	lawyer on  9.7.1977 stating  that  the	suit
premises was  required for  her	 cloth	business  which	 she
intended to  start. Even  on the basis of the second notice,
no action  was taken  by the  respondent-landlady.  A  third
notice	was   also  issued  by	the  respondent-landlady  on
12.10.1979 repeating  the same	allegations contained in the
second notice  dated 9.7.1977. This time, the landlady filed
a suit	for eviction  on the  basis of	the notice issued on
12.10.1979. The	 grounds for eviction as given in the plaint
were that  the landlady required the premises for starting a
cloth business;	 that the tenant has defaulted in payment of
rent for the period from 1.4.1979 to 30.11.1979 and that the
tenant has sub-let the premises unauthorisedly.
The tenant	 resisted the  suit for eviction denying the
requirement of	the landlady  for her  new business.  It was
also denied by the tenant that there was default the payment
of rent. The allegation of sub-tenancy was also denied.
The trial	court on  the basis  of the pleadings framed
live issues.  The  plaintiff  (respondent  herein)  examined
herself	 and   three  other  witnesses	in  support  of	 her
pleadings. Likewise,  the deceased  defendant-tenant,  apart
from examining	himself, examined  six	other  witnesses  in
support of his pleadings.
The trial court in its detailed judgment found that the
requirement of	the landlady for starting cloth business was
bona fide  and that  she was  not in possession of any other
vacant shop  of her  own for  the said requirement: that the
landlady failed	 to establish  the case	 of sub-letting	 and
also the case of default in payment of rent. In other words,
out of	three grounds put forward in support of the suit for
eviction. The  trial court  deceased the  suit only  on	 the
ground of bona fide requirement by the landlady for starting
the cloth business. We are therefore, not concerned with the
other grounds for eviction.
Aggrieved by  the judgment	 of  the  trial	 court,	 the
deceased tenant	 preferred an appeal to the appellate court.
The  lower   appellate	court,	 after	re-appreciating	 the
pleadings and  evidence, came  to a  conclusion on  the bona
fide requirement  of  the  landlady  for  starting  a  cloth
business.  According  to  the  lower  appellate	 court,	 the
landlady failed	 to establish her case of the requirement of
the suit  premises for	starting a cloth business. The lower
appellate court	 reversed the  Judgment and  decree  of	 the
trial Court  mainly on the ground that the landlady issued a
first notice  on 12.1.1976  giving out an entirely different
ground for  eviction, namely, that she required the premises
for the use of her husband as lawyer's office. Subsequently,
according to  the first appellate court, in the light of the
judgment of  the High  Court that such a claim cannot be the
basis for  eviction under
Section 12(1)(f)
of	 the  Madhya
Pradesh Accommodation  Control Act. 1961 thereinafter called
the `Act').  The landlady  has changed	her  stand  and	 put
forward an  entirely new  ground for  eviction, namely, that
the premises  was required  for starting  a cloth  business.
According to  the lower	 appellate court,  the change in the
stand of  the landlady	exposed her  intention to  evict the
tenant for  some other	motive. The  lower  appellate  court
dismissed the  suit for	 eviction  by  allowing	 the  appeal
preferred by  the tenant  on the  ground that  the  landlady
failed to  established	her  case  viz.	 that  required	 the
premises bona fide for starting a cloth business.
Aggrieved by  the reversing  judgment and decree of the
lower appellate	 court, the  respondent-landlady preferred a
Second Appeal  under
Section  100
, CPC,	 before	 the  Madhya
Pradesh High  Court. The  High Court  after going  into	 the
judgments of the courts below after going into the judgments
of the	courts below  found that  the lower appellate court,
though entitled	 to re-appreciate the evidence and come to a
different conclusion  failed to	 read the whole evidence and
all the	 documents  exhibited  in  the	trial  court  before
reversing the  finding of  the trial  court on	the issue of
bona fide  requirement of  the landlady for starting a cloth
business. According  to the  High Court, the lower appellate
court failed  to appreciate  the notices  issued on 9.7.1977
and 12.10.1979	taking a consistent stand regarding the bona
fide requirement  for starting	a cloth	 business. The	High
Court has  taken note of a number of judgments to the effect
that the notice issued and the circumstances which prevailed
just before  the institution  of the  suit are	relevant for
coming to  conclusion regarding the bona fide requirement of
the landlady. By giving undue importance to the first notice
and ignoring  the subsequent  notices.	according  the	High
Court, the  conclusion reached	by the lower appellate court
is  vitiated.	On  that   ground  and	also  accepting	 the
appreciation of	 evidence by the trial court on the issue of
bona fide  requirement	of  the	 landlady,  the	 High  Court
allowed the Second Appeal and decreed the suit for eviction.
It is  under these circumstances, the present appeal by
special leave has been preferred by the legal representative
of the tenant who died pending the proceedings.
Mr.  D.D.Thakur,	learned	 Senior	  Counsel  for	 the
appellants, strenuously	 argued	 contending  that  the	High
Court exceeded	its jurisdiction  under
Section 100
, CPC, by
going into  the evidence and reversing the conclusion of the
lower appellate	 court on  a question  of  fact.  On	that
ground,	 according   to	 the  learned  Senior  Counsel,	 the
judgment of  the High  Court is	 liable to  be set aside. He
also submitted	that the First Appellate Court was justified
in commenting  upon the ground for eviction  as given in the
first notice and the subsequent change in the stand taken by
the landlady.  Another words,  the learned counsel justified
the  conclusion	  reached  by	the  lower  appellate  court
reversing the  conclusion of  the trial court. Mr. Thakur in
support of  his contention  placed reliance on two judgments
of this	 Court in Sarvate T.B. vs. Nemichand (1966 (
MPLJ) 26
(SCC) and Mattulal vs. Radhe Lal
( 1974 (2) SCC 365).
Dr. Shankar  Ghosh learned Senior Counsel appearing for
the respondent-landlady	 contending contrary  submitted that
the High  Curt was  fully justified in reversing the finding
of the	lower appellate	 court as  the lower appellate court
failed to  read the  entire evidence  and all  the documents
before coming to a conclusion contrary to the one reached by
the trial  court. Learned  Senior Counsel  further submitted
that this  Court has consistently taken the view that if the
first appellate	 court while  reversing the  finding of	 the
trial court  failed  to	 take  note  of	 all  the  documents
exhibited before  the trial  court and	failed to  read	 the
entire evidence,  the High  Court can  interfere  with	such
finding while  exercising jurisdiction	under
Section	100
,
CPC. He	 also  laid  stress  on	 the  fact  that  the  lower
appellate court	 ought not  to have looked into the contents
of first  notice issued	 by the	 landlady when	the relevant
notice for  the purpose	 was the last one issued just before
the filing  of the  suit. The  landlady having not taken any
steps pursuant	to first and second notices, the contents in
those notices  ought to	 have been  ignored. Learned  Senior
Counsel submitted  that the  High Court	 was right observing
that the  circumstances prevailing  before the filing of the
suit are  relevant and	not be	circumstances that prevailed
long earlier to the filing of the suit.
We have  considered the  rival submission and carefully
gone through  the judgments  of all  the three courts. It is
true that  this Court  in Nemi	Chand's case (Supra) has, in
unmistakable terms,  held while	 deciding a  case under	 the
Madhya Pradesh Accommodation Control Act
23 of 1995 that the
finding of  the District  Court	 based	on  appreciation  of
evidence was  binding upon the High Court and the High Court
had no	power to  reverse that	finding. This  Court further
observed as follows:-
"The criticism  made  by  the  High
     Court  that  the  District	 Court's
     finding was  vitiated "due	 to very
     imperfect	understanding	of   the
     meaning	of     the    expression
     `genuinely requires'  occurring  in
     clauses (g) and (h) of
Section 4
of
     the Act,"	and  that  the	District
     Court and	"arrived  at  a	 finding
     which is  totally unrelated  to the
     legal  connotation	 of  the  phrase
     `genuinely	 requires'   and  almost
     borders on	 perversity",  does  not
     appear  to	  be  merited.	 In  our
     judgment,	 the	District   Court
     committed	 no    error   in    the
     examination of  the evidence in the
     light of the Full Bench judgment in
     Damodar's case."
Likewise in
Mattulal
's case  (supra), this court after
referring to Nemi Chand case held as follows:-
" Now it is obvious that the issues
     whether the respondent required the
     Lohia Bazar shop for the purpose of
     starting a new business as a dealer
     in iron  and steel materials and if
     so,  whether  his	requirement  was
     bona fide	were both  questions  of
     fact. Their  determination did  not
     involve the  application  of  legal
     principles to the facts established
     in the  evidence. The  findings  of
     the Additional  District  Judge  on
     these   issues    were   no   doubt
     inferences from  other basic facts,
     but  that	 did   not   alter   the
     character	of  these  findings  and
     they remained finding of fat. There
     is, therefore,  no doubt  that  the
     conclusion	  of	the   Additional
     District Judge  that the respondent
     did not bona fide require the Lohia
     Bazar  shop   for	the  purpose  of
     starting business	as a  dealer  in
     iron    and     steel     materials
     represented a  finding of	fact and
     it could  not be interfered with by
     the High  Court  in  second  appeal
     unless  it	  was  shown   that   in
     reaching it  a mistake  of law  was
     committed	 by    the    Additional
     District Judge  or it  was based on
     no	 evidence  or  was  such  as  no
     reasonable man  could  reach.  This
     was precisely the ground on which a
     Bench of  four Judges of this Court
     in Sarvate	 T.B. vs.  Nemichand set
     aside the	judgment of  the  Madhya
     Pradesh  High   Court   which   had
     interfered with  the decree  passed
     by the  District Court dismissing a
     suit  for	eviction  filed	 by  the
     landlord against  the  tenant.  The
     District Court,  sitting as a court
     of	 first	appeal,	 had  taken  the
     view, on  an  appreciation	 of  the
     evidence, that  the requirement  of
     the premises  by the  landlord  for
     his residence  was not genuine, but
     in second appeal the Madhya Pradesh
     High Court	 reversed  this	 finding
     and passed	 a decree  for	eviction
     against the  tenant. This Court set
     aside the	judgment of  the  Madhya
     Pradesh High  Court on  the  ground
     that the  finding	reached	 by  the
     District Court  on an  appreciation
     of the  evidence that  the landlord
     did  not	genuinely  require   the
     premises for  his residence  was  a
     finding  of  fact	and  the  Madhya
     Pradesh   High    Court   had    no
     jurisdiction in  second  appeal  to
     disturb this finding".
In the  case on  hand unfortunately the lower appellate
court before reversing the finding of the trial court on the
issue of  bona fide requirement of the landlady for starting
a cloth business failed to read the entire evidence and take
into consideration all the documents placed before the trial
court. Therefore,  it was  rightly contended  by Dr.  Ghosh,
learned Senior	Counsel for  the respondent,  that the	High
Court was  justified in	 interfering with the finding of the
first appellate	 court. A  reading of  the judgment  of	 the
lower appellate	 court leaves  no doubt	 that it  has looked
into  the  contents  of	 the  first  notice  whereunder	 the
landlady has  stated that  she required the premises for her
husband's office  and ignored  the notice issued just before
the filing  of the  suit. The lower appellate court has also
failed to  give due importance to the fact that the landlady
has not	 taken any  steps to file suit for eviction pursuant
to the	notice issued on two earlier occasion and the ground
stated in the notice preceding the suit are relevant for the
purpose of deciding the issue.
The judgments  cited by  the learned Senior Counsel for
the respondent on the scope of Section 100.
CPC
, are apposite
in the	circumstance of	 the this  case.
In
J.B. Sharma  vs
State of  Madhya Pradesh  & Another
(1988 (Supp.) SCC 451),
this Court  while considering the scope of
Section 100
, CPC,
observed thus:-
" It  will thus  be seen  that  the
     first   appellate	  court	   while
     recording the  finding acted  on an
     assumption	 not  supported	 by  any
     evidence  and   further  failed  to
     consider the entire document on the
     basis  of	which  the  finding  was
     recorded.	The   High  Court   was,
     therefore, justified  under
Section
     100
of  the Code of Civil Procedure
     to set aside the finding."
In
Dilbagrai  Punjabi vs.	Sharad Chandra
(1988 (Supp.)
SCC 710)  again	 this  Court  while  considering  the  scope
Section 100
, CPC, held as follows:-
"It is  true that	the  High  Court
     while  hearing   the  appeal  under
Section 100
of the  Code of  Civil
     Procedure has  no	jurisdiction  to
     reappraise the evidence and reverse
     the conclusion reached by the first
     appellate court,  but at  the  same
     time its  power to	 interfere  with
     the finding  cannot  be  denied  if
     interfere with  the finding  cannot
     be	 denied	  if  when   the   lower
     appellate court decides an when the
     lower appellate  court  decides  an
     issue   of	  fact	 a   substantial
     question of  law arises.  The Court
     is under  a  duty	to  examine  the
     entire relevant  evidence on record
     and  if   it  refuses  to	consider
     important	evidence  having  direct
     bearing on	 the disputed  issue and
     the error	which  arises  is  of  a
     magnitude that  it gives birth to a
     substantial question  of  law,  the
     High Court	 is fully  authorised to
     set aside the finding."
To the  same effect,  another judgment of this Court in
Sundra Naicka  Vadiyar (Dead)  by IRs.	&
Anr. vs. Ramaswami
Ayyar (Dead)  by His  LRs
. (1995  Supp. (4)  SCC 534),	this
Court observed as follows:-
"A Perusal of the impugned judgment
     of the  High Court shows that there
     were good	reasons for treating the
     finding   on    the   question   of
     possession recorded  by  the  first
     two courts	 to be	vitiated.  Apart
     from the  reasons given by the High
     Court,  it	  appears  to	us  that
     ignoring  some   of  the  documents
     which were	 vital for  deciding the
     question	of    possession    also
     vitiated	the   finding	on   the
     question of  possession recorded by
     the trial	court  as  well	 as  the
     first appellate court."
Recently also in Kochukakkada Aboobacker (Dead) by LRs.
and Other vs. Attah Kasim and Other (1996 (7) SCC 389), this
Court again  observed on  the scope  of
Section 100
, CPC, as
follows:-
"The  appellate   court   had   not
     considered	 these	documents  in  a
     proper perspective	 and the  effect
     of those documents on the rights of
     the   parties.   Accordingly,   the
     learned   Judge   reluctantly   had
     reconsidered the  evidence and,  in
     our view, quite rightly since it is
     not a mere appreciation of evidence
     but  drawing  inferences  from  the
     admitted  documents,  Since  proper
     construction of  the documents  and
     inferences have  not  legally  been
     drawn by  the appellate  court, the
     High  Court   gone	 in  detail  and
     recorded the finding".
In the  light of  the pronouncements  of this Court and
for the	 reasons given	by the	High Court. namely, that the
lower appellate	 court	has  failed  to	 take  into  account
document necessary for giving a finding on the issue of bona
fide requirement,  we are  of the  view that  we cannot find
fault with  the High Court in interfering with the reversing
judgment of  the lower	appellate  court.  Accordingly,	 the
appeal fails  and it is dismissed. However, there will be no
order as to costs.