[Cites
5
, Cited by
42
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Oblum Electrical Industries Pvt. ... vs Collector Of Customs Bombay on 2 September, 1997
Equivalent citations: AIR 1997 SUPREME COURT 3467, 1997 (7) SCC 581, 1997 AIR SCW 3557, (1997) 7 JT 688 (SC), 1997 (5) SCALE 692, (1997) 94 ELT 449, (1997) 72 ECR 535, (1997) 3 SCJ 150, (1997) 8 SUPREME 161, (1997) 5 SCALE 692
Author:
S.C. Agrawal
Bench:
S. C. Agrawal
,
G. T. Nanavati
PETITIONER:
M/S. OBLUM ELECTRICAL INDUSTRIES PVT. LTD., HYDERABAD

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
COLLECTOR OF CUSTOMS BOMBAY

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	02/09/1997

BENCH:
S. C. AGRAWAL, G. T. NANAVATI




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
Present:
Hon'ble Mr. Justice S.C. Agrawal
	      Hon'ble Mr. Justice G.T. Nanavati
S. Ganesh and K.J. John, Advs. for the appellant
A. Subba Rao,  Kishore Kumar Patel and V.K. Verma, Advs. for
the Respondent
		      J U D G M E N T
The following Judgment of the Court was delivered:
S.C. AGRAWAL, J.
The  appellant   is  a  manufacturer  and	exporter  of
'Lightening Arrestors'	which are  supplied  to	 electricity
boards, railways  and other public sector undertakings.	 The
appellant was  awarded a  Deemed Export	 Order (Contract) by
the Railway  Board for	supply 937  numbers of	Metal  Oxide
Gapless Type  Lightening Arrestors  (hereinafter referred as
'lightening Arrestors').  The said contract was entered into
under  an   International  Development	 Scheme.    For	 the
manufacture of Lightening Arrestors, Porcelain housing (H.T.
Insulators) are	 required and  those insulators are produced
in a  ceramic kilns.  Crystar (main and Gross) Beams made of
Silicon Carbide	 are used  for 'firing'	 dry and hollow H.T.
Porcelain bushings  in the  kilns and  are fitted inside the
kins.	The beams are susceptible to breakage and damage and
have  to   be  continuously   replaced	in   the  course  of
manufacture.
The applicant submitted an application before the Chief
Controller of  Imports and  Exports on	March 29,  1990	 for
issuance of a Special Import Licence to import various items
required for  the manufacture  of Lightening Arrestors.	 The
said items  included Crystar  Beams as	Kiln Furniture.	 The
Deputy Chief  Controller of  Import and	 Export	 issued	 the
Special Import	Licence on  April  24  1990  for  import  of
various items  including crystar  beams.  Alongwith the said
import license,	 the Duty  Exemption Entitlement Certificate
(hereinafter referred  as 'DEEC')  was also  issued  in	 the
following terms:
"Material imported	 against advance
     Licence			     No.
     P/L/3236631/CS.XX/16/H/90	   dated
     24.4.90  issued   by  Deputy  Chief
     Controller of  Imports  &	Exports,
     Hyderabad to the above importer and
     covered by	 the list  of  Materials
     specified under  Part 'C'	of  this
     Certificate would	be  eligible  fr
     exemption from  Import duty subject
     to the  conditions specified in the
     Notification of  the Government  of
     India,   Ministry	  of	Finance,
     Department of  Revenue and	 116/88-
     Cus. On 30.3.88."
On import	of goods  into India,  the appellant claimed
duty free  clearance on	 the basis  of exemption  granted by
Notification No.210/82-Cus dated September 10, 1982.
By Notification  No.210/82-Cus dated September 10, 1982
issued under
Section 25
of  the  Customs  Act,  1962,	 the
Central Government  has exempted  from whole  of the customs
duty and  additional duty  leviable under the
Customs Tariff
Act, 1975
,  "raw materials  and components  required for the
manufacture  of	  goods	 to  be	 supplied  to  International
Development   Association    or	  international	  Bank	 for
Reconstruction and Development or bilateral and Multilateral
aided projects	or Asian  Development Bank or United Nations
Organisation or	 under	the  Aid  Programme  of	 the  United
Nations or  for	 the  replenishment  of	 raw  materials	 and
components of  used in the manufacture of such goods already
supplied".   The said exemption was, however, subject to the
conditions laid down in clauses (1) to (5) of paragraph 1 of
the said  Notification.	  The case  of the appellant is that
the conditions	laid down  in  the  said  Notification	were
fulfilled in  he present  case and, therefore, the appellant
was entitled  to exemption  from duly  on the  Cryster Beams
imported by  it and  reliance was placed on the DEEC granted
by the	Import Control Authorities while granting the import
licence for  importing the  said articles.   The  Additional
Collector of  Customs has,  however, held  that the entry of
Kiln Furniture (Crystar Beams) in the special import licence
and DEEC book does not preclude the customs authorities from
deciding the issue regarding eligibility of the articles for
duty exemption in terms of exemption Notification No.210/82-
Cus.   The Additional  Collector further  held that the said
exemption is  only in respect of raw material and components
of the	resultant product  to be  supplied  to	the  project
authorities specified in the said exemption Notification No.
210/82-Cus.   Itself and  that	the  item  in  question	 are
admittedly   utilised	 as   supporting    structures	 for
manufacturing Bushings and on account of bearing heavy loads
and extremely  high temperatures  undergo high	rate of wear
and tear  and that  they are  capital goods  and  cannot  be
termed as  raw materials or components of the said resultant
product.  The said view of the Additional Collector has been
upheld by  the Customs	Excise &  Gold	[Control]  Appellate
'Tribunal [hereinafter	referred to as the Tribunal'] by the
impugned judgment  dated November  5 1992.  The Tribunal has
held that the question regarding exemption from duty and the
interpretation of  the notification  issued under
Section 25
of the	Customs	 Act  has  to  be  decided  by	the  customs
authorities alone  and the fact that the import of the goods
was covered  by the  specific mention  in Part C of the DEEC
has  no	  bearing  on	the  jurisdiction   of	the  customs
authorities because  exemption from  duty is on aspect while
validity of  import under  the	import	license	 is  another
aspect.	  The Tribunal	has also agreed with the view of the
Additional Collector  that the expression "raw materials and
components required  for the  manufacture of the goods to be
supplied"   in	  Notification	 No.210/82-Cus	 read	with
Notification No.  116/88 dated	March  30,  1988  cannot  be
extended to  include  within  it  scope	 raw  materials	 and
components required  for a  Kiln or  a furnace	in which the
goods to be supplied are manufactured.	Hence this appeal.
Shri S.  Ganesh, the learned counsel for the appellant,
has urged that the appellants are entitled to exemption from
payment of  customs duty  on Crystar  Beams imported by them
both on	 the basis  of Notification No.210/82-Cus as well as
Notification No.  116/88 dated	March 30,  1988. As  noticed
earlier, Notification  No. 210/82-Cus  dated  September	 10,
1992 contained	the expression	"raw material and components
required for  the manufacture  of goods"  and  "or  for	 the
replenishment of  raw materials	 and components	 used in the
manufacture of such goods".
In Notification  No. 116/88  dated March 30, 1988 there
is slight  difference in  language The	material part of the
said Notification is as under:
"In   exercise    of   the	  powers
     conferred	by  sub-section	 (1)  of
section 25
of the Customs Act, 1962
     [52 of 1962] and in supersession of
     the Notification  of the Government
     of	 India	 in  the   Ministry   of
     Finance,  [Department  of	Revenue]
     No.44/87-Customs  [G.S.R,	101(E)],
     dated the	19th February, 1987, the
     Central Government, being satisfied
     that it  is necessary in the public
     interest so  to do,  hereby exempts
     goods imported  into India	 against
     an Advance Licence issued under the
     Imports (Central) Order 1955, being
     materials required	 to be	imported
     for the  purpose of  manufacture of
     produce [hereinafter referred to as
     the    resultant	 products]    or
     replenishment of  materials used in
     the manufacture  of  the  resultant
     products, or both, or for export as
     manufacture   of	 the   resultant
     products, or both, or for export as
     mandatory	spares	 alongwith   the
     resultant products,  for  execution
     of one  or more export orders, from
     the whole	of the	duty of	 customs
     leviable thereon which is specified
     in	 the
First  Schedule	 to  the
     Customs Tariff  Act,  1975
[51  of
     1975] and	from the  whole	 of  the
     additional	 duty  leviable	 thereon
     under
section 3
of the said
Customs
     Tariff Act
",
     Notification   No.116/88-Cus    uses   the	  expression
'materials required  to	 be  imported  for  the	 purpose  of
manufacture of	products [hereinafter  referred	 to  as	 the
resultant products]  or replenishment  of materials  used in
the manufacture of resultant products or both."
Shri Ganesh  submits that	on a  proper construction of
the  language	used  in  Notification	No.210/82-Cus  dated
September 10,  1982  Crystar  Beams  should  be	 treated  as
components  required   for  the	 manufacture  of  Lightening
Arrestors and  would fall  within the ambit of the exemption
granted	 under	 the  Notification   No.  210/82-Cus   dated
September 10,  1982.  The learned counsel has contended that
the  words  "required  for  the	 manufacture"  In  the	said
notification  would   include  material	  which	 though	 not
directly used in the manufacture of product is necessary for
the purpose  of manufacturing  the product.  Shri Ganesh has
also urged that in any event Cryster Beams would fall within
the ambit  of  the  expression	"materials  required  to  be
imported  for	the  purpose  of  manufacture  of  products"
contained in  Notification No.116/88-Cus  dated	  March	 30,
1988 because  the words	 "for the purpose of manufacture" in
the said notification have the effect of enlarging the ambit
of the	exemption that	has been  granted.   In this context
Shri Ganesh  has pointed  out that in the DEEC reference has
been made  to Notification  No.116/88-Cus, dated  March	 30,
1988.
Shri Subba	 Rao, the  learned counsel appearing for the
Revenue,  has  placed  reliance	 n  the	 definition  of	 the
expressions "exempt  materials" and "materials" contained in
clauses (iii)  and (viii) of the explanation to Notification
No.116/88 dated March 30, 1988.	 The said clauses provide as
follows:
"(iii) Exempt  materials' means the
     materials imported and specified in
     Part 'C"  of the  said  Certificate
     and  eligible  for	 exemption  from
     duty under this notification;
(viii) materials  means goods which
     are  raw	materials,   components,
     intermediate      products	      or
     consumables used in the manufacture
     of	 resultant  products  and  their
     packings, or mandatory spares to be
     exported  alongwith  the  resultant
     products."
Shri Subba	 Rao has laid emphasis on the words "used in
the manufacture	 of in	clause (viii) and has urged that for
availing the  exemption it  is necessary  that the  material
must be	 required for  use in  the manufacture	of resultant
products.   Shri Subba Rao has also invited our attention to
the decision of this Court in
The Tata Oil Mills Co. Ltd vs.
Collector of  C. Ex.
1989 43 ELT. 183, wherein in the matter
of interpretation  of a notification granting exemption from
payment of duty this court had said :
"But, in  trying to  understand the
     language  used   by  an   exemption
     notification, one	should	keep  in
     mind two  important aspect	 (a) the
     object   and    purposes	of   the
     exemption and (b) the nature of the
     actual  process   involved	 in  the
     manufacture  of  the  commodity  in
     relation  to   which  exemption  is
     granted".
Having  regard  to	 the  fact  that  in  DEEC  specific
reference has been made to Notification No.116/88-Cus, dated
March 30,  1988, we will consider the claim of the appellant
for  exemption	 for  duty   on	 the   basis  of   the	said
notification.
A perusal	of Notification	 No. 116/88-Cus.  shows that
the object  and purpose	 of  the  said	notification  is  to
encourage exports by granting exemption from customs duty on
materials that	are required  to be imported for the purpose
of  manufacture	  of   the   resultant	 products   or	 for
replenishment of the material used in the manufacture of the
resultant products,  or both  or  for  export  as  mandatory
spares alongwith the resultant products.  The manufacture of
the resultant  products has  to be  for execution  of one or
more export  orders.   In order to ensure that the exemption
is availed  only by  deserving people,	conditions have been
laid down in
clauses (a) to (g), which must be fulfilled for
availing the exemption.	 One such condition, as
laid down in
clause (a)  that is  that  the	material  imported  must  be
covered by  a Duty  Exemption Entitlement Certificate issued
by the licensing authority.  Under Clause (c) it is required
that the  goods corresponding  to the resultant products and
the  mandatory	spares	would  be  exported  with  the	time
specified in  the DEEC	or such	 extended period  as may  be
granted by  the licensing  authority.	The  wordings in the
notification have  to be construed keeping in view that said
object and  purpose of	the exemption.	 In the notification
two different  expressions have	 been used namely, materials
required to  be imported  for the  purpose of manufacture of
products'  and	'replenishment	of  materials  used  in	 the
manufacture of resultant products' which indicates  that the
two expression	have not  been used  in the same sense.	 The
expression  'materials	required  to  be  imported  for	 the
purpose of  manufacture of  products' cannot be construed as
referring  only	  to  materials	  which	 are   used  in	 the
manufacture of	the products.	The  said exemption  must be
given its  natural meaning  to include	materials  that	 are
required in order to manufacture the resultant products.  On
that view,  the exemption  cannot be  confined to  materials
which are  actually used in the manufacture of the resultant
product but  would also	 include materials  which though not
used  in  the  manufacture  of	the  resultant	product	 are
required in  order to  manufacture  the	 resultant  product.
Crystar Beams imported by the appellant are materials, which
though	not  used  in  the  manufacture	 of  H.T.  Porcelain
Insulators required  for Lightening Arrestors, are materials
which are  required for	 producing  the	 insulators  in	 the
kilns.
It is  true that in clause (viii) of the Explanation to
the Notification  expression 'materials' has been defined to
mean goods which are raw materials, components, intermediate
products or consumables used in the manufacture of resulting
products and  their  packings  or  mandatory  spares  to  be
exported in the resultant products.  But the said definition
in the	Explanation has	 to be	read in	 consonance with the
main part  of the  notification.    It	is  a  well  settled
principle of  statutory construction  that  the	 Explanation
must be	 read so  as to	 harmonise with	 and  clear  up	 any
ambiguity in  the main	provision. [See:
Bihta	 Cooperative
Development Cane  Marketing Union  Ltd. & Anr. vs.  The Bank
of Bihar  & Ors.
1967(1) SCR 848 at p.854].  The definition
of "materials"	in clause  (viii) of  the Explanation  must,
therefore,  be	 so  construed	 as  not  to  climinate	 the
distinction between  the words	'materials required  for the
purpose of manufacture of products' and the words 'materials
used in	 the manufacture  of the  resultant products' in the
main part of the definition.
On a  proper construction the definition of "materials"
in Clause  (viii) of the Explanation must be confined in its
application  to	 the  word  "materials"	 in  the  expression
'replenishment of  materials used  in the manufacture of the
resultant products'  in	 Notification  No.116/88-Cus.  dated
March 30, 1988.
It is  not disputed  that appellant  had fulfilled	 the
conditions laid	 down for  grant of  exemption contained  in
clause (a) to (g) of the Notification No. 116/88 dated March
30, 1988.   In	the circumstances,  it must be held that the
appellant was  entitled to  exemption from  customs duty and
additional duty	 under Notification  No. 116/88	 dated March
30, 1988  on the  import of  Crystar Beams.   The appeal is,
therefore, allowed,  the  judgment  of	the  Tribunal  dated
November  5,  1992  as	well  as  the  order  of  Additional
Collector (Customs) dated march 8, 1981 are set aside and it
is held	 that the  appellant is	 entitled to  exemption from
payment of customs duty and additional duty on the import of
Crystar beams  required for  the purpose  of manufacture  of
Lightening Arrestors.  No order as to costs.