[Cites
18
, Cited by
93
]
Supreme Court of India
Reliance Industries Ltd vs Pravinbhai Jasbhai Patel & Ors on 29 August, 1997
Equivalent citations: AIR 1997 SUPREME COURT 3892, 1997 (7) SCC 300, 1997 AIR SCW 3819, (1997) 7 JT 618 (SC), 1997 (7) JT 618, 1997 (5) SCALE 633, (1997) 4 RECCIVR 120, (1997) 5 SCALE 633, (1997) 2 GUJ LH 590, (1997) 3 CURCC 241, (1997) 8 SUPREME 52, (1997) WRITLR 792, (1999) 1 GUJ LR 244, AIRONLINE 1997 SC 650
Author:
S.B. Majmudar
Bench:
S. B. Majmudar
,
S. Saghir Ahmad
PETITIONER:
RELIANCE INDUSTRIES LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
PRAVINBHAI JASBHAI PATEL & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	29/08/1997

BENCH:
S. B. MAJMUDAR, S. SAGHIR AHMAD




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
S.B. Majmudar, J.
Leave granted  in Special	Leave Petitions	 challenging
the judgment  and order	 dated 24th  and 25th  October	1996
passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Gujarat in
Miscellaneous (Civil) Application No. 1939 of 1995.
By consent	 of learned advocates of parties the appeals
were taken up for final hearing. In these appeals by special
leave the  appellant-company has  brought in  challenge	 the
judgment and  order dated  24th and 25th October 1996 passed
by the	Division Bench	of the	High  Court  of	 Gujarat  in
Miscellaneous Civil Application No.1939 of 1995 arising from
Special Civil  Application No.770  of 1995.  Apart from	 the
merits of  the controversy  raised by  the appellant-company
against the  aforesaid judgment,  it is necessary to note at
the outset  one important  procedural question	which arises
for consideration in these appeals. It runs as under :
`When in review proceedings arising
     out of the decision of the Division
     Bench of  two learned Judges of the
     High  Court   rendered  in	 a  writ
     petition under
Article 226
of the
     Constitution of  India which  is in
     the nature of original proceedings,
     the two learned Judges deciding the
     review petition differ on questions
     of fact or law, whether a reference
     to	 a   third  learned   Judge   is
     required to be made for disposal of
     the  review  petition  as	per  the
     majority  opinion	 of  the   three
     learned  Judges   or   whether   on
     difference of  opinion between them
     on these questions, the petition is
     required  to   be	dismissed  under
     Order XLVII  Rule 6,
Code of Civil
     Procedure
, 1908  (`
CPC
' for short),
     keeping the  order,  sought  to  be
     reviewed untouched.'
     As the  aforesaid question	 goes to  the  root  of	 the
matter we thought it fit to hear the learned counsel for the
respective parties on this question at the outset.
Before coming  to the  grips of the said question it is
necessary to  note a  few introductory	facts leading to the
present proceedings.
A public interest litigation petition was moved i n the
High Court  of Gujarat	by the two writ petitioners who were
agriculturists having  agricultural lands  in kheda district
of Gujarat  state. Said petition was moved under
Article 226
of the	Constitution of	 India.	 It  was  alleged  that	 the
industries which  had been  set up in the industrial estates
at Naroda,  Vata and  Odhav on	the periphery  of  Ahmedabad
city,  were   discharging  their   polluted  effluents	into
Kharicut canal	which, in turn, leads to Khari river. It was
further alleged	 that there  are about	11 villages in kheda
district whose	only source  of water  for  the	 purpose  of
agriculture is	from khari river. Due to the water pollution
caused by  the said  industries the water in the khari river
was no	longer suitable for agriculture. It addition thereto
the agricultural  lands in  these villages  had	 lost  their
fertility and  the water  drawn from  the wells	 was  having
reddish colour	even when it was from the depth of about 300
ft. Various other allegations were made in the writ petition
which tried  to cover  in its  sweep  of  attack  about	 756
industrial units  situated  in	the  industrial	 estates  of
Gujarat Industrial Development Corporation, sited at Naroda,
Vata and  Odhav and  also some	of the	textiles  units	 and
processing units  situated in  or hereby  Ahemdabad. In	 the
said writ petition the present appellant was also one of the
contesting respondents.	 After hearing the parties concerned
the Division  Bench consisting	of B.N.	 Kirpal, CJ.  (as he
then was),  and H.L. Gokhale, J., by its order dated 5th/7th
August 1995  allowed the  writ petition	 and issued  various
directions against  the polluting  industries  concerned  as
detailed in  the same judgment. It is not in dispute between
the parties  that some of the industries covered by the said
judgment  came	to  this  Court	 by  way  of  Special  Leave
Petitions which	 were dismissed by this Court. So far as the
appellant is  concerned it  also challenged  the  very	same
judgment of  the High Court by filing Special Leave Petition
(C) No.24916  of 1995. A Bench of two learned Judges of this
Court consisting  of Hon'ble K. Ramaswamy and B.L. Hansaria,
JJ. passed  the following order on 17th November 1995 in the
Special Leave Petition of the appellant :
"The	 petitioner's	specific
     case set  up in  this Court is that
     is that  it has  already set up the
     affluent treatment	 plant as  early
     as in  1985 at  a cost  of Rs.  1.5
     crore and	that its  case was mixed
     up	 with	other  cases.	it   not
     discharging any  affluent	polluted
     waters into  the canal.  If that be
     so,  it   would  be   open	 to  the
     petitioner to  make an  application
     in the  High Court	 for appropriate
     review of	the order concerning the
     petitioner only.  Counsel	for  the
     petitioner seeks  for  and	 granted
     two months time."
Pursuant to  the aforesaid	 order	of  this  Court	 the
appellant  moved   a  review  petition	being  Miscellaneous
(Civil) Application  No. 1939  of 1995	in the	Gujarat High
Court seeking  to get  reviewed the  main  decision  in	 the
Special Civil  Application No.	770 of	1995 on	 the grounds
raised in  the review  petition. This  review  petition	 was
heard by another Division Bench of the High Court consisting
of H.L.	 Gokhale and M.S. Shah, JJ., as in the meantime B.N.
Kirpal, CJ.,  was elevated  as Judge of this Court. The said
review petition	 was heard  on	merits	by    the  aforesaid
Division Bench of the High Court. During the pendency of the
review petition	 additional evidence  was also considered by
the  Bench   as	 tendered  by  the  contesting	respondents.
Ultimately by  an order dated 24th October 1996 Gokhale, J.,
came to the conclusion the appellant-company was not covered
by the	impugned directions contained in the judgment in the
writ petition.	Said decision was rendered by Gokahle, J. on
various reasons	 mentioned therein.  So	 far  as  the  other
learned Judge M.s. Shah, J., was concerned, he took a August
1995. Consequently  the Special	 Leave Petition (C) No.24916
of 1995	 challenging the  said order  was  permitted  to  be
withdrawn by this Court on 20th December 1996.
In view  of the  aforesaid developments, therefore, the
main controversy  which survives  in these  appeals  centers
round the  legality of the order f the Division Bench of the
High  Court   which  dismissed	 the  Miscellaneous  (Civil)
Application No.1939  of 1995. These appeals, therefore, will
have to	 be decided  only with	reference to the controversy
centering round the decision in the review petition moved by
the appellant before the High Court.
So far as the challenge to the impugned decision in the
review petition is concerned it consists of two questions :
1.	  Whether the  Division Bench of
     the High  Court on	 a difference of
     opinion  between  the  two	 learned
     Judges was	 justified in dismissing
     the review	 petition under	 O.XLVII
     R. 6,
CPC
.
2.	  If yes,  whether on merits the
     review petition  was required to be
     allowed.
It is  obvious that  if it is held that on a difference
of opinion  between  the  learned  Judges  constituting	 the
Division Bench reference to third learned Judge was required
to be  made then  the second  question would not service for
our consideration  at this stage. That would service only if
it is  held that  the  review  petition	 was  liable  to  be
dismissed under	 O.XLVI R.6
CPC
as  has been  done  by	 the
Division Bench	in the	impugned judgment. We therefore, now
address ourselves  to the  consideration  of  the  aforesaid
procedural question.
Shri Kapil	 Sibal, learned senior counsel appearing for
the appellant  submitted that when the hearing of the review
petition resulted  in difference  of opinion between the two
learned Judges	constituting the Review	 Bench, reference to
third learned  Judge should  have been made as per clause 36
of the	Letters Patent	applicable  to	the  High  Court  of
Gujarat . In this connection it was also submitted that even
though rules were framed by the High Court of Gujarat as per
Clause 37  of Letters  patent the said rules especially Rule
186 thereof  did not  contra-indicate  the  said  procedural
position. In  this connection  he submitted that as per Rule
186 of	the Rules framed by the High Court, the procedure of
Section 98
of the  CPC got  attracted	for  resolving	this
controversy.  But  even	 in  such  a  case  looking  at	 the
conflicting decisions  rendered by the two learned Judges in
the review  petition proviso  to sub-Section  (2) of
Section
98
, CPC	 required reference of the question of law, on which
there was  difference of  opinion, for decision of the third
learned Judge.	It was alternatively contended By Shri Sibal
that in	 any case all questions of law and fact flowing from
the difference of opinion between the two learned Judges are
required to  be referred  to the  third	 learned  Judge	 for
resolution of  said difference	of opinion as per
Section 98
sub-Section (3)
of the	 CPC
read  with	 Clause	 36  of	 the
Letters Patent.	 That is  no case  the	Division  Bench	 was
justified the  dismissing the  review petition	despite this
conflict  of   opinions	 between  the  two  learned  Judges,
following the  provisions  of  O.XLVII	R.6,
CPC
.  It	was,
therefore, contended  that the ultimate decision rendered by
the Division  Bench of	the High  Court	 on  24th  and	25th
October 1996  dismissing the  review petition us required to
be set	aside  and  the	 controversy,  centering  round	 the
question on  which the	two learned Judges had difference of
opinion, is  required to  be resolved  by reference to third
learned Judge for being decided as per the majority decision
in the light of the opinion of the third learned Judge.
On the  other had	learned Solicitor  General shri T.R.
Andhyarujina,  appearing   for	respondent   no.4,   Gujarat
Pollution Control  Board and  Shri Soli J. Sorabjee, learned
senior counsel	appearing for  respondent no.6, Commissioner
of  Ahmedabad	Municipal  Corporation	contended  that	 the
procedure adopted  by  the  Division  Bench  dismissing	 the
review petition was the
Section 98
, CPC could not be pressed
in service  on the  facts of the present case for the simple
reason that  both the  learned Judges  had not	disagreed on
question of  law but  had disagreed  purely on	question  of
facts, namely, whether the appellant-industry was covered by
the sweep  of the main decision in Special Civil Application
No.770 of  1995 or  not and  whether  the  appellant  was  a
polluting industry  or not.  It was next contended that sub-
Section (3)  of
Section 98
, CPC cannot apply to the facts of
the present case as Rule 186 of the Gujarat High Court Rules
clearly indicated  the procedure  to be	 followed in such an
eventuality and as that procedure was provided by
Section 98
sub-Section (2),
CPC
which  was a  complete Code in itself,
the said  question could not be resolved by recourse to sub-
Section (3)  of
Section	 98
, CPC  as that  would render	 the
operation of  Rule 186	of  the	 Gujarat  High	Court  Rules
options. It was next contended that even assuming
Section 98
sub-Section (3),
CPC
applied  to the  facts of	 the present
case, and  consequently Clause	36 of the Letters patent got
attracted even	then the  said clause on its own terminology
could not  cover the  facts  of	 the  present  case  as	 the
decision rendered  in the review proceedings by the Division
Bench could  not be  said  to  be  a  decision	rendered  in
exercise of  original jurisdiction  of the High Court and it
was admittedly	not  a	decision  rendered  in	exercise  of
appellants jurisdiction	 of the	 High Court.  That Clause 36
only   covered those  decisions which  were rendered  by the
Division Bench	of the	High Court  either  in	exercise  of
original  jurisdiction	 or   in   exercise   of   appellate
jurisdiction. That  review jurisdiction	 is  an	 independent
jurisdiction which  is	different  from	 the  aforesaid	 two
jurisdiction and consequently such a decision was not at all
covered by  the sweep of Clause 36 of the Letters Patent and
even on	 that ground  only
Section  98
sub-Section  (2),
CPC
applied and as the proviso to the said sub-Section (2) could
not be	invoked for  resolving the factual controversy which
has resulted in two divergent opinions of two learned Judges
of the Division Bench, hearing the review petition, the only
course open  to the  High Court	 was to	 dismiss the  review
petition as  enjoined by  O.XLVII R.6,
CPC
. Consequently not
fault could  be found  with the	 decision of  the High Court
following the said course.
In the  light of the aforesaid rival contentions we now
proceed	 to  consider  this  moot  question  posed  for	 our
consideration. It is not is dispute between the parties that
the High  Court of Gujarat is governed by the Letters Patent
which earlier applied to the parent High Court of Bombay and
on bifurcation	on 1st	May 1960  the  said  Letters  Patent
continued to  apply to the Gujarat High Court as a successor
High Court  to the  erstwhile High  Court of Bombay. Letters
patent, therefore,  are the  charter which  would govern the
proceedings in	the High  Court	 and  the  procedure  to  be
followed by  it for  deciding  matters	falling	 within	 its
jurisdiction. It  is also not in dispute between the parties
that the  original writ	 petition moved in the High Court by
way of	public interest	 litigation was under
Article 226
of
the Constitution  of India invoking original jurisdiction of
the High  Court. It is that writ petition which got disposed
of by  the order dated 5th and 7th August 1995 passed by the
Division Bench	of the High Court. The review petition moved
by the	appellant-company stems	 from the aforesaid decision
in the	writ petition.	This review  petition was placed for
final  disposal	  before  a  Bench  of	two  learned  Judges
consisting of  H.L. Gokhale  and M.S.  Shah, JJ.,  as  noted
earlier. These	two learned  Judges of	the High Court were,
therefore, constituting a Division Bench which was entrusted
with the  task of  deciding about  apparent error,  it	any,
discernible from  the judgment of the earlier Division Bench
passed in  exercise of	original jurisdiction  of  the	High
Court. Consequently  if	 any  difference  of  opinion  arose
between the  two learned  Judges regarding the merits of the
review petition,  ex facie,  Clause 36 of the Letters Patent
got attracted. The said clause reads as under :
"36 Single	 Judges	 and  Divisional
     Courts. And  we do	 hereby	 declare
     that any  function, which is hereby
     directed to  be  performed	 by  the
     said High	Court of  Judicature  at
     Bombay  in	  the  exercise	 of  its
     original or appellate jurisdiction,
     may be  performed by  any Judge  or
     any   Division    Court	thereof,
     appointed or  constituted for  such
     purpose, in  pursuance  of	 section
     One  hundred   and	 eight	 of  the
Government of  India Act, 1915
, and
     if such  Division Court is composed
     of two  or	 more  Judges,	and  the
     Judges are divided in opinion as to
     the decision  to be  given	 on  any
     point, such  point shall be decided
     according to  the	opinion	 of  the
     majority of  the Judges,  if  there
     shall be  a majority,  but	 if  the
     Judges should  be	equally	 divided
     they shall	 state	the  point  upon
     which  they  differ  and  the  case
     shall then be heard upon that point
     by one  or more of the other Judges
     and  the  point  shall  be	 decided
     according to  the	opinion	 of  the
     majority of  the Judges,  who  have
     heard  the	  case	including  those
     first heard it."
It is  not possible  to agree  with the  contention  of
learned senior	counsel Shri  Sorabjee for  respondent	no.6
that even  if Clause  36 applied  it could  not cover review
proceedings arising out of decisions in writ petitions under
Article 226
of the  Constitution of India invoking original
jurisdiction  of  the  High  Court.  It	 is  true  that	 the
aforesaid clause  of Letters Patent deals with the decisions
of  Division   Benches	exercising   original  or  appellate
jurisdiction. Question of exercise of appellate jurisdiction
does not  arise in  the present	 case. Therefore,  the short
question is  whether he	 decision rendered  by the  Division
Bench of  the High Court in Special Civil Application No.770
of 1995 allowing it as a public interest litigation petition
in exercise of original jurisdiction of the High Court under
Article 226
of the  Constitution of  India would  not	lend
colour of  the very  same original  jurisdiction  to  review
proceedings arising  out of that very judgment? It has to be
kept in	 view, that  review petitions  are  not	 by  way  of
appeals before	the superior  Court but	 they are  by way of
requests to  the same  Court which  decided the	 matter, for
persuding it  to recall	 or reconsider	its own	 decision on
grounds which  are legally  permissible for  reviewing	such
orders. As  laid down by O.XLVII R.5,
CPC
as far as possible
the same  two learned  Judges or more Judges who decided the
original  proceedings  have  to	 hear  the  review  petition
arising from  their won judgment. Thus in substance a review
amounts to  reconsideration of	its own decision by the very
same Court.  When the Court sits to review its own order, it
obviously is  not sitting in appeal over its judgment but is
seeking to  have a  fresh look at its own judgment of course
within the  limits of  review powers, but still invoking for
that limited  purpose the  very same  jurisdiction which  it
exercised earlier.  it is axiomatic that if a Division Bench
of two	learned Judges	deciding the  appeal  had  exercised
appellate powers  and when  its decision  is  sought  to  be
reviewed it can be said to be required to reconsider its own
decision within	 the limits of review jurisdiction but still
in exercise  of the  same appellate  jurisdiction  which  it
earlier exercised.  Similarly when  a decision	rendered  in
exercise of  original jurisdiction by a Bench of two learned
Judges	is   sought  to	  be  reviewed	the  learned  Judges
exercising review  jurisdiction subject	 to the	 limitations
inhering in  such an exercise, can be said to be called upon
to reconsider their decision earlier rendered in exercise of
the  very   same  original   jurisdiction.  In	that  review
jurisdiction  takes   colour  from   the   nature   of	 the
jurisdiction exercised	by the	Court at  the time  when the
main judgment,	sought to  be reviewed, was rendered. Review
jurisdiction,  therefore,   cannot  be	 said  to   be	same
independent jurisdiction sought to be exercised by the Court
the nature  of the  jurisdiction exercised  by it  when	 the
judgment sought	 to be	reviewed was  rendered by it. As the
decision   sought to be reviewed in the present	 proceedings
was rendered  by the  Division	Bench  in  exercise  of	 its
original jurisdiction  the review proceedings emanating from
the very  same judgment	 would partake	the character of the
very same  exercise of original jurisdiction. It remained in
the domain  of original	 jurisdiction which could be said to
have been  invoked by  the appellant  when it  requested the
Court to review its earlier decision rendered in exercise of
original jurisdiction.	It is,	therefore, not	possible  to
agree with  the contention  of learned	senior counsel	Shri
Sorabjee for  respondent no.6  that the review proceeding in
the present  case which	 was arising  out of the decision of
the  High   Court  rendered  in	 exercise  of  its  original
jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India
sought to  invoke an  independent and  separate jurisdiction
of the	High Court which was neither original not appellate.
it must	 be held  that both the learned Judges who heard the
review petition arising out of decision rendered by the High
Court in exercise of its original jurisdiction under
Article
226
of	the Constitution  of India  were also called upon to
exercise the  very same	 original jurisdiction at the second
stage, and  for the second time when they were to reconsider
the legality  of the very same decision subject of course to
the limitations	 of review  power as  enjoined by  the	well
settled fetters	 and parameters	 for exercise of such review
jurisdiction. Once  that conclusion  is reached	 it  becomes
obvious that  fetters of  O.XLVII R.6,
CPC
could  not	 get
attracted to  the said	review proceedings as the wide sweep
of the	provisions of  Clause 36 of the Letters Patent being
the paramount  charter	applicable  to	the  High  Court  of
Gujarat could not be whittled down by the provisions
of Code
of Civil Procedure
if they were in any way inconsistent with
Clause 36 of the Letters Patent.
As laid  down by
Section 4
sub-Section (1),
CPC
itself
in the	absence of  any specific  provision to the contrary,
nothing in  the Code  shall be	deemed to limit or otherwise
affect any  special or local law now in force or any special
jurisdiction or	 power conferred,  or any  special  form  of
procedure prescribed, by or under any other law for the time
being in force. It cannot be disputed that Letters Patent as
applicable to  High Court  of Gujarat  is a  special law  in
force which  confers special  jurisdiction or power and lays
down  special  form  of	 procedure  prescribed	therein	 for
governing the cases where the two learned Judges forming the
Division Bench	of the	High Court differed on a question of
law or	fact. Under  such circumstances	 Clause	 36  of	 the
Letters Patent laying down the special procedure for meeting
such a	contingency was	 required to  be followed without in
any way	 being impeded	or restricted or being cut across by
the procedural	requirements laid  down by O.XLVII R.6,
CPC
.
The said  provision on	its own	 would apply to those courts
which were  governed strictly  by the  procedure
of  Code of
Civil Procedure
and had  no  provision	 of  Letters  Patent
Charter to  fall back  upon. In	 other	words  charter	High
Courts governed	 by the	 Letters Patent	 which were original
charter High  Courts or which were the successor High Courts
like Gujarat  High Court,  would be  governed by the special
procedure laid	down by	 Clause 36 of the Letters Patent and
that would  remain saved  by the operation of
Section 4
sub-
Section (1),
CPC
noted above. It is, therefore, not possible
to agree  with the  reasoning  of  the	High  Court  in	 the
impugned judgment  to the  effect  that	 Clause	 36  of	 the
letters Patent does not deal with a situation where there is
conflict of  decisions between the two learned Judges of the
Bench sitting  in review against the earlier judgment of the
Division Bench of the High Court.
However learned  senior  counsel  for  the	 respondents
vehemently contended  that Clause  37 of  the  same  Letters
patent	 directs that  the High	 Court will be guided by the
Civil Procedure	 Code in  such contingencies and in exercise
of the	said power  available to the High Court under Clause
37 of  the Letters  Patent read with
Sections 122
and
129
of
CPC Gujarat  High Court	 had framed rules which would govern
the present  controversy. Clause  37 of	 the Letters  Patent
reads as under :
"37.  Regulation  of  Proceedings.-
     And we  do further	 ordain that  it
     shall be  lawful for  the	said  to
     time to  make rules  and orders for
     the  purpose   of	regulating   all
     proceedings in  civil  cases  which
     may be brought before the said High
     Court, including proceedings in its
     Admiralty,		 Vice-Admiralty,
     intestate,	    and	     matrimonial
     jurisdiction respective  : Provided
     always that  the  said  High  Court
     shall  be	guided	in  making  such
     rules and orders as far as possible
     by the  provisions
of  the Code  of
     Civil  Procedure
,	 being	an   Act
     passed by	the Governor  General in
     Council, and  being Act  No.VIII of
     1859, and the provisions of any law
     which has	been  made  amending  or
     altering  the   same  by  competent
     legislative authority for India."
It is true that in exercise of the powers vested in the
High Court  under Clause  37 rules  have been  framed by the
High Court for governing the procedure in matters dealt with
by the	High Court  in exercise of its diverse jurisdiction.
Said rule  making power	 also flows  from the  provisions of
Sections 122
and
129
of CPC. However a mere look at
Section
129
, CPC  shows that  the rules	 framed by  the	 High  Court
cannot be inconsistent with the Letters Patent. Said
Section
129
reads as under :
"129. Power  of High Courts to make
     rules as  to their	 original  civil
     procedure.-	 Notwithstanding
     anything in  this	Code,  any  High
     Court, not	 being the  Court  of  a
     Judicial  Commissioner,   may  make
     such rules	 not  inconsistent  with
     the  Letters  Patent  or  order  or
     other  law	  establishing	 it   to
     regulate its  own procedure  in the
     exercise  of   its	 original  civil
     jurisdiction as it shall think fit,
     and nothing  herein contained shall
     affect the	 validity  of  any  such
     rules in  force at the commencement
     of this Code."
Keeping in	 view the aforesaid statutory scheme we have
to consider  the scope	and ambit  of Rule 186 framed by the
High Court  in this  connection and on which strong reliance
was placed  by learned	senior counsel	for the respondents.
Rule 186 reads as under :
"186.   Procedure	  in   case   of
     Difference	  of   Opinion	 between
     Judges.- In  case of  difference of
     opinion	between	   the	  Judges
     composing the  Division  Bench  the
     point  of	 difference   shall   be
     decided  in   accordance  with  the
     procedure referred to in
Section 98
of the Civil Procedure Code."
A more  look at  the  said	 rule  shows  that,  amongst
others, in  the petitions  under
Article  226
decided  by  a
Division Bench	of two learned Judges of the High Court if a
difference of opinion arises between them the procedure laid
down by
Section  98
,  CPC  has	 to  be	 followed.  We	may,
therefore, turn to
Section 98
, CPC. it reads as under :
"98. Decision where appeal heard by
     two or  more Judges.-(1)  where  an
     appeal is	heard by  a Bench of two
     or more Judges, the appeal shall be
     decided  in   accordance  with  the
     opinion of	 such Judges  or of  the
     majority (if any) of such Judges.
	  (2) Where  there  is	no  such
     majority	which	concurs	  in   a
     judgment varying  or reversing  the
     decree appealed  from, such  decree
     shall be confirmed:
Provided that	 where the Bench
     hearing the  appeal is  composed of
     two or  other even number of Judges
     belonging to  a Court consisting of
     more Judges than those constituting
     the Bench	and the Judges composing
     the Bench	differ in  opinion on  a
     point of  law, they  may state  the
     point of law upon which they differ
     and the  appeal shall then be heard
     upon that point only be one or more
     of the other Judges, and such point
     shall be  decided according  to the
     opinion of the majority (if any) of
     the  Judges   who	have  heard  the
     appeal, including	those who  first
     heard it.
(3) Nothing  in  this	 section
     shall  be	 deemed	 to   alter   or
     otherwise affect  any provision  of
     the  Letters  Patent  of  any  High
     Court."
A conjoint	 reading of  Rule 186  of the  Gujarat	High
Court Rules  and
Section  98
of	 the CPC  shows that  is the
procedure of
Section 98
,  CPC which  gets telescoped	into
Rule 186  of the Gujarat High Court Rules for deciding as to
how the	 decisions of  a Bench of two or more learned Judges
disposing of  the writ	petitions covered  by the  sweep  of
these  provisions  have	 to  be	 processed.  Shri  Sorabjee,
learned senior counsel for respondent no.6 was right when he
contended that	Rules 186 refers to the procedure of
Section
98
,  CPC   and	does   not  import  the	 provision  thereof.
Ipsissimis verbis. Let us, therefore, turn to the procedural
scheme envisaged  by
Section  98
, CPC.
Section 98 (1)
of CPC
read with Rule 186 of the Gujarat High Court Rules framed by
the High  discussed earlier,  would include  review petition
arising therefrom,  is head by a Bench of two or more Judges
the said  petition has	to be decided in accordance with the
opinion of  such Judges	 or the	 majority thereof. Upto this
stage,
Section	98 (1)
does not  conflict  with  any  other
provision of Letters Patent. Then follows sub-Section (2) of
Section 98
,  CPC with  lays down that where there is no such
majority which	concurs in  a judgment	varying or reversing
the decree appealed from, such decree shall be confirmed. By
its very  language sub-Section (2) of
Section 98
, CPC cannot
apply to  the decision	rendered by  a Division Bench of the
High Courts  in exercise  of its original civil jurisdiction
as is  the present  case. Reason  is obvious.  There  is  no
question of  confirming decree	of the	lower court when the
Division  Bench	  of  the   High  Court	  decides   original
proceedings under
Article  226
of  the  Constitution.	 Its
decision in  the writ petition partakes the character of the
decision of  the Court	of first  instance. Thereby the High
Court  decides	 for  the   first  time	  the  questions  in
controversy between the parties and adjudicates upon them as
a Court of first instance. Consequently on the very language
of sub-Section	(2) of
Section 98
,  CPC the  said provision
cannot get  attracted to cases where a Division Bench of the
High Court  decides writ  petition under
Article 226
of the
Constitution of	 India in  exercise of	its  original  civil
jurisdiction or for that matter review petition invoking the
exercise of  the very  same original  jurisdiction  as	seen
earlier. Consequently  the proviso  to	sub-Section  (2)  of
Section 98
,  CPC also  would remain  out of  picture in such
cases. Under these circumstances there would remain only the
residuary provision  of sub-Section  (3) of
Section 98
, CPC
which clearly  enjoins that  nothing in	 the  said  Sections
shall be  deemed to  alter or otherwise affect any provision
of Letters  Patent of any High Court. This would necessarily
lead to	 a back reference to Clause 36 of the Letters Patent
which would  remain the solitary provision applicable in the
field for  resolving the  procedural controversy  in such  a
case. In  short when  an application  to  get  reviewed	 the
decision of  a Division	 Bench of the High Court rendered in
exercise of  its original  civil jurisdiction  in a petition
under
Article  226
of the Constitution of India, is moved in
the High Court and if there is conflict of decisions between
the two	 Judges constituting  the Review  Bench, it  is only
Clause 36  of the Letters Patent which would govern the said
controversy. Neither O.XLVII R.6,
CPC
nor
Section
98 (2)
,	 CPC would  apply to  such eventualities  arising in
these review  proceedings. Under  these circumstances it has
to be  held even  in the light of Rule 186 read with
Section
98
of  the CPC	that if	 the Division  Bench of	 two learned
Judges	hearing	  the  review	petition  arising   out	  of
proceedings  earlier   decided	under
Article	226
of	 the
Constitution of	 India, differ	and do not come to an agreed
conclusion the	procedure laid	down by	 Clause	 36  of	 the
Letters patent	which would  govern  the  said	controversy.
Neither O.XlVII	 R.6,
CPC
nor
Section 98(2)
, CPC would apply
to such	 eventualities arising	in these review proceedings.
Under these circumstance it has to be held even in the light
of Rule	 186 read  with
Section	 98
of	the CPC	 that if the
Division Bench	of two	learned Judges	hearing	 the  review
petition arising  out of  proceedings earlier  decided under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India, differ and do not
come to	 an agreed  conclusion the  procedure laid  down  by
Clause 36  of the Letters Patent would be the only procedure
that has  to be	 followed and  it cannot be whittled down or
cut short by any other provision to the contrary as found in
the CPC
.  We have already seen earlier that there is no such
contrary procedure  laid down by
the CPC
but even if it were
so such	 contrary procedure  seeking to	 whittle down at the
wide sweep  of Clause  36 of  the Letters Patent has to give
way to	the provisions of the charter in view of the express
saving provision  of
Section  4(1)
of  CPC read with
Section
129
thereof. In this connection we may profitably refer to a
decision of  the Privy	Council in  these  case	 of  Bhaidas
Shivdas V.  Bai Gulba  and another AIR 1921 Privy Council 6.
The question  before the privy Council was whether Clause 36
of the	Letters	 Patent	 of  Bombay  could  be	said  to  be
controlled by
Section 98
of the  CPC. In  1921 when  Their
Lordships  of	the  Privy   Council  were  considering	 the
question, Clause  36 of the Letters Patent applicable to the
Bombay High  Court made	 a special  provision regarding	 the
procedure to  be followed  in case  the	 Bench	hearing	 the
appeal was  composed of	 two or	 more Judges  and the Judges
were divided  in opinion  as to	 the decision to be given on
any point. In such a case the decision was to be rendered in
the light  of the opinion of the majority of the Judges. But
if the	Judges were  equally divided,  opinion of the senior
Judge was  to prevail.	Now  that  clause  was	directly  in
conflict with  the provisions of
Section 98
, CPC, as it then
was on the Statute Book, which, contemplated that in case of
such a	difference of opinion between the two learned Judges
constituting the  Bench the  point of  law was	to be stated
arising	 from such difference of opinion for decision of the
third learned  Judge. Their  Lordships of  the Privy Council
placing reliance on
Section 4
sub-Section (1),
CPC
held that
Clause 36  of the  Letters  Patent  was	 not  controlled  by
Section 98
of the  CPC and, therefore, it was the clause in
the Letters  Patent which  would govern	 the procedure to be
followed in  such a  case and not the procedure laid down by
Section 98
, CPC. It is of course true that rule analogous to
Rule 186  of the  Rules framed	by the High Court of Gujarat
was not	 on the anvil of consideration of the Privy Council.
But the	 Privy Council	considered
Section 44
of the Letters
Patent making  an express  provision that the Letters patent
would be  subject to  legislative powers of Governor General
in Council.  Despite that  provision the  aforesaid decision
was rendered  by the Privy Council. It will be profitable to
extract	 the   observation  of	 Lord  Buckmaster  who	gave
unanimous opinion  on behalf  of the  Privy Council  in	 the
following terms :
"That contention  depends upon
     the  construction	of  the	 Letters
     Patent of	Bombay, under  which the
     Court was constituted, and
the Code
     of	 Civil	 Procedure
,   1908.   By
Section 36
of the Letters Patent it
     is provided  that if the High Court
     is sitting	 in a  division composed
     of two  or	 more  Judges,	and  the
     Judges are divided in opinion as to
     the decision  to be  given	 on  any
     point,  the  decision  shall  agree
     with the opinion of the majority of
     the Judges:  but if  the Judges are
     equally divided, the opinion of the
     senior Judge shall prevail.
In  this   case  it  is  quite
     clear.  There   were   two	  Judges
     sitting: the  senior Judge	 was the
     Chief Justice:  there was	an equal
     division  of   opinion;  and  under
Section  36
,  in  consequence,  the
     plaintiff was  entitled to a decree
     in this favor.
It  is,   however,  urged   on
     behalf of	the respondents that the
     procedure in
Section 36
is modified
     by
the  Code of Civil Procedure
, of
     the  Letters  Patent  there  is  an
     express subject  to the legislative
     powers of	the Governor-General  in
     Council.
There are  two sections in
the
     Code of  Civil Procedure
which are
     relevant to  this dispute.	 The one
     is
section  4
and  the  other  is
section 98
.
Section 98
appears to
     have been	the section  under which
     the  Judges   acted.  That	 section
     provides:-
`That where  the Bench hearing
     the  appeal   is  composed	 to  two
     Judges   belonging	  to   a   Court
     consisting of more than two Judges,
     and the  Judges composing the Bench
     differ in	opinion on  a  point  of
     law, they	may state  the point  of
     law upon which they differ, and the
     appeal shall  then	 be  heard  upon
     that point	 only by  one or more of
     the other	Judges, and  such  point
     shall be  decided according  to the
     opinion of the majority (if any) of
     the  Judges   who	have  heard  the
     appeal, including	those who  first
     heard it.'
	  It is	 quite plain  that those
     provisions	  create    a	 totally
     distinct method of procedure in the
     event  of	difference  between  two
     judges from  that	which  was  laid
     down by
section 36
.  Under
section
     36
of   the  Letters   Patent  the
     judgment of  the Judge  who was the
     senior Judge  would be the judgment
     which the	parties before the Court
     would have a right to obtain; under
section 98
,  the judgment	to which
     they are  entitled is  the judgment
     of the  majority of  all the Judges
     who have heard the appeal; and this
     case   shows    that   those    two
     provisions might  produce a totally
     different	result.	 If,  therefore,
section 98
controls
section 36
that
     the  proper   procedure  had   been
     followed, and  that  the  appellant
     head no  cause of complaint. But by
section 4
of  the	 Code  of  Civil
     Procedure	it   is	 also	provided
     that:-
`In the  absence  of  any	specific
     provision to  the contrary, nothing
     in this  Code shall  be  deemed  to
     limit  or	 otherwise  affect   any
     special or	 local law now in force,
     or	 any   special	jurisdiction  or
     power  conferred,	or  any	 special
     from of  procedure prescribed by or
     under any	other law  for the  time
     being in force.'
	  There is no specific provision
     in
section  98
,  and  there  is  a
     special form of procedure which was
     already prescribed.  That	form  of
     procedure
section	98
does	 not, in
     their	Lordships'	opinion,
     affect....."
Moreover the  fact remains	 that by  the  enactment  of
Section	 98(3)
,	 CPC  whatever	doubt  earlier	remained  in
connection with	 this controversy  was put  at rest  by	 the
Legislature and the view propounded by the Privy Council got
statutory recognition by the amendment of
Section 98
and the
insertion of sub-Section (3) thereof.
One contention  of learned	 Solicitor General appearing
for respondent	no.4 in connection with the applicability of
Rule 186  of the  Gujarat High Court Rules is required to be
noted at  this stage.  He  submitted  that  by	the  express
language of  Rule 186  of the  Gujarat High  Court Rules the
procedural  gamut  on  difference  of  opinion	between	 two
learned Judges	composing the  Division Bench is required to
be the	same as	 referred to in
Section 98
of CPC which is a
complete Code  in itself and consequently the procedure laid
down under  Clause  36	of  the	 Letters  Patent  would	 get
excluded and  if again the same procedure under Clause 36 is
to be pressed in service via
Section 98
sub-Section (3),
CPC
the very  Rule 186  would be  rendered options or at least a
situation conundrum  we would  be moving  in a circle. It is
not possible  to agree	with this  contention. The reason is
obvious. Rule  186 is  found in	 Chapter XVII of the Gujarat
High Court Rules which deals with `Application under
Article
226
, 227
and
228
of the Constitution and Rules for issue of
writs and  Orders  under  the  said  Articles'-	 So  far  as
proceedings under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India
are concerned  they are	 original in nature. As we have seen
earlier qua  them
Section  98(2)
,  CPC	 would	on  its	 own
language Article,  the	decisions  rendered  by	 subordinate
Tribunals. In  these petitions	if the Division Bench of the
High Court  by	majority  does	not  concur  in	 varying  or
reversing the  subordinate  Tribunal's	judgment  and  order
which is  brought in  challenge, then
Section 98(2)
, CPC may
get attracted  for confirming  such judgment  of  the  lower
Tribunal and  in such  a situation  if	the  learned  Judges
composing the  Bench are  equally divided  on a point of law
then the  procedure laid  down by the proviso to sub-Section
(2) of
Section 98
,  CPC can be followed. It is well settled
that proceedings  under
Article 227
are not by way of appeal
before the  High Court	and, therefore, the High Court under
Article 227
of	 the  Constitution  can	 interfere  only  on
questions of  law and  that too	 involving patent  errors of
law. When  there is  a difference of opinion between the two
learned Judges	of the	Division Bench	hearing the petition
under
Article 227
on such patent questions of law, then they
can refer  the points  of  law	on  which  they	 differ	 for
consideration of  the third  learned Judges  as laid down by
the  proviso   to  sub-Section	 (2)  of
Section  98
,	CPC.
Consequently it	 cannot be  said  that	Rule  186  would  be
rendered totally  nugatory or  options if  it is  held	that
procedure laid	down by
Section  98
sub-Section  (2),
CPC
cannot be  pressed in  service in proceedings emanating from
petition under
Article 226
of the  Constitution  of  India
which are  original  in	 nature	 and  wherein  no  order  of
subordinate authority is brought in challenge. But even that
apart, mandate of Rule 186 itself contemplates applicability
of procedure  of
Section 98
, CPC which enables invocation of
the procedure of Clause 36 of the Letters Patent via
Section
98(3)
, CPC  itself in  cases where
Section 98(2)
does	 not
apply as  in the  present case.
Section 98(3)
, CPC, as seen
earlier, clearly  indicates that
Section 98
will not affect
the substantive	 provisions of the Letters Patent. Clause 36
of the Letters Patent is a substantive provision laying down
the procedure  to be  followed in contingencies contemplated
by the	said Clause.  That being  the paramount	 clause will
necessarily apply  to all the proceeding decided by the High
Court. As observed by us earlier the said result will follow
apart from  the operation of
Section 98
sub-Section (3),
CPC
also from  the combined	 operation of  the saving  clause of
Section 4(1)
, CPC and
Section 129
thereof.
Consequently it  is not  possible	to  agree  with	 the
conclusion to  which the High Court reached that because the
two learned  Judges of	the High  Court deciding  the review
petition  did  not  agree  and	gave  contradictory  opinion
regarding the  merits of the review petition the decision of
the review  petition had  to be	 as laid down by O.XLVI R.6,
CPC
. Consequently,  the said  decision	of  the	 High  Court
dismissing the	Miscellaneous Civil  Application No.1939  of
1995, rendered	on 25th October 1996 cannot be sustained and
will have  to be  set aside.  As a logical corollary to this
decision of  ours Miscellaneous Civil Application No.1939 of
1995 is	 directed to  be restored  to the  file of  the High
Court of  Gujarat with	a direction  that  in  view  of	 the
conflicting opinions  expressed by  the Bench  of  the	High
Court consisting  of H.L.  Gokhale and	M.S. Shah,  JJ., who
earlier heard the review petition, the questions arising for
decision in  the review	 proceedings on	 which the aforesaid
two learned  Judges either differed in their opinions or did
not concur will have to be referred for opinion of the third
learned Judge  of the  High Court  as per  Clause 36  of the
Letters	 Patent.   For	that  purpose  the  remanded  review
petition will  have to	be placed  before the  Bench of H.L.
Gokhale and  M.S. Shah,	 JJ. to	 enable them  to  state	 the
points of  their difference  as per Clause 36 of the Letters
patent for  being placed  for  consideration  of  the  third
learned Judge.	The Hon'ble  Chief Justice of the High Court
is  requested	to  assign   the  review   petition  to	 the
appropriate Bench and thereafter to the third learned Single
Judge for  deciding these remanded proceedings as per Clause
36 of the Letters Patent at the earliest. it is obvious that
the third learned Judge will be entitled to consider all the
aforesaid questions arising out of the difference of opinion
between the  two learned  Judges, whether they are questions
of fact	 or  questions	of  law,  and  the  review  petition
ultimately will	 be decided  in the light of the decision of
the third  learned Judge,  as per the procedure laid down by
Clause 36  of the  Letters Patent. It is obvious that if the
ultimate decision  in the review proceedings, as remanded as
per this  order of  ours, goes against the appellant it will
be open	 to  the  appellant  to	 challenge  the	 said  final
decision in accordance with law.
We may also mention at this stage one development which
took place  during the pendency of these proceedings in this
Court. By  an order dated 17th June 1997 a Division Bench of
the High  Court consisting  of B.C. Patel and M.S. Shah, JJ.
passed an order in Miscellaneous Civil Application No.178 of
1997 in	 Special Civil	Application  No.770  of	 1995.	That
decision is  based on  the main	 judgment in  Special  Civil
Application No.770 of 1995 which is its turn is sought to be
got reviewed  by the  appellant in  the present	 proceedings
which are  now directed	 by us	to be  remanded to  the High
Court for  a fresh  decision. Consequently  the observations
made by	 the aforesaid	Bench of the High Court in its order
dated 17th  June 1997  against the  appellant will obviously
abide by  the final  decision in  the review  petition to be
rendered pursuant  to the  present order of ours by the High
Court and  if the  remanded review  proceedings get  decided
against the  appellant the appellant will also be at liberty
to challenge  along with  the said  decision in	 the  review
proceedings,  also   the  decision   rendered  against	 the
appellant by  the High	Court by  its order  dated 17th June
1997. It  goes without	saying that  if and when June future
challenges are levelled by the appellant against any adverse
decision in the remanded review proceedings also against the
order of  the High  Court dated	 17th  June  1997  the	said
challenges  will   have	 to  be	 processed  and	 decided  in
accordance with	 law. We  make to  clear  that	we  make  no
observations on	 the merits  of the  controversy between the
parties,  emanating  from  these  proceedings  and  all	 the
contentions raised  by the  contesting parties	before us in
the present  proceedings on  merits of	the controversy	 are
kept open.  They will  remain untouched one way or the other
by the present order of remand.
So far  as the  delinked SLP  arising out	of the	main
judgment of  the High Court dated 5th and 7th August 1995 in
Special Civil  Application No.770  of 1995 is concerned, the
only question  which  would  survive  for  consideration  as
submitted  by  learned	senior	counsel	 for  the  appellant
pertains  to  the  liability  of  the  appellant-company  to
contribute pro	rata towards  the expenses to be incurred by
the  State   of	 Gujarat,  G.I.D.C.  and  A.M.C.  in  laying
separate/necessary pipelines  and/or  drains  to  carry	 the
treated industrial  effluent to	 Pirana for  mixing the same
with the treated sewage before discharge into the river. The
said direction	issued in  general  is	found  in  paragraph
135(B) (ii)  of the judgment. It was submitted that the said
question will  remain a	 solitary question for consideration
of this Court in the SLP against the main judgment which has
to await the decision in the remanded review proceedings. If
the remanded  review proceedings ultimately result in favour
of the	appellant and  it is held by majority of the learned
Judges	deciding  the  remanded	 review	 petition  that	 the
appellant is  not a polluting unit at all then the aforesaid
solitary question  in appellant's  SLP may  not survive	 for
consideration of  this Court.  But if  on the other hand the
remanded review	 petition gets	dismissed  by  the  majority
decision subject  to  the  appellant  challenging  the	said
decision before	 this Court  the aforesaid solitary question
will arise  for consideration  in the  delinked SLP  of	 the
appellant against the main judgment.
The learned  senior counsel  for the respondents on the
other hand  contended that  if the  ultimate decision in the
remanded review	 petition  is  against	the  appellant,	 the
aforesaid  solitary   question	 would	 not   survive	 for
consideration for two reasons - (1) the SLP against the main
judgment which was filed by the appellant earlier is already
withdraw by  the appellant;  and (ii)  in the said withdrawn
SLP at	an earlier  stage this Court relegated the appellant
for redressing its grievances, if any, by filing appropriate
review petition	 and when  the appellant  filed	 the  review
petition it  confined its  challenge to	 two  directions  as
found in the main judgment, namely, paragraphs 135 (C) (xii)
and 135	 (A) (I)  (v) of  the operative	 part  of  the	said
judgment as  mentioned in  paragraph 22	 to 25 of the review
petition moved before the High Court pursuant to the liberty
given by  this Court  in the  aforesaid SLP  (C) No.24916 of
1995  by  its  order  dated  17th  November  1995.  It	was,
therefore, contended  by the  learned senior counsel for the
respondents that  the appellant	 in its	 wisdom confined its
attack against the impugned common main judgment only on the
basis of  the aforesaid	 two contentions. It has, therefore,
to be  held that  by necessary	implication it	gave up	 its
earlier challenge  to the  directions contained in paragraph
135(B) (ii)  of the  main judgment  which deals with the pro
rata contribution by the polluting units towards the cost of
laying the  pipelines and consequently the fresh SLP raising
the very same challenge against the main judgment in Special
Civil Application  No.770 of  1995  does  not  survive	and,
therefore, the delinked SLP should be summarily rejected.
Learned senior  counsel for  the appellant on the other
hand contended	that even  if remanded	review	petition  is
rejected  this	 solitary  contention	will   survive	 for
consideration  as  according  to  the  appellant  directions
contained in  the main judgment at paragraph 135(B) will not
apply and similarly directions contained in paragraph 135(A)
(I) (ii) will also not apply as the appellant discharge more
than 25000 litres of water per day but they have already got
primary and  secondary treatment  plants since	long. As  we
have  remanded	 the  review   proceedings   for   a   fresh
consideration by  the third learned Judge of the High Court,
in our	view, it  will be  too	premature  to  consider	 the
delinked SLP  on the  aforesaid	 solitary  contention  which
remains to  be	considered  in	the  SLP  against  the	main
judgment at this stage. Hence keeping all the contentions of
the contesting	parties open,  centering round the aforesaid
solitary contention  on which  the said SLP against the main
judgment is sought to be pressed by the appellant at a later
stage, we  have thought	 it fit	 to be	delink the  said SLP
awaiting the decision in the remanded proceedings.
As the remanded review petition pertains to proceedings
decided in  1995 and  as the  SLP  filed  by  the  appellant
against the said judgment is kept pending by us awaiting the
decision in  the remanded review proceedings, we request the
High Court  to dispose	review proceedings,  we request	 the
High Court  to dispose of the remanded review proceedings at
is earliest  convenience and  preferably within	 a period of
eight weeks  from the receipt of a copy of this order at its
end.
Before parting  with these	 appeals we may note that on
the suggestion	of the	Court, the  appellant's	 counsel  on
instructions agreed  to deposit	 with respondents  concerned
Rs.50 lakhs  without prejudice	to  appellant's	 rights	 and
contentions in the delinked SLP and also the remanded review
proceedings. This  good gesture	 was made  with	 a  view  to
seeing that  proper pipelines  are laid	 in the	 surrounding
area of the industrial estate where other admitted polluting
industries are	operating. This	 deposits will be considered
to be  a benevolent  act on the part of the appellant, if it
ultimately succeeds  in these litigations. We note this fair
stand of  the appellant and direct it to deposit Rs.50 lakhs
as agreed to before us, with respondents concerned for being
utilised for  the purposes indicated in the main judgment in
Special Civil Application No.770 of 1995.
In	 the   result  these  appeals  are  allowed  to	 the
aforesaid extent. In the facts and circumstances of the case
there will be no order as to costs.