[Cites
10
, Cited by
84
]
Supreme Court of India
Tata Davy Ltd. Etc vs State Of Orissa & Ors on 4 August, 1997
Equivalent citations: AIR 1998 SUPREME COURT 2928, 1997 (6) SCC 669, 1998 AIR SCW 2352, (1997) 4 COMLJ 337, (1997) 7 JT 216 (SC), 1997 (2) UPTC 1267, 1997 ( ) STI 225, 1997 (5) SCALE 335, (1997) 94 ELT 477, (1997) 2 LABLJ 989, (1997) 43 KANTLJ(TRIB) 227, (1997) 26 CORLA 294, (1997) 7 SUPREME 6, (1997) 5 SCALE 335, (1998) BANKJ 252, 1997 UPTC 1 331, (1998) 93 COMCAS 1, (1997) 140 TAXATION 545, (1998) 111 STC 462
Author:
S.P. Bharucha
Bench:
S.P. Bharucha
,
V.N. Khare
PETITIONER:
TATA DAVY LTD. ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF ORISSA & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	04/08/1997

BENCH:
S.P. BHARUCHA, V.N. KHARE




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
THE 4TH DAY OF AUGUST, 1997
Present:
Hon'ble Mr. Justice S.P.Bharucha
	       Hon'ble Mr. Justice V.N.Khare
(R.F.Nariman, Sr.Adv.,	S.Sukumaran) Adv. for M/s JBO & Co.,
M.L.Lathoty,   P.K.Sharma,    Himanshu	 Shekhar,   P.S.Jha,
P.N.Mishra, Advs. with him for appearing Parties.
J U D G M E N T
     The following Judgment of the Court was delivered:
WITH
	     (Civil Appeal Nos.1362-63 of 1991)
		      J U D G M E N T
S.P. BHARUCHA, J.
The facts that we state relate to the case of Tata Davy
Limited (C.A.  No.1354/91).   They are substantially similar
to the facts of the other appeals.
The said  appellant was, o 9th February, 1988, declared
a sick	company within	the meaning  of the  Sick Industrial
companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 (now referred to as
"the Central  Act").  On a reference under Section 15 of the
Central Act  made on  23rd December,  1989, an inquiry under
Section 16 was made and a scheme was sanctioned by the Board
for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (now referred to
as "the	 Board") for the said appellant's benefit and it was
at the relevant time under implementation.
For the  Assessment Years	1983-84 and 1984-85 the said
appellant was in arrears of sales tax under the
Orissa Sales
Tax Act, 1947
(now referred to as "the State Act"). Recovery
of the	said arrears  was sought to be made by attachment of
the  said  appellant's	property  under	 the  provisions  of
section 13-A  of the State Act. The High Court of Orissa was
considering the	 question whether steps to recover sales tax
dues under  Section 13-A of the State Act were in the nature
of proceedings	by way	of execution,  distress or  the like
contemplated by	 Section 22(1)	of the Central Act in a writ
petition  filed	 by  M/s.  Aluminium  Industries  Ltd.	(the
appellant in  the other	 appeals) which was, as aforestated,
in a  position similar	to that	 of the said appellant.	 The
said appellant	intervened in  the  writ  petition  and	 was
heard.
The High  Court  said  in	its  judgment  on  the	writ
petition  that	the  question  before  it  was	whether	 the
provisions of  Section 22(1) of the Central Act overrode the
provisions of  Section 13-A  of the  State Act. It held that
there  was  no	irreconciliable	 conflict  between  the	 two
provisions as  they operated  in separate an distinct fields
and, therefore,	 both were  capable of	being obeyed.	 The
result was  that Section 22(1) of the Central Act "would not
protect the  properties of  industrial companies  from being
proceeded against in exercise of the power under Section 13-
A of the State Act".
Very soon	after the  High Court's	 judgment this Court
decided the case of
Gram Panchayat and Anr. vs. Shri Vallabh
Glass Works Limited & Ors.
, 1990 (1) S.C.R. 966, to which we
shall make  reference.	 The appellants	 applied to the High
Court to  review its  decision in  the light  of the Vallabh
Glass  Works'	judgment.
The	 High  Court  expressed	 its
inability to do so.
Hence, these appeals.
For  the  purposes	 of  appreciating  the	controversy,
Section 22(1) of the Central Act needs to be set down.
"22.    Suspension	    of	   legal
     proceedings, contracts,  etc. - (1)
     where in  respect of  an industrial
     company an inquiry under
section 16
is pending	 or any	 scheme referred
     to	 under
section  17
is  under
     preparation or  consideration or  a
     sanctioned	   scheme    is	   under
     implementation or	where an  appeal
     under
section  25
relating  to  an
     industrial	 company   is	pending,
     then,   notwithstanding	anything
     contained	in  the
Companies  Act,
     1956
(1  of 1956), or any other law
     or the  memorandum and  articles of
     association   of	the   industrial
     company  or  any  other  instrument
     having effect under the said Act of
     other law,	 no proceedings	 for the
     winding  up   of	the   industrial
     company or	 for execution, distress
     or the  like  against  any	 of  the
     properties	  of	the   industrial
     company or for the appointment of a
     receiver in  respect thereof and no
     suit for  the recovery  of money or
     for the enforcement of any security
     against the  industrial company  or
     of any  guarantee in respect of any
     loans   or advance	 granted to  the
     industrial company	 shall lie or be
     proceeded with further, except with
     the consent of the Board, or as the
     case   may	   be	the    Appellate
     Authority."
Learned counsel for the appellants
placed reliance upon
the judgment in Vallabh Glass Works. Vallabh Glass Works had
been declared  a sick  industrial company within the meaning
of Section  3(1) (o) of the Central Act.  The appellant Gram
Panchayat initiated  coercive proceedings  under
Section 129
of the	Bombay Village	Panchayat Act  against Vallabh Glass
Works to  recover arrears  of property	tax.  Vallabh  Glass
Works filed  a writ  petition in  the High  Court at  Bombay
claiming the  protection of  Section 22	 of the Central Act.
The writ  petition  was	 allowed,  and	the  Gram  Panchayat
appealed to  this Court.   This	 Court noted  that the	said
Board had  been satisfied  by its  order dated	27th August,
1987, that  Vallabh Glass Works had become a sick industrial
company	 and,  consequently,  steps  had  been	taken  under
Sections 16  and 17  of the  Central Act.  As  soon  as	 the
enquiry under
Section 16
was ordered by the said Board, this
Court said,  the various  proceedings set  out under Section
22(1) of the Central Act were deemed to have been suspended.
Creditors could	 then approach the said Board for permission
to proceed  against the	 sick company  for recovery of their
dues and  the said  Board, at  its discretion,	could accord
such approval.	 If approval was not granted, the creditors'
remedy was  not extinguished.  it was  only  postponed.	 The
section provided  for exclusion	 of the	 period during which
the remedy  was suspended  while  computing  the  period  of
limitation for recovery of the dues.
Learned counsel  for the  appellants submitted  that in
the case  of Vallabh  Glass Works  this Court had dealt with
proceedings for	 recovery of  dues under a State Act and had
come to the conclusion that Section 22(1) of the Central Act
applied thereto.  The case of the appellants was, therefore,
squarely covered by the Vallabh Glass Works judgment.
Learned  counsel  for  the	 respondents  submitted	 the
Section	 22(1)	 of  the  Central  Act	should	be  so	read
as not	to interfere  with the exclusive power of the States
to legislate  under Entry  54 of  List	II  of	the  Seventh
Schedule of  the Constitution  in respect  of sales tax.  In
his submission,	 the words  "any other law" in Section 22(1)
of the Central Act must be so read as to exclude all laws on
List II subjects, for Parliament must be assumed to know its
limitations.   Learned Counsel	cited the  judgment of	this
Court  in
Deputy  Commercial	 Tax  Officer	&  Ors.	 vs.
Corromandal Pharmaceuticals  & Ors.
,  1997 (2) SCALE 640, as
supporting his case.
The Vallabh  Glass Works judgment covers these appeals.
Arrears of  taxes and  the like	 due  from  sick  industrial
companies that	satisfy the  conditions set  out in  Section
22(1) of  the Central  Act cannot  be recovered	 by coercive
process unless the said Board gives its consent thereto.
The Central  Act is enacted under Entry 52 of List I of
the Seventh Schedule.  The said Entry 52 empowers Parliament
to legislate in respect of "Industries, the control of which
by the	Union is  declared by Parliament by law to be in the
public interest".   The Central Act declares that it is "for
giving effect  to the  policy of  the State towards securing
the principles	specified in  clauses (b) and (c) of
Article
39
of  the Constitution",  namely, "that  the ownership	 and
control of  the material  resources of	the community are so
distributed as	best to serve the common good" and "that the
operation of  the economic  system does	 not result  in	 the
concentration of  wealth and  means  of	 production  to	 the
common detriment".   The  Central Act  does  not  impair  or
interfere with	the rights  of the  States to legislate with
respect to  sales tax  under Entry  54 of  List	 II  of	 the
Seventh Schedule.   In the larger interest of the industrial
health of the nation, Section 22 of the Central Act requires
all creditors  seeking	to  recover  their  dues  from	sick
industrial companies  in respect  of whom  an inquiry  under
Section 16
is pending	or a  scheme is under preparation or
consideration or  has been  sanctioned to obtain the consent
of the	said Board to such recovery.  If such consent is not
secured and  the recoverers  deferred, the creditors' remedy
is protected  for the  period of  deferment is, by reason of
sub-section (5)	 of
Section  22
, excluded in the computation
of the	period of  limitation.	The words "any other law" in
Section	 22
cannot,  therefore,  be  read  in	 the  manner
suggested by learned counsel for the respondents.
The Corromandal  Pharmaceuticals judgment	dealt with a
sick industrial company which was enabled to collect amounts
like sales  tax after  the date	 of the	 sanctioned  scheme.
This Court said, "Such amounts like sales tax, etc which the
sick industrial company is enabled to collect after the date
of the	sanctioned scheme,  legitimately  belonging  to	 the
Revenue, cannot	 be and	 could not  have been intended to be
covered within
Section 22
of the  Act". It  added that the
issue that  had been  arisen before it had not arisen in the
case of Vallabh Glass Works.  It did not appear therefrom or
from any  other decision of this Court or of the High Courts
"that in  any one of them, the liability of the sick company
dealt with therein itself arose for the first time after the
date of sanctioned scheme.  At any rate, in none these cases
a situation  arose whereby  the	 sick  industrial  unit	 was
enabled to collect tax due to the Revenue from the customers
after the  sanctioned scheme but the sick unit simply folded
its hands  and declined	 to pay	 it over to the Revenue, for
which proceedings  for recovery	 had to be taken".  Clearly,
the facts  in the
Corromandal Pharmaceuticals
case  differ
from the  facts of  the
Vallabh	 Glass Works
case and those
before us.  The reference to the
Corromandal Pharmaceuticals
case is, therefore, inapposite.
We hold,  in the  premesis, that the respondents cannot
recover the  aforementioned arrears  of sales  tax from	 the
appellants without  first seeking  the consent	of the	said
Board in this behalf.
The appeals  are allowed  and the	judgments and orders
under appeal are set aside. No order as to costs.