[Cites
13
, Cited by
41
]
Supreme Court of India
Thiru Arooran Sugars Ltd., Madras vs The Commissioner Of Income-Tax, Madras on 30 July, 1997
Equivalent citations: AIR 1997 SUPREME COURT 3575, 1997 AIR SCW 3682, 1997 TAX. L. R. 929, (1997) 7 JT 165 (SC), (1997) 93 TAXMAN 579, 1997 (4) COM LJ 1 SC, 1997 (5) SCALE 284, 1997 (6) SCC 606, 1998 BRLJ 71, 1998 (1) UPTC 369, (1997) 5 SCALE 284, (1997) 227 ITR 432, (1997) 7 SUPREME 256, (1997) 140 TAXATION 564, (1997) 142 CURTAXREP 9
Bench:
Suhas C. Sen
,
S.P. Kurdukar
PETITIONER:
THIRU AROORAN SUGARS LTD., MADRAS

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX, MADRAS

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	30/07/1997

BENCH:
SUHAS C. SEN, S.P. KURDUKAR




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
W I T H
(C.A. No.  6636/83, 6637/83,  6638/83M 6639/83, 6640/83, SLP
(C) No. 2611/88, C.A. No. 2399/89, 175-77/85 & 3674/89)
		      J U D G M E N T
Sen, J.
The assessment years in this group of appeals (C.A. No.
6636/83, 6637/83,  6638/83M 6639/83,  6640/83, &  175-77/85)
are 1962-63  to 1967-68. The assessee-company, Thiru Arooran
Sugar Ltd.,  is a  manufacturer	 of  sugar  which  purchases
sugarcane from	the market for crushing. It also has its own
cane fields  where it cultivates sugarcane which is entirely
consumed by  its factory.  Since the  profits  made  by	 the
assessee from  the sale	 of sugar arises out of agricultural
activities as  well as	the  manufacturing  activities,	 the
income earned  by the  assessee has  to be  divided into two
parts. No  tax is  leviable under  the
Income	Tax  Act
on
agricultural income  but the  profit generated	by the	non-
agricultural activities is liable to be taxed under the Act.
There is  no dispute  that the	income attributable  to	 the
agricultural activities	 must be  excluded from	 the  income
earned by  the assessee	 from the  sale of  sugar.  But	 the
problem is of computation of such income.
Section 10(1)
of the Income-tax Act lays down that the
agricultural income  shall not	be taken into computation of
the total  income of a previous year of any person under the
Income-tax Act,	 1961
.
Section 295
of the Act which empowers
the Board  to make  rules for  carrying out  the purposes of
this Act has specifically empowered the Board by sub-section
(2)(b) of
Section 295
to frame Rules for the manner in which
and the procedure by which the income shall be arrived at in
the case  of,  inter  alia,  income  derived  in  part	from
agriculture and	 in part  from business. In exercise of this
power Rule  7 of the Income-tax Rules, 1962 was framed which
lays down :
"Income	which	 is    partially
     agricultural  and	 partially  from
     business -
(1) In  the case of income which is
     partially	agricultural  income  as
     defined in
section 2
and partially
     income  chargeable	  to  income-tax
     under the	head "Profits  and gains
     of business",  in	determining  the
     part which is chargeable to income-
tax  the	market	value	of   any
     agricultural produce which has been
     raised by	the assessee or received
     by him  as rent-in-kind  and  which
     has been utilised as a raw material
     in	 such	business  or   the  sale
     receipts of  which are  included in
     the accounts  of the business shall
     be	  deducted,   and   no	 further
     deduction shall  be made in respect
     of any  expenditure incurred by the
     assessee	as   a	 cultivator   or
     receiver of rent-in-kind.
(2) For  the purposes  of	sub-rule
     (1) "market  value" shall be deemed
     to be -
(a) Where	agricultural produce  is
     ordinarily sold  in the  market  in
     its raw state, or after application
     to it  of	any  process  ordinarily
     employed	by   a	 cultivator   or
     receiver of  rent-in-kind to render
     it fit  to be  taken to market, the
     value calculated  according to  the
     average price  at which it has been
     so	  sold	 during	  the	relevant
     previous year;
(b) Where	agricultural produce  is
     not ordinarily  sold in  the market
     in	  its	raw   state   or   after
     application to  it of  any state or
     after  application	 to  it	 of  any
     process aforesaid, the aggregate of
-
(i) the expenses of cultivation;
(ii) the  land revenue or rent paid
     for the area in which it was grown;
and
(iii)   such    amount    as    the
     (Assessing) Officer  finds,  having
     regard to	all the circumstances in
     each   case,    the   represent   a
     reasonable profit."
Sub-rule (1)  of Rule  7 lays down that market value of
the agricultural produce raised by the assessee will have to
be deducted  from the  business account of the assessee. The
`market value'	spoken of  in sub-rule	(1) will  have to be
determined in the manner laid down in sub-rule (2). Sub-rule
(2) lays  down in  clause  (a)	the  well-known	 formula  of
average price  of the goods ordinarily sold in the market as
market value  of the  goods. The formula contained in clause
(b) will  only apply  in cases where agricultural produce is
not ordinarily	sold in the market in its raw state or after
any process applied to it to make it marketable.
The assessee's  contention is  that the market value of
the sugarcane  which has  been produced	 and consumed by the
assessee must  be determined  in the manner laid down n sub-
rule (2)(b) of Rule 7. The contention of the Revenue is that
the procedure  laid down  in clause (a) of sub-rule (2) will
be the	right procedure	 to follow.  The Tribunal was of the
view that  the procedure  laid down  in clause (b) had to be
resorted to because the price of sugar was controlled by the
Sugarcane Control Order at the material time. The High Court
was  of	  the  view   that  the	  Sugarcane  Control   Order
notwithstanding there was a market for sugarcane and even if
the assessee  consumes	the  entire  quantity  of  sugarcane
raised	by   it	 the  market  price  of	 such  sugarcane  is
ascertainable  and   this  price   of  such   sugarcane	  is
ascertainable and this price has to be excluded from profits
and gains of business of the assessee.
The Tribunal  found that the assessee Company had grown
sugarcane in  its own  land as well as lands taken on lease.
Since the  crushing capacity  of the  assessee's factory was
1200 tons  per day,  the sugarcane grown by the assessee was
not  adequate	for  its  requirement.	It  had,  therefore,
purchased  sugarcane   from  other  growers.  The  sugarcane
purchased by  the assessee  was much more than the sugarcane
produced by it for the assessment years 1962-63, 1966-67 and
1967-68.  The	assessee  purchased   sugarcane	  from	 the
registered  ryots   according  to   the	 provisions  of	 the
Sugarcane Control  Order and also from non-registered ryots.
The quantity  of sugarcane purchased from the non-registered
ryots was  negligible compared	to the quantity of sugarcane
purchased  from	 the  registered  ryots	 except	 during	 the
periods relevant  for assessment  years 1962-63, 1963-64 and
1966-67. The  Tribunal was  of the view that sugarcane could
not be	treated as  agricultural produce  ordinarily sold in
the market during the relevant previous years. Therefore, it
upheld the contention made on behalf of the assessee-company
that sugarcane produced by it had to be valued in accordance
with Rule 7(2)(b).
The High  Court took  a contrary  view. The  High Court
took not  of the  fact that  for some  of  the	years  under
consideration in  this case  the average cost of cultivation
shown by  the assessee	was more  than the  average cost  of
purchase. The  assessee was  really trying in those years to
get deductions	of a  higher figure than the market value of
the sugarcane  produced by  it. The  High Court	 pointed out
that the  Tribunal had	not come  to a	finding of fact that
sugarcane was  not ordinarily  sold in the market in its raw
state in  the area  where the  factory of  the assessee	 was
located. Sugarcane,  as a  matter of  fact, was	 sold in the
market in raw state, even before the Sugarcane Control Order
came into force. Because of the Control Order, sugarcane did
not cease to be a produce ordinarily sold in the market. The
Control Order merely regulated the market for raw sugarcane.
Merely because	the price, the distribution, the production,
the relationship  between the grower and the purchaser, were
all subjected  to elaborate Government regulations, it could
not be said that the product itself lost either its identity
or its	nature or  its character  of an agricultural produce
sold in	 the market.  The High	Court held that Rule 7(2)(a)
will  clearly  apply  in  this	case  and  market  value  of
sugarcane produced  and consumed by the assessee-company had
to be computed accordingly.
Under Rule	 7(1), in computing the profits and gains of
business, market  value of  an agricultural  produce in	 raw
state  has  to	be  deducted  from  the	 profits  of  partly
agricultural and  partly industrial  products. Sub-rule	 (2)
lays down  the method of computation of market value. If the
agricultural produce  is ordinarily sold in the market, Rule
7(2)(a) will  apply. If	 not, Rule  7(2)(b) will  apply. The
question, therefore, is was sugarcane ordinarily sold in the
market in  raw state? The answer must be in the affirmative.
The assessee-company  itself was buying more sugarcane, than
it was producing, from registered and unregistered ryots.
Mr. Nariman  on behalf  of the assessee has argued that
in order  to invoke  Rule 7(2)(a)  it has to be found that a
market exists  where  sugarcane	 is  ordinarily	 sold.	This
implies that there will be a market of a nature where buyers
and sellers congregate. If such a market does not exist, the
provisions of  Rule 7(2)(a) will not apply. Sub-rule (b) was
framed by  the Board  to determine the value of agricultural
products where	such markets  for agricultural	products did
not exist.
We are  unable to uphold this argument. "Market" in the
context of  Rule 7 does not mean an open market where buyers
and sellers  get together  for the  purpose of	purchase and
sale of	 goods. The  assessee-company regularly,  year after
year, in  ordinary course  of business bought sugarcane from
registered and	unregistered ryots. Whether the purchase was
at a  price controlled by the Sugarcane Control Order or not
is quite  immaterial. There  was a  price at which sugarcane
could ordinarily  be  purchased	 by  the  assessee  for	 the
purpose of  its own business. The price paid by the assessee
was the	 market price. It is by now well-settled that market
does not  have to  be one open place of business where buyer
and seller congregate.
If the  market is	controlled by Government regulation,
sale and purchase of sugarcane within the framework of these
regulations will  be the ordinary mode of selling sugarcane.
No  special   significance  can	 be  read  into	 the  phrase
`ordinarily sold'.  It is  not disputed	 that  the  assessee
utilised sugarcane  grown by  it in  its own  field for	 its
factory	 and   also  purchases	 a  considerable  amount  of
sugarcane from	outside. Therefore,  it is  not the  case of
assessee that  sugarcane growers  do not  sell sugarcane  in
ordinary course	 of their  business in	the region where the
assessee carries on business.
Mr. Nariman next contended that the assessee was buying
sugarcane at its own factory gate. There is no other factory
in the region where the assessee's factory was situated. The
area adjoining	the factory  gate could	 not be	 treated  as
market for  sugarcane. In the fact of this case there was no
way to find out the average price of the sugarcane which was
being sold  in the  market in  ordinary	 course	 during	 the
previous years.
In support  of this contention, Mr. Nariman
relied on  a Special  Bench decision of the Patna High Court
in the	case of
J.M. Casey  vs. Commissioner of Income-tax,
Bihar & Orissa
AIR 1930 Patna 44.
This argument  again is  misconceived. The	 place where
the sugarcane  was bought  and sold  is quite immaterial for
deciding whether  there was  a market  for sugarcane or not.
The place  of delivery	of the	goods may  be decided by the
buyer and  seller by mutual consent, express or implied. The
assessee might	have purchased	and taken  delivery  of	 the
goods from  the seller's  doorstep. The point that has to be
borne in  mind is  that in  order  to  apply  Rule  7(2)(a),
existence of  an open  market where  buyers and sellers come
together to do business is not an essential pre-requisite.
We are  unable to	uphold the contention of Mr. Nariman
that where  the buyer was only one and the sellers were many
it cannot  be said  that the  sale was	in a  market and the
price was  market price.  The case of
J.M. Casey
(supra) was
decided by  a Special  Bench of	 the Patna High Court in the
special and  unusual facts  of that  case. The Special Bench
considered the	scope and  effect of
Section 2(1)(b)
of the
Indian	income-tax  Act.  It  was  observed  that  the	word
"market" in  that section  implied area	 centre of  economic
exchange. The  implication of  this observation	 has  to  be
understood  in	 the  facts  of	 that  case.  Motihari	Jail
purchased  aloe	  leaves  from	 cultivators  not   for	 any
commercial purpose  but to  keep the prisoners occupied. The
purchase by  the jail  was not a commercial activity at all.
Courtney Terrel, C.J. explained the position thus:
"The object  of the  manufacture in
     jail is  not the  conducting of  an
     economic process which shall render
     profitable the  cultivation of  the
     aloe plant	 but merely  to keep the
     prisoners employed	 on sufficiently
     laborious and punitive work."
It was  held in  the facts of the case that purchase of
aloe leaves  by jails  in an  artificial  condition  had  no
relation to market for agricultural produce. But in the case
before us,  the purchases  of sugarcane	 made by the factory
were purely  commercial transactions  controlled  by  market
forces within  the framework of the Sugarcane Control Order.
The Special  Bench decision of the Patna High Court does not
support the case made out by Mr. Nariman in any way.
The principle  that value	of a  property will  be	 the
price which  it will  fetch if	sold in the open market is a
well-known method  of valuation	 which has been adopted in a
large number of statutes in England and also in India. It is
well-settled that  existence of an open market is not a pre-
condition for  application of  this principle.	There may or
may not	 be  an	 actual	 market	 where	buyers	and  sellers
congregate to  purchase and  sell goods.  Where there  is no
such open  market an  estimate of the market price will have
to be  done on	a hypothetical	basis.
In  a case  under the
Gift-Tax Act
,  Gift-Tax Officer,  Calcutta & Anr. vs. Kastur
Chand Jain  53 ITR  411, dealing  with
Section	6(1)
of that
Act, R.S. Bachawat, J. observed:
"The basic	 principle of  valuation
     is embodied  in
section 6(1)
of the
     Gift-Tax  Act,  1958,  and	 in  the
     corresponding section,
section  36
of the  Estate Duty  Act, 1953,  an
section 7(1)
of the Wealth-Tax Act,
     1957. The	valuer has  to find "the
     price which....it	would  fetch  if
     sold  in	the  open  market".  The
     measure of value of the property is
     the price	which  the  hypothetical
     buyer in  an open	market would pay
     for it."
In the  case of
Ahmed G.H. Ariff & Ors. v. Commissioner
of Wealth-Tax,	Calcutta
76  ITR 471,  explaining the phrase
"if sold  in the open market" in
Section 7(1)
of the Wealth-
Tax Act,  it was  observed by  Grover, J.  speaking for	 the
Court that the phrase did not contemplate actual sale or the
actual state of the market, but only enjoined that it should
be assumed  that there	was an	open market and the property
could be sold in such a market and, on that basis, the value
had to	be found  out. It  was a hypothetical case which was
contemplated and  the tax officer must assume that there was
an open market in which the asset could be sold.
In view  of the  aforesaid, it  is	 very  difficult  to
uphold the  contention of  Mr. Nariman that in order to find
out the	 market price there has to be an actual market where
there will  be `a  concourse of	 buyers and  sellers'.	This
argument was  specifically rejected  by Lord Pearson L.J. in
the case  of Building  and Civil Engineering Holidays Scheme
Management Ltd.	 vs. Post  Office (1966)  1 QB	247  in	 the
following words:
"What is  meant by	 "market value"?
     It is  not	 reasonable  to	 suppose
     that  for	 the  purposes	of  this
     proviso there  is no  market  value
     unless  there  is	a  concourse  of
     buyers and	 sellers.  There  is  no
     need to infer that there must be an
     open market,  or that there must be
     a price  fluctuating  according  to
     the   pressures   of   supply   and
     demand."
In that case Lord Denning also explained the concept of
market value in the following words:
"What  is	the  "market  value"  of
     these stamps? It does not connote a
     market  where  buyers  and	 sellers
     congregate. The "market value" here
     means the	price at which the goods
     could be  expected to be bought and
     sold as  between willing seller and
     willing buyer,  even  though  there
     may  be  only  one	 seller	 or  one
     buyer, and even thought one or both
     may  be  hypothetical  rather  than
     real."
These are	the principles	universally applied  to find
out the	 price at which the goods are ordinarily sold in the
open market.  For determination of market value, there is no
pre-requisite that  an open  market where  buyers ad sellers
congregate to  buy and sell goods must exist. In the instant
case, the  assessee-company actually bought sugarcane from a
large number  of growers years after year in ordinary course
of business.  The price	 at which  it buys sugarcane must be
taken to  the market  price. If	 the price  is controlled by
Sugarcane Control  Order the  controlled price will be taken
as the	market price  because it  is at	 this price  that  a
willing buyer  and a  wiling seller are expected to transact
business. As  Lord Denning pointed out, it does not make any
difference to  this position  that the assessee was the only
buyer in the region where its factory was located.
In the  facts of this case, we are of the view that the
High Court  has come  to a  right decision.  The appeals are
without any  merit and are dismissed. There will be no order
as to costs.
C.A. No.  3674/1989, C.A.  No. 2399(NT)/1989  AND S.L.P. NO.
2611/ 1988
     Mr. Nariman  has argued that there are certain facts in
these cases  which were	 not brought  to the  notice of	 the
Tribunal. Therefore,  in these	cases,	there  should  be  a
direction by this Court to the Tribunal to investigate those
facts.
It is  not possible  to accede  to this prayer. Certain
questions of  law on the basis of the fact and circumstances
found by  the Tribunal	have been referred to the High Court
for its	 opinion. The  High Court  has give  its opinion  on
those questions on the basis of facts found by the Tribunal.
The Tribunal  is the  final fact finding authority. The High
Court cannot  go behind	 the fats  found by the Tribunal. It
was for	 the assessee to raise questions of fact at the time
of hearing  of	the  appeal  before  the  Tribunal.  At	 the
reference  stage,  no  fresh  investigation  into  facts  is
permissible. There  may be  cases where the Court feels that
it is  unable to answer the question of law referred because
findings of  fact are  incomplete. In  such cases, the Court
may call  for a	 supplementary statement  from the Tribunal.
But that  is not  the case here. The High Court did not feel
any difficulty in answering the question on the basis of the
facts found. The assessee's prayer is for a direction to the
Tribunal to  consider new  questions of	 fact which were not
raised before the Tribunal at all. We see no reason to grant
this prayer at this stage.
These appeals  must also  fail and	 are dismissed.	 The
Special Leave  Petition No.  2611 of 1988 is also dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.