[Cites
2
, Cited by
36
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India & Ors vs Lieut (Mrs.) E.Iacats on 6 August, 1997
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 1997 SC 99, 1997 SCC (L&S) 1613, (1997) 77 FAC LR 277, (1998) 1 SERV LJ 82, (1997) 4 LAB LN 497, (1997) 2 CUR LR 701, 1997 (7) SCC 334, (1997) 4 SCT 33, (1997) 2 LAB LJ 830, (1997) 5 SCALE 395, (1997) 7 JT 279, (1997) 7 SUPREME 172, 1998 ALL CJ 1 54, (1997) 7 JT 279 (SC), 1997 UJ(SC) 2 413, (2017) 3 CIVLJ 195, ILR 2017 CHH 1338
Author:
Sujata V. Manohar
Bench:
Sujata V. Manohar
PETITIONER:
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
LIEUT (MRS.) E.IACATS

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	06/08/1997

BENCH:
SUJATA V. MANOHAR, G.B. PATTANAIK




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
THE 6TH DAY OF AUGUST, 1997
Present:
Hon'ble Mrs.Justice Sujata V.Manohar
	    Hon'ble Mr.Justice M.Jagannadha Rao
N.N.Goswami, Sr.Adv.,  Ms. Binu Tamta and Mrs. Anil Katiyar,
Advs. With him for the appellants.
Aseem Mehrotra,	 Adv. for  Abhijat P.  Medh,  Adv.  for	 the
Respondent.
J U D G M E N T
     The following Judgment of the Court was delivered:
J U D G M E N T
Mrs. Sujata V. Manohar. J.
Pursuant to an advertisement the respondent applied for
the post  of a	Nursing Sister	(Lioutenant) in the Military
Nursing Service	 for local  service. She  was  selected	 and
joined the  post on  6th of February. 1959. On attaining the
ago of	55 years  she was  superannuated  with	effect	from
30.11.1981. The	 respondent filed  a writ  Petition  in	 the
Gauhati High  Court challenging her retirement at the age of
55 years  on the ground that in other nursing services under
the Military  Establishment the	 age of	 retirement  was  58
years. It  was discriminatory  to retire the nurses who were
appointed for local service only at the age of 55 years. She
also  claimed	pensionery  benefits   on  retirement.	This
petition has  been allowed.  Hence the appellants have filed
the present appeal.
There are	three different	 types of  Military  Nursing
Service governed  by their own different rules. These are --
(1) Military  Nursing Service (Regular) (2) Military Nursing
Service (Civilian) and (3) Military Nursing Service (Local).
The terms  and conditions  of service  in the three services
are separate.  Under Army  Instruction No. 14 issued on 12th
of  March.   1977  terms   and	conditions  of	service	 for
employment of Nursing Officers for local duties are set out.
Clause 1  provides that	 married nurses	 or nurses  who	 are
widows	with  encumbrances  or	are  separated	or  divorced
including those	 whose marriage	 has been  dissolved and who
have encumbrances.  May be  granted temporary commission. If
otherwise suitable,  in the  military  nursing	service	 for
local service  only. The  service so  constituted is  to  be
known as  the Military	Nursing Service	 (Local).  Clause  6
provides that  candidates will	be  appointed  for  rank  of
Lieutenant and	will not  be eligible for further promotion.
Clause 10  provides that  they will  normally be  liable for
service	 at   one  station   only.  Benefits   available  on
superannuation are  also set  out. Clause  it  provides	 for
service members of the Military Nursing Service (Local) will
be eligible, subject to their service being satisfactory, to
gratuity of one month's basic pay for each completed year of
service at  the scale  drawn at	 the time  of termination of
service. There is a provision under Clause 12 for disability
pension and  under of a local member of the military nursing
service on  account of	an  attributable  cause.  Since	 all
appointees under  the Military	Nursing Service	 (Local	 are
appointed in  the  rank	 of  lieutenant	 and  they  are	 not
eligible for  promotion, they  retire as  lieutenants. It is
and  accepted	position  that	 the  retirement   age	 for
lieutenants  is	 55  years.  This  is  the  reason  why	 the
respondent was retired at the age of 55 years. The terms and
conditions of  service as  spelt out in Army Instruction No.
14 do  not provide for payment of any pension on retirement.
There is  a provision for payment of gratuity as already set
out. However.  the  appellant  appointed  a  study  team  to
recommend improvements	in  service  condition	of  Military
Nursing	 Service   (Local),   including	  their	  pensionery
benefits. Pursuant  to the recommendations of this committee
certain	 pensionery   benefits	were  extended	to  Military
Nursing Service	 (Local) from	  1st October, 1983 to those
persons who retire after 1st of October, 1983.
The respondent contended that the denial of the benefit
of pension  to the  respondent was  discriminatory and	that
although she  retired in  1981, she  should  also  be  given
pensionery benefits  in the  same manner  as those  who	 had
retired after  1st of  October, 1983. On the question of the
age of retirement, though the respondent contended that Army
Instruction No.	 14 does  not contain the age of retirement,
the position  relating to the age of retirement unambiguous.
All appointees	in this	 service hold the rank of Lieutenant
with no	 eligibility for  further promotion. Therefore, They
must retire  at the  same age  as a  Lieutenant,  they	must
retire at  the same  age as a Lieutenant which is at 55. The
contention of  the respondent  that it is discriminatory not
to have	 prescribed the same age of retirement for her as is
prescribed for	other military	nursing services  cannot  be
accepted. The  terms and  conditions attaching	to the other
two military  nursing services	are different from the terms
and  conditions	  attaching  to	  Military  Nursing  Service
(Local). One  major difference	lies in	 the fact that those
who are	 appointed to  Military Nursing	 Service (Local) are
not liable to transfer and that married women or widows with
children can  avail of	this service without any problem. We
are told  that under  the terms and conditions of service of
the other two military nursing services the person appointed
is liable  to transfer	from one  place to  another and that
there are  also restrictions  on married women or women with
children being	appointed to  the  other  two  services.  If
different nursing  services are	 constituted under  saparate
army instructions  carrying their  own	separate  terms	 and
conditions of service, one cannot complain of discrimination
if the	ages of	 retirement prescribed under these different
service are  different. Each  will be  governed by  its	 own
rules and  regulations. The  respondent is,  therefore,	 not
justified  in  claiming	 that  she  has	 been  discriminated
against because she has retired at the age of 55.
The next  question relates to payment of pension. Under
Army Instruction  No. 14  which was in force at the material
time, the  respondent, either on the date of her appointment
or on the date of her  retirement, or at any time during her
service, did  not have the benefit of pension on retirement.
The terms and conditions of service were known to her at the
time when  she joined  the service.  At the  time of joining
service she  has signed	 an agreement  to abide by the Rules
and Regulations	 governing Military  Nursing Service (Local)
from time  to time. She has claimed that pensionery benefits
which were  conferred for  the first  time to  all those who
retired on  or after 1st October 1983 should be given to her
although she  retired much  prior to that date. Although she
has not	 challenged the	 cut off date as arbitrary, reliance
in this	 connections is placed by her on the decision in the
case of	 D.S. Nakara and Ors. Vs. Union of India (1983 1 SCC
305). This  decision has  been	subsequently  explained	 and
distinguished in  a number  of cases. In the case Dr. (Mrs.)
Sushma Sharma  etc. etc.  v. State  of Rajasthan & Ors. (AIR
1985 SC	 1367 at  1379) this  Court cited  with approval the
observations of	 this Court in Union of India & Anr. Etc. V.
Parameswaran Match  Works Ltd.	(AIR 1974  SC 2349)  to	 the
effect that  the choice of date as a basis of classification
cannot always be dubbed as arbitrary unless it is capricious
or whimsical.
In the case of
State of West Bengal & Ors. v.
Ratan Behari  Dey &  Ors.
(1993  (4)  SCC  62)	 this  court
considered the	pension scheme	introduced by  the  Calcutta
Municipal Corporation  from 1.4.1977. It upheld the validity
of the cut-off date.
Nakara's case (supra) was distinguished
on the ground that in Nakara's case by an artificial cut-off
date, distinction  was sought  by the  same rules.  However,
when a pension schema is introduced from a given date. there
are two	 sets of employees who are governed by two different
sets of rules. They cannot be treated as similarly situated.
As the	cut-off date  was  retrospective.  this	 Court	also
examined the reasonableness of this retrospective operation.
It found  the cut-off  date to be reasonable, it being based
upon the  date of  appointment of  the pay  Commission.
In a
recent decision	 in the	 case of
Commander,  Head  Quarter,
Calcutta &  Ors. V.  Capt
.
Biplabendra	Chanda (1997 (1) SCC
208) new  rules reducing  the minimum qualifying service for
pension came  into affect  from 1.1.1986. The respondent who
had retired prior to this date was not granted pension under
the old	 rules as he did not qualify for pension under those
rules. This  Court, distinguishing  Nakara's  case  (supra),
held that  he cannot  be retrospectively made eligible under
the new rules. Pensioners under the old rules and pensioners
under the  new rules are not similarly situated. Each set of
retiring employees  will be  governed by  their own rules in
force when they retire.
The respondent,  therefore, cannot claim the benefit of
a scheme which came into operation from a date subsequent to
the date  of her  retirement. The  respondent also  did	 not
contend either	before the  High Court	or in the grounds of
appeal before us that a cut-off date for grant of pensionery
benefits is  arbitrary or  unreasonable. Even  otherwise  in
view of	 the fact  that a study team was first appointed and
pursuant to  its report	 certain benefits  were given  after
considering the	 report of  the study  group would show that
the cut-off  date had  a logical  nexus with the decision to
grant these benefits on the basis of the report of the study
team. fresh financial benefits which are conferred also have
to  be	 based	on  proper  astimates  of  financial  outlay
required. Bearing  in mind  all relevant  factors, if such a
benefit is  conferred from  a given date, such conferment of
benefits from a given date cannot be considered as arbitrary
or unreasonable.
The appeal	 is, therefore,	 allowed. The  judgment	 and
order of  the High  Court is set aside and the writ petition
filed before  the  High	 Court	is  dismissed.	There  will,
however, be no order as to costs.