[Cites
2
, Cited by
59
]
Supreme Court of India
Gurdev Singh & Ors vs Mehnga Ram & Anr on 11 July, 1997
Equivalent citations: AIR 1997 SUPREME COURT 3572, 1997 ALL CJ 1345
Bench:
S. B. Majmudar
,
M. Jagannadha Rao
PETITIONER:
GURDEV SINGH & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
MEHNGA RAM & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	11/07/1997

BENCH:
S. B. MAJMUDAR, M. JAGANNADHA RAO




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
Present:
Hon'ble Mr. Justice S. B. Majmuder
	     Hon'ble Mr. Justice M. Jagannadha Rao
Munilal Verma,	Sr.  Adv.  Devender  Verma  and	 Ms.  Naresh
Bakshi, Advs. with him for the appellants.
P.N.Puri, Adv. for the Respondents
			 O R D E R
The following Order of the Court was delivered:
O R D E R
     Leave granted.
We have  heard learned  counsel for  the parities.	 The
grievance of  the appellants  before us is that in an appeal
filed by  them before the learned additional District Judge,
Ferozepur, in  an application  under Order  XLI Rule  27(b),
Code  of   Civil  Procedure
(
CPC
)  the	 learned  Additional
district Judge	at the	final hearing  of the appeal wrongly
felt that  additional evidence	was required  to produced as
requested by  the appellants  way of  examination of a hand-
writing	 expert.  The  High  Court  in	the  impugned  order
exercising jurisdiction under
Section 115
, CPC took the view
that the  order of  the Appellate Could not be sustained. In
our view  the approach of the High Court in revision at that
interim stage  when the appeal was pending for final hearing
before	the   learned  Additional  District  Judge  was	 not
justified and the High Court should not have interfered with
the order which was within the jurisdiction of the Appellate
Court. The  reason is  obvious. The  Appellate Court hearing
the matter  finally could  exercise jurisdiction  one way or
the other  under Order	XLI Rule 27 specially clause (b). If
the order  was wrong  on merits, it would always be open for
the respondent	to challenge  same in accordance with law if
an occasion  arises to	carry the  matter in  Second  Appeal
after an  appellate decree  is passed.	But at	this interim
stage, the  High Court should not have felt itself convinced
that the  order was without jurisdiction. Only on this short
question, without  expressing any  opinion on the merits the
controversy involved  and on the legality of the contentions
advanced  by  both  the	 learned  counsel  for	the  parties
regarding additional  evidence, we  allow this	appeal,	 set
aside the  order of  the High  Court.  In  the	result,	 the
Additional District  Judge, Ferozepur  shall now  decide the
appeal on its own merits. We make it clear that the order of
the  learned  Additional  District  Judge,  Ferozepur  dated
12.12.1995 shall  now  be  complied  with,  subject  to	 the
liberty reserved to the respondent as aforesaid.