[Cites
21
, Cited by
119
]
Supreme Court of India
Deputy Commercial Tax Officer & Ors vs Corromandal Pharmaceuticals & Ors on 12 March, 1997
Equivalent citations: AIR 1997 SUPREME COURT 2027, 1997 AIR SCW 1816, (1997) 3 JT 660 (SC), (1997) 4 SUPREME 259, 1997 (3) JT 660, 1997 (2) UPTC 813, 1997 (2) SCALE 640, 1997 (3) ADSC 713, 1997 STI 146, 1997 (2) COM LJ 164 SC, 1997 (10) SCC 649, (1997) 2 SCR 1026 (SC), 1997 (2) SCR 1026, (1997) 3 ALL WC 1421, (1997) 43 KANTLJ(TRIB) 540, (1997) 25 CORLA 10, (1997) 2 SCALE 640, (1997) BANKJ 554, (1997) 89 COMCAS 1, (1997) 138 TAXATION 172
Bench:
B.P. Jeevan Reddy
,
K.S. Paripoornan
PETITIONER:
DEPUTY COMMERCIAL TAX OFFICER & ORS

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
CORROMANDAL PHARMACEUTICALS & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	12/03/1997

BENCH:
B.P. JEEVAN REDDY, K.S. PARIPOORNAN




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
Paripoornan, J.
Special leave granted.
2.   Respondent 1  to 4	 in writ  petition No. 21973 of 1995
before the  High Court	of Andhra  Pradesh representing	 the
Commercial  Tax	  Department,  Andhra	Pradesh,    are	 the
appellants in  this appeal. The petitioner and respondents 5
and 6  in the  writ petition  are respondents 1 to 3 in this
appeal. This  appeal is filed against the judgment and order
of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh dated 4.11.1995.
3.   The petitioner in the writ petition is M/s. Corromandal
Pharmaceuticals	 Ltd.	The  said  company  manufacture	 and
markets bulk  drugs and	 formulations. It  was declared as a
sick industrial	 company under
The Sick Industrial Companies
(Special Provisions)  Act, 1985
(hereinafter referred to as
'the Act' (Act No.1 of 1986) by the Board for Industrial and
Financial  Reconstruction   (shortly  called   'BIFR').	 The
Industrial Reconstruction  Bank	 of  India  (shortly  called
'IRBI') has been appointed as the operating agency. The BIFR
sanctioned a  scheme of 1988 in exercise of its powers under
Section 18(4)
read with
Section 19(3)
of  the  Act  after
obtaining   the	  consent   of	 the   concerned   financial
institutions, on  19.11.1990. The said sanctioned scheme was
brought into  force with  immediate effect.  It was modified
later on  29.12.1993. Shortly  stated, the  said  sanctioned
scheme	for   rehabilitation  of   the	company	  is   under
implementation.
4.   The petitioner-company  is an  assessee  to  sales	 tax
under the
Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1957
. It was
assessed for  the assessment  years 1992-93  by order  dated
3.1.1994 and  for the  year 1993-94 by order passed in 1995.
The Sales  Tax authorities initiated action under
Section 17
of the	Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act for recovery of
the said  dues. It  is seen that appeals were preferred from
the assessment	orders and the appellate authority granted a
conditional order  of  stay  to	 pay  the  tax	assessed  in
instalments. Even then, there was default. For the aforesaid
two years,  the sales  tax arrears  due from the petitioner-
company is stated to be Rs. 9,53,833/-. It is brought to our
notice that  there are sales tax arrears for the years 1986-
87 to 1992-93, but those arrears are not in question in this
appeal. We  are concerned  only with  the collection  of the
balance of  tax Rs.  9,53,833/- due for the assessment years
1992-93 and  1993-94. As  stated, the  assessment orders for
the said  years were  passed on	 3.1.1994 and in 1995-- long
after the scheme was sanctioned by the BIFR on 19.11.1990.
5.   The   petitioner-company	 assailed    the    recovery
proceedings for the sales tax dues before the High Court. It
prayed for  the issue  of a  writ of  mandamus directing the
first and  second respondents  (commercial Tax	Authorities)
not to	proceed with  the collection  of balances  sales tax
amount of  Rs. 9,53,833/- without the permission of BIFR, as
required under
Section 22
of the Act (Act No. 1/86), and for
other reliefs.	The plea  of the  petitioner  was  that	 the
sanctioned scheme  by BIFR for rehabilitation of the company
is  under   implementation,  and   so,	no  proceedings	 for
execution, distress  or the  like against the company, shall
lie except  with the consent of the Board.  According to the
Revenue, the  arrears of the sales tax in question relate to
the period  after the  sanctioned scheme  was brought  under
implementation and  that the  leal embargo/bar under
Section
22
of  the Act	is inapplicable	 since
Section 22
of the Act
can apply  only in respect of the sales tax dues included in
the "sanctioned scheme". Only those dues which were included
in "the	 package" in  the sanctioned scheme will be governed
by the	said bar.  The High Court considered the rival pleas
in the	light of  the relevant	statutory provisions,  a few
decisions of  this court  and of  other High Courts and held
that there  is not  warrant  to	 import	 the  limitation  as
contended by  the Revenue  in applying
Section 22
of the Act
and that  no coercive  steps for  the purpose of recovery of
tax dues  including action  under
Section  17
of  the Andhra
Pradesh General	 Sales Tax  Act ca  be taken  by the Revenue
without obtaining  the consent	of BIFR.  The writ  petition
filed b	 the first  respondent herein---  the  company,	 was
allowed. It  is thereafter,  the Revenue  move this court by
way of S.L.P.No. 10474/96 and has come in appeal.
6.   We heard  counsel. For  the purpose  of  resolving	 the
controversy raised  in this case, it will be useful to quote
Section 22(1)
and
22(5)
of  the  Act	 as  also  Board  of
industrial and	Financial Reconstruction  Regulations, 1987,
regulation Nos. 29 and 30 :-
"22.    Suspension	    of	   legal
     proceedings,  contracts,  etc.  ---
(1)  Where	  in   respect	 of   an
     industrial	 company,   an	 inquiry
     under
section  16
is pending or any
     scheme referred to under
section 17
is	    under     preparation     or
     consideration   or	  a   sanctioned
     scheme is	under implementation  or
     where an  appeal under
Section  25
relating to  an industrial	 company
     is pending,  then,	 notwithstanding
     anything contained in the companies
     Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), or any other
     law or  the memorandum and articles
     of association  of	 the  industrial
     company  or   ay  other  instrument
     having effect under the said Act or
     other law,	 no proceedings	 for the
     winding  up   of	the   industrial
     company or	 for execution, distress
     or the  like  against  any	 of  the
     properties	  of	the   industrial
     company or for the appointment of a
     receiver in  respect thereof and no
     suit for  the recovery  of money or
     for the enforcement of any security
     against the  industrial company  or
     of any  guarantee in respect of any
     loans or  advance	granted	 to  the
     industrial company	 shall lie or be
     proceeded with further, except with
     the consent of the Board or, as the
     case   may	   be	the    Appellate
     Authority.
(2) ............................
     (3) ...........................
     (4) ...........................
     (5)  In  computing	 the  period  of
     limitation for  the enforcement  of
     any right, privilege, obligation or
     liability, the  period during which
     it	  or	the   remedy   for   the
     enforcement     thereof	 remains
     suspended under  this section shall
     be excluded."
Regulation Nos. 29 & 30.
"29. The  Board  shall  publish  or
     cause   to	  be   published   short
     particulars  concerning  the  draft
     scheme, by	 way of notification, in
     such    daily     newspapers    and
     periodicals,  as  it  may	consider
     necessary, inviting suggestions and
     objections	 regarding   the   draft
     scheme, within  such time as may be
     mentioned in the notification, from
     the  shareholders,	  creditors  and
     employees of  the	sick  industrial
     company,	the    sick   industrial
     company, the  transferee company as
     well as any other company concerned
     in the amalgamation.
30. The  Board shall  consider  the
     suggestions and objections received
     from the  sick industrial	company,
     the operating  agency  or,	 as  the
     case may  be, from	 the  transferee
     company  and   any	 other	 company
     concerned in  the amalgamation  and
     from any  shareholder, creditor, or
     employee	or    such    industrial
     companies."
(emphasis supplied)
     It will  be useful	 to understand the scheme of the Act
(No. 1/1986); the Preamble to the Act states as follows :-
"
An Act
to  make,	 in  the  public
     interest, special provisions with a
     view   to	 securing   the	  timely
     detection to  sick and  potentially
     sick  companies  owning  industrial
     undertakings,	the	  speedy
     determination by a Board of experts
     of	 the  preventive,  ameliorative,
     remedial and  other measures  which
     need to  be taken	with respect  to
     such companies  and the expeditious
     enforcement  of   the  measures  so
     determined	   and	  for	 matters
     connected therewith  or  incidental
     thereto."
Section 3(b)
,
3(i)
and
3(o)
may also be read :-
3.	  (b) "Board"  means  the  board
     for   Industrial	 and   Financial
     Reconstruction  established   under
section 4
;
xxxx		 xxxx
(i)  "Operating agency"  means
     any public	 financial  institution,
     State level  institution, scheduled
     bank or  any other person as may be
     specified	by  general  or	 special
     order as its agency by the Board;
xxxx	       xxxxx
(o)  "sick industrial company"
means an  industrial company (being
     a company	registered for	not less
     than five	years) which  has at the
     end   of	 any   financial    year
     accumulated  losses   equal  to  or
     exceeding its entire net worth.
Explanation. - - For the removal of
     doubts, its is hereby declared that
     an	 industrial   company	existing
     immediately before the commencement
     of the  sick  industrial  Companies
     (Special Provisions) Amendment Act,
     1993, registered  for not less than
     five years and having at the end of
     any  financial   year   accumulated
     losses equal  to or  exceeding  its
     entire net worth shall be deemed to
     be a sick industrial company;
xxxxx		 xxxxx"
Chapter  III   of	the   Act
deals  with	"References,
inquiries and  schemes".
Section  15
thereof  authorises the
Board of directors of the Company to make a reference to the
Board (BIFR)  for determination	 of the measures which shall
be  adopted   with  respect   to  the  company.
Section  16
authorises the	Board to  make such inquiries as it may deem
fit for	 determining  whether  any  industrial	company	 has
become a  sick industrial  company. Where Board is satisfied
that a	company has  become a  sick industrial	company,  it
could give  a reasonable time to the company to make its net
worth positive	[
Section 17(2)
]. Where it is not practicable
for sick  industrial company  to make its net worth positive
within a reasonable time,
Section 17(3)
steps in authorising
the Board to direct any operating agency to prepare a scheme
in relation  to the  company.  The  Board  may	specify	 the
various measures  to be	 considered by the operating agency.
These measures are detailed out in
Section 18
. The operating
agency has to prepare a scheme as per the order specified by
the Board.
Under
Section 18(3)
of the Act a Scheme prepared by the
operating agency  shall be examined by the Board and an copy
of the	scheme with  modification made by the Board shall be
sent to	 the  sick  Industrial	Company	 and  the  operating
agency. The  draft scheme  shall be  published in  brief  in
daily  newspapers,   inviting  suggestions  and	 objections.
(Regulations No.  29 &	30). It is open to the Board to make
modifications as  it considers necessary in the light of the
suggestions and	 objection received.  It is  thereafter	 the
scheme is  sanctioned by  the Board  and it  shall come into
force on  such date as the Board may specify in that behalf.
Section 19
of the Act provides for rehabilitation by giving
financial assistance.
Section 22(1)
deals with suspension of
legal proceedings, contracts, etc.
     It is  common ground  that a  sanctioned scheme for the
rehabilitation	of   the   petitioner	company	  is   under
implementation. The scheme was sanctioned on 19.11.1990.
It is also admitted before us that the sales tax arrears for
which proceedings  were initiate  by the Revenue are for the
assessment years  1992-93 and 1993-94. The assessment orders
for these  years were  passed on  3.1.1994 and in 1995, long
after the sanctioned scheme was brought into force. The main
contention of the Revenue before the High Court and still in
appeal before  us is,  that the	 arrears  of  sales  tax  in
question for  which proceedings	 are   initiated against the
petitioner  company,   relate  to   the	 period	  after	 the
sanctioned scheme  was brought	under implementation and the
legal bar or embargo under
Section 22
of the Act can only be
in respect  of the  sales tax  dues included in a sanctioned
scheme. According  to the  Revenue, the	 Section  should  be
reasonably construed  and understood  or read  down  in	 the
above light.  It was  argued that  apparently the embargo or
bar envisaged by
Section 22
of the Act is of wide import and
covers a  long period. This bar or embargo beings to operate
the moment  an inquiry	is ordered or pending, and continues
during the  course of  the inquiry,  when a  scheme is under
preparation or	consideration,	and  still  later  when	 the
scheme is  under implementation or even when an appeal under
Section 25
of the Act relating to the company is pending. It
was urged  that the  inquiry itself  will take	time and the
pendency of  the proceedings  form the	date of	 the inquiry
till the  scheme is implemented or an appeal is disposed of,
envisage going	through various	 formalities and will take a
long time.  If the bar or embargo envisaged by
Section 22
of
the Act is to cover the entire length of time, the situation
may lead to very unreasonable or unintended state of affairs
similar to  the one  in the  present case; the suspension of
proceedings specified  in
Section  22
of  the Act  should be
confined to matters included, in prepackage state of affairs
only,  (in  the	 sanctioned  scheme)  and  not	post-package
matters like  the instant  one, which  should be outside the
pale or	 area of  the "sanctioned scheme". Counsel submitted
that when the scheme was sanctioned on 19.11.1990, there was
no assessment  for the	sales tax  for the years 1992-93 and
1993-94.  The	petitioner  (assessee)	 itself	 could	have
collected sales tax for the said years only after the scheme
was sanctioned.	 The tax  so collected really belongs to the
State. But,  the amount is not remitted to the State. If the
bar or	embargo under
Section 22(1)
of the  Act is held to
cover such  amounts collected  by the assessee, which really
belong to the State, and enables it to retain the same, till
the implementation is over or the appeal under
section 25
of
the Act is disposed of, it will result in a state of affairs
enabling the assessee to retain the amounts due to the State
for no	reason and  indefinitely; the  Revenue will  have to
obtain consent	of the	Board or  as the Appellate Authority
even for  realising the	 legitimate amounts  due to  it	 and
withheld by the assessee, unreasonably. There may be similar
instances where the petitioner/assessee collects amounts due
to the	Revenue or others and it yet enabled to keep it back
with itself  unreasonably for  a long  time if	the immunity
under
Section	 22(1)
of   the  Act  operates	 absolutely.
According to  the Revenue the bar under
Section 22(1)
of the
Act should  not	 lead  to  such	 an  undesirable,  state  of
affairs; and  so the  section should  be understood  or read
down to	 act as a bar or embargo only for such of those pre-
package dues  reckoned or included in the scheme sanctioned.
On  the	  other	 hand,	counsel	 for  the  first  respondent
(petitioner in	the writ petition) company asserted that the
embargo under
Section 22(1)
to the  Act  is  absolute	 and
cannot be  diluted or whittled down. All that is required by
Section 22(1)
of the  Act is that in cases where an inquiry
is pending  or scheme  is under preparation or consideration
or a  sanctioned scheme is under implementation or an appeal
is pending,  no proceedings,  as stated in
Section 22
of the
Act for	 execution. distress or the like, shall be proceeded
with except  with  the	consent	 of  the  Board	 or  as	 the
Appellate Authority.  What is  contemplated by
Section 22(1)
of the	Act is	only a previous consent of the Board for the
proceedings to	be initiated  against, a sick company. It is
not   an absolute  bar. The facts pointed out by the Revenue
do not	call for  reading down	the wide  import of
section
22(1)
of the Act.
8.   We considered  the rival  peas urged before us. In
Gram
Panchayat and  another v.  Shree Vallabh Glass Works Limited
and others
[1990 (2)  SCC 440],  the concerned	 company was
declared a  sick industrial  company and  steps	 were  taken
under
Section  16
and
17
of  the  Act	by  the	 Board.	 The
question was; whether the creditor (Panchayat) could recover
the amount due to it from out of the property of the company
without the consent of the Board. This Court, stated the law
at page 443 (paragraph 10), thus : -
"In the light of the steps taken by
     the board	Under
Sections 16
and
17
of	 the  Act,  no	proceedings  for
     execution,	 distress  or  the  like
     proceedings  against   any	 of  the
     properties of the company shall lie
     or be proceeded further except with
     the consent  of the  Board. Indeed,
     there would be automatic suspension
     of	 such  proceedings  against  the
     company's properties.  As	soon  as
     the inquiry  under
Section 16
is
     ordered by	 the Board,  the various
     proceedings  set	out  under  Sub-
     section (1)  of
Section 22
would be
     deemed to have been suspended."
(emphasis supplied)
     The above	decision  was  followed	 by  this  court  in
Maharashtra Tubes  Ltd. v.  State  Industrial  &  Investment
Corporation of	Maharashtra Ltd.  and another
[1993 (2) SCC
144]. The  following portion  of the heed note of the report
at pages  144-145 sufficiently brings out the ratio relevant
for the purpose of the present appeal :-
"Where an	inquiry is pending under
Section  16
/
17
or  an  appeal  is
     pending under
Section  25
of  the
     1985 Act  there should be cessation
     of the  coercive activities  of the
     type mentioned  in
Section 22(1)
to
     permit the	 BIFR to  consider  what
     remedial measures	it  should  take
     with respect to the sick industrial
     company."
"The   purpose    and   object   of
     suspension	 of   proceedings   etc.
     under
S.  22(1)
of	 the 1985 Act is
     to	 await	 the  outcome	of   the
     reference made  to the BIFR for the
     revival and  rehabilitation of  the
     sick industrial  company. The words
     or the  like  which  follows  words
     'execution'  and	'distress'   are
     clearly intended to convey that the
     properties of  the sick  industrial
     company  shall   not  be  made  the
     subject-matter of	coercive  action
     of	    similar	 quality     and
     characteristic   till    the   BIFR
     finally dispose  of  the  reference
     made under
Section 15
of the 1985
     Act. The  legislature has advisedly
     used  an  omnibus	expression  'the
     like'  as	 it   could   not   have
     conceived of  all possible coercive
     measures that  may be taken against
     a sick undertaking............"
(emphasis supplied)
     Our attention  was also  drawn to	the  following	High
Court decisions:
Reliance Ispat  Industries Ltd.  & Anr. v. Commissioner
of Sales  Tax, M.P.  & Ors.  [Vol
.
91  (1993) STC 521 M.P.);
Himalaya Rubber	 Products Limited  and Anr. v. The Board
for
Industrial and	Financial Reconstruction  &  Ors.  [Vol.  88
(1993) STC Cal.
47]; Vijay Mills Co. Ltd. & Ors. v. State of
Gujarat & Ors. [Vol. 68 (1990) Co. Cases 597 Guj], etc.
9.   The  Madhya  Pradesh  and	Calcutta  High	Courts	have
followed the  decision of  this court  in
Gram Panchayat and
another v.  Shree Vallabh  Glass Works	Limited	 and  others
[1990 (2) SCC 440].
10.  On a fair reading of the provision contained in
Chapter
III of	Act
1/1986  and in  particular
Sections 15
to
22
, we
are of	the opinion  that he plea put forward by the Revenue
is reasonable and fair in all the circumstances of the case.
Under the  statue, the	BIFR is	 to  consider  in  what	 way
various preventive  or remedial	 measures should be afforded
to a  sick industrial  company.	 In  that  behalf,  BIFR  is
enabled to  frame an  appropriate scheme. To enable the BIFR
to do so, certain preliminaries are required to be followed.
It starts  with the  reference to  be made  by the  Board of
Directors of  the sick company. The BIFR is directed to make
appropriate inquiry as provided in
sections 16
and
17
of the
Act. At	 the conclusion	 of the	 inquiry, after	 notice	 and
opportunity  afforded	to  various  persons  including	 the
creditors, the	BIFR is to prepare a scheme which shall come
into force on such date as it may specify in that behalf. It
is  in	 implementation	 of   the  scheme   wherein  various
preventive remedial  or other  measures are designed for the
sick industrial	 company, steps	 by way	 of giving financial
assistance etc.	 by Government, banks or other institutions,
are contemplated.  In other words, the scheme is implemented
or given effect to, by affording financial assistance by way
of loans, advance or guarantees of reliefs or concessions or
sacrifices   by	   Government,	 banks,	  public   financial
institutions and other authorities. In order to see that the
Scheme is  successfully implemented  and  no  impediment  is
cased for  the successful  carrying out	 of the	 scheme, the
Board is  enabled to have say when steps for recovery of the
amounts or other coercive proceedings are taken against sick
industrial company  which, during  the relevant	 time,	acts
under the  guidance/control or	supervisions  of  the  board
(BIFR). Any  step for  execution  ,  distress  or  the	like
against the  properties of  the industrial  company or other
similar steps  should not  be pursued which will cause delay
or  impediment	in  the	 implementation	 of  the  sanctioned
scheme. In  order to  safeguard such  state of	affairs,  an
embargo or bar is placed under
Section 22
of the Act against
any step  for execution,  distress  or	the  like  or  other
similar proceedings  against the company without the consent
of  the	 Board	or,  as	 the  case  may	 be,  the  appellate
authority.  The	 language  of
Section	22
of	the  Act  is
certainly wide.	 But, in  the totality of the circumstances,
that is	 likely to  be caused  in the  implementation of the
scheme. If that be so, only the liability or amounts covered
by the	scheme will  be taken  in, by
Section 22
of the Act.
So, we	are of	the view that though the language of
Section
22
of  the Act	is of  wide import  regarding suspension  of
legal proceedings from the moment an inquiry is stated, till
after the implementation of the scheme or the disposal of an
appeal under
Section 25
of the Act, it will be reasonable to
hold that  the bar  or embargo envisaged in
Section 22(1)
of
the Act	 can apply  only to  such of  those dues reckoned or
included in  the sanctioned  scheme. Such amounts like sales
tax, etc,  which the  sick industrial  company is enabled to
collect after the date of the sanctioned scheme legitimately
belonging to  the Revenue, cannot be and could not have been
intended to  be covered	 within
Section	 22
of	the Act. Any
other construction  will be unreasonable and unfair and will
lead to a state of affairs enabling the sick industrial unit
to collect  amounts due	 to  the  Revenue  and	withhold  if
indefinitely and  unreasonably. Such a construction which is
unfair, unreasonable  and against  spirit of  the statue  in
business sense, should be avoided.
11.  The situation which has arisen in this case seems to be
rather exceptional. The issue that has arisen in this appeal
did not	 arise for  consideration in the two case decided by
this Court  in
Gram  Panchayat and  another v. Shree Vallabh
Glass  Works  Limited  and  others
[1990(
2)  SCC  440]	 and
Maharashtra Tubes  Ltd. V.  State  Industrial  &  Investment
Corporation
of	maharashtra Ltd,  and another  [1993 (2) SCC
144]. It  does not  appear from	 the above  two decisions of
this court nor from the decisions of the various High Courts
brought to  our	 notice,  that	in  any	 one  of  them,	 the
liability of  the sick	company dealt  with  therein  itself
arose, for  the	  first time  after the	 date of  sanctioned
scheme. At  any rate,  in none	of those  cases, a situation
arose whereby  the  sick  industrial  unit  was	 enabled  to
collect tax  due to the Revenue from the customers after the
"sanctioned scheme"  but the  sick unit	 simply	 folded	 its
hands and  declined to pay it over to the Revenue, for which
proceedings for recovery, had to be taken. The two decisions
of this	 Court as  also the decisions of High Courts brought
to our notice are, therefore, distinguishable. They will not
apply to  a situation  as has  arisen in  this case. We are,
therefore, of  the opinion that
Section 22(1)
should be read
down or understood as contended by the Revenue. The decision
to the	contrary by  the  High	Court  is  unreasonable	 and
unsustainable. We  set aside  the judgment of the High Court
and allow this appeal. There shall be no order as to costs.