[Cites
17
, Cited by
197
]
Supreme Court of India
Vam Organic Chemicals Limited & ... vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh & Others on 21 January, 1997
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 1997 SC 608
Bench:
A.M.Ahmadi
,
S.C. Sen
PETITIONER:
VAM ORGANIC CHEMICALS LIMITED & ANOTHERINDIA GLYCOLS LIMITED

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & OTHERS

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	21/01/1997

BENCH:
A.M.AHMADI, S.C. SEN




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
WITH
		CIVIL APPEAL NO. 231 OF 1997
       (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 16889 of 1991)
		      J U D G M E N T
     Ahmadi, CJI
     Leave granted.
These two appeals are filed against the judgment of the
High Court  of Allahabad  dated 9.9.1991  whereby  the	writ
petitions filed	 by the	 appellants herein  challenging	 the
Notification No.25/Licence/Part-3  dated 18.5.1990 issued by
the Excise  Commissioner, Uttar Pradesh, were dismissed. The
impugned Notification dated 18.5.1990 was issued in exercise
of powers  conferred by
Section 41
of the U.P. Excise Act,
1910 (hereinafter  called the  Act') with the prior approval
of the	State Government.  By the  said Notification certain
amendments  were   made	 in   the   Rules   published	with
Notification No.  423-Five/284/B, dated 26th September 1910.
Section 41
of the Act gives power to the Excise Commissioner
to make	 Rules, inter  alia, for regulating the manufacture,
supply, storage	 or sale  of any  intoxicant; for regulating
deposit and  removal of	 any intoxicant	 and prescribing the
scale of  fees or  manner of  fixing the  fees	payable	 for
licence, permit	 or pass,  including for  the grant  of	 any
exclusive or  other privilege  under
Sections  24
and 24A of
the said  Act. The  earlier Rule  2 was substituted by a new
Rule 2	entitled "Denaturation	of Spirit". The amended rule
provides for  a new  license for denaturation of spirit in a
prescribed form	 to  be	 issued	 by  the  Collector  to	 all
distilleries situated  within his  district holding  licence
PD-1 or	 PD-2 and persons holding licences FL-16, FL-39, FL-
40 and	FL-41 to  denature the spirit. It further prescribed
that the  distilleries mentioned  above and  holding licence
for  denaturation  of  spirit  shall  be  liable  to  pay  a
denaturation fee  at the  rate	of  7  paise  per  litre  in
advance. The  appellants Vam  Organic Chemicals	 Limited are
manufacturing  vinyl   acetate	monomer,   a  basic  organic
chemical for  which industrial	alcohol	 is  the  main	feed
stock. The  industrial alcohol	is  being  produced  in	 the
distillery of the appellants and according to the appellants
the entire  industrial alcohol	produced is denatured as per
the method  approved by	 the State Excise Authorities and is
being used  in their factory for manufacturing vinyl acetate
monomer. The  other appellants,	 viz., India Glycols Limited
and another,  are manufacturing	 Monoethylene Glycol and its
products Diethylene glycol and heavy glycol. One part of the
factory of  these appellants is being used for manufacturing
ethyl alcohol produced by them for being captively consumed.
The appellants  hold licences  in the  form of FL-39 to
enable them  to use  the industrial  alcohol as the main raw
material for  their product.  They were	 obliged to take out
licence in  the form  of DS-1  as prescribed in the impugned
Notification and  pay a	 licence fee  at the rate of 7 paise
per litre  with effect from 2nd June, 1990. The Notification
is challenged  on two  grounds, namely,	 that the  State  of
Uttar Pradesh  has no  power  to  legislate  in	 respect  of
industrial alcohol  or to  levy taxes in respect thereof and
further that  the levy	being not  based on quid pro quo was
otherwise bad. The State of Uttar Pradesh contested the writ
petitions. By the impugned judgment, the High Court rejected
all the contentions of the appellants and dismissed the writ
petitions. Hence these appeals by special leave.
Before  proceeding	  further,  it	will  be  proper  to
understand  the	  difference  between	industrial  alcohol,
denatured  spirit  and	potable	 liquor.  Ethyl	 alcohol  is
rectified spirit of 95% v/v in strength. Rectified spirit is
highly toxic  and  unfit  for  human  consumption.  However,
rectified spirit  diluted  with	 water	is  country  liquor.
Rectified spirit,  as it  is, can be used for manufacture of
various	 other	 products  like	 chemicals,  etc.  Rectified
spirit,	 produced  for	industrial  use	 is  required  by  a
Notification issued  under the	Act to be denatured in order
to  prevent   the  spirit   from  being	 directed  to  human
consumption.  Rectified	  spirit  is   denatured  by  adding
denaturants  which   make   the	  spirit   unpalatable	 and
nauseating. As	such rectified	spirit can  be converted  to
potable liquor	but once  denatured it	can be	used only as
industrial alcohol. The process of denaturation described by
the  respondent	 is  narrated  by  the	High  Court  in	 the
following words:
"Denaturation of  rectified  spirit
     is	 a   highly  technical	process.
     Every  drum/lot/batch   has  to  be
     tested by Chief Development Officer
     at	  the	Excise	 Head	Quarters
     Laboratory so as to ensure that the
     same is according to the prescribed
     specification   before   they   are
     allowed to	 be used  for denaturing
     the rectified  spirit.  After  they
     are    properly	 tested,     the
     denaturants have  to be  separately
     stored under  lock and  key of  the
     officer-in-charge	    of	     the
     distillery, and measured quantities
     are pumped	 into denaturation  vats
     at the  time of  denaturation.  The
     process  of   mixing  goes	 on  for
     several   hours.	 The   resultant
     mixture  is   denatured  spirit  or
     specially denatured  spirit, as the
     case may  be. After  denaturing, it
     is again tested to find out whether
     it has  been properly  denatured or
     not.  The	 Excise	 Department   is
     obliged  to,   and	 does	maintain
     laboratory for  this purpose at the
     Head   Quarters   of   the	  Excise
     Commissioner.  There   is	a  Chief
     Development  Officer,  assisted  by
     four	Assistant	 Alcohol
     Technologists and a large number of
     supporting	  staff	   apart    from
     apparatus	and   other   equipment.
     Denaturation takes	 place under the
     close  supervision	 of  the  Excise
     Officials in  accordance  with  the
     provisions of  rule 785 of the U.P.
     Excise Manual, volume I."
The first	contention raised  before the High Court was
that rectified	spirit being  industrial alcohol  as held by
the Supreme  Court in
Synthetic and Chemicals Ltd. v. State
of U.P.
[(1990) 1  SCC 109]  and being	 not fit  for  human
consumption, the  State Legislature  has no  power to make a
law with  respect to it or to charge licence fee or levy nay
other impost.  It was  submitted  by  the  petitioners	that
industrial alcohol  is within  the exclusive  domain of	 the
Parliament by  virtue of declaration made by it in
Section 2
of  the	 Industries  Development  &  Regulations  Act,	1956
(hereinafter referred  to as "the
IDR Act
") and the addition
of Item	 26 in	the
Schedule  to the  Act
. Further,  it	 was
submitted that	Entry 8	 or 51	of List	 II of	the  Seventh
Schedule to  the Constitution  cannot support  the  impugned
Notification.  Entry   33  of	List  III,  the	 petitioners
submitted, could not sustain it as the field was occupied by
the provisions of
Section 18G
of the IDR Act.
So far as List II is concerned, the impugned judgment refers
to Entries  6, 8,  24,	51  and	 66  to	 conclude  that	 the
Notification is	 covered by  Entries 6 & 8. The said entries
are reproduced below:-
"6.  Public health	 and sanitation;
     hospitals and dispensaries.
8.	  Intoxicating liquors,	 that is
	  to   say,    the   production,
	  manufacture,	     possession,
	  transport, purchase  and  sale
	  of intoxicating liquors.
24.  Industries  subject	to   the
     provision of
     *	    **
     Entries 7 and 52 of List I.
51.  Duties  of   excise	on   the
     following	goods	manufactured  or
     produced	in    the   State    and
     countervailing duties  at the  same
     or lower  rates  on  similar  goods
     manufactured or  produced elsewhere
     in India:-
(a)  Alcoholic  liquors  for  human
     consumption;
(b)  opium, Indian	 hemp and  other
     narcotic drugs and narcotics;
but  not  including  medicinal  and
     toilet   preparations    containing
     alcohol or	 any substance	included
     in sub-paragraph (b) of this entry.
66.  Fees in  respect of any of the
     matters  in   this	 List,	but  not
     including fees taken in any court."
Production, possession,  storage, and  distribution  of
country liquor,	 IMFLs, wines  etc. are	 fully controlled by
the State.  (See Section  24-B, U.P.  Excise Act).  The U.P.
Excise Act  & Rules  made thereunder  prescribe a  system of
licensing for producing rectified spirit, for
___________________________________________________________
*    7. Industries  declared by	 Parliament  by	 law  to  be
necessary for  the purpose of defence or for the prosecution
of war.
**   52. Quoted in the following page.
obtaining	country	  liquor,  etc.,   as  well  as	 for
possession,    storage and  trade  in  these  products.	 The
licensing has the twin objective, the High Court points out,
of raising  revenue and	 regulating  trade  in	the  noxious
goods. The  High Court finds the Entries 6 & 8 of List-II as
providing the filed for legislation and consequent licensing
for denaturation  of spirit  and Entry	51 as  providing the
scope for levy of duties.
Coming to List-III, the relevant Entry is 33:
"33. Trade and commerce in, and the
     production, supply and distribution
     of,
(a)  the products	of any	industry
     where the	control of such industry
     by	 the   Union  is   declared   by
     Parliament by  law to  be expedient
     in	  the	public	 interest,   and
     imported goods  of the same kind as
     such products;
(b)  foodstuffs,  including  edible
     oilseeds and oils;
(c)  cattle    fodder,    including
     oilcakes and other concentrates;
(d)  raw cotton,  whether ginned or
     unginned, and cotton seed; and
(e)  raw jute."
A similar Entry is 52 is List-I:
"52. Industries,  the   control  of
     which by  the Union  is declared by
     Parliament by  law to  be expedient
     in the public interest."
A declaration  is made by
Section 2
of the IDR Act that
"it is	expedient in  the public  interest  that  the  Union
should take  under its	control the  industries specified in
the First Schedule."
Item 26 of the 1st Scheduled reads:
"26. Fermentation Industries
1.	  Alcohol
2.	  Other products of fermentation
     industries.
Recall Entry 24 of List-II :
"24.  Industries	subject	 to  the
     provisions of [Entries 7 and 52] of
     List I."
The impugned  judgment now proceeds to examine how much
of the	field is  occupied by  the
IDR	Act
so that the area
available to the State Legislature can be ascertained.
Section 18G  empowers the Central Government to provide
for regulating	the supply  and distribution  and trade	 and
commerce in  any article  or class  of articles relatable to
any scheduled  industry insofar	 as it	appears to  it to be
necessary  or	expedient   for	  securing   the   equitable
distribution and availability at fair price. Sub-section (2)
specifies the various provisions that can be made under sub-
section (1) :
"18-G.  Power  to	control	 supply,
     distribution,   price,    etc.   of
     certain articles. - (1) The Central
     Government so  far as it appears to
     it to be necessary or expedient for
     securing the equitable distribution
     and availability  at fair prices or
     any article  or class  of	articles
     relatable to any schedule industry,
     may    notwithstanding	anything
     contained in any other provision of
     this  Act,	  by   notified	  order,
     provide, for  regulating the supply
     and distribution  thereof and trade
     and commerce therein.
(2)  Without   prejudice	to   the
     generality of  the powers conferred
     by sub-section (1) a notified order
     made thereunder may provide -
(a)  For controlling  the prices at
     which any	such  article  or  class
     thereof may be bought or sold;
(b)  For  regulating  by  licences,
     permits,	 or    otherwise,    the
     distribution,  transport  disposal,
     acquisition,  possession,	 use  or
     consumption of  any such article or
     class thereof;
(c)  For	   prohibiting	     the
     withholding from  sale of	any such
     article or class thereof ordinarily
     kept for sale;
(d)  For	requiring   any	  person
     manufacturing producing  or holding
     in stock  such  articles  or  class
     thereof to	 sell the  whole or  the
     part    of	   the	  articles    so
     manufactured or  produced during  a
     specified period  or  to  sell  the
     whole or  a part of the articles so
     held in  stock to	such  person  or
     class  or	 persons  and	in  such
     circumstances as  may be  specified
     in the order;
(e)  For regulating  or prohibiting
     any   class    or	 commercial   or
     financial transaction  relating  to
     such article or class thereof which
     in the  opinion  of  the  authority
     making  the   order  are,	 or   if
     unregulated  are	likely	 to   be
     detrimental to public interest;
(f)  For requiring	 persons engaged
     in the  distribution and  trade and
     commerce in  any  such  article  or
     class thereof  to mark the articles
     exposed of	 intended for  sale with
     the sale  price or	 to  exhibit  at
     some easily accessible place on the
     premises	the    price-lists    of
     articles held  for sale and also to
     similarly exhibit	on the first day
     of every  month, at such other time
     as may  be prescribed,  a statement
     of the total quantities of any such
     articles in stock;
(g)  for collecting any information
     or	 statistics   with  a	view  to
     regulation or  prohibiting	 any  of
     the aforesaid matters; and
(h)  for	 any	incidental    or
     supplementary  matters,  including,
     in particular,  the grant	or issue
     of	 licences,   permits  or   other
     documents	and   charging	of  fees
     therefore."
(Emphasis supplied)
     Thus, the power under Section 18G can be exercised only
so far as is permitted by sub-section (1) viz., for securing
the equitable distribution and availability at fair price of
any article  or class of articles relatable to any scheduled
industry. To  this extent  the State Legislature cannot make
any law. The High Court concludes that in other respects the
field is still open to the State Legislature. The High Court
goes on	 to say	 that the impugned Notification is issued to
ensure	that   rectified  spirit   sought  to  be  used	 for
industrial purposes  is not  diverted for  obtaining country
liquor or  other forms	of potable liquor and that it is not
concerned with	equitable distribution	and availability  at
fair price  of either  rectified  spirit  or  the  denatured
spirit. The  Notification was, thus, justified under Entry 6
of List-II-Public  health; and	Entry  8  of  List  -  II  -
Possession and sale of intoxicating liquors.
This Court	 dealt	with  the  question  of	 legislative
competence of  the State to impose tax or levy on industrial
alcohol in  the case of
Synthetic Chemicals v. State of U.P.
[(1990) 1 SCC 109] = 1989 Supp. (1) SCR 623 and ruled in the
negative. The  High Court took the view that the distinction
between ethyl alcohol/rectified spirit as such and denatured
spirit was  not in  issue, nor	was it	considered  in	that
judgment and  held that	 this Court  cannot be	said to have
ruled  that   every  rectified	 spirit/ethyl	alcohol	  is
industrial alcohol.
The High  Court  reiterated  that	once
denatured,  the	  alcohol  becomes   exclusively  industrial
alcohol since it cannot be used for obtaining country liquor
or for	manufacturing IMFLs  and said  that it	is to ensure
that ethyl  alcohol meant  for industrial use is not misused
or diverted  for human	consumption that impugned regulation
is provided for by the State and further that the regulation
being part  of general regulation of the trade in alcohol in
the interest  of public health is relatable to Entries 6 & 8
of List-II.
The second	 part of the case relates to the question of
quid pro  quo between the services rendered by the State and
the   rate    of   fee	  charged.    According	   to	 the
petitioners/appellants, the  fee charged  was excessive	 and
hence bad. The High Court pointed to the distinction between
the regulatory	fee and compensatory fee. It opined that the
licence fee  imposed for  regulatory purposes  may not carry
with it any service rendered, but that such licence fee must
be reasonable.	Further, the  High Court  said, it  would be
appropriate to	look to	 the  expenditure  which  the  State
incurs for  administering the  regulation and  if there is a
broad co-relation  between the	expenditure which  the State
incurs and  the fees charged, the fees could be sustained as
reasonable. It also referred to the counter-affidavit of the
State to  conclude  that  a  good  number  of  officers	 and
employees are  engaged in  managing the laboratories besides
the staff  which is  posted at	the distilleries  and so the
rate of 7 paise per litre was in order.
In these  appeals the  appellants reiterate  that	this
Court by  its 7-Judge  Bench decision in
Synthetic Chemicals
(supra) has  expressly ruled  against legislative competence
of the	State so  far as  ethyl alcohol/rectified  spirit is
concerned. Further,  they say that even if the State is left
with  regulatory  power	 to  prevent  misuse  of  industrial
alcohol for  potable purposes,	such power  did not  include
power to  levy any  impost. Further, the appellants say that
denaturation is	 a statutory  duty imposed by a Notification
under the  U.P. Excise Act and no service by the State being
provided for  the same,	 no fee	 could be charged and in any
case even  if the  State  has  to  incur  any  expenses	 for
enforcement of	the requirement of denaturation, there is no
quid pro  quo between  the expenses  incurred and  the	fees
charged.
We may  not that  the term	 `industrial alcohol' is not
used in	 nay of	 the Lists  in the  Seventh Schedule  of the
Constitution. All  the entries quoted in the earlier part of
the judgment  have to  be  read	 with
Article	248
of	 the
Constitution which specifies residuary powers of the Union:
"248.    Residuary	    powers    of
     legislation. -  (1) Parliament  has
     exclusive power  to  make	any  law
     with  respect  to	any  matter  not
     enumerated in  the Concurrent  List
     or State List.
(2)  Such power  shall include  the
     power of  making any law imposing a
     tax  not  mentioned  in  either  of
     those Lists."
This is  reflected in  Entry 97  of
     List-I :
"97. Any	 other	   matter    not
     enumerated in  List II  or List III
     including any  tax not mentioned in
     either of those Lists."
Whether alcoholic liquors other than "alcoholic liquors
for human  consumption" of "intoxicating liquor" was a State
subject or  a Union  subject should be the real controversy.
It is with a view to describing this kind of liquor that the
term `industrial  alcohol' is used. After an analysis of all
the provisions	of law	giving the  Union Parliament and the
State Legislature jurisdiction to legislate on alcohol, this
Court in  the
Synthetic	 Chemical
case (supra) held that the
impugned Notifications	imposing certain fees as vend fee or
transport fee  etc., were  held to be within the legislative
competence of  the State. A careful reading of that judgment
shows that  the Court  was fully  aware	 of  the  fact	that
rectified spirit  was the ingredient for intoxicating liquor
or alcoholic liquor for human consumption although rectified
spirit/ethyl  alcohol	as  well  as  denatured	 spirit	 are
referred to  as `industrial  alcohol' in that judgment. This
Court did  not hold  that  the	State  will  have  no  power
whatsoever in  relation to "industrial alcohol". In fact, in
the judgment  itself, the  Court has  enumerated the various
areas relating	to industrial  alcohol in  which  the  State
could still  legislate or  make rules. The following part of
the judgment can be read with profit.
"The position  with regard	 to  the
     control  of  alcohol  industry  has
     undergone material	 and significant
     change after  the amendment of 1956
     to	  the
IDR   Act
.   After   the
     amendment, the  State is  left with
     only  the	 following   powers   to
     legislate in respect of alcohol:
(a)  it may pass any legislation in
     the  nature   of	prohibition   of
     potable liquor referable to entry 6
     of list II and regulating powers.
(b)  it may lay down regulations to
     ensure that  non-potable alcohol is
     not  diverted   and  misused  as  a
     substitute for potable alcohol.
(c)  the state  may  charge  excise
     duty on  potable alcohol  and sales
     tax under	entry  52  of  list  II.
However,  sales   tax   cannot   be
     charged on	 industrial  alcohol  in
     the present case, because under the
     Ethyl   Alcohol   (Price	Control)
     orders, sales tax cannot be charged
     by the state on industrial alcohol.
(d)  however,  in	 case  State  is
     rendering any  service, as distinct
     from its  claim of	 so-called grant
     of privilege,  it may  charge  fees
     based on  quid pro quo. See in this
     connection,  the	observations  of
     India Mica's case (supra)."
(1989) Supp.1. SCR 623 (681-682).
Denaturation of  spirit meant  for	 industrial  use  is
meant to  prevent misuse  of non-potable  alcohol for  human
consumption and	 as such specifically mentioned by the Court
to be within the legislative competence of the State.
It is to be noticed that the States under Entries 8 and
51 of  List-II read  with Entry	 84 of List-I have exclusive
privilege to  legislate on  intoxicating liquor or alcoholic
liquor	for   human  consumption.  Hence,  so  long  as	 any
alcoholic preparation  can be diverted to human consumption,
the States  shall have	the power  to legislate	 as also  to
impose taxes,  etc. In	this view, denaturation of spirit is
not only  an obligation	 on the	 States but  also within the
competence of the States to enforce.
This court	 had occasion  to deal with the same entries
in the three Lists and their effect when confronted with the
IDR Act
in the	 case of
Shri Bileshwar  Khan Udyog  Khedut
Sahakari Mandali  Ltd. v.  State of  Gujarat & Anr.
[1992] 1
S.C.R. 391. In that case, the matter under challenge was the
validity  of   demand  under  Section  58-A  of	 the  Bombay
Prohibition Act	 for maintenance  of the  excise  staff	 for
supervision of	the manufacture	 of industrial alcohol which
was assailed  for lack	of  legislative	 competence  of	 the
State. The appellant
in that case
urged that even if State's
power to  supervise production	of alcohol  is conceded, the
State could not be said to have the power to impose any levy
to meet the cost of supervision. The court observed:
"According to learned counsel since
the entire	 judgment
of  the  High
     Court proceeded on privilege theory
     it cannot	withstand the  principle
laid down in
Synthetic & Chemical's
     case. Levy	 as a  fee under Entry 8
     of List  II of  VIIth  Schedule  or
     excise  duty  under  Entry	 51  are
     different than  cost of supervision
     charged  under   Section  58A.  The
     former has	 to stand  the	test  of
     levy; being  in accordance with law
     on power  derived from  one of  the
     constitutional    entries.
Since
     Synthetic & Chemical
's case finally
     brought purview  of either	 Entry 8
     or 51  of List II of VIIth Schedule
     of the  competency of  the State to
     frame any	legislation to	levy any
     tax or  duty is  excluded.	 But  by
     that a  provision	enacted	 by  the
     State  for	  supervision  which  is
     squarely covered  under Entry 33 of
     the  concurrent  list  which  deals
     with   production,	   supply    and
     distribution     which	includes
     regulation cannot	be assailed. The
     Bench  in	Synthetic  &  Chemical's
     case made it clear that even though
     the power	to levy	 tax or	 duty on
     industrial alcohol	 vested	 in  the
     Central Government	 the  State  was
     still left	 with power  to lay down
     regulations  to  ensure  that  non-
potable	alcohol,     that    is,
     industrial	  alcohol,    was    not
diverted and  misused as substitute
     for potable alcohol. This is enough
     to justify a provision like 58A.
In
     paragraph 88 of the decision it was
     observed	that   in   respect   of
     industrial alcohol	 the States were
     not authorised to impose the impost
     as they  have purported  to  do
in
     that case
but that  did not effect
     any imposition  of fee  where there
     were  circumstances   to  establish
     that there was quid pro quo for the
     fee  nor	it   will   affect   any
     regulatory measure. This completely
     demolishes the  argument on  behalf
     of appellant."
The judgment  was followed	 in a later case raising the
same questions	and challenging the validity of
Section 58-A
of the	Bombay Prohibition  Act, namely,
Gujchem Distillers
India Ltd. v. State of Gujarat and Anr.
1992.
(1)  S.C.R. 675.  On a	proper	appreciation  of  the  legal
situation, the	fee of 7 paise per litre has to be seen as a
part of	 the regulatory	 measure,  namely,  denaturation  of
spirit and supervision of the said process.
More recently  by effect  of interaction of entries 8 and 24
List II,  entry 52  of List  I of  the Seventh	Schedule and
entry 26  of the
First Schedule  of the  IDR Act
came to be
considered in  the case	 of State  of A.P.  & Ors.  etc.  v.
McDowell &  Co. &  Ors. etc. reported in JT 1996 (3) SC 679.
The State  of Andhra  Pradesh prohibited  the manufacture of
liquor by  an amendment	 in the
Andhra Pradesh	 Prohibition
Act, 1995
. `Liquor' in the Act was defined as under:
"(7). `Liquor' includes, -
(a)  spirit of wine, wine, beer and
     every  liquid   consisting	 of   or
     containing alcohol including Indian
     liquor and Foreign Liquor,
(b)  any	  other	    intoxicating
     substance which  the Government may
     by	 notification,	 declare  to  be
     liquor for	 the  purposes	of  this
     Act,
     but   does	  not	include	  today,
     denatured,	  spirits,    methylated
     spirits and rectified spirits;"
We	 may   also  notice  Section  7A.  By  that  Section
manufacture of liquor came to be prohibited.
M/s. McDowell  &  Co.,  manufacturers  of	intoxicating
liquors challenged the constitutional validity of the Act by
which the
Prohibition Act
was amended to include
Section 7-
A. One	of the	grounds of challenge was lack of Legislative
competence in  view of entry 26 in the
First Schedule of the
IDR Act
which according to the writ petitioners, vested the
control of  alcohol industries	exclusively in the Union and
denuded the  State Legislature	of its	power to  licence or
regulate the  manufacture of  liquor.  This  submission	 was
based on the fact that fermentation industries were included
in the
Schedule of  the IDR  Act
and  hence the  State	 was
denuded of  its power to licence and regulate manufacture of
liquor.	 Entry	 26  reads   "Fermentation  Industries;	 (1)
Alcohol, (2)  other products of fermentation industries". It
was  argued   that  after  the	amendment  the	control	 and
regulation of  such industries and their product fell within
the exclusive province of the Union and hence the State lost
its competence to grant, refuse or renew the licences. After
an analysis  of all  the relevant  provisions of the law the
Court concluded as under:
"(W)e  must  first	 carve	out  the
     respective fields	of Entry  24 and
     Entry 8  in List  II. Entry 24 is a
     general	entry	  relating    to
     industries whereas	 Entry	8  is  a
     specific and special entry relating
     inter alia to industries engaged in
     production	  and	manufacture   of
     intoxicating liquors.  Applying the
     well-known rule  of  interpretation
     applicable	 to   such  a  situation
     (special excludes	the general), we
     must  hold	  that	the   industries
     engaged	in     production    and
     manufacture of intoxicating liquors
     do not  fall within Entry 24 but do
     fall within  Entry 8.  This was the
     position at the commencement of the
     Constitution  and	 this	is   the
     position today  as well.  once this
     is so,  the making of a declaration
     by the  Parliament as  contemplated
     by Entry 52 of List I does not have
     the  effect   of  transferring   or
     transplanting, as it may be called,
     the    industries	   engaged    in
     production	  and	manufacture   of
     intoxicating liquors from the State
     List to Union Lists. As a matter of
     fact, the	Parliament  cannot  take
     over  the	 control  of  industries
     engaged  in   the	production   and
     manufacture of intoxicating liquors
     by making a declaration under Entry
52 of  List-I, since the said entry
     governs only  Entry 24  in List  II
     but not Entry 8 in List II."
It was  reiterated in the later part of the judgment as
under:
"It   follows    from   the   above
     discussion that the power to make a
     law with respect to manufacture and
     production	 and   its   prohibition
     (among other  matters mentioned  in
     Entry   8	 in   List-II)	 belongs
     exclusively    to	   the	   State
     Legislatures. Item	 26 in the First
     Schedule to  the I.D.R. Act must be
     read subject  to Entry  8 - and for
     that matter,  Entry 6 - in List-II.
So read, the said item does not and
     cannot   deal   with   manufacture,
     production of intoxicating liquors.
All the  petitioners before  us are
     engaged  in   the	manufacture   of
     intoxicating  liquors.   The  State
     Legislature     is,      therefore,
     perfectly competent  to make  a law
     prohibiting their	manufacture  and
     production -  in addition	to their
     sale, consumption,	 possession  and
     transport	-   with  reference   to
     Entries 8	and 6  in List-II of the
     Seventh	 Schedule     to     the
     Constitution read	with
Article  47
thereof."
The High  Court in	 the impugned  judgment has  drawn a
distinction  between   fees  charged   for  licences,  i.e.,
regulatory fees	 and  the  fees	 for  services	rendered  as
compensatory fees.  The distinction  pointed out by the High
Court can be seen in clause (2) of
Article 110 :
"110.(2) -	 A  Bill  shall	 not  be
     deemed to be a Money Bill by reason
     only  that	  it  provides	for  the
     imposition	 of   fines   or   other
     pecuniary	penalties,  or	for  the
     demand  or	  payment  of  fees  for
     licences  or   fees  for	services
     rendered, or  by  reasons	that  it
     provides	for    the   imposition,
     abolition, remission, alteration or
     regulation of  any tax by any local
     authority	 or   body   for   local
     purposes."
The High Court has quoted from this Court's decision in
Corporation of	Calcutta v. Liberty Cinema
, AIR 1965 SC 1107
1965 2	S.C.R. 477,  which was	based  on  a  Privy  Council
judgment in  Shennon v. Lower Mainland Dairy Products Board,
1938, AC  708 =	 AIR 1939  PC 36.
This Court  said  in	 the
Corporation of Calcutta v. Liberty Cinema
(supra) :
"In fact,	in our	Constitution fee
     for licence  and fee  for	services
     rendered	are    contemplated   as
     different kinds of levy. The former
     is not  intended to  be a	fee  for
     services rendered. This is apparent
     from  a  consideration  of
Article
     110(2)
and
Article  199(2)
where
     both    expressions     are    used
     indicating thereby	 that  they  are
     not the same.'
     The High  Court has  taken the view that in the case of
regulatory fees,  like the  licence fees,  existence of quid
pro quo	 is not	 necessary although the fee imposed must not
be, in	the circumstances  of the  case, excessive. The High
Court further  held
that  keeping in  view the	quantum	 and
nature of  the work  involved in  supervising the process of
denaturation and  the consequent  expenses incurred  by	 the
State, the  fee of  7 paise  per litre	was  reasonable	 and
proper. We  see no  reason to  differ with  this view of the
High Court.
In view of the foregoing, the appeals are dismissed. No
costs.