[Cites
0
, Cited by
568
]
Supreme Court of India
Special Deputy Collector & Anr. Etc vs Kurra Sambasiva Rao & Ors. Etc on 29 April, 1997
Equivalent citations: AIR 1997 SUPREME COURT 2625, 1997 (6) SCC 41, 1997 AIR SCW 2584, (1997) 5 JT 580 (SC), (1997) 3 SCR 1107 (SC), 1997 (4) SCALE 326, 1997 (5) JT 580, (1997) 3 CURCC 75, 1997 BLJR 1 651, (1997) 1 BLJ 682, (1997) 3 MAD LW 163, (1997) 2 RAJ LW 305, (1997) 6 SUPREME 150, (1997) 4 ICC 99, (1997) 4 SCALE 326, (1997) 3 APLJ 23, (1997) 3 CIVLJ 794, (2000) 2 LANDLR 266, 1997 WLN(UC) 1 505, (1997) 2 LACC 472
Author:
K. Ramaswamy
Bench:
K. Ramaswamy
PETITIONER:
SPECIAL DEPUTY COLLECTOR & ANR. ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
KURRA SAMBASIVA RAO & ORS. ETC.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	29/04/1997

BENCH:
K. RAMASWAMY, S. SAGHIRAHMAD, G.B. PATTANAIK




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
WITH
    CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3795-3814OF 1997
[Arising out  os SLP  (C) No.15841/95 and SLP (C) No. 11355-
373/96 (CC-702)
 O R D E R
     Delay condoned.
Substitution ordered.
Leave granted.
This batchof appeals relates to the acquisition of the
lands of 97 acres 42 cents of land situated in the outskirts
of the Tenali town of Guntur District in the State of Andhra
Pradesh. The  lands were acquired for the development of the
colony for  theweakersections-middleincome group persons
etc.  The  notification underSection 4(1)  of  theland
Acquisition Act was publishedon December 9,1980. TheLand
Acquisition officer  awarded compensation  Rs. 22,940/- per
acre for  levelled up  land and Rs. 21,700/-per acre for
unlevelled land. On reference, the Subordinate judge, Tenali
by hisaward  and  decree,  dated  February  26,1991  award
uniformcompensation atthe rate of Rs.1,00,000/- per acre.
On appeal  by  the  appellantsas  well	as  the	 claimants
respondents, the  High court  by judgment  and decree  dated
March 23,1994,furtherenhanced  the  compensation  to Rs.
23.50 per  sq. yard;  thus it  allowed the  appeals  of the
respondent-claimants and  dismissed those of the appellants.
Thus, these  appeals by special leaveand cross appeals by
the  respondent-claimants   for	 further   enhancement	of
compensation. They are disposedof by common order.
The High  Court, after  rejecting the  entire  evidence
adducedby  theclaimants relied only on a saledeed, Ex. A-
12 dated  May 19,1978  relatingto  a piece  ofland  of	an
extent of  250 sq. yardwith a thatchedhouse. It worked out
compensation at the rate  of Rs. 48/- per sq. yard; onthat
basis, it  gavemarginof deduction  of 50%  of the awarded
compensation, namely,  at the rate of Rs. 23.50per sq.yrd.
The question  for consideration is; whether  the  principle
laid down  by the  HighCourt  is correct  in law?  Theland
Acquisition  officer  in  his  award  had  referred  to the
topographical features of the land thus.
"The landsunder acquisition form a
     compact  block  surrounded on  the
     north  by Tenali-Guntur Railway
     Track, onthe east	by lands owned
     bySouth  Central Railways.	 On the
     south  by landswhich  abut	 the
     Tenali-Guntur highway roadand also
     built up area in T.S. No.22 (in the
     case for  T.S. No.27)  and on  the
west by  Agril lands.  T.S. No.  26
and 29  which fall in the compact
     block have already been  acquired.
The beneficiaries have raised a few
     huts here and there. R.S. No. A-250
     also formspart ofthe block and it
     is under acquisition  for	house
     sites    for     weakersections
     separatelyunder aseparate scheme.
All the  lands  in  the  block
     under acquisitionbarringa	few I
     velled  up	 fields	  are similar
     because ofthe following reasons
     (1)  All the landsare more or less
     equally   inaccessible   from   the
     township.
(2)  All the  lands (excepting  few
     levelled up fields) are read as wet
     paddy  fields   similar   in   soil
     fortility and productivity.
(3)  Excepting the few levelled on
     plots to  level each  of the  under
     acquisition, similar  levelling  up
     cost is  requiredto  beincurred
     which works  out  to  approximately
     Rs. 60,000/-per  acre in  the  most
     conservative  estimate.   All   the
     lands under  acquisition have equal
     potentiality or  otherwiseof being
     used as house sites.
In between  the blockof lands
     under acquisition,there is channel
     running  in  North-south  direction
     and it touches theGuntur Narakodur
     Tenali Road. The channel is now not
     inuse.
A metal  roadhas  been formed
     along with the channel bythe side
     ofTS. 15 to make across from truck
     road to  the built up area in T.S.
     Nos. 23 and 22.
T.S. No. 142 and T.S.Nos. 12,
     13, 14  and 16  which are not under
     acquisition fieldin  between  the
     lands  under  acquisitionand  the
     Guntur-Narakodur Tenali   Road.
Unless these  fields are  developed
     into Township, there is noprospect
     of the   lands  under  acquisition
     features of a township.
Onlya	  few  fields	stand
     classifiedin  accounts as semidry
     and all  others stand classified as
     wet. Notwithstanding  the variation
     inclassification, all  the	 lands
     under acquisitionexecuting a  few
     levelled up  plots are  wet  paddy
     fields onground. The  few	lands
     which were not  grown  with  paddy
     were cultivated with dry crops like
     banana, sugar and chillies. To make
     the   lands    under    acquisition
     suitable  for   house  sites,   the
     levels have to be raised by about 2
     to3  feetto  make	themfit	 for
     building purposes. There can be no
     two opinions  about the  difficulty
     that is presently being experienced
     by	   personswhopurchase
     Agricultural lands in Tenali  Town
     ingetting earth rooted  to	 those
     lands forlevelling themup. From
     the experience of the  Municipality
     which understood levellingwork for
     provisionof   houses  to  weaker
     sections of  the society, it can be
     said withcertainty thatthe cost
     involved  in   levelling  up  these
     lands  to makethem	  fit	for
     residential purposes  would be  not
     less than Rs. 60,000/- peracre.'
     Onthe  basis of  the above factual material collected,
the land  Acquisition officer passed his award.The question
arises:whether the acquired  lands possessedof potential
value for  being used  as building sites? The High Court has
found, as pointed out by Shri Sudhir Chandra, learned senior
counselfor  the claimants,  that the lands arepossessed of
potential value for being  used for building purpose. It is
well settled  legal position that the claimantsstand in the
position of  plaintiffs. Burden of proof  is always  on the
claimants to  prove byadduction of  cogent and	acceptable
evidence that  the lands  are  capableof  fetching  higher
compensation than what is determined bythe land Acquisition
officer, whichis only an offer.	 If the award is accepted
withoutprotest,	 it binds  theparties.	It is the bounden
duty of the court  to evaluatethe evidence onthe basis of
the human  conduct, even if no rebuttalevidence is produced
by theLand Acquisition Officer, to assess themarket value
applying the  relevant tests laid down by this Court inbead
role of decisions. InPeriyarand	 PareekanniRubbersltd.
V/s.  State  of Kerala [(1991)	4  SCC	195], this  Court
considered theentire case  law as  onthat  date,  on the
principle of  determination of market value andthe relevant
test laid  in that  behalf. The burdenof  proof	 that the
amount awardedby the land AcquisitionOfficer/Collector is
not adequate  is always on the claimant. Theburden is to
adduce relevant and material evidence to establish that the
acquired landsare capable  offetching highermarket value
than  the   amount   awarded   by   the	 land Acquisition
officer/Collector   or	that  the land Acquisition
Officer/Collector proceeded  ona wrongpremiseor applied a
wrong principle of law.	 The object  of the  enquiry  in  a
reference under Section 18 of the Act is to bring on record
the price  which the  land under  acquisition was capable of
fetching  in   the  open  market  as  on  the  date  of the
notification. The  relative situation  of the  acquiredland
which is  the subject of the sale transaction, the nature of
the land,  its suitability,  nature ofthe useto which the
lands are  put to  on the  dateof  thenotification, income
derivedor  derivable from  or any other special distinctive
feature whichthe  land	is  possessed  of  and	thesale
transactions  in  respect  of  lands  covered  by  thesame
notification, are  all relevant factors to  be takeninto
consideration  in  determiningthe  market  value.  It is,
therefore, theparamount dutyof thecourts of  facts  to
subjectthe  evidence to	 very close  scrutiny, objectively
assess the  evidence  tenderedby  the parties  on  proper
consideration thereof  in correct  perspective to  arrive at
adequate and  reasonable market value.The  attending facts
and circumstances  in each  case wouldfurnishguidance  to
arrive at  the market  value of the acquired  lands. it	 is
equallyrelevant	 to consider the neighbourhoodlands as are
possessed  ofsimilar potentiality  or  anyadvantageous
features or  any special  circumstances available  ineach
case. The  Court is  required to  take into  account all the
relevant considerations.  The Court  isrequired	 to Keep at
the back  of its  mind that  the object of assessment is to
arrive at reasonable and adequate market value of the lands.
In thatprocess, thoughsome guess workis involve, feats of
imagination should  be eschewedand mechanical assessment of
the evidence  should beavoided. Even in the absence oforal
evidence adduced  by the  land Acquisition  officer  or the
beneficiaries the  judges are  to draw from their experience
the normal  human conduct  of the  parties and bona fide and
genuinesale transactions are guiding star in evaluating the
evidence. Misplaced  sympathiesor  undue emphasis solely on
the claimants'right to compensation would place very heavy
burden on  the public  exchequer  to  which  other  everyone
contributes by direct or indirect taxes.
Whether fair  and reasonable  and adequatemarket value
is always  a question  of   fact  depends  on  the  evidence
adduced, circumstantial evidence, and probabilities arising
in each case. The  guiding star	 or the	 acid test would be
whethera  hypotheticalwillingvendor would offer the lands
and a  willing purchaser  in normal  human conduct  would be
willingto  buyas  a prudent  man in  normal human  conduct
would be  willing to  buy as  aprudentman in normal market
conditions prevailing  in the open market in the locality in
which the  acquired lands are situated as on the date of the
notification under  Section 4  (1) of  the Act; but not	 an
anxiousbuyer dealing at arm's length with throw away price,
nor facade  of sale  orfictitious  sales brought  about	 in
quick succession  or otherwiseto inflate the market value.
The judge  should sit  in the  arm chair of thesaid willing
buyer and  seekan  answer to  the question  whether in the
given set of circumstances as aprudentbuyer he would offer
the same  market valuewhich the	 court proposed to fix for
the acquired  lands inthe available market conditions. The
court is therefore, enjoined with the bounden duty of public
function and  judicial dispensation  indetermination of the
marketvalueof  the  acquired   land   and  compulsory
acquisition.
The best evidence of the value of propertyare thesale
transaction inrespectof	 theacquired  land to  which the
claimant himself  is a party; the time at whichthe property
comes to be sold; nature of theconsideration and the manner
in which  the transaction  cameto  be brought out. They are
all relevant  factors. In  the absenceof such a saledeed
relating  to   the  acquired  land,  the  saletransactions
relating to  the neighbouring  lands in the vicinity of the
acquired land.In that case, the	 features required  to be
presentare  ; it  mustbe  within a  reasonable time of the
date  of   thenotification;it  must   be  a  bonafide
transaction; itshould be a sale of land similar to theland
acquired or  land adjacent  to the  land  acquired;  and  it
should possesssimilar advantageous  features.  These are
relevant features  to be  takeninto  consideration to prove
the market  value of the acquired land as on the date of the
notification publishedunder Section 4(1) of the Act.This
would be  established by  examining either the vendor or the
vendee.If  it is  proved thatthey are  not available, the
scribe of  the documentmay also be examined inthat behalf.
Sect 51-A  of the  act only dispenses with the production of
the original sale deed and directs to receive certifiedcopy
for thereason that parties to the saletransaction would be
reluctant  topart  with	 the original  sale deed  since
acquisition proceedingswould take longtime before award of
the compensation  attains finality  andin the meanwhile the
owner of  the sale deedis precluded from usingthe same for
other purposesvis-a-vis thisland.  The	marking	 of the
certified copyis perse is  not	admissiblein  evidence
unless it is duly proved and the witnesses, viz., the vendor
or  the vendee,	 are  examined.	 Thisprinciple	hasbeen
repeated in a catena ofsubsequent decisions ofthis Court.
InBasant Kumar & Ors. V/s. Union of India& Ors. [1996
(11) SCC  542],	 this Court  pointed out  thatdoctrine	of
equality  in   determination  of   the payment	 ofsame
compensation  to   allclaimants	  covered  by  thesame
notification, is  not a good principle. Treating the entire
villageas  oneunit  and uniformly determiningcompensation
that basis is not sustainable in law.  The Court must always
determine  market   value  prevailing  as  on  the  date  of
notification under Section 4 (1) of theAct andnot what was
claimedby  theparties.	Even estimate of claimant  is not
decisive. The  status of  the claimant is irrelevant. It was
reiterated that while determining  the compensation  under
section23  (1), the  Court should sit in the arm chairof a
prudentwilling purchase in the open market and see whether
he would  be willing  to offer the sameprice as is proposed
to be  fixed bythe Land Acquisition Officer asmarket value
for  the   same or  similar  lands  possessedof	 all the
advantageous features.This test	 should always	be kept in
mind in analysing theevidence and the Court should answer
affirmatively taking  into consideration  all  the  relevant
factors. If  feats of  imagination are allowed the sway, the
land Acquisition  Officer/collector would  overstep judicial
decisions/quasi-judicial ordersand would land in misconduct
amenable to disciplinary law. In that case, thecompensation
as fixed  by the  Land Acquisition  officer was reduced. In
Special landAcquisition	 Officer,Dharwad V/s.  Tajar
Hanifabi (Smt.)[(1996)10 SCC 627], the question related to
determination of  the market  value in respect of 6 acres of
land. When  theland  in	 factwas  used	foragricultural
purpose, no prudent andwiling vendee would offer the market
value  on   square  foot   basis.    Thus  determination  of
compensation on the basis  of square foot basis on thefoot
of a small saletransaction washeld tobe a wrong principal
of lawand  according the determination of compensation was
reducedfrom Rs. 1,96,20\- per acre to 45,000/-per acre.
InAgricultural  Produce  Market  Committee	 V/s.Land
Acquisition   officer and Asstt. Commissioner &Anr. [(1996)
10 SCC 629], same view was reiterated. It was held thatwhen
a total7 acresand oddof landwas sought to be acquired no
prudentpurchaser in the open market would offer to purchase
the open  land on square foot basis that too onthe basis of
a few  small sale  transactions. This court pointed outthat
such  fixation of  the	 market	 value	 wasillegal and
accordingly reduced themarket value.
Itwould  thus b  be settled  lawthat  the	court  is
enjoined to  determine the  market value  on an	  objective
assessment of  the conditions prevailing in theopen market;
the nature of the user of the land to which theland was put
on  the	 dateof	 the notification,the  income  derived
therefrom and  all other  relevant attending  circumstances.
The market  value so determinedshould be just,adequate and
reasonable. Inother words,  it must  be just equivalent to
what the land is capable of fetching inthe open marketfrom
a  willing  and prudent	 buyer,	 Therefore,  the  court	 is
required to  sit in thearm chair of a bona fide willing and
prudentpurchaser  in the  openmarket and seekan answer to
the question  whether in  the conditions  prevailing in the
market he  would offerthe same	market value as	 the court
has proposed.
The HighCourt  has relied	upon the  oral	evidence
adducedby  theclaimants in support ofthe Claim. It is not
in dispute,  aseven  pointed out  by the  Land Acquisition
Officer, that there is colony and railway shed etc. near the
acquired lands. But the question is: whether on the date of
the notification, the lands possessed of potential value and
were fit   foruse asbuilding site?On thebasis of the
evidence adduced beforethe land Acquisition officer and the
contents of theaward which is always part of the record and
material evidence,  it is difficult to accept the contention
of ShriSudhir Chandra that thelands possessedof potential
value for  being used  for building  purpose. Except a small
fraction of land, the elands are agricultural lands. Tomake
them  fit   for construction, evenaccording   to the
conservative estimate,an amount	 of Rs.	 23.50 per acre to
level up  the same.  Itwould  be figment  of imagination to
believethat  aprudent builder woulddo  that.  TheHigh
Court, therefore,  is clearly in error in treating the lands
as fitfor building  purpose and	 on that basis determining
the compensation after giving the deduction.
The question,  therefore, arises:what is the  market
value the  lands were capable to fetch?In a reference under
Section18,  asheld  earlier, the burden of proof always is
on theclaimants to  establishthat the lands are possessed
of advantageous features and  are,  therefore, capable	of
fetching higher marketvalue than whatis determined by the
Land Acquisition  Officer in  his awardunder Section 11. In
view ofthe fact that the High Court itself hasrejected all
the sale  deedsexcept Ex. A-12which we are now constrained
to reject,  andas no other evidence isavailable, we cannot
allow the  appeals anddismissthe  reference. The  Court,
insteadof  indulging into  feats of imagination, should sit
in thearm chair	 of a prudent willing  purchaser  in the
normal conditions  of the  market and  seek  answer  to the
question whether  he would  be willingto offer	the amount
proposed by  the court, after taking into consideration all
the features  of the  land existing  ason  thedate  of the
notification . In view of the material collected by theland
Acquisition officer  himself as referred in  the award,	 we
think that  after taking into consideration allthe relevant
factors, the  reasonable compensation should beRs. 50.000/-
per acre. The compensation is accordingly awarded.
The question  thenis:  whether the	 claimants arealso
entitled to  additionalamountunder Section  23(1-A)? The
notification under  Section 4(1)  of the  Act was  issued on
December 9,  1980. The possession was taken on June 20,1981.
The Amendment  Act 68 of 1984 was introduced onthe floor of
the  House  onApril  30,  1982.	 Thus it  is clearthat
possession wastaken prior to the introductionof Amendment
Act. However,  award under  Section  11 was  made  onJune
19,1982,  i.e., after the  introduction of  the bill but
before the  Actcame  into force.  It would be beneficial to
refer to  the transitional  provisions contained  in Section
30(1) (a) of the Amendment Act which reads as under:
"30. Transitional Provisions. - (1)
     The provisions of sub-section (1-A)
     ofSection 23 ofthe	   principal
     Act, as  inserted by  clause (a) of
     Section  15   of  this  Act,  shall
     apply, and shall be deemed to have
     applied, also  to,and  inrelation
     to,-
(a)  every proceeding for the
       acquisition of  any  land
       under the  principal  Act
       pending on  the 30th  day
       of April,  1982 (the date
       of  introduction of  the
       Land	Acquisition
       (Amendment)  Bill,  1982,
       in  the Houseof	 the
       People, in whichno award
       has  been   made by  the
       Collector   before   that
       date;"
InK.S. Paripoornan V/s. state of Kerala &Ors. [(1994)
5 SCC  593]  the Constitution Bench considered the effect of
the transitional provisions in section 30 (1) (a). The right
to additional  amount 12  per cent  per annumon	 enhanced
compensation was  heldto  bepart  of  the  component  of
determination  of  compensation.  If  the  proceedingswere
pendingas  on the  date the notification underSection4(1)
came into  force, the  provisions of the Amendment Act 68 of
1984 would apply. By operation of the transitional provision
in  Sections   30(1)  (a),   the  claimant  isentitled	to
additional amount @12 per cent per annum to be paid from the
date ofthe notification under Section 4(1) till the date of
depositinto  court and where the  possessionwas	 already
taken, from  the date  of the  notification till  taking  of
possession. Similar view was reiteratedin special Tahsildar
(LA) P.W.D.  Schemes, Vijaywada V/s. M.A.  Jabbar [(1995) 2
SCC 142]  and Khanna Improvement Trust V/s. Land Acquisition
Tribunal  &  Ors.  [(1995)  2  SCC  142].  Accordingly, the
respondent-claimants are  entitled to  payment of additional
amount@12  per	centper	 annum	from  the  date	 of the
notification till date of the taking possessionas mentioned
hereinabove.
Payment ofadditional amount underSection23(1-A)is a
substantive right.  Under those circumstances,by operation
of thetransitional provisions in Section  30(1)(a), the
claimants are  entitledto  theadditional amount at 12% per
annum under  Section 23 (1-A) from thedate ofnotification
under Section  4(1) till  that date  of taking possession.
Insteadof  Rs.1,00,000/-  peracre,  they are entitled to
compensation atthe rate of Rs.50,000/- per acre in respect
of allacquired landswith solatium at 30% onthe enhanced
compensation and  interest @  9% for  one year from June 20,
1981 and  on expiry thereof, @ 15% tilldate ofdepositinto
the court;  andadditional  amount. Consequently,  the award
and decree  ofthe  referenceCourt  stand  modified. The
judgment of theHigh court Stands set aside.
The appeals  are accordingly  allowed. As a result, the
cross appeals  of the  respondent-claimants stand dismissed.
No costs.