[Cites
0
, Cited by
47
]
Supreme Court of India
Smt. Ram Rati vs Saroj Devi & Ors on 25 April, 1997
Equivalent citations: AIR 1997 SUPREME COURT 3072, 1997 AIR SCW 3111, (1997) 5 JT 601 (SC), 1997 (5) JT 601, 1997 ALL CJ 2 1288, (1997) 3 SCR 1050 (SC), 1997 (4) SCALE 307, 1997 (6) SCC 66, (1997) 2 CTC 753 (SC), (1997) 6 SUPREME 6, (1997) 4 SCALE 307, (1997) 5 SCJ 178
Bench:
K. Ramaswamy
,
D.P. Wadhwa
PETITIONER:
SMT. RAM RATI

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SAROJ DEVI & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	25/04/1997

BENCH:
K. RAMASWAMY, D.P. WADHWA




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
O R D E R
     Leave granted.
Wehave heard the counsel on both sides.
This appeal, by special leave, arises fromthe judgment
of theHigh Court  of Madhya  Pradeshat	Jabalpur  bench,
passed on October 30, 1996, in W.P.No. 632/95.
Elections to  the post  ofSarpanch	 of Gram Panchayat,
Laua Kothar  Block, Raipur  Distt. Rewawere held on May 30,
1994. 223 voteswere polled in favour of the appellant while
the respondent was polled 207 votes. Inform No.26-B, Ex.P2,
the Returning officer had declared thatthe elections to the
officerof  Sarpanch ofthe Gram Panchayat wereheld and the
appellant, Smt. Ram Rati,  R/oVillage Loua Kothar, Raipur
Kurchulian, Rewa  Distt., M.P., was a candidate in thesaid
election, was  duly elected.  The saidcertificate  of the
Returning Officer  is dated  June 1,  1994. The respondent,
feelingaggrieved  filed an  Election Petition. In thesaid
petition, the  respondent stated  that the  election was not
properly conducted;  anapplication  for recounting wasmade
but itwas  not	dome; evidence	wasadduced in  support
thereof. The  Tribunal directed recounting, which  hasbeen
affirmed by  the High  Court. Thus  this appeal,  by special
leave.
The   question is : whether the respondenthas made any
application  for  recounting?  The  order  of  the  Tribunal
indicates thus:
"Accordingto  theaforesaid, after
     discussingthe election application
     and analysing  the submissions  of
     Applicant and  Respondent No.1, The
     Vihit   Adhikariat	  the	first
     instance  is  satisfied  with  this
     that to decide thedisputeproperly
     itis  essential that recounting be
     got  done.	 Therefore,   Returning
     Officer  (Panchayat),   Development
     Division,	Raipur	   Karchuliyan
     Development    Division,  Raipur
     Karchuliyan District Rewa is hereby
     directed that  after obtaining  all
     the documents  connected with  Gram
     PanchayatLaua   KotharSarpanch
     Election 1994  from the strong room
     inthe  police custody,  He	 should
     present himself inthe Court 1.3.95
     at10.30 A.M."
The question,  therefore, is  ; whether  the respondent
has made  any  application  tothe  ReturningOfficer and
recounting wasproperly done? Rule 76 of the M.P. Panchayat
Elections Rules,  1994 (for  short, the `Rules') postulates
thus:
"76. Recount  of Votes  - (1) After
     the completion of the counting, the
     ReturningOfficer (Panchayat)  or
     such other officer	 authorised  by
     him  shall record in  the	result
     sheet in  Forms mentionedin  Sub-
     rule  (2)of  Rule	73  the	 total
     number  of votespolledby  each
     candidate and announce thesame.
     (2)  After such  announcement  has
     been madea candidate  or, in  his
     election agent mayapply in writing
     to	  the	Returning Officer
     (Panchayat) or  such otherofficers
     authorisedby him,for a recount of
     all or  any of  the  ballot  papers
     already counted stating the grounds
     onwhich he demands such recount.
(3) On  such an  application  being
     made    the    returning officer
     (panchayat) or  such otherofficers
     authorisedby  himshall decide the
     matter   and    may    allow    the
     application in  whole or in part or
     may reject it if it appears to him
     tobe frivolous orunreasonable.
     (4) Every decisionof the returning
     officer (Panchayat)  or such  other
     officer (Panchayat ) or such other
     officers authorised  by him,  under
     the  Sub-rule   (3)  shall	 be  in
     writing  and   contain  the  reason
     thereof."
Byapplication of sub-rule(1) of Section 76, after the
completion  of the   counting,	 the Returning	 Officer
(Panchayat) orsuch other  officer authorised by him, shall
record in  the result  sheet. in Forms mentioned in sub-rule
(2) of Rule 73 (Form 26-B), thetotal number ofvotes polled
by each candidates and announce the  same. Under  sub-rule
(2), after  such announcement  has beenmade, acandidate of
in hisabsence, his election agent, may apply in writing to
the Returning  Officer (Panchayat)  or such  other  officers
authorised by  him, for a recount  of all  or any  of there
ballot papers  already counted,statingthe grounds on which
he  demands  such  recount.  Under  sub-rule  (3),  onsuch
application being made,the Returning Officer (Panchayat) or
such other  officers authorised by him,	 shall decide the
matter and  mayallow the application in whole or in part or
may reject  it if  it appears  to him  to  be  frivolous  or
unreasonable. Under  sub-rule  (4)  every  decision  of the
Returning  Officer   (Panchayat)  or   such  other  officers
authorised by  him, under  the sub-rule (3) ,shall be  in
writingand contain thereason thereof.
Itis  difficult to	 give acceptance  to the contention
that the  respondent made  an application  to the  Returning
Officerand  the Returning officer had not recounted. In the
light of  the mandatory anguage of Rule 76 of the Rules, it
is incumbent  upon a candidate or an agent, if the candidate
was not present, to make an application in writing andgive
reasonsin  support thereof, while seeking recounting. If it
is not done, then the Tribunal of the court is not empowered
to direct  recounting even  after adduction  ofevidence and
consideration of the alleged irregularities in the counting.
The essential  condition-precedent is that an application in
writingshouldbe made and the  Returning	 Officer  should
pass an order with  reasons in support thereof	either	to
recall the order or otherwise, in writing. The fact that the
officerhad  not passed any order in writing would indicate
that the respondent hadnot made any application. Obviously,
some subsequent had hot	 made any  application.	 Obviously,
some subsequentmanipulation, as contended by the appellant,
would have  taken place,  as aresult of whichthe election
petition was  filed and the argumentswere  addressed for
recounting. Itis settled  legal position  that secrecy	of
ballot should  not be  breachedand  asfar as possible, the
secrecyof ballot or the court is required to order recount,
that too  on giving  satisfactory grounds for recounting. In
view ofthe fact that the rule itself provides that, assoon
as theresult of	 the electionis announced, an application
in writing  must be  made at the first instanceand thefact
***** no  such application  hasbeen  placed before  usdoes
indicate that  no such application had been made on thedate
of thedeclaration ofthe result.	 The  allegation  of  an
application having  been made, would bean afterthought. The
Tribunal,  therefore,has  committed manifest  error  in
directing recount.
The appealis accordingly allowed and the orders of the
Tribunal and  the HighCourt stand setaside. No costs. We,
however, make  it clear that we have proceededon the basis
of  plea  of  the  respondent  for  recount  under  Rule  76
aforementioned which  has beennegatived and  we	 have not
examined the powers of the Tribunal to order recount and the
circumstances under which it can be so ordered.