[Cites
8
, Cited by
254
]
Supreme Court of India
National Bank Of Oman vs Barakara Abdul Aziz & Anr on 3 December, 2012
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2012 SC 730
Bench:
K.S. Radhakrishnan
,
Dipak Misra
REPORTABLE

ITEM NO.23               COURT NO.11             SECTION II


                    S U P R E M E   C O U R T   O F   I N D I A
                                 RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS


Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl) No(s).9098/2012
(From the judgement and order  dated 03/10/2012 in CRLA No.3146/2012 of The
HIGH COURT OF BOMBAY AT AURANGABAD)




NATIONAL BANK OF OMAN                             Petitioner(s)


                 VERSUS


BARAKARA ABDUL AZIZ & ANR.                        Respondent(s)


(With appln(s) for exemption from filing O.T.)




Date: 03/12/2012  This Petition was called on for hearing today.




CORAM :
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE K.S. RADHAKRISHNAN
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE DIPAK MISRA




For Petitioner(s)       Mr. Devashish Bharuka,Adv.




For Respondent(s)




           UPON hearing counsel the Court made the following
                                       O R D E R
The complainant-National  Bank  of  Oman  lodged  a  private
        complaint  RTC  NO.No.260/2007  in  the  Court  of  Chief   Judicial
        Magistrate, Ahmednagar against the respondent alleging that  he  had
        cheated the bank by swindling 43,15,000/- U.A.E. Dirhams (equivalent
        to 5.178 Crores Indian Rupees).  The gist of the complaint reads  as
        follows:
“In the year  1995,  the  applicant/accused  opened  current
                account with the complainant Bank on a  representation  that
                he was holding Indian Passport.  The accused  slowly  gained
                confidence of the complainant Bank.  In February  1996,  the
                accused  produced  trading  licence  issued  by  Abu   Dhabi
                Municipality and Town Planning and represented that he owned
                firm – M/s  Bushra  Textiles,  situated  at  Abu  Dhabi  and
                engaged in retail and wholesale trading and sale of textiles
                garments, stationery items, electronics  etc.   The  accused
                further represented that he was established in  business  at
                Abu Dhabi and was well supported by loyal clientele and  was
                in  process  of  expanding  his  business,  which   required
                financial  facilities  from  the  Bank.   The  accused  also
                represented to  the  Bank  that  he  had  more  than  enough
                financial stability and viability to  honour  the  financial
                commitments and pay back the finances made available to  him
                by the Bank.  Based on the said solemn  representation,  the
                Company in good  faith  granted  to  the  accused  overdraft
                facility of 2,50,000/- A.E.D.   This facility  was  enhanced
                from time to time  to  the  extent  of  51  lacs  A.E.D.  by
                overdraft loan against trust  receipts,  local  bill  limit,
                credit card etc. till October 2001.  The  accused,  however,
                committed breach of undertaking and failed to repay the dues
                of the complainant Bank.
The complainant Bank, therefore, contemplated  legal  action
                against the accused in order to obtain detention orders from
                the competent Court at U.A.E.


                The accused thereupon approached  the  complainant  Bank  in
                November 2002 and entered  into  a  restructuring/settlement
                agreement  with  the  accused  on  12.11.2002   for   A.E.D.
                43,15,000/- by converting all  the  outstanding  liabilities
                into a term loan to be repaid in 48 installments.
The accused undertook to pay the said amount as per terms of
                MOU and also  issued  post  dated  cheques  for  24  monthly
                installments and gave assurance and  undertaking  that  said
                cheques would be honoured and loan would be  repaid  as  per
                the restructuring agreement between the parties and  thereby
                induced the Bank not to take  immediate  action  and  obtain
                detention order.   The  complainant  relied  upon  the  said
                representation and did not take action against  the  accused
                in November 2002.
The said cheques were dishonoured  for  want  of  sufficient
                funds  in  the  account  and  in   meanwhile   the   accused
                surreptitiously and clandestinely absconded to India without
                discharging his loan liability.”




                The  complainant-Bank  is  not  having  any  branch  or  any
        activity in India or nor carrying on any  business  in  India.   The
        Bank, therefore, decided to appoint Mr. N.B. Sapkal, as its power of
        attorney holder for the purpose of filing complaint and taking legal
        steps against the respondent, who is alleged to have duped the  Bank
        and escaped to India.  The power of attorney holder is a resident of
        Ahmednagar and according to the Bank it was convenient for the  Bank
        to file the complaint at Ahmednagar.  The respondent being a citizen
        of India, necessary sanction had to be  obtained  from  the  Central
        Government under the proviso to
Section 188
of the Code of  Criminal
        Procedure.  Sanction was accordingly sought for from the  Government
        of India and the Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs, vide
        letter  No.F/83/2007.Jud.Cell  dated  26th  March,   2010   accorded
        sanction to enquire and trial  of  the  respondent  by  a  court  of
        competent jurisdiction in India.
The  Chief  Judicial  Magistrate,  Ahmednagar  on  25.2.2011
        passed the following order on the complaint:
“Perused complaint and the documents attached thereto.  The
                 Central Government has accorded sanction to  prosecute  the
                 accused.   Heard  learned   counsel   appearing   for   the
                 complainant.  There are sufficient  materials  against  the
                 accused.  The complainant has made  out  prima  facie  case
                 against the accused.  Hence process be issued for  offences
                 u/s 418 and 420 of I.P.C.
Dt.25.02.2011

                                Sd/-
(G.O. Agrawal)
                                        C.J.M. Ahmednagar






                The respondent challenged  that  order  by  filing  Criminal
        Application No.3146/2012 before the High Court of Judicature, Bombay
        Bench at Aurangabad.  It was contended that the allegations  in  the
        complaint do not prima facie constitute any offence or  make  out  a
        case for issuance of process under
Sections  418
and
420
of  the
        I.P.C.  Further, it was stated that  the  respondent-accused  was  a
        resident of Dakshin Kannada in the State of Karnataka and the C.J.M.
        Ahmednagar issued the process without complying with  the  mandatory
        requirement of making an enquiry or directing an  investigation  for
        the purpose of deciding whether or not there was  sufficient  ground
        for initiating proceedings against the accused as contemplated under
Section 202
of the Code of Criminal Procedure.  The High Court  took
        the view that prima facie the bare allegation of  cheating  did  not
        make out a case against the accused for issuance  or  process  under
Section 418
of 420 of the
I.P.C
.  Further,  it  was  held  that  the
        C.J.M. did not follow the procedure laid down under
Section  202
of
        the Cr.P.C.  The High Court held that the Magistrate was obliged  to
        postpone the process against the accused and either enquire the case
        himself or direct an investigation to be made by a police officer or
        by such other officer as he thinks fit for the purpose  of  deciding
        whether or not there is sufficient grounds for proceeding in a  case
        where  the  accused  is  residing  beyond  the  area  in  which  the
        Magistrate exercises his jurisdiction.  The High Court noticed  that
        the accused is a resident of District Dakshin Kannada, Karnataka and
        hence, the CJM should have  followed  the  procedure  laid  down  in
Section 202
Cr.P.C.   The High Court, therefore, set aside the order
        dated 25.2.2011 issuing the process under
Sections 418
and
420
of
        the I.P.C. by the C.J.M. Ahmednagar.  Aggrieved by  the  said  order
        the Bank has come up with this special leave petition.
We find no error in the view taken by the  High  Court  that
        the C.J.M. Ahmednagar had not carried out  any  enquiry  or  ordered
        investigation as contemplated  under
Section  202
of  the  Cr.P.C.
        before issuing the process, considering the fact that the respondent
        is a resident of District  Dakshin  Kannada,  which  does  not  fall
        within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  C.J.M.  Ahmednagar.    It   was,
        therefore, incumbent upon him to  carry  out  an  enquiry  or  order
        investigation as contemplated  under
Section  202
of  the  Cr.P.C.
        before issuing the process.
The duty of a Magistrate receiving a complaint is set out in
Section 202
of the  Cr.P.C.  and  there  is  an  obligation  on  the
        Magistrate to find out if  there  is  any  matter  which  calls  for
        investigation by a criminal court.  The scope of enquiry under  this
        Section is restricted only to find out the truth or otherwise of the
        allegations made in the complaint  in  order  to  determine  whether
        process has to be issued or not.  Investigation under
Section 202
of
        the Cr.P.C. is different  from  the  investigation  contemplated  in
Section 156
as it is only  for  holding  the  Magistrate  to  decide
        whether or not there  is  sufficient  grounds  for  him  to  proceed
        further.  The scope of enquiry under
Section 202
of the Cr.P.C.  is,
        therefore, limited to the ascertainment of truth or falsehood of the
        allegations made in the complaint – (i) on the materials  placed  by
        the complainant before the Court (ii) for  the  limited  purpose  of
        finding out whether a prima facie case for issue of process has been
        made our; and (iii) for deciding the question purely from the  point
        of view of the complainant without at all adverting to  any  defence
        that the accused may have.
Section 202
of  the  Cr.P.C.  was  amended  by  the
Cr.P.C.
        (Amendment Act
2005) and the following words were inserted:
“and shall, in a case where the accused is  residing  at  a
                 place beyond the area in which he exercises jurisdiction”


                The notes on clauses for the above-mentioned amendment  read
        as follow:
“False complaints are filed against persons residing at far
                 off places simply to harass them.  In order to see that the
                 innocent persons are not harassed by unscrupulous  persons,
                 this clause seeks to amend sub-section (1) of
Section  202
to make it  obligatory  upon  the  Magistrate  that  before
                 summoning the accused residing beyond his  jurisdiction  he
                 shall enquire into the case himself or direct investigation
                 to be made by a police officer or by such other  person  as
                 he thinks fit, for finding out whether  or  not  there  was
                 sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused.”






                The amendment has come  into  force  w.e.f.  23.6.2006  vide
        notification No.S.O.923(E) dt. 21.6.2006.
We are of the view that the High Court  has  correctly  held
        that the above-mentioned amendment was not  noticed  by  the  C.J.M.
        Ahmednagar.  The C.J.M. had failed  to  carry  out  any  enquiry  or
        ordered investigation as contemplated under the amended
Section  202
of the Cr.P.C.  Since it is an admitted fact  that  the  accused  is
        residing outside the jurisdiction of the C.J.M. Ahmednagar, we  find
        no error in the view taken by the High Court.   All  the  same,  the
        High Court instead of quashing the complaint, should  have  directed
        the Magistrate to pass fresh  orders  following  the  provisions  of
Section 202
of the Cr.P.C.   Hence,  we  remit  the  matter  to  the
        Magistrate for passing fresh orders uninfluenced by the prima  facie
        conclusion reached by the High Court that the  bare  allegations  of
        cheating do not make out a case against the accused for issuance  of
        process under
Section 418
or 420 of the
I.P.C
.  The C.J.M. will pass
        fresh orders after complying with the procedure laid down in
Section
        202
Cr.P.C., within two months from the  date  of  receipt  of  this
        order.
The special leave petition is, accordingly, disposed of.
|(NARENDRA PRASAD)                      | |(RENUKA SADANA)                       |
|COURT MASTER                           | |COURT MASTER                          |