[Cites
16
, Cited by
4
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Shantilal Bazaz And Anr. vs Municipal Council, Visakhapatnam on 19 November, 1982
Equivalent citations: AIR1983AP199, AIR 1983 ANDHRA PRADESH 199
JUDGMENT

 

 Rama Rao, J.
1.  The defendants are the appellants.  This appeal arises out of  a suit  filed for recovery of a sum of Rupees 34,304.04 p.  Including the warrant  fee of re. 0.12p. being the house tax due from the  defendants on the suit  schedule building for the  years 1968-69 to 1971-72.  The break-up  for the  said  years is:
1968-69                 .......           Rs. 4,096.90
1969-70                  ......           Rs. 4,596.90
1970-71                 .......           Rs. 4,229.08
1971-72                 .......           Rs. 4,229.08
The averments in the plaint are that the plaintiff is entitled to assess and collect the property tax in respect of houses and lands within the Municipal limits of visakhapatnam.  The defendants are the owners of a house situated in  ward No. 20  and the  schedule property  was assessed to municipal tax for the  years 1968-69 to 1971-72.  As the  defendants are the owners of the house, they are under an obligation to pay the tax but failed to pay the amounts in spite  of demand and a  warrant.
2.  The 1st defendant filed a written statement and the  2nd defendant adopted the same.  The 1st defendant admitted that  the  defendants are the owners of the  plaint  schedule building but averred that  the  assessment made by the  plaintiff for payment of property tax is devoid of any basis and invalid.  The  defendants leased out the  said building and the  appurtenant site to M/s. Bajaj Hotels (private) limited for 98 years at an  annual  rent of Rs. 9,000/- and the  assessment of th property tax has to be made only on rental  basis and calculated on the basis of  the rent  received the plaintiff is not competent to levy  the yearly  tax more  than Rs. 2,400/-  it  is also further  averred that the  assessment is wrong illegal and excessive and  the  method of  levy of tax appears to be on the  basis of the  income  said to   have been received by the  lessees.  Further,  the sum of Rs. 4,000/-  paid by the  defendants is not given credit to and the  plaintiff is not entitled to a decree for the sale of the plaint schedule property.
3.  Basing upon these  pleadings, the  following issues are framed:-
(1)  whether  the assessments  made  by the plaintiff for  payment  of  property tax in  respect of the defendant's building is baseless, Arbitrary and invlaid?
(2)  whether  the suit claim is not maintainable?
(3)  To what  relief?
4.  On issue No. 1  the learned subordinate Judge visakhapatnam held that the provisions of the Andhra pradesh
Municipalities Act
do not  contemplate that the  lease amount should be the basis for  fixing  the annual  rental value of the building and the  assessment made by the  municipality is not arbitrary and invalid as the suit  building consisted of 30  rooms and  the  rent ranges from Rs. 25/- to rs. 80/- per  day.  On issue No. 2 it is  held that  the suit  claim is maintainable.  In view of the  findings arrived at on issues 1 and 2  preliminary decree is passed.
5.  The learned counsel for the appellants contended that in respect of the  house leased out, the basis for the  levy of municipal  tax  is the rental  amount received from the tenant and as such the levy of tax  based  upon the amount  or income that could have been  received by the  tenant is not contemplated by the  provisions  of the Act and as such, the levy of tax  is devoid of basis.  Further, it is always open to the  defendants to  resist the  claim for  recovery of  the municipal tax if such tax is not  in conformity with the  provisions of  the Act.  The learned counsel for  the respondent contended that in the case of houses let out the lease amount is not  invariably  the basis for the  levy of municipal  tax and the potential rent or income that is likely to fetch can be made the basis  for levy of municipal tax.  It is also further  contended that the suit   questioning the  legality or validity of the assessmetn is barred under  S. 356 of the District  Municipalities Act and  a fortiori the plea that the levy is not sustainable is  also not  open to  the  defendants in a  suit filed by the  Municipality.
6.  The central  section that controls this decision is
S. 87
of the Andhra  pradesh district (?)
Municipalities Act, 1965
prevailing during the assessment years  in question.
Section 87
may be extracted:
"87.  (1)  Every building shall be asessed together  with its site and other adjacent  premises occupied as an appurtenance thereto unless the owner of the  building is a different person  from the owner of such site or premises.
(2) (a).  The capital value of lands and buildings shall be determined in such due regard to the prevailing  market value of the building and the land on which it  stands.
(b) The annual rental  value of lands  or buildings  shall  be determined in such manner  as may be prescribed having due   regard to the rent  received in respect thereof:
Provided that  in respect of any building and the land  appurtenant thereto,  the fair  rent of which has been fixed under
S. 4
of the Andhra  pradesh buildings (lease, rent  and Eviction) control Act, 1960  (Andhra pradesh Act 15 of 1960), the gross annual rent shall be the  annual amount of the fair rent so fixed'.
xx                                xx                                    xx
Section 87
postulates two  situations for the levy of tax. Sub-sec (2) (a) pertaining to the capital value as the basis  provides that the capital value  shall be determined having due regard to the prevailing having  due  regard to the prevailing market value of the building and the land  on which it stands.  Sub-sec. (2)  (b) is cncerned with a situation when the building is let out  and the  rental  value should be determined. The  rental value  should be determined having due regard to the rent received in respect of the building.  The  proviso pertaining to sub-sec. (2) (b) envisages that in the  event of fixation of the  rent  under
S. 4
of the Andhra  pradesh Buildings (lease rent  and Eviction) control Act, 1960 the rental value  under subsec. (2) (b)  should not  exceed the actual amount of the rent fixed under the rent control Act.  Though sub-sec (2)  (a) and (b) provide the manner of determination of the  tax by prescription, no Rules  have been framed pursuant to
S. 87 (2)  (a)
or (b).  To get  at the real content of this provision, it will be profitable to advert to the  legislative antecedent and succession to this  provision.    The  analogus predecessor provision i.e., S. 82 (2) of  the Municipalities Act, 1920 provides for  the fixation of annual  value according  to the rent at  which  lands and buildings  may reasonably be expected  to be let from month to month or from year to year less the specified  deduction.  The  latter  amended provision as a result of  Act XXIII of 1975  is as follows:-
"87 (2)  Tha annual  rental value of  lands and  buildings shall be deemed to  be the gross annual  rent at which they may reasonably be expected to let from month to month or from  year to year less a deduction in the  case of buildings.  Of ten  per cent of that portion of such annual rent which is attributable to the buildings alone,  apart from their sites and the adjacent  lands occupied as an appurtenance thereto; and the said deduction shall be in lieu of all allowance for repairs  or an any other account whatever:
Provided that in respect of any building and the  land  appurtenant thereto, the fair rent of which has been fixed  under
S. 4
of the Andhra pradesh Buildings  (lease, Rent and Eviction) control  Act, 1960, the  gross annual  rent shall be the  annual amount of the fair rent so fixed."
7.  It is patent that the amendment brought by Act  No. XXIII of  1975  reverted to the earlier  provision prevailing under the
District Municipalities Act, 1920
wherein the rent at which the premises may reasonably be expected was provided. During the periods relevant for the purpose  of this  appeal,  the provision then prevailing and applicable  is
S. 87 (2) (b)
before  amendment in 1975, A close scrutiny of
S. 7
reveals  that three modes of assessments are visualised.  In the  event  of premises  under self-occupation  or not let out the  capital value is the  basis for  arriving  at  the market value of the building on the basis of which the  Municipal tax has to be levied.  In the  event of leasing  out the  premises the rental value  is  postulated as the basis for assessment of tax and  two modes have been modulated for arriving  at the  rental value.  The criterion of the receipt of rent is evolved for the  determination of the  annual  rental  value.  The proviso to sub-sec. (2) (b) seeks to determine  the rental value with reference to fair rent fixed under
S. 4
of the Andhra pradesh Buildings (lease, rent  and Eviction) control Act, 1960 in respect of buildings covered by the Rent control Act.
8.  The essence of the contention of the learned counsel for the  respondent is that even in a situation where the  premises is let out, the annual  rental value can be fixed up on the amount of  rent that the  premises is reasonably expected  to fetch.  It is stressed by the  learned counsel  that  in this case  the  lessee gets a fabulous amount of Rupees 25/- to Rs. 80/-  per day and that  amount should be the basis and further this is a  case where the owners leased out to himself because M/s.  Bajaj Hotels (private) Limited  is a company  wherein the owners are having  a substantial   share  holding and the abnormal  low rent of Rs. 9,000/-  per annum and grant  of lease for a  period of 98 years at the same rent appears to be nominal and collusive.
9.
S. 87 (2) (b)
at the relevant time made a departure from the  analogous provision of
S. 82 (2)
under the district
Municipalities Act
of 1920 and  thereafter this provision is again  amended by  Act No. XXIII  of 1975  and by this amendment the original tenor of the  provision is restored.
By Act
No. XXIII of 1975, "reasonably expected  to be received" has been substituted for the expression ' having  regard to the rent   received in respect  thereof".  The expression " having regard to the rent  received in  respect thereof".  The expression 'reasonably expected to be received"  is in the realm of estimation on a consideration of several  factors and this  expression was  substituted by "having  regard to the rent  received" with an  obvious intention of the basis of annual rent  to be in close proximity to the  actual receipt of  rent   if not equal to the rent  fetched.  The  difference in the  language employed and the  subsequent reversion to the original expression clearly indicates that different  connotation was sought to be credited to as otherwise there is no necessity for the latest amendment.  The receipt of either rent or profit  or otherwise by the  lessee in the building  let  out cannot be the basis for levy of tax on the owner.  The owner  is not  concerned with the  amount  that  the lessee manages to get by dint of his ability or resources or otherwise; and  the owner cannot  be mulcted with the  liability to pay the tax  on the basis  of the rents or profits received by the  lessee.  This approach leads to an incongruous result and a situation  can be  visualised wherein the lessee can  get more  rent  or return in th event of subletting or doing  business and if  levy on the basis of the said amount is done the  rent  realised will  not be sufficient to meet the liability of tax.
10.  The learned counsel for the  respondent relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court in Guntur Municipal council v. Guntur Town Rate payers' Association, .  In this  decision the Supreme Court is concerned with the interpretation and applicability of
S. 82 (2)
of the  Madras district
Municipalities Act
1920 where it is provided that the annual  value of lands and buildings shall be deemed to  be the  gross annual  rent at which  they  may reasonably be expected to let from month to month.  The question that came up for  consideration is whether before the fixation of fair  rent on the premises under the  Rent  control Act, the Municipality was bound  to make  assessment in the light  of the provisions contained in the rent acts.  In the  context of considering this issue, th Supreme Court held as follows:-
"We are unable to agree that on the  language of
S. 82 (2)
of  the Municipalities Act any distinction can be made between buildings the fair rent of which has  been actually fixed  by the  controller and those  in  respect of which no  such rent has been fixed.  It is perfectly clear that the landlord cannot lawfully expect to get more rent than the fair rent  which is payable  in accordance with the  principles laid down int eh Act.  The  assessment of valuation must take  the  assessment of valuation must take into account the measure of fair rent as  determinable under the Act.  It may be that  where the controller has not fixed  the fair rent the municipal authorities will have to arrive at thier own figure of fair rent but  that can be done with out any difficulty by keeping in view  the principles laid down in
S. 4
of the Act for  determination of fair rent".
In this decision, the  interpretation is with regard to the  expression "may reasonably be expected' used in
S. 81
of the Act.
11.
In
Lokmanya Mills Barsi Ltd v. Barsi
borough Municipality, Barsi, , R. 2C framed by the  Barsi Municipality under
S. 58 (j)
of the Bombay municipality  Boroughs Act for asessing  house tax and water tax for  factory buildings was held to be illegal  and ultra vires of the Act.  This decision is not  directly concerned with the  issue involved  in the instant  case.
12.  In corporation of calcutta v. Smt.  Padma debi, , the  Supreme Court is concerned with section 127 (a) of the  calcutta Municipal Act, 1923 wherein the  provision to the  extent relevant is:
"...........  the  gross annual  rent at which a building or land might reasonably be expected to  let from month to month".
In this context, it is held as follows  (p. 154):
"It is said  that
S. 127 (a)
does not contemplate the actual rent  received by a landlord but a hypothetical rent which he can reasonably be expected  to  receive if the  building is let.  So stated the proposition is unexceptionable.  Hypothetical  rent may be described as a rent  which a  landlord may reasonbly be expected to get in the open market, But an open market cannot include a "back  market", a term euphemestically used to commercial transactions entered into between parties in  defiance of law.  In  that  situation a statutory limitation of  rent circumscribes the scope of the bargain in the  market.  In no circumstances the hypothetical rent can exceed that  limit".
13.  In guntur Town  Ratepayers' Association v. Guntur Municipal council  (1978) 1 APLJ  (High Court) 356, Chinnappa Reddy, J. Considered the applicability of
S. 87 (2)
which at the relevant  time stated that the annual value of the  building has to be determined on  the basis of "the  gross annual  rent at which a building has to be determined on the  basis of "the gross annual   rent  at which a building may reasonably the expected to let from month to month or year to year".  In the  context of considering this issue it is held:
"The gross annual  rent at which a building  may reasonably be expected to let from month to month or year to  year" is not the  actual rent which a landlord may receive from a  tenant, but the  hypothetical rent which a  landlord may lawfully receive.  Where  there  is no  statute controlling the rent which a landlord may receive from a tenant,  the actual rent received from a tenant  the  actual rent  received by a  landlord from his tenant  may possibly afford the best evidence of the hypothetical rent.   But where the rent  which a landlord may receive from a tenant is statutorily  controlled.  The hypothetical rent  has to be determined by the  municipal authorities in each case, keeping   in view the principles found  in the statute  controlling the  rent.  It makes no difference whether  fair  rent' or " standard rent" has in   fact, been  fixed by the  Court, the Municipal  authorities are not absolved from the duty of determining the rent  at which the building may reasonably be expected to let from month to month or year to year on the basis of the  principles found in the Rent  control statute".
This decision is again concerned with the amplitude of the expression "reasonably expected".
14.
In Sattenapalli panchayat
Board  v. Yekkala  Lakshmi Kantham
,   the impact of Cl. (2) of R. 2 of the  Rules for the assessment of house tax framed under
S. 64 (1)
of the Gram panchayats Act is considered.  The  said clause states that the  annual value of a  house shall be deemed to be the gross annual rent at which the house may reasonably be expected to let  from  month to month.  In the context of considering this aspect  Madhava Reddy, J.,  held that  whatever  rent  may be  actually realised by the  owner of a house or  whatever rent the owner of a house  occupied  by him if it were to be let  out, if the house  if situate in a place to which the  provisions of the Rent  control Act are  applicable the basis for  determining the  annual  rental value would be the fair rent  that may be fixed  under  the provisions of the rent control Act. It is  further  held:
"The  test is what rent the house can lawfully  fetch if let out to a hypothetical tenant".
The annual value should  not  be arbitrary but should be the standard rent which is payable for a  particular house  under the Rent  control  Act and even in a situation where  fair rent is not fixed under the
Rent  Control Act
, absolute discretion is not conferred upon the  taxing  authority and the fair rent alone would form   the basis  for determining  the annual rent; and  for that purpose, the annual rent; and for  that  purpose,the Gram panchayat has to  keep in view the  provisions of  the rent  control  Act.
15.  In  Guntur Municipality v. Gadde subba Rao, (1968)  2 Andh WR 94, the Municipality revised the property tax assessmetn  on the basis of hypothetical  rents ignoring the rents actually received by the owner of the house.  Thereupon the owner of the  house.  Thereupon the owner of the  house filed a suit challenging  the validity and  legality of the  assessment on  the  ground that the  enhancement is not  in conformity with the provisions of the District Municipalities Act.
Section 82 (2)
applied to the years under consideration in this decision.  Obul Reddy, J. Held that the  revision and enhancement of  rent is based on  hypothetical  rent  and   this is not  in consonance with the  provisions of hte Act; and the revision should have relationship to the standard rent and  not to the  hypothetical rent.  It is also further held that it may be that the hypothetical rent  fixed by the  special revision officer is correct, but the hypothetical  rent, in no circumstances. Can exceed the reasonably expected rent which the  landlord has been getting.  Even on an interpretation of  the  expression "reasonably  expected', obul Reddy, J. Held that the actual  rent received by the landlord is the criterion for determining the annual rental  value and the  hypothetical rent cannot be resorted to.  In this decision it is also held that the jurisdiction of the civil Court is not taken  away by the Act where the action taken  by the  Municipality is not in conformity with th   provisions of the Act.  It is held  that  when the  Municipality fixed  a hypothetical rent which is remote from the actual rent  which is remote from the actual rent   realised by  the landlord is in issue, that can be canvassed in a  suit at the  instance of the owner questioning th validity and legality of such an assessment.
16.  In. C. Padmaraju v. Panchayat Board, samalkot.  (1960) 1 Andh WR 63, the enhancement of the assessment of house tax  under the  Madras village panchayats Act was questioned on  the ground that the  assessment is not in consonance  with the rules  framed under the panchayats Act.  Rule 2 (2) of the house Tax Rules framed by the  Government provides:
'The  annual value of a house should be deemed to be the  gross annual  rent  at which the  house may  reasonably be expected to let  from month to month or from   year to year, less a deduction of ten per centum of such annual rent and the  said deduction shall be in  lieu of all allowances for  repairs or on  any other account whatever'.
In the  context of considering  this aspect, a  Division bench consisting  of  Chandra Reddy, C.J. and Jaganmohan Reddy, J. Held that the annual  value has to be measured by the  amount of rent which the landlord is likely to realise having  regard to the law applicable to the letting  of house and it will be necessary to consider  what  rent  the  landlord can reasonably demand  and  also what rent a tenant can be reasonably expected to pay.  The principles  set out in
S. 4
of the Rent control Act have  to be borne in mind in assessing the rental value.
17.  The learned counsel for the respondent contended that the  expression "having  regard to" occurring in
S. 87 (2) (b)
is not  equivalent to the actual rent paid by the tenant and this provision  empowers the taxking  authority to assess the rental value taking into consideration or  having  in view the rent paid by the  tenant and this does not exclude the element  of estimate.  Even considering  from this  point  of view,  the  expression "having due regard to" must  be  construed as having very close proximity to the  rent  paid  by the  tenant and in the context of the set up of this provision and as distinct from the  preceding and subsequent  provision, Having due  regard to"  has to  be considered as equivalent  to in the circumstances sub cl. (A)  is concerned with the  capital value and it is not  concerned with the estimate of  rent  at all  as  it  is concerned only with  the value of the buildings and  lands.  The subsequent  provision is relatable to the  rent fixed by the   authorities under the  rent  control Act.  The  area reserved for  this  provision is the actual rent that has been  paid.  The  element of guess work or estimate is excluded and in any event the  annual  rental value should  (not)  be fare removed from inforced by the legislative hisotry.  Before this provision  was  introduced in the 1965  Act,
S. 82
which is the  analogous provision  to  this section, contained the expression  "reasonably expected".  The  departure from this  expression by substituting "having  regard to" must necessarily bear a different connotation.  If the  intention  is to reiterate what  is  contained in the  earlier enactment, there  is  absolutely no necessity for  employing a different language therefore, it is explicitly clear from  the language employed that a different object is  sought to  be  achieved.  Further  in the  subsequent   amendment brought in by Act  No. XXIII of 1975, probably having  realised the implications of the  expression "having  regard to" and  probably  with an intention to  revert to the  original content of that  section.  The  old provision is again substituted.  It cannot be  controverted that the expression reasonably expected' comprehends the estimate and objective assessment based   upon facts and circumstances and by the  substituation of  the  words "having  regard to" the element of estimate is sought  to be  eliminated.  Therefore, the contextual set up unequivocally indicates that tha actual rent realised form the tenant is the  basis for assessing the rental    value.  The   expression "having   regard to" has been considered by the  Supreme Court  in Mysore state Electricity board v. Bangalore wollen cotton and silk Mills LTd,   after adverting to the  decision of the privy council  in Ryots of garabandho v. Zamindar of parlakimedi AIR  1943  pc 164,  it is held  that 
   

"This expression requires that the  provisions must be taken into consideration".
18.   The learned counsel for the  respondent finally  contended that
S. 376
of the Municipalities Act bars the suit  questioning the  levy and assessment of  municipal tax; and  assuch  the plea of  the defendants that the  assessment cannot be enforced is not maintainable.
19.
S. 376
of the Municipalities Act, to the extent relevant isas follos:
(1)  No assessment or demand made, and no charge  imposed  under the  authority of this  Act shall be quesitoned or  affected by reason of any clerical error or by reason of any mistake (a) in respect of the name,  residence, place of  business or occupation of any person or  (b) in  the  description of any property or thing or (c) in  respect of the  amount  assessed, demanded  or  charged,  provided that the  provisions of this  Act have been, in substance and effect complied with and no   proceedings under   this  Act shall,  merely for defect in form  be quashed, or set aside by any Court:
xx                                                xx                xx                       xx
 

Section  376 bars  the filling of the  suit  in  respect of the  procedure adopted and also  any defect in form and  mistakes with respect to the  amount assessed, demanded or charged; but however, saves  the disputes regarding the  non-compliance or deviation of the provisions of  the Act.  In  a situation where there  is  an infraction of the provisions of  the Act, it cannot be said that  the suit is  not maintainable.  Further in a suit  is not maintainable.  Further in a suit for  recovery of tax,  it is open  to the defendant to plead that  both  the levy and  collection of tax are illegal.  The plea  of the defendants in this  case is that the levy of  assessment of tax deviates from the provisions of
S. 87
of the Act.  The essence of the plea is that the  assessment  is not  in conformity with
S. 87 (2) (b)
which says that the rent  received is the basis for assessing the rental  value the estimate of value or the assessment on the basis  of rent  by the leesee or the tenant  is far  remote  from the  intention of
S. 87  (2) (b)
and as such the  plea in defence is maintainable.
20.  The learned counsel for the appellant relied upon the decision in
Vizianagaram Municipality v. Bhaskara
rao,  where a Division Bench  of this Court consisting  of Satyanarayana Raju J.  And Kumarayya. J. Held that the ouster of civil court's Jurisdiction under S. 364  of  the  Madras District Municipalities Act is only partial and is confined to the  language and intendment of the provisions.  The impeachment of the  assessment or demand   is  not permissible on the  ground that  there  is  a clerical error or  mistake in respect of the  amount  assessed. But in a situation where the  provisions of the Act have not  in substance and  effect, complied with  by the  authority while  making   the  assessment,  the jurisdiction of  the civil Court is unaffected.
21.  The learned counsel  for the   respondent contended that in any event the  amount of rent   that is said  to have been received by the  defendants cannot be considered as correct or final.  The  defendants are  having a substantial share-holding in the Limited company and  they are the  directors and  the  company was  floted at their  instance; and  as such it is tantamount  to the  defendants leasing  the suit building to  themselves.  This  contention  is  untenable  the  factum of the defendants being shareholders or directors  in theLimited company  does not deflect the fundamental  issue that the Limited company is a  separate and distinct legal entity   different from the  persons who  are share  holders of the company.  A limited company, when it is registered under the  companies Act has a distinct corpus and personality and as such collusion or otherwise cannot be permitted  to be contended further
S. 87 (2) (b)
is   converned with the  rent  that  has been received and does  not  extend to the position of piercing the corporate veil and  discern the substance of the  matter.
22. It is also  contended that the  remedy  is open to the  defendants by way of an appeal under R. 22 of Sch. I  of the  Municipalities Act; and as  such this plea  is not maintainable.   It  must be borne in mind that the   defendants  have not initiated action and they are  defending themselves against the onslaught of the illegal and  invlaid assessment and  collection pursuant to the same.  They are not  questioning the quantum of assessment as such; but the basis of assessment.  In the circumstance,s  the  suit  is not  barred; much less  the plea  in defence against, the suit  filed by the  Municipality.
23.  In the circumstances the judgment  and decree of the Court below is set aside.  Appeal  allowed.  No costs throughout.  This does not  preclude the municipality to make a  fresh assessmetn on the  basis of the rent received as  indicated above.
24.  The learned counsel  for the  respondent moved an oral application for leave to appel  to Supreme Court.  There is no substantial  question of law much less any question  of law of general importance  which  requires  to  be decided by the Supreme Court.  Hence we cannot  certify that   it is  a  fit case and the  and  the oral leave is refused.
25. Appeal  allowed.