[Cites
9
, Cited by
8
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
The Base Repair Organisation (Now Naval ... vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh on 23 December, 1982
Equivalent citations: [1983]53STC223(AP)
Author:
B.P. Jeevan Reddy
Bench:
B.P. Jeevan Reddy
JUDGMENT
 

Jeevan Reddy, J.
1. The petitioner "Base Repair Organisation", now called "Naval Dock Yard"
Visakhapatnam, is maintained by the Defence Ministry for repairing and servicing the 
ships of the Indian Navy. As required by
section 46
of the Factories Act, 1948, the 
petitioner runs a canteen, to cater to the needs of its employees. The petitioner says 
that it is running the canteen on "no-profit-no-loss" basis. For the assessment years 
1969-70 to 1972-73, the Deputy Commercial Tax Officer-II, Visakhapatnam, treated 
the turnover of the canteen as taxable turnover under the
A.P. General Sales Tax 
Act
, and levied tax thereon. The petitioner's contention was that it's canteen activity 
carried on to comply with a statutory obligation is not "business", and that it is not a 
"dealer" as defined by the Act and therefore not liable to pay any tax. This 
contention was overruled by the Deputy Commercial Tax Officer, as well as the 
Appellate Assistant Commissioner in appeal. The matter was carried in second appeal 
to the Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal, which too held that the proceeds of the sales 
made in the canteen run by the petitioner constitute taxable turnover, and 
accordingly dismissed the appeal.
2. In these tax revision cases, the first contention urged by Mr. P. Venkatrama 
Reddy, the learned counsel for the assessee, is that running the canteen is only 
ancillary and incidental to the main activity carried on by the Naval Dock Yard; and 
inasmuch as the main activity of the petitioner does not amount to "business" as 
defined in the Act the petitioner cannot be treated as a dealer.
3. Under
section 5(1)
of the Act, "every dealer ...... whose total turnover for a 
year is not less then Rs. 25,000 ...... shall pay a tax for each year, at the rate of 
......".
Section 5
is the charging section. The tax under the Act is, therefore, payable 
only by a dealer, besides of course, the agent of a non-resident dealer, with which 
category we are not concerned herein. The expression "dealer" is defined in clause
(e) of
section 2(1)
in the following words :
"'dealer' means any person who caries on the business of buying, 
selling, supplying or distributing goods, directly or otherwise, whether for cash, or for 
deferred payment, or for commission, remuneration or other valuable consideration 
and includes
(i) the Central Government, a State Government, local authority, 
a company, a Hindu undivided family or any society (including a co-operative 
society), club, firm or association, which carries on such business;
(ii) a society (including a co-operative society), club, firm or association, which 
buys goods from or sells, supplies or distributes goods to its members;
(iii) a casual trader, as hereinbefore defined;
(iv) a commission agent, a broker, a del credere agent, an auctioneer or any 
other mercantile agent, by whatever name called who carries on the business of 
buying, selling, supplying or distributing goods on behalf of any principal or principals 
.........."
The expression "business" is defined in clause (bbb) of
section 2(1)
,rand it 
reads thus :
"'business' includes
(i) any trade, commerce of manufacture or any adventure or 
concern in the nature of trade, commerce or manufacture whether or not such trade, 
commerce, manufacture, adventure or concern is carried on or undertaken with a 
motive to make gain or profit and whether or not any gain or profit accrues 
therefrom; and
(ii) any transaction in connection with, or incidental or ancillary to, such trade, 
commerce, manufacture, adventure or concern."
4. A reading of the definition of "dealer" makes it clear that a dealer means any 
person, be it the Central Government, State Government, local authority, 
incorporated body, Hindu undivided family, society, club firm or association, who 
carries on the business of buying, selling, supplying or distributing goods, whether 
directly or otherwise; and whether for cash or for deferred payment or for 
commission, remuneration or other valuable consideration.
5. Now coming to the definition of "business", it is in two sub-clauses. According 
to sub-clause (i) the expression "business" includes any trade, commerce or 
manufacture or any adventure or concern in the nature of trade, commerce or 
manufacture; it does to matter whether such trade, commerce or manufacture is 
carried on with a motive to make gain or profit. It is equally immaterial whether gain 
or profit does arise or not. Sub-clause (ii) is in the nature of an explanation. It says 
that any transaction in connection with or incidental or ancillary to, the trade, 
commerce, manufacture, adventure or concern, referred to in sub-clause (i), shall 
equally be a business. The contention of Mr. Venkatarama Reddy is that, on the 
same parity of reasoning, inasmuch as the main activity of the petitioner does not 
amount to trade, commerce or manufacture, the ancillary or incidental activity of 
running a canteen cannot equally amount to business. It is not possible to agree with 
this submission. According to the definition, if the main activity is in the nature of 
trade, commerce or manufacture, any ancillary or incidental transaction, be it per se 
in the nature of trade, commerce or manufacture or not, is also treated as 
"business". But the converse is not true. In other words, if the main activity is not 
business, but if an ancillary or incidental activity is per se business, the incidental or 
ancillary activity does not cease to the business, merely because it is ancillary or 
incidental to the main activity, which itself is not business. The definition is not 
capable of being read in such a manner. We are, therefore, unable to agree with Mr. 
Venkatarama Reddy that, though the transactions relating to the canteen are per se 
business, they cease to be business they are incidental to the main activity of the 
assessee, which is undoubtedly not a business.
6. We are, however, inclined to agree with Mr. Venkatarama Reddy on the 
alternate contention, viz., that, inasmuch as the running of the canteen constitutes 
an integral and inseparable part of the activity carried on by the assessee, it is not 
possible to isolate or insulate it from the main activity, and treat it as business for 
the purpose of the Act. It should be noticed that the canteen is not only being run in 
discharge of a statutory obligation, but that it constitutes an infinitesimal and 
insignificant part of the entire activity of the assessee. Having regard to the nature of 
the functions and the purpose for which the Naval Dock Yard is established, and also 
because of the fact that the canteen subserves the main object and purpose of the 
assessee, and is an integral and inseparable part of it, it would be unrealistic to 
separate the said activity and treat it as a business. We must make it clear that 
there is a definite distinction between an activity which is ancillary or incidental to 
the main activity, and an activity which is an integral part of the main activity. In the 
first case, the incidental or ancillary activity is a distinct activity, though it is 
incidental or ancillary to the main activity; whereas, in the latter case, it is one single 
activity.
In
Swadeshi Cotton Mills Company Ltd. v. Sales Tax Officer
[1964] 15 STC 
505, the Allahabad High Court was considering the case of dining halls maintained 
and run by the Aligarh Muslim University, wherein food and refreshments were 
served to its resident-students. The court examined the purposes for which the 
University was established, as well as its academic Ordinances, and concluded : "the 
dining-hall service is an integral part of the University for imparting education to the 
students. It is indissolubly blended with, and is an inseparable component of, 
education of this University". It was further observed that, it was difficult to 
appreciate the respondent's argument that the dining-hall service of the University 
should be separately treated, and qua this activity the University should be treated 
as carrying on the business of buying or selling.
Similar view was expressed by the 
same High Court in
Indian Institute of Technology v. State of U.P.
[1976] 38 STC 
428, with respect to the visitors' hostel maintained by the Indian Institute of 
Technology, where lodging and boarding facilities were provided to persons who 
came to the Institute in connection with education and the academic activities of the 
petitioner. It was observed that, not only the maintenance of the hostel was a 
statutory obligation of the Institute, but that its activity in supplying food-stuffs to 
the occupiers of the hostel was an integral part of the objects of the petitioner. It 
was also observed that the running of the hostel cannot be said to be the principal 
activity of the petitioner or that it was doing business in a commercial way of buying 
or selling food-stuffs. The principal activity of the Institute was predominantly 
academic and the supply of food-stuffs was minor, subsidiary and incidental to the 
principal activity and was an integral part of its academic activity.
7. A somewhat similar question arose before this Court in
A.P. State Road 
Transport Corporation v. Commercial Tax Officer
[1971] 27 STC 42. The Andhra 
Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation sold the scrapped vehicles, old tyres, old 
containers and other unserviceable material left with the Corporation in the course of 
its activity, and which articles were being disposed of periodically by public auction or 
by inviting tenders. When the turnover on this account was sought to be taxed, this 
Court held that inasmuch as the Corporation was not a dealer having regard to the 
nature of its activity, the sale of old or scrapped vehicles or other scrapped or 
unserviceable material by it cannot equally be treated as business, nor can it be held 
to be a dealer in that behalf.
While it is true that the main premise of this judgment 
that the A.P. State Road Transport Corporation is not a "dealer" may be open to 
doubt in view of the subsequent decision of the Supreme Court in
District Controller 
of Stores v. Assistant Commercial Taxation Officer
, this 
decision is certainly relevant in so far as it says that the Corporation cannot be held 
to be a "dealer" while disposing of the discarded material which came into possession 
in the course of its activity.
This decision was followed by another Bench of this Court 
in
Board of Trustees of Visakhapatnam Port Trust v. Commercial Tax Officer
[1979] 
43 STC 36. In the case of Visakhapatnam Port Trust [1979] 43 STC 36, the main 
thrust of this judgment, of course, is that having regard to the statutory objects for 
achieving which the Visakhapatnam Port Trust was established it cannot be said to 
be a dealer.
8. For the above reasons, we hold that the transactions effected by the assessee 
in its canteen being an inseparable and integral part of its main activity, which 
admittedly does not amount to business, as defined in sub-clause (i) of clause (bbb) 
of
section 2(1)
,rcannot be brought to tax under the
A.P. General Sales Tax Act
. The 
main activity not being a business, the petitioner herein cannot be called a dealer.
9. Accordingly, these tax revision cases are allowed; but in the circumstances, 
there shall be no order as to costs. Advocate's fee Rs. 500 consolidated.