[Cites
6
, Cited by
3
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
The Associated Cement Companies Ltd. vs Government Of Andhra Pradesh And Anr. on 10 June, 1982
Equivalent citations: AIR1983AP234, AIR 1983 ANDHRA PRADESH 234
JUDGMENT
 

 Madhava Rao, J.
1. These writ  petitions are taken up  together   for hearing  as the question   involved in all these writ  petitions  is in  respect of issue of a writ   of  Mandamus restraining the respondents  from levying and collecting  the tax  under the Andhra pradesh, Nonagricultural  Land Assessment  Act (Act XIV  of 1963),
2.  In these  writ  petitions  the legislative competence to make  amendment to S. 2 (d)  of  the said  Act and  also the definition of the term industry (Industrial  purpose ?)  under this  section are challenged.  To have a clear idea of the several  points raised, we will narrate the facts of writ  petition 3494 of 1978.
3.  The petitioners-Associated  cement companies  Limited Mancherial, are the  owners of 338  acres 22 guntas of alnd on which the  cement plant  for the  manufacture of cement is erected.  It   is stated that only on 32 acres 18 guntas the machinery is  set up where the  manufacturing  process takes place and in  the said  are the  company has constructed certain  buildings where the  staff of  the  company work in connection  with the manufacture.  The company has also constructed certain  houses  to accommodate its staff and workers  and the area covering these residential quarters is about 173  acres  5 guntas leaving a vacant site of 121 acres 14 guntas as waste  land with shrubs thereon.  It is further stated that the company  has  taken on lease 1900  acres of  land   for the  purpose of carrying on mining operations i.e.  for  extraction of lime  stone as lime  stone  is the raw  material  for the  manufacture of cement.  Under the Andhra Pradesh Non-Agricultural lands assessment Act, 1963  (Act  XIV  of 1963),  tax  was levied on the lands used  for non-agricultural  purposes.  The same  was challenged by filing a   writ petition in this Court and several   other writ  petitions followed.  The  main attack   was on the validity of the Act and the state Government has no power to collect tax on the land  actually used as commercial,  industrial  or  for residential purposes and  no tax  can  be  levied on  the land  which is not used at all in the sense it has been kept waste.  It  was sought  to be contended that a distinction should be made  between the land  used for industrial commerical  and residential purposes in  order to levy tax and on that  levy cannot be made for  the  land used for extraction of minerals like mining operations etc.  This batch  of writ  petitions viz.,  Writ  petition 290  of 1965  etc.  Were  disposed of by a Division Bench of this  Court by its  judgment dated 22nd April  1970  holding:
"..........It is therefore cleraly wrong to class lands containing mines and from which ore is extracted with the aid of  power as lands used for industrial   purpose when the  activity in that  land  does  not involve any process of manufacture with the aid  of  power".
Thus it was made clear that it was not  open to the  Government to levy tax on the area used  for mining operations.
4.  In view of the aforesaid judgment,  the  state  legislature has amended the said Act which is known as the  andhra pradesh Non-Agricultural). Lands Assessment  (Amendment)  Act 1974.  The Act received the assent  of the Government on 22nd August.  1974  and was published in the Gazette on 23rd  August 1974.  To the  definition clause of industrial purpose under S. 2 (d) of the  Act.  The following  para  was added:
".............. and  includes a purpose connected  with  an excavation underground  or otherwise, where any operation for the purpose of searching  for  or obtaining a mineral has been or is being  carried on".
The petitioner states that  this amendment  evidently is  made to bring  mining  operation within  the definition of the term  industry  and according to him the state legislature has  no power to do so.
5.  The learned counsel  for the  petitioner Mr. K. Srinivasa Murthy submitted that it is open to the parliament  to take  over the control of the mines and mineral  development  he referred to item  54, List I of the seventh sch.  To the Constitution.  He submitted that in pursuance of the  said  power the Mines and Minerals  (regulation and  Development)  Act 1957  is enacted S. 2 of the  said enactment states the intention of the  Government of India to take under its control the  regulation  of mines have been taken over by the Government  of India and it is not open to the  state  Government  in purported exercised of  power  under the Act to levy tax on areas used for mining operations Therefore if the  intention of hte Amendment Act 1974  is to enable the state Government  to levy tax on  lands  used for mining operations to that extent, it must be held  to be ultra vires of   the state legislature.
6.  On the other hand.  The learned Government pleader submitted  that item 54, List I  of the  seventh sch. To the Constitution which relates to the regulation of mines and  development of minerals has nothing to do with the  provision of the amendment  Act 1974  by virtue of S. 2 of the Mines and minerals (regulation and Development)   Act, only  regulation  of mines and development   of minerals have been covered but the  subject of the  amendment Act  1974  falls within Entry 45 of the said  (or second)  List of the  Constitution. Thus the said  legislation in  intra vires of the  state legislature.
7.  To examine the  rival  contentions it will be useful  to refer to the items under the schedule referred to by the  counsel.
8.  Item 54 of List -I  of the seventh sch to the  Constitution.  Reads as  under:
"Regulation of mines and mineral development  to the  extent to which  such  regulation and development under the control of the Union is declared by parliament by law to be expedient in public   interest".  By virtue of this Item  54, the  Mines and Minerals (Regulation and development ) Act, 1957  is enacted.  The scheme of the Act is given in S. 2 wherein it is declared that it is  expedient  in  public  interest  that  the  Union should take under its control the regulation of mines  and development of minerals to the extent  hereafter provided S. 3 defines  minerals  Mineral oils mining  lease mining operations minor  minerals prescribed prospecting  licence prospecting  operations: and mines and owners S. 4  provides for   prospecting and mining operations licence  S. 4-A provides for termination of a mining  lease.  There is however no  provision under the
Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act
vesting the land  containing m,ines or minerals in the  central Government by divesting the state Government  nor is there   provision leaving a  cess or tax on the use of land for  mining industrial or other non-agricultural purposes. It is to be noted that item 54 speaks only of mines and mineral development and  not  with regard to land.  Therefore, evidently  there is no provision under which any tax on land  could be levied under the Mines and minerals (regulation and Development)  Act, at his juncture, we will refer to item 45, list II of thw seventh sch.  To the  Constitution, which reads as under:
"Land revenue including the assessment and collection of revenue the maintenance of land records surevey for revenue purposes and records of rights and alienation of revenues".
The state legislature is competent to legislate in  respect to land  which is also evident from item 18 List II of the seventh sch. To the Constitution which reads  as under:-
"Land that is  to say rights in or over land.  Land  tenures including the relation of landlord and tenant and the collection of rents transfer and alienation  of agricultural land  land  improvement and agricultural loans colonization".
Tax to be collected on land is also a subject which falls under Item 49 list II of the seventhsch.  To the Constitution which reads as under:
"Taxes  on lands and  buildings".
9.  If items 18, 45 and 49  are taken into consideration it becomes evident  that the state legislature is competent  to legislate in respect of land  the rights in or over the land, its tenure with regard to land revenue  including  assessment.  Collection  of revenue including  assessement.  Collection of revenue and also with regard to levy of tax on land.  This  power is exclusively vested in the  state legislature to levy tax on the  state legislature to levy tax on  land.  This  power is exclusively vested in the state legislature to levy tax on the  land which inlcudes agricultural  land  and non-agricultural  land.  Therefore the point  for consideration is when the  Union Government has not chosen to take over  or to levy any cess or tax on lands  containing mines and minerals, why can't the state legislature in respect   of assessment on land.  In view of the clear legal position extracted above the state legislature was competent to make the amendment we are therefore of the view  that the state legislature was quite competent to bring  in the  amendment to
S. 2
oil  the  said Act.
10.    The learned counsel for the petitioners next submitted that the assessment on the  land was really tax on the minerals  rights and not tax on the land.  Under the guise of collecting  tax, as if on non-agricultural  land.  Tax is really  being   imposed on the mineral and the same is  being  collected.  When  the tax is already being  paid for the  excavation of the minerals, the  question  of its again being  paid  on the mineral does not arise at all. Such an argument in a  slightly different form was urged  before  the Supreme Court in
H.R.  Murthy v. Collector of Chittoor
.  The point  raised before the Supreme Court was that the land cess was really a tax on mineral  rights falling within Entry 50  of the state List, which reads; "tax on mineral rights subject to any limitation imposed by parliament  by law  relating to mineral  development" and that the central  acts  under which also taxes and fees might  be levied brought into play  the last portion of this entry and that as a result the power to impose this tax was not avaliable after the central acts of 1948  and 1957  came into force.  In this  connection  the advocate for the appellant therein pointed out that as the  impugned  land   cess was payable only in the event of the lessee 'winning'  the mineral and so paying the  royalty and  and not when no minerals were extracted it was in effect a tax on  the minerals won and  therefore on mineral rights.  However  the Supreme Court observed  (para 10)
  "We are unable to accept this  argument.  When a question arises as to the  precise head of legislative power under which a taxing statute has been passed,  the subject for  enquiry is what in truth and substance is the  nature of the tax No doubt in a sense but in a very remote sense.  It has relationship to mining  as also to the mineral won from the mine  under a contract  by which  royalty  is payable on the quantity of mineral  extracted.  But that does not  stamp  it as a tax on either the extraction of the mineral or on the mineral right It is unnecessary for the purpose  of this  case to examine the question as to what exactly is  a tax on mineral rights".
11.  Therefore the Supreme Court negatived the  contention that the  levy of tax on land was in effect a tax on the  minerals won and, therefore on  mineral rights.
12.  The learned counsel for the  petitioners further submitted that  by virtue of item 54, List I of the seventh sch. To the  Constitution, under the
Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act
1957  the land  comes under the control  of the  central  Government.  In our view, this  submission is devoid  of merit.  The  very Act itself  clearly points out that an application for licence is to be filed   before the state Government under
section 9
thereof.
Section 10
of the said  Act provides that an application for  a  prospecting  licence or a mining lease in respect of any land  in which minerals vest in the Government shall be made to the state Government concerned in the prescribed from  and   shall be accompanied  by the  prescribed  fee.  Sub-sec. (3)  of
S. 10
, provides that on receipt of an application under this section the state Government may having regard to the provisions of this Act and any rules made thereunder  grant or refuse to grant the license or lease.  Therefore  it becomes clear that minerals vest in the Government and as corollary land also vests in the  persons or in the state Government as the case may be therefore, under the Mines and Minerals (regulation and Development)  Act it cannot ipso facto be said that the lands covered by mines vest  in the central Government and therefore the state Government has  no power  to legislate in respect of land  and impose tax.
13.  The  learned counsel for the petitioners next  submitted that to the extent of land  over which mining operations are carried on levy can be imposed and not to  the  extent of land which is kept vacant  as waste i.e.  in which mining operations are not being  carried on.  In the affidavit filed in support of the writ  petition, it is  stated by the  petitioner that only an extent of 46 acres is at present being used for the manufacture of cement and as such out of 1900  acres levy was to be imposed only to the extent indicated above.  The  extent indicated above.  The  extent disclosed by the  petitioner in the  affidavit  is not accepted in the counter.  Thus there  is  a dispute about the extent of the land  put to use as non-agricultural, when the   land is  not put to a non-agricultural  purpose and it is a waste land  then the  question of imposing  tax on it treating it as non-agricultural land does not arise.  Assessment has to be made only on the land  which is put to  use as non-agricultural land.  Thus, there is  a dispute  with regard to the actual extent of the land  used as non-agricultural land  and  that question cannot be decided in these proceedings.  However the demand notice is for the  entire  extent  of 1900 acres, in the counter, it  is  admitted that only 242 acres of land is  used for mining  operations it is made clear  that when  1900 acres of land is  granted for  mining  purposes, at this  stage, the question of leaving  certain portion for the  purpose of searching for minerals does not arise (sic)  only mining operations will be carried on.  Therefore on the basis  that  searching operations are being  carried on no assessment  could be made.  In  respect of the land on which the mining  operations  are being   carried on levy can be imposed.  On the basis that operation for  the  purpose of searching  and obtaining minerals is being  carried on on the entire  1900 acres  of land the  assessment is made with regard to the entire  1900 acres of land, therefore such assessment is vitiated.  Under the andhra  Pradesh Non-agricultural  Lands  Assessment Act, there can be imposition of  assessment on the use of the land as non-agricultural  and no other cess can  be imposed and collected on the land  thereunder.
14.  Therefore, we hereby quash the  demand notice to the extent  indicated above.  The assessing authority would  now re-assess the land in the light of the observations made above and issue fresh notice to the petitioner.
15.  In  the result  the writ  petitions are allowed in part, as indicated above  there will be no order as to costs Advocate's  fee Rs. 100/- in each.
W. Ps. Nos 5540  and 5541  of 1980.
16.  These two writ  petitions  are taken up for hearing together.  The point  raised in these writ  petitions is  whether the petitioner is liable  for the  payment  of the assessment  imposed on him.  It is not in dispute that the petitioner has taken  godowns on lease along  with the   adjacent land for a  period  of  99 years from the andhra pradesh state warehousing corporation.  The  petitioner submitted that no notice  was issued to  him at the  time of the assessment  of the tax.  So far as the  position of law is  concerned, if the land is owned  by the state or the central Government the lessee is liable to pay the   assessment  but if  the owner  of the   land is not the  state  or the  central   Government  the owner  has to  pay the   assessment.  In  the  instant  case it is not clear as to who is  the owner  of the land.  Therefore this  fact needs to be  ascertained.  It  is a question of fact.  Keeping  all  these facts in view  and also the complaint of the petitioner that there is no notice issued to him regarding the assessment in all fairness, we are of the opinion that the petitioner must be given a chance to be heard in the matter.  There is a remedy by way of an appeal under
S. 5
of the Andhra pradesh Non-agricultural  Lands Assessment Act 1963.  We, therefore direct the petitioner to file an appeal  against the demand notice issued to him within one month from to-day.
17.  With  this  direction, the  writ  petitions are disposed of.  There will be no order as to costs.  Advocate's fee Rs. 100/- in each.
18.  However, the stay granted by this Court will  continue till the  disposal  of the appeal before the appellate  authority.
W. Ps. 1795, 2026,2459, 3185/80 and 2688/91.
19.  We have already dealt with the competency of the state legislature to bring  in the  amendment to
S. 2 (1) (d)
of the Andhra pradesh Non-agricultural lands  Assessment Act.  The constitutional  validity of the Act has already  been upheld by the judgment of the division Bench of this Court in writ  petition 290  of 1965  and batch dated 22nd April , 1970.
20.  Therefore these writ petitions are dismissed.  There will be no order as to costs.  Advocate's fee Rs. 100/-  in each.
W. Ps 3071 and 3072  of 1980.
21.  Apart from the  other questions raised, the main  point on which we want to dispose of these writ petitions is that one demand notice was issued  for the assessment relating  to several years the learned counsel for the  petitioner submitted that there  is no separate assessment  made for each year  but  only a single  demand notice is issued.  In  will not be proper for us to  accede to this submission because if there are separate assessments.  The  demand notice is likely to be proper.  But there is no counter  filed in these cases.
22.  In the  circumstances, we are  of  view that the  petitioner must be permitted to file an appeal against the  demand notice before  the appellate authority within one month from  to-day.  It is open to the  petitioner to raise all the grounds advanced before us, before the appellate authority.
23.  However, the   recovery of the amount in pursuance of the  impugned demand notice  is  stayed until  the disposal  of the appeal.
24.  The writ  petitions are disposed of accordingly.  No orders as to costs Advocate's fee  Rs. 100/- in each.
W.P. Nos. 4595  and  5862  of  1978.
25.  The learned counsel  for the  petitioner challenge the demand  notice on several grounds in these  writ  petitions we are of the view  that   against the  issue  of the demand notice an appeal lies under
S. 5
of the Act.  It is open to the petitioner to file an appeal  with in one month from   today.  He can raise all the  grounds in the appeal.
26.  Pending appeal  the petitioner is directed to pay the  tax at the previous  rate.
27.  The writ  petitions are disposed  of accordingly.  There will be no order as to costs.  Advocate's fee Rs. 100/- in each.
28. Order accordingly.