[Cites
4
, Cited by
5
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Kesarla Raghuram vs Narasipalle Vasundara on 6 July, 1982
Equivalent citations: AIR1983AP32, AIR 1983 ANDHRA PRADESH 32
JUDGMENT
1. The  short but important question of law which arises in this second appeal is whether the memo filed before  the Court below signed by both the advocates of the parties   concerned without being signed by the parties, could be acted upon? The  format of the case is : the tenant who is the  appellant herein filed R.C.C. 14 of 1979  against the respondent herein  for restoration of certain amenities under section 14 of the Rent control Act averring  therein that the  respondent-landlady is deliberately trying to cut off the electricity connections and so on.  That  petition is still  pending.  Thereafter on 8-8-1979 a quite notice under  section  106 of the Transfer of property Act was served on the appellant and thereafter the suit was filed for eviction.  The suit was decreed and the appeal was preferred which was  numbered as A.S. no. 55/1981.  The said appeal was directed originally to be posted  for final hearing on 18-6-1982.  However C.M. P. No. 27/1982 was filed on 25-2-1982   for advancing the case and  accordingly the case was  advanced to 25-3-1982.  Be that  as it may,  when the  matter came  up for hearing  on 25-3-1982  a memo which  by implication a compromise memo signed by the  advocates of both the parties concerned, was  filed.  The compromise memo reads  as under:
"It is submitted that the  appellant-defendant hereby agrees to vacate the decree schedule building in question  and deliver possession of the same to the respondent-plaintiff on or before 30-6-1982.  Failing which the  respondent can execute the decree for possession and take possession through process of Court.  The appellant undertakes to pay all arrears of rent lawfully due by that date (i.e.) 30-6-1982.  Hence the appeal may be dismissed without costs".
On the above memo. The impugned order was made which reads as under:
"Joint memo filed.  Appeal dismissed without costs in view of the memo and time granted to appellant for vacating the building till 30-6-1982."
It is this  order that is made a grievance of in  this  second appeal. Sri T. Mohanarangam, the  learned counsel for the appellant, contends that the compromise memo which was filed  in the appellate Court  purporting to be under
Order XXIII, Rule 3 of C.P.C
.,  requires inter alia, the signatures of the  parties as well and unless and until the signatures of the  parties are initialled, the Court cannot  and should not Act upon the same  Reliance is  placed on a number of decisions In
B.D.M. Rao v. Co-op. Industries
estates, , Ramachandra raju, j., held (at pp. 309, 310):
"The recording of compromise is not purely a formal matter, but  a question of substance.  Under order 23, Rule  3 the Court has to find  out if  there is  any agreement between the parties for  compromise.  The terms of settlement must be examined with care and caution and  see that the parties  understood the terms  of the compromise and there is no fraud or misrepresentation.  A Court making a decree by consent would be performing a judicial and not a ministerial Act.  If  for any reason, the  party cannot appear before  the Court  or sign in the  compromise petition the Court can give permission to the counsel to admit the compromise in Court on behalf of the  party, by filing a separate vakalat (Which is usually called a special vakalat) from  this party, specifically authorising him either to enter  into compromise or admit compromise on his behalf in  Court  or both.  Then after the Court is satisfied it records  the compromise.   That is what is mentioned in Rule 19 of the civil rules of practice."
In 1956  Andh LT (SN)   16 it is held:
"In the absence of a specific provision in the vakalat a counsel has no implied authority to enter into a compromise on behalf of his client".
In
Durairaj v. Shanmugham
, (1980) 1 Mad LJ 291  it is held:
"The plaintiff filed a suit for a permanent injunction against the defendants restraining them from  obstructing the plaintiff from ploughing the land which he had purchased.  The trial Court found that the plaintiff was in possession and  granted the decree as prayed for.  On Appeal by the defendants the lower appellate Court found that the  pleadings and  documents  showed some dispute regarding title  to the property and in view  of a joint endorsement made by counsel on the appeal grounds before  the lower appellate Court: "the matter  may be remanded for amending the plaint, to decide the  question of title and adducing further evidence'.  Remanded tha matter to the trial  Court for fresh disposal.  The  plaintiff filed an appeal against the order  of remand and contended that the consent of the counsel was without  authority and the remand order was illegal.
Held.  The lower appellate Court has not noticed the  amended provisions of the  civil  procedure code about the manner in which  a compromise should be recorded in  a pending proceeding.  There is no compliance with the  provisions of order 23, Rule  3 because the  endorsement tantamounts only to a compromise.  The  endorsement having not been based on a valid compromise entered into between the parties to the proceedings, it  was not a consent order,  and  therefore the  order of  remand was illegal".
In Jamilabai v. Shankarlal,    (both the learned counsel  placed reliance)  it is held (para 22):
"A  pleader (which includes all legal  practitioners as indicated in
section 2 (15)
, civil procedure code) has the  actual though implied,  authority of a pleader to Act by way of compromising a case in which he is  enagaged even without specific consent from his  client, subject undoubtedly to two overriding considerations:  (I)  he must Act in good faith and for the benefit of his client; otherwise the power fails; (ii)  it is purudent and proper to consult his client and  take his consent if there is time and opportunity.  In my case, if there is my  instruction  to the  contrary or withdrawal of authority, the  implicit power to compromise in the pleader will fall to the  ground".
Sri N. V. Ranganadham, the learned counsel for the  respondent relied on C. S. Nayakam v. A.N. Menon,  Wherein the Full Bench of the kerala High Court  was concerned with the  construction of the   provisions  enacted under  order 3,
Rule 4 of C.P.C
., and held:
"An advocate in India has inherent  authority to enter into a compromise on behalf of his  client and the  compromise so entered into would  be binding on him.  The implied authority is an actual authority and not an appendage to his office or dignity added by the Court to the status of the advocate.  The  implied authority can however always be countermanded by the client.  AIR  1930  PC 158  and AIR  1935  PC  119:  and  AIR  1947  Nag  17 (FB), Rel on. O.3,  R. 4 civil P.C. does not  make any difference.  The onlyrequisite it lays down is a  written authority of appointment.  When that is given it leaves counsel so appointment.  When that  is  given it leaves counsel  so appointed free to 'Act' and  draws no distinction between various kinds of acting."
Before  analysing the arguments advanced by both the counsel,  he provisions enacted in order 23, Rule 3 be set out:
"Order XXII, Rule 3:
Where it is proved to the  satisfaction of the Court that a suit has been adjusted wholly or in part  by  any lawful agreement or compromise (1) (in writing  and signed by the parties) or where the  defendant satisfied the plaintiff in respect of the whole or any part of  the subject-matter of the  suit, the  Court shall order such agreement, compromise or  satisfaction to be  recorded and shall pass a decree in accordance therewith (2), (so far as ti relates to the parties to the  suit,  whether or  not the  subject-matter of the  agreement, compromise or satisfaction is the same as the  subject-matter of the  suit)".
Apart from the consepectus of the case law cited above, it is quite manifest from the provisions enacted under O. 23, R. 3 and  in particular the  words added to Rule 3 by virtue of an amendment brought in by the  Act 104 of 1976  with effect from 1-2-1977 "in Writing and signed by the  parties"  any lawful  agreement or compromise before it is  given effect to by the  Court by way of a recording the memo must be initialled by the  parties and thereafter decree follows. In this  case it is  not in dispute that  the parties have not signed the compromise memo and therefore the  point raised herein  should not detain long for answering as it is quite mandatory specifically so when the said words were added by way of an amendment in the year 1977.
Therefore the compromise  memo cannot be given effect to and  violation breach is quite apparent from the order made under appeal.  Henc it cannot be allowed to stand.
2.  In the circumstances, the impugned order which is not in compliance with the provisions enacted under 0. 23, R. 3,
C.P.C
.  is set aside and  the case is  remitted back  to the appellate Court directing it to renumber the appeal and hear the case after giving due opportunity and notice to both the parties.
3.  The second appeal is accordingly allowed, but there shall be no order as to casts.
4.  The lower appellate Court is however, directed to dispose of the appeal as expenditiously  as possible, preferably within two months from the  date of receipt of this order.
Appeal allowed.