[Cites
5
, Cited by
7
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Potti Venkata Kasi Viswanadham vs Vallabha Vyas on 14 April, 1982
Equivalent citations: AIR1983AP64, AIR 1983 ANDHRA PRADESH 64
ORDER
1. The revision petition which raises rather important  points, arises under the following circumstances:-
2.  The Execution petition No. 341/74 in O.S. No. 100/67  was filed for the execution of the decree in A.S. No. 94/69  allowing  the appeal preferred against the dismissal of O.S. No. 199/67.
3.  To the said E.P. objections were filed stating inter alia that  the  decree was inexecutable inasmuch as it was merely a declaratory decree.  The objections were overruled and the  E.P. was allowed.  The appeal A. S. 135/76  preferred against that order was dismissed.  Hence this revision.
4.  Pending A. S. No. 135/76  the revision-petitioner - Judgment-debtor herein filed O.S. No. 285/78 challenging that the decree obtained in a. S. No. 94/69,  as inexecutable and pending the O.S I.A No. 3058/79  was  filed for injunction restraining the respondent-decree-holder   herein from  executing the decree; when rejected C.M.A was filed in this  Court and therefore the C.R.P. as well as the C.M.A should be disposed of  bya common order.
5.  Before adjudicating upon whether  the decree is  inexecutable the circumstances in brief that led to this  revision may be noticed. O.S. No. 199/67  was filed by the  respondent-plaintiff herein for declaring that he is  entitled to free air and  light and the extended construction of the balcony by 3 feet on the first floor and  also the pillars constructed on the   ground floor thereby diminishing and affecting the right  of the plaintiff to free air and light may be caused to be removed by issue of a mandatory injunction and further restraining the  defendant from interfering with the right of the plaintiff to free air and light.  The said suit was dismissed.  As against that A. S.  No. 94/69  was preferred which was allowed and the decree so passed in A. S. Was sought to be  executed through E.P. No. 341/74.  When it was allowed on being  objected to A.S. No. 135/76 was preferred and when the said  A.S. was dismissed, the petitioner-judgment-debtor herein preferred the revision.
6.  The principal contention of Sri. S. Satyanarayana prasad the learned counsel for  the petitioner is that the decree so passed  is not  executable since it is  merely a declaratory decree as there was no consequential direction.  The only  alternative for the  respondent-decree-holder herein is to file a suit and  get the decree executed.  The countercontentions aof Sri Syryanarayana Murthy the learned counself or the respondent   are that the decree as it mandates congerring the right to have the decree executed by getting  the obstructions caused.  Removed even if there is  any ambiguity in the decree so passed, reference could  be had to the pleadings and the  judgments passed thereon  to comprehend what the decree contemplated.
7.  The decree passed in A.S. No. 94/69  may now be read:
"In the result the judgment and decree of the lower Court are set aside holding the plaintiff is  entitled to a mandatory injunction with  regard to the removal of the extended balcony and the pillars constructed by the  defendant adjoining the  windows of the  plaintiff  in the ground  floor and  for a  permanent injunction restaraining the defendant from  interfering with the  light and  air  that were being enjoyed by the plaintiff".
The case law cited for and  against in this behalf may be noticed.
In
Ramanuja Naicker v. Seethalakshmi Ammal
, (1958) 2 Mad LJ 512  while  dealing with the decree  referred to the  clause contained therein  which reads as follows:-
"III (a) that the 8th defendant be and  hereby is entitled to past mainentance due to her mother. 7th defendant for a period from 12 years prior to  suit up to  27th November. 1950, the  date of death of 7th defendant, at Rs. 100 per mensem:
(b)  for the return of the sum of Rupees 500 given by her  husband's family to that of plaintiff and defendants 1 to 3;
(c)  to be reimbursed by plaintiff and defendants 1 to 3 the sum of Rs. 500 spent by her  for the funeral of her mother (7th defendant)".
This clause was followed by another clause which ran as follows:-
IV.  That the payments of the amounts declared under para III (supra) be a charge on items 1, 13, 14,20 and 52 to 62 of the  plaint A schedule".
A division bench of the madras High Court held:
"The decree does declare that the  eighth defendant is entitled to the  past maintenance due to her mother and to other sums of money.  But there  is no direction that the  plaintiff or any of the defendants or all of them  do pay to the  eighth defendant any amounts on or before  a particular  date.  The further clause also  declares a charge on certain items,  but there is no  specific provision that in default of payment  of the  amounts declared to be due  to the eighth defendant, the  charged items, or such of them as may be sufficient, to  discharge the amounts due under the decree.  Be sold; on the language of the  decree we cannot but hold that the decree is not exeuctable.  We are convinced however that it could not  have been the intention of the parties that  though the  eighth defendant was finally declared to be entitled to particular sums fo money,  nevertheless she should not obtain any relief by way of recovery of that money in execution of hte decree.  It  could never have been intended that  she  should  file another suit to recover the amounts declared to be due to her.  In  our opinion the respondent, the eighth defendant. Should  have brought to the notice of the Court the lacuna in the decree as drafted and we  are certain that the Court would have made necessary modifications to the decree".
8.  The next case is  abdul  mohammed v. Armugham pillai, (1979) 1 Mad LJ 319  the facts of which are little and analogous to the case on hand, may briefly be noticed;
"The appellant and the respondent therein were owners of neighbouring properties. Disputes arose between them and each one filed a suit against the other for injunction, which were dismissed by the trial Court so also the appeals preferred aginst.  When one of  the parties went in second  appeal to the High Court  it passed a decree in the following terms:
"In the result, the decree of the trial Court confirmed by the lower appellate court,is modified by granting a declaration that the suit wall belongs to the plaintiff (abdul mohammed)  exclusively, subject tot he right  of the defendant (Armugham pillai)  to rest  his thatched roof thereon and that  the plaintiff is further entitled to the accustomed supply of light and air through the ventilators as he  has been receiving all along."
9.  Thereafter E.P. was filed which ended up in second appeal.  In the E.P. appointment of a commissioner by the Court was asked for to enforce the right to air and light  which, as per the allegation, of the decree-holder were being  interferred with.  The commissioner was appointed directing him as under:
"He  is directed to carry out  the  directions of High Court's  judgment in S.A.  895/70 and provide accustomed air and  light to the plaintiff through the ventilators after removing  any obstructions in providing the above supply".
10.  Appeal  was preferred against the said order tot he district judge.  The district judge held that execution petition did not lie as the remedy was only by way of filing a suit. Asagainst that C.M.A was preferred to lie High Court  there  the contention which was pressed into service was that whether a fresh suit would be a proper remedy or the matter could be agitated in execution  of the decree the madras High Court held :that the  proceedings in execution cannot  be converted into a suit  and that the proper remedy for the  appellant is to file a suit to enforce that right.  On the terms of the  decree it is not self-executable and therefore, the execution petition was clearly not maintainable'.
11.
In
Bhavan Vaja v. Solanki
hanuji  the Supreme Court  while discussing the scope of
s. 47
C.P.C held (at P. 1374):
"It is true that anexecuting Court cannot go behind the decree under execution. But that does not mean that if  has no duty to find out the true effect of that decree.  For construing a decree it can and in appropriate cases it ought to  take into consideration the pleadings as well as the proceedings leading up to the  decree.  In order to find out the meaning of the words employed in a decree, the Court often has to ascertain the circumstances under which these words came to be used.  That is the plain duty of the executing Court and if that Court fails to discharge that duty it would be deemed to have failed to exercise the jurisdiction vested in it".
12.
In
Topanmal v. Kundomal
gangaram,  the Supreme Court while dealing with the  power of  executing Court to construe a decree which is ambiguous held:
"The  decree passed, at the worst could be said to be an ambiguous decree and  it is the duty of the  executing Court to construe the decree and for that purpose it would be certainly entitled to look into the  pleadings and the  judgment'.
In
Sudhir v. B.K. Thapar
,  while dealing with a case where one of the  terms of the lease relating  to a cinema house was that  after the expiry of the lease the lessee shall have the  option to renew the lease with the consent of the lessor.  At the  end of the  lease  period, the lessor brought a suit for  ejectment but died during  its pendency.  But however the suit was compromised between the legal  representatives of the lessor  and the lessees by which the  tenancy was continued up to a  certain time on the terms and conditions of the original lease, and the  lessees were to vacate on a particular date. One of the  legal representatives sold his  share in the cinema house to the appellant who sought execution of the compromise decree on a date which the suit  premises were to be vacated the lessees contended that  the compromise created a fresh lease that the decree was only a declaratory one and that they were entitled to an extension of the lease on the basis of the renewal clause.  Then the Supreme Court held: "the question whether  under the  terms of a compromise the parties enteredinto a fresh lease or were only granted an extension of time for  delivery of possession depends upon  the intention  of parties as expressed in the  comrpomise and the decree based on it.  On the terms of the  compromise  in the  present  case the  lessors had granted a fresh lease and the lessees were given the  option to renew the lease.  Which was one of the terms of the original  lease at the end of the  term  fixed that is 31st December 1982.  Hence the direction in the compromise decree to vacate at the end of the term would be ineffective and would not  amount to an ejectment decree.  It is  at best a declaration of the right of the lessors to eject the  lessees at the end of the  lease period if the lessees fail to get a renewal.  Merely because  the compromise had fixed the period during  which the  respondents continued as lessees, it did not mean that the  renewal clause in the original lease had not become one of  the  terms of the agreement."
13.  On the above conspectus what  emerges is that  when there is  ambiguity in the decree. Certainly it is competent for the executing Court to go behind the decree and look into  the  pleadings and the  judgment so as  to have the assistance from them in order to have the ambiguity dispelled.  Therefore
section 47
, C.P.C. would not  be a bar and the Court can call in aid the contents of the pleadings as well as  the judgment.  But however where the decree is clear,  unequivocal  and is not ambiguous, the  Executing Court cannot call for the assistance of any of the  documents, viz.,  pleadings' judgment and so on.  It has  to be spelled out from the  decree itself as to whether it is a declaratory decree simpliciter or whether there  are accompaniments to the decree with consequential directions in case the  right conferred is not given effect to.
14.  In so far as the  decree in question is conderned in my judgment, it is a declaratory decree simpliciter.  I do not find any ambiguity whatsoever in the decree so as to spell out as to what it contains.  It merely confers the title in regard to the right of  light  and  air to the plaintiff and it also says  that he is  entitled to an injunction restraining the opposite party from interfering with but,  then there is no positive direction along with  the  declaration of the right, for the  implementation of the said  order prescribing  the course of action in case the order and directions are not  implemented.
In fact in
Ramanuja Naicker v. Seethalakshmi Ammal
(1958) 2 Mad LJ 512) (supra)  wherein apart from the entitlement to a particular sum of money it also sought to create a charge against the particular  items mentioned in the schedule to the  plaint.  Notwithstanding that, Rajamannar, chief Justice held that it was only a declaratory decree because of the fact that if the  direction for payment of money is disputed then what should follow.  The case before me is a case of a fortiori.  Here we lack good many details barring holding that the  plaintiff is entitled to light and air by way of mandatory injunction, it has not laid down as to which of the pillars, on what direction and to what extent the balcony will have to be removed and if it is not obeyed  what directions should follow in  consequence thereof.  Therefore, it is quite manifest from  this decree that it lacks in many of the material particulars which a decree for mandatory injunction should  inevitably contain.  Particularly so, in the absence of any plan appended thereto and without any guidance whatsoever laid down, the  executing Court cannot simply execute.  It is for the  Court which passes the decree to incorporate all these courses of action.
In the absence of any, it is not competent for the executing  Court to take  a look at the  pleadings and the consequential prayers made thereof and then  execute the decree, as it will  be amounting to reqriting the decree incorporating all those ingredients in it.
15.  Yet another contention was sought to be pressed into service by the learned counsel for the  respondents sri N. V. Suryanarayana Murthy that in the  second appeal preferred against A. S. No. 94/69 the  petitioners herein themselves made an allegation that as per the decree the respondentss are seeking  to remove  the pillars,  and if so, it is  too late in the day for the petitioners  to argue that it is merely a declaratory decree and so they are estopped from raising  the same.  Ex. A.3 is the affidavit filed in support of a Miscellaneious petition filed in the  second  appeal.  Reliance is placed by the learned counsel for the respondent on the following  passages in Ex. A. 3.
"The learned subordinate Judge without considering the evidence on record and the  probabilities of the case  reversed the Judgment of the lower Court on  surmises and conjectures.  He held that the plaintiff is entitled  to a mandatory injunction for removal of the  balcony and the pillars constructed by me in the  space 'ABCD' and  for a permanent injunction restraining  me from interfering with the light and air that were being enjoyed by the  plaintiff'.
Taking advantage of the decree passed by the lower appellate Court, the respondent will now take  steps for demolition of the balcony and the pillars constructed by me  in the space marked 'ABCD'  in the  plaint plan which admittedly belongs to me.  I  will be subjected to grave hardship and irreparable  loss  unless the decree passed by the  lower appellate  Court is not suspended immediately".
Based on this  it is contended that no allegation that  the decree is only a declaratory decree has been specifically made in the  affidavit and therefore they are barred from pleading now in  the executing  Court. I do not find  anything which  would  bar the  petitioner herein from agitating that the  decree is only a declaratory decree.  What all   has been stated is more or less an extract of the operative portion of the judgment.  Therefore, this would not  create any bar from agitating that the  decree  is a  declaratory decree.  Hence the contention of the  learned counsel for the  respondent which has no substance is  rejected.
16.  On the  affidavit (Ex. A-3) filed in support of the C.M.P.  the operation of the decree was suspended.  On this basis it is osught to be contended by the learned cousnel for the  respondent that since the  appellant in that second  appeal,  who is the  petitioner herein, did not raise any objection with regard to the executability of the decree on the premise  that it was only a declaratory decree the respondent  is now prevented from filing either a fresh suit or get the  decree so amended. I  apprehend this contention is not well founded either.  The nature of the decree and the  executability thereof are the matters which fall within the  province of the executing Court.  Therefore, this would not  bar the petitioner herein from agitating about the executability of the  decree at a time when the decree is sought to be executed and not at a time  when the case is sought to be prosecuted on merits.  Hence the contention is rejected.
17.  In the circumstances the order under revision which is erroneous is set aside.  The civil revision petition is allowed. No costs.
18.  In view of the judgment in C.R. P.  2909/80 no order is necessary in Tr. C.M.A. No. 771/81.  The Tr. C. A.  Is  accordingly disposed of No. Costs.
19. Order accordingly.