[Cites
12
, Cited by
426
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Jawajee Naganatham, Etc. vs Revenue Divisional Officer, Abilabad ... on 29 October, 1982
Equivalent citations: AIR1983AP155, AIR 1983 ANDHRA PRADESH 155
JUDGMENT
 

 P. Ramachandra Raju, J.
1. An extent of  Ac. O. 18 guntas of  land in S. NO. 155/2 of Bhuktapur village, part of abilabad    town was acquired by the  Government for the  construction of a vegetable   market by the adilabad  Municipality.  A draft notification dated   21-3-1975  was published in the gazette dated 17-4-1975 .  The declaration  under section 6 was published in the gazette on 8-5-1975.  Possession of the land was taken on 21-2-1976.  Before  the land acquisition officer the appellant claimed compensation at the rate of Rs. 300/-  per square  yard.  He further claimed Rs. 70,000/-  towards the cost of the building Rs. 9,000/-  towards the cost of  the compound wall and  Rs. 3,000/-  for a  well.  According to the appellant, the  building, compound wall and well are  existing  by the  date of the draft notification and  he should be compensated for such building compound wall  and well at  the  rates claimed by him.  The  land Acquisition officer held that  the appellant constructed the building well and compound wall after the publication of the draft notification and the appellant was,  therefore not entitled to be compensated for those  structures.  The  land  acquisition officer felt that the values reflected by certain sales cannot be considered for the  various reasons given by him in his  award.  He collected some  particulars regarding the annual rental  values of sites  in that  locality and  adopted the capitalisation method and fixed  the market value of the land at Rs. 70,691-33 ps after making  various deductions on different  accounts he  provided interest at 4% from the date  of taking possession and ultimately  awarded a sum of Rs. 90.689-03  which besides solatium also included the interest calculated till 12-1-1979.  On an  application by the  appellant, the  necessary reference under section 18 was made to the civil  Court.  The said reference was numbered as O.P. No. 108/79 and was disposed of by the additional district Judge, Adilabad,  by his order dated 31-12-1980.  The Additional district judge did not approve of the capitalisation method adopted by the  land acquisition officer.  He evaluated the evidence and held that the market value should be fixed at Rs. 75/- per sq. Yard He deducated 25% towards the costs of  amenities and enhanced the total additional compensation payable  to the appellant by Rs. 60,810-69 p. He held that the house compound wall  and well were constructed after the date of publication  of the draft notification and he rejected the claim made by the  appellant for compensation in that behalf he did not however indicate in that judgment as to  the amounts  if any awardable to the appellant   in case compensation became payable to the appellant on account of the cost of such building compound wall and well.  The  appeal was argued once before us.  By order dated 4-3-1982  we called for a finding regarding the amount of compensation that  may be payable  to the appellant for the  building, compound wall and well. As certain  documents which were filed in  the appeal were not filed  earlier before  the Additional district Judge we also directed the Additional District judge to consider the claim of the appellant afresh in the  light of those documents and in the  light of any further evidence which the  parties may  adduce and determine afresh the point  of time at which the building  compound wall  and the well have been erected or dug by the appellant.  The learned  Additional district Judge has  recorded the following findings:
"There  were no constructions on  the  acquired site except foundations of 50' x 60' by the date of notification under section 4 (1).  The claimant failed to adduce any positive evidence as regards the actual expenses incurred for the construction of the building compound wall  and  the well.  However, since  the revenu divisional officer has estimated the value of the building and the  well in the  P.V. statement the saem can be adopted as the value for the  well and the  building inclusive of the compound wall".
It may be noted that the value indicated by the revenue divisional  officer is Rs. 65,000/-
2.  Mr.  Narasimha Rao, the learned  counsel appearing for the  appellant has not disputed before  us the correctness of the value of Rs. 65,000 towards the building compound wall and the  well.  He  has however made the following  main submissions.  (1)  The fixation of the market value at Rs. 75/-  is grossly low.  The  market  value  should be fixed at not less than Rs. 300/-  per  sq. Yard  (2) the plot is surrounded on all the four sides by roads.  It is a fully developed area.  There is therefore no justification to deduct 25%  or any amount  towards the cost of providing  amenities (3)  There  is abundant material  to indicate that the building compound  wall  and well   were existing by the  date  the draft notification was published.  The appellant should therefore  be compensated for   such structures (4) Award 4% from the date  possession was taken is illegal.  Interest at 6%  per annum should be provided.  The learned   Government pleader reiterated the correctness of all the findings recorded by the additional dist. Judge.
3.  The ac.  O-18  guntas are located in ward No. 5 Block No. 7 in Adilabad yards.  It is in  the  heart of adilabad  town surrounded by residential houses.  There are municipal  roads on all the  four  sides of the site.   The state Bank  of Hyderabad and Andhra Bank are located on the eastern and western sides across the  roads.  Gandhi chowk market and Ambedkar chowk Market as also the national highway towards Nagpur are  each at a distance of 200  yards from the land.  The cinema theatres are  situated at a distance of 50 or 60 yards  from  the  acquired site.  Three lodging  houses are also situated within a  distance of 200 yards from the  acquired  site.  The con-operative  consumers stores is at a short distance of 10 yeards from the acquired site.  There is thus no dispute that the  acquired site is in a  busy and important area  of  Adilabad  Municipality.  Despite the fact that the  land is  still registered as agricultural   land  in the revenue accounts, it has gained the value of a potential building area and the appellant  had even paid  the required converting fee in November  1974  for converting the land from an  agricultural to a non-agricultural  purpose.  There have not however been any recent sales of lands in the neighbourhood, vis-a-vis, the  date of publication of the notification under section 4 (1) the appellant has however, let in evidence of certain offers he had for the land and  of transactions  which took place much later than the date of section 4 (1) notification and of the  values adopted by the  Registration Department for lands in this area.  In his evidence as R.W. -2, the  appellant gave  out that one Dattatreya, ganapth Rao  and Kansibai offered to purchase the site  at the rate of Rs. 300/-  per square yard and that even during  1979, people were offering  to purchase the site at Rs. 500/- per  square yard.  Dattatreya of them  was examined as RW-5.  He runs a cloth stores.  His  son-in-law one Triambak is the  nephew of the appellant. RW-5, is therefore closely related to the appellant and not much importance need by given to his evidence.  Ganapath Rao and Kasibai  were however not examined.  The acquired land was in  fact notified under section 4 (1) once in the year 1941, but for  some reason or other the further land  acquisition proceedings were  not held  pursuant to such notification made in the year 1941  and the land was again renotified under Sec. 4 (1)  on 17-4-1975  As we will have occasion  to point out, there have been proceedings between the appellant and the Adilabad  Municipality regarding the right of the appellant to raise structures on a land so notified earlier in the  year 1941 for the  purposes of  the very same municipal market.  It  is therefore improbable  that anybody would have evinced interest in purchasing any part of the acquired land.  This  evidence of RW-2 and RW-5 regarding the alleged  officer has not  impressed us to be true.  RW-5  who is a broker for sale transactions of sites gave evidence that during  the year 1974-75, lands  in  the neighbourhood at a distance of 30  to 40 yards from  the  acquired land were sold at  rates varying from Rs. 30/-   to Rs. 50/-  per square yard.  None of  the persons who acquired plots by utilising the services of R. W. 5 have been examined and the  documents relevant to such alleged purchases have not either been filed.  That  apart,  the additional  district Judge fixed  the  market value at Rs. 75/-  per square yard which   is  higher than the rates disclosed by R.W. 5.  The evidence of  R.W. 5 does not therefore assume  any importance sivanna (R.W. 7)   gave evidence of his  purchase under Ex. B-9 dated 30-12-1976.  He paid Rs. 14,000/-  for  50 sq. Yards.  Likewise, Kishan Rao (R.D. 8) acquired title under Ex. B-10 dated 14-4-1977 in terms  of which another extent of 50  sq. Yards was purchased by him for Rs. 14,000/- These purchases reflect a market value of about Rs. 300/-  per sq. Yard for  plots in the neighbourhood  by the end of december,  1976  and April  1977.  Possession of the acquired land was  taken on 21-2-1976  and the vegetable market of the Municipality was either  functioning or became a certainty.  The  prices of lands in the neighbourhood of such market would have sky-rocketed.  Exs. B-9 and B-10 have come into existence about  two years after the draft notification was publiched in the gazette.  We do  not therefore feel  persuaded to place any reliance  on the  values reflected by Exs. B-9 and B-10  as indicating  the market value of the acquired land on  the date of section 4 91) notification the appellant also filed Ex. B-8  sale deed  dated 24-10-1975  in terms  of which  50 sq. Yards was sold for Rs. 10.000/- that document  discloses the market value at Rs. 200/-  per sq. Yard none of the parties connected with Ex. B-6, have been examined Further there  is a time lag of 7 months between the date of Ex. B-6 and  the  date of sec. 4 (1) notification we do not feel persuaded to adopt the value reflected in Ex. B-8 sale deed for two reasons firstly, it is a post-notification sale and secondly litigation was pending  regarding the acquired land  between  the Municipality and the appellant from some years prior to 1975.  Purchasers willing to pay  a higher price for a land  free from litigation would not be willing to pay  at the  same rate for  any part of the  acquired land.
4.  Mr. Narasimha rao  relied upon state of U.P v. Jitender kumar  to submit that this is a proper case  where we could rely on the  values reflected in post notification sales.  In  that case, the High Court enhanced the rate of  compensation  to Rs. 2-12- per sq. Yard as against the rate of Rs. 1/0/7 fixed by the civil Court.  There were sale deeds pertaining to comparatively smaller areas reflecting the market  value as varying from Rs. 1-12 to Rs. 5/- per sq. Yard.  There was also a sale deed  dated 11-7-1951  in terms of which the co-operative housing society itself for  whose benefit the land was  acquired, purchased another  part of the  land  at the rate of Rs. 2.12 per sq. Yard section  4 (1) notification in that case was  issued in january, 1948.  The Supreme Court held that there was no other material to suggest that there  was any fluctuation in the market rate during the period 1948  to 1951  and if so, to what extent.  It was under those circumstances that the Supreme Court held that the  market value was properly fixed by the  High Court at Rs. 2.12/-  per sq. Yard basing itself on the sale deed Ex. 21 of the year 1951. Such are not the facts in the present  case.  There is escalation of prices even during  1974-75, the rate varying  from Rs. 30/-  to Rs. 50/- per  sq. Yard.  The prices would have escalated further especially when the  municipal vegetable market became a reality.  We cannot, therefore place any reliance on the values reflected in  the post-notification sales.
5.  To curb the  tendency on the  part of persons to recite a low value in registering documents the  Government have prepared market value registers indicating the values of different lands  in a particular area and made it obligatory on the parties to pay the stamp  duty and registration expenses on the  basis of such values. Ex. B-7 is the  market value register wherein the entry Ex. B-15 is relied upon to show that during the year 1975 a sq. Yard in ward No. 5, Block No. 7 was directed to be valued at Rs. 300/-.  It appears Rs. 300/- rate relates  to sites sold  for shops but the rate is Rs. 150/-  per sq. Yard if the site is  sold fro residential purposes subsite is sold for  residential purposes.  Subsequently there was a representation that such  rates as were  noted in the market value register were too high and yielding to such representation the  rates were  correspondingly reduced to Rs. 150/- or Rs. 75/-  sq. Yard depending  upon whether the sites were sold for shops or for residential purposes.  In  his evidence as R. W. 3, the  sub-Registrar, Adilabad, made it clear that the   valuations noted in the market value register were not based on  comparative sales and that such valuation was based on primarily  the property tax assessments.   Property tax assessment is naturally based on the  annual  rental value.  If it is  a shopping  area, the  annual  rental value will be more and naturally the property tax assessment would also  be at a higher level.  As such values were based  only on the municipal  assessment, they do not reflect the market value obtaining in the locality and more so, when the values so noted in the market value register were not based on any comparative sales.  In fixing the market value,  the Court has to take into account the price which a willing purchaser is prepared to pay to a willing vendor.  The  valuations noted in the market value register were not admittedly based on  such consideration which a willing party was paying to a willing  vendor.  We can not, therefore fix the  market value on the basis of the valuations noted in the market value register.  This was also the view expressed by a division Bench of this Court in land  acquisition officer v. Venkateswara prasad  Appeal No. 880/80  dated 11-11-1981.
6.  The appellant has, therefore  not placed before us any relevant material on the basis of which he can claim compensation at any rate exceeding the  rate of Rs. 75/- per sq. Yard fixed by the  learned additional District Judge  We accordingly reject the first of the submissions made by Mr. Narasimha Rao.
7.  We find  force in the  second  of the submissions made  by Mr. Narasimha Rao.  The acquired land is less than half  an acre being of the  extent of 2,178 sq.  Yards.  We have earlier set out that the  the property is situated in the  midst of a developed area and have the facility of municipal  roads on all its  four sides.   There is no need for  the appellant to invest any further amount for laying roads or providing other amenities.  In respect of samall area situated in such manner in the heart of the city, no deductions need be made to meet the expenses connected with laying of roads or  providing other amenities.  A similar view was taken by a division bench of the madras  High Court in Mohammad karimuddin v. Collector of madras (1965) 1 Mad LJ 66.  The appellant will,  therefore  be entitled to claim the  market value without making any deductions therefrom towards roads or other  amenities.
8.  The appellant's right  to claim the amount of Rs. 65,000/-  as the market value of the building, compound wall and the well depends on the answer to the question whether such structures were existing by the date of publication of sec. 4 (1) notification viz., 17-4-1975.  The existence of such structures is, however not in dispute.  The  land Acquisition officer refused to award compensation for such structures as according to him, those structures were raised after the publication of  sec. 4 (1)  notification.  The land  acquisition officer was examined  in the  enquiry as P.W. 1.  His evidence would disclose  that the acquired land was personally  inspected by the  Tahsildar before the notification  and that P.W. 1 himself never inspected it.  P.W. 1 was also definite that the Tahsildar prepared a sketch but that it was no longer available in the records.  The   tahsildar who made the  inspection  before the issue of the draft notification, was  not examined the appellant has let in positive evidence that  he constructed the house, compound wall and the  well even  by the time the  draft notification was published.  The additional district judge read the evidence in such a manner that the municipality obstructed the appellant while he was constructing a  compound wall and the appellant was obliged  to file the suit O.S. No. 30/75   on 28-10-1975  and according  to the appellant he constructed the building after  he constructed the compound wall and that such evidence would  establish that the building compound wall and well would have been constructed after  the publication of the draft notification.  The correctness of this  finding is seriously questioned on the  basis of various documents but in particular on the basis of Ex. B-16 an enclosure to the  Tahsildar's letter dated 4-6-1977.  The  matter, therefore requires careful  scrutiny of the evidence and the  background  of  the  circumstances in  which the  appellant felt himself obliged to file O.s. No. 30/75 on the file  of the District Munsif's  Court, Abilabad.
9.  The disputes between the appellant and  the  Municipality regarding the appellants' right to raise some structures appear to have been going on from some years prior  to  1968.  The  appellant initially applied for permission some time in August 1965  for constructing   a wall.  The Municipality relying on hte earlier notification made in the year 1941, obstructed the plaintiff from proceeding with the  construction of the compound wall and this necessitated O.s. No. 16/68  on the file  of the district judge Adilabad, a certified  copy of the Judgment in which is filed as  Ex. B-14 dated 12-3-1972.  The  Municipality was restrained  by a permanent injunction from interfering with the construction of the  compound wall  provided that it was not in contravention of the provisions of the district
Municipalities Act
or  any rules or bye-laws made thereunder.  This judgment was subsequently confirmed by the High Court .  There is clear indication afforded by Ex. B-30  that by  September,  1974 the appellant dug foundations over an extent of 50' x 60' for the building.  Earlier, he  obtained the estimates under Exs. B-31 and B- 32 during  April 1973  from an Architect of Nizamabad.  We  find from Ex. A-16 letter dated 2-1-1976  of the Municipal commissioner addressed to the Revenue Divisional officer that the appellant was constructing the building and the construction was in progress and that it would  be completed shortly.  By january, 1976  therefore the building was in  an advanced stage of  construction.   The Tahsildar  enclosed the pre-valuation statemetn together with the pre-valuation notes to his letter Ex. A-18.   In such notes, we find the  Tahsildar also included an approximate value of  Rs. 60,000/- which may become payable  to the appellant as  compensation.  It cannot be imagined that  in  making such a statement, the tahsildar did not  Know that compensation need not be paid for any constructions  made after the publication of the draft notification.  The circumstance that the  provision was so made for  payment of compensation on account of this building would indicate that the building was raised before the publication of  the  draft notification.  If the Government  wanted to say that  it was a mistake on the part of the then Tahsildar to have prepared the pre-va-luation statement in that manner, the  Government should have examined the Tahsildar to explain this mistake.  The  Tahsildar was not examined.  An inference has  therefore, to  be  necessarily drawn  that the  structure was raised even before the publication of the  draft notification.  The  positive evidence let  in by the  appellant that he raised the structure even before   the publication of the notification under
section 4 (1)
has,  therefore to be accepted.  The circumstance, that the  appellant did not  obtain the prior  permission of the municipality for raising the structure, has no relevance to the liability on the part of  the Government to pay the  compensation for such structure.  The  appellant as R. W. 2 stated that  he  completed the construction of the building  by the end of 1975  and  the compound wall was constructed and  the well  was sunk even during 1974, In cross-examination, he stated:
"I constructed the compound  wall and later I constructed the  building .....It is  not correct to say that the  building was constructed after notification.  The foundation walls and  roof were constructed prior to notification.  Plastering only was not done'.
This  evidence has to be  read as a whole and  so  reading the evidence it becomes clear that the foundation,walls and roof were laid even prior to the  notification but that some plastering  work which remained to be done was  completed subsequent  to the notification.  The  finding  of the additional district Judge that only foundations were  dug prior to the  notification but   the  structure was erected subsequent  tothe notification cannot therfore, be supported.  That apart,  we have to keep in view the probabilities also.  The appellant who is  a businessman and an income-tax assessee would not have taken the risk of raising the  structure at a substantial cost subsequent to the publication of the  draft notification.  We accordingly hold that  the building and compound  wall  were  publication of  the draft notification being so the  appellant  is entitled to be paid Rs. 65,000/-  towards the cost thereof.
10.   The other major  submission made on behalf of the  appellant  relates to the rate of  interest.  In terms of
section  34
of  the land acquisition Act, 1894.  The rate of interest is 6% By an amendment made by the  land acquisition (Andhra pradesh
Amendment) Act, 12
of  1953, the rate of interest is reduced to  4% Different states have modified the rate of  interest by making local amendments applicable to acquisitions made  for their state purposes.  So far as this Court is  concerned it has uniformly  been awarding 4% interest only under
section 34
of the Act as amended in this  state.
11.
In
Y. Venkannachowdary v. Special Deputy
collector  ,  the  lands were notified for the  central Government.  Interest  was, therefore, payable at 6% the award however granted interest only at 4% per annum and the same rate of  interest  was confirmed by this  Court in C.C.C. A. Numbers 51 and 55  of 1974 dated 7-2-1978.  Thereafter four review petitions were filed before this Court  seeking provision for payment  of interest at 6% and those review petitions were allowed.  The  grant of interest at 6%  in cases  of acquisition of land for  the purpose of central  Government  was  in conformity with para 21 of the Board's standing  order 90 which was extracted at page 423  of the Judgment.  In the year 1962.  However the Government  passed a G.O. expressing its opinion:
"The reduction of rate of interest on compensation from 6% to 4% made by virtue of Madras Act 12  of 1953  came into force from 8-7-1953, and it applies to all cases of  acquisition of  lands undertaken by the state  Government  either for the state Government or for the  central Government".
The Bench construed the amending Act  of 1953  as proviiding for 4% interest irrespective of the question whether  the  acquisition of land  was for the state purpose or for a central purpose.  The  Bench then proceeded to state that the  amending Act of 1953  is violative of
Article  14
of  the  Constitution and was  therefore  void.  Having  regard to the  admitted fact that the  acquisition
in  that case
was for a central  purpose it was  unnecessary for the learned judges to have expressed themselves  on the  constitutional validity of  the land acquisition (Madras Amendment) Act,  1953 as was  adopted by the  state of Andhra pradesh by the  Andhra pradesh adoptation  of laws order, 1957.  We, therefore, consider those observations to be obiter.  That  apart we fail to see how violation of
Article  14
of the Constitution arises at all if  some  of the  states, with reference to acquisitions  made for state purposes have provided for a different  rate of interest.  There is no discrimination regarding  the rate of  interest so far s the acquisitions for the state purposes are concerned.  The rate of interest at 6% as provided  in
section  34
,  remained unaffected only  so far as the  acquisitions  were  made for purposes of   the central Government the  learned judges relied upon vajravelu v. Special Deputy Collector.  .  In vajravelu's case  (supra) certain  amendments  made by the  land  acquisition  (Madras Amendment)  Act No.  23 of 1961  to
section 23
of the  land acquisition Act were questioned as violating
art.  14
of the Constitution.  The Supreme Court observed:-
'On a comparative study of  the land
Acquisition Act, 1894
and the land acquisition (Madras Amendment) Act  (23 of 1961), it becomes clear that  if a  land is acquired for housing scheme  under the
Amending Act
, the  claimant gets a lesser value than he would get for the  same  land  if it is acquired for a public  purpose like hospital  under the  principal Act.  The classification thus sought  to be made by the  land acquisition (Madras Amendment)  Act (23 of 1961) between  persons whose  lands are acquired for other public  purposes has  no reasonable relation to the object sought to be achieved.  Discrimination is writ  large on the
Amending  Act
and it cannot be sustained on the principle of  reasonable  classification".
Those observations made with reference to the  madras Amendment  Act, 1961, cannot be applied with reference to the amendment brought about by the land  Acquisition (Madras Amendment) Act 1953.  The interest payable after that  amendment will be 4% where the acquisition is for the  state  purpose because the amendment made by the state cannot have  any application to  acquisitions made through the agency of  the  state Government  for central Government  purposes.
12.  In special   land acquisition officer v. Abdul  Basith  the   purpose for  which the  acquisition was made whether  for a state purpose or a central  purpose is not clear.  Interest was however, awarded in one of the  cases at 5%  and another of th cases at 6% the  Supreme Court held that there is no  justification for such disparity and awarded 6%  interest.   Under the karnataka state Amendment  the rate  of interest was reduced to 5%  Even assuming  that the lands were there acquired for the state purpose the circumstances remains that  interest was awarded at 6% to one  of the claimants and only at 5% for another of the claimants.  It  was this  anomaly that was corrected by the Supreme Court.  The  decision of the Supreme Court in Basith's case (supra) cannot, therefore be construed as laying down that  interest at 6% is payable  irrespective of the  question whether the land is  acquired for a state Government purpose or a central Government purpose.  We accordingly hold that interest is payable only at 4% and not at 6%.
13.  The land  acquisition officer  has provided for the  15 % solatium in awarding the totals  compensation on the basis of the market value  as fixed by him.  The additional  Disteict Judge, in granting additional compensation, also took  into   consideration the 15%  solatium payable  on the market value. Mr. Narasimha Rao is not therefore correct in stating  that the Court   below  did not provide for interest on  the solatium  component of the compensation.  In the  view we have taken  that there  need be no deduction made towards the cost of  laying roads and providing amenities, the  appellant will have  to be paid  compensation  for the  entire  extent of 2178 sq. Yards.  The additional compensation payable  towards the value of the  site inclusive of 15% solatium is Rupees 46,963-10 ps.  In the view  we have taken,  the appellant has also  to be paid  compensation for  the house, compound wall and well whose  market value, as already stated, is Rs. 65,000/-  The compensation amount inclusive of 155 solatium therefor is  74,750/-  the additional    compensation payable  to the  appellant  is   therefore, Rs. 1,21,713-10 ps. Possession of the  land was taken on 21-2-1976.  The  house including  the compound  wall and the well have not yet been taken possession thereof was interdicted by a  stay granted by this  Court in W.P. No. 6031 of 1979.  We have therefore, provided for payment of interest at 4% on Rupees 46,963-10 ps. From 21-2-1976 till date of  payment and payment of 4% interest on Rs. 74,750/-  from the  date of taking  possession of the  house till date of payment.
14.  The appeal is accordingly allowed in part, directing the land  acquisition officer to  pay to the  appellant the additional compensation of Rs. 1,21,713-10 ps. With subsequent interest on rs. 46,963-10 ps. At 4%  per annum from 21-2-1976 and interest at 4% per annum on rupees 74,750/- from the date of taking  possession of the  building compound  wall and well  till date of payment.   Three months time  from this day is  granted to the land acquisition officer for  making  such payment.  The appeal as regards the rest is dismissed.  Having  regard to the  exaggerated claim made by the  appellant, we  direct both the parties in the  circumstances, to bear their  respective costs in  this appeal.
15.  The additional grounds sought  to be raised in C.M.P. No. 2008/82  have been considered.  The said  C.M.P.   is accordingly ordered.
16.  In  C.M.P. No. 2297 of 1982  the appellant requested this Court for permission to  amend the valuation to direct refund of Rs. 609/-   paid as excess courtfee.  In valuing the appeal, the  appellant provided for a  deduction of 25%  but  now  he wants  permission to plead that no such deducation need be  made.  We   have considered this submission on merits while disposing of the  main appeal.  The  amendment sought for  is  accordingly granted.  The officer is  directed to work out  the court-fee payable and  issue refund for the  Court fee paid in excess, if any.
17.  The appellant  in the above appeal  is the petitioner in "W.P. No. 6031/79.  He seeks a direction in the  nature of a writ of Mandamus directing the proceedings R.C.  3405/72/C1 dated 26-6-1979  of the Municipal council, Adilabad,the 2nd respondent in the writ  petition, as void and illegal and to set aside the same.  The state of andhra pradesh who is the 1st  respondent in the writ petition as also the 2nd respondent have filed their counters.  Excepting two submissions made on behalf of the  petitioner the other  submissions do not  survive for  consideration in view of the facts found in the appeal  which we have disposed of today by this common judgment the  building, compound wall and  the  well in relation to which the writ  petition  is  filed,  has been held by us to have been raised by the  petitioner before the publication of  the draft notification under
section 4 (1)
of the  land  acquisition Act.  It is on that basis  that we have awarded in  favour of the petitioner the  compensation payable  therefor in terms of the  land  acquisition Act.  The award under the Act having been made and  compensation for such structures having been provided by us in the appeal,  the collector became  entitled under S. 16  of the land acquisition Act to take possession which shall thereupon vest absolutely in the Government free  from  all encumbrances.  As the  land  subjectmatter of acquisition and in which the structures exist, has already been taken possession  on 21-2-1976, the  petitioner has no longer any right  to continue in possession of the  building and other structures existing in that land.
18.   The first submission made on behalf of  the  petitioner is that  till the Municipality paid the compensation the property does not  vest in the Municipal  council and that  without such vesting  of the property in the council the commissioner is not competent  to have issue (sic)  the impugned proceedings.  The provisions of
section 42
of the A.P.  Municipalities Act have been  relied on as supporting this submission. Sec 42 (1) provides for the procedure for acquisition of immoveable property under the land acquisition Act if the  Municipal  authority is authorised by the
A.P. Municipalities Act
to so acquire the acquisition in question is not made by the municipalities Act.  It is an acquisition made by the state Government for the purposes of the Municipal   authority.  Being so the  payment of  the compensation by the Municipality before the property vests in the       counsil does not arise.  The only other submission made before us is that  it is not open to the  municipality to evict the petitioner who is  in  possession  of the  property without filing a civil suit for that purpose.  After the award is passed and  possession of the  land has been taken,  the  petitioner has ceased to have any  title to  continue in possession of  the building existing in  that  site.  He is an encroacher in the  eye of law and it is competent for the  2nd respondent to obtain vacant possession of the property departmentally, especially when the petitioner has no semblance of bona  fides in continuing to be in possession  of the building .  the writ  petition is accordingly dismissed.  No costs advocate's fee Rs. 150/-  the writ petitioner is however given time  till the end of December  1982   to vacate the premises.
19.  On the pronouncement of the judgment sri G.v.L. narasimha Rao, learned counsel for  the  appellant, made an oral request for grant  of leave  to appeal  to the Supreme Court.  We are unable  to certify that this case  involves such substantial questions of law of  general importance as require the consideration by the  Supreme Court or that it is  otherwise  a fit  case  for grant of leave,  leave refused.
20. Order  accordingly.