[Cites
3
, Cited by
3
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Magunta Mining Cp. vs M. Kondaramireddy And Anr. on 3 December, 1982
Equivalent citations: AIR1983AP335, AIR 1983 ANDHRA PRADESH 335
JUDGMENT


 

  Jagannadha Rao, J.
1.   The appeal is directed  against the order of the  learned   subordinate  judge,  Gudar in E.A. No. 107/ 80 in E.P. No. 2/79  in o.s. No. 64/67.
2.  The  appellant filed  an application in the Court  below  under O. 21 R. 58
C.P.C
and the same  having   been rejected by  the  lower  Court this  appeal  has been preferred  under  the amended  provisions of  the civil  P.C.  Which  provided  for  an appeal  instead  of a suit.
3.  The first  respondent in the appeal is the judgment-debtor  while  the 2nd   respondent is the  decree-holder.  There was a  compromise  decree on 12-3-1968  for a sum  of Rs. 1,00,000/-  (one lakh)   with   interest  thereon at 12%  P.A.  and subject to  certain   other terms  and  conditions  the  Judgment -debtor    paid  some  amoutn  towards  the decree  but on the date  when the E.P. No. 2/79  was filed  still a sum  of Rs. 68,724.89  was  outstanding.
4.  The  2nd  respondent-decree-holder filed  E.P. No. 2/79  for realisation  of the above   sum and obtained  an order of attachment  of  certain  lands  belonging to the judgment   debtor  in  three  villages.  The attachment  was effected  on 15-3-1980 in  one village and  on 19-3-80  in two  others   villages  of which utukuru  is one.  In this appeal  we are  concerned   with   certains  items   in Utukuru  village   with   regard  to which  the   appellant    filed an application  under O. 21 R. 58
C.P.C
. on  25-4-1980  in E.A. No. 107/80 claiming to be interested in getting  the attachment  released in respect  of  four   survey  numbers  in Utukuru  village.  As such   we are not concerned   with the  attachment  of the other lands  in  Uukuru  or with regard  to the other  villages.  The  lands  with regard  to which  the appellant  filed the claim  application  are-
1.  Patta  No. 12  - survey  No. 183  - Extent ac. 3-78 cents.
2.  Patta No. 118 - survey  No. 182  - Extent Ac 1-85 cents.
3.  Patta No. 44 - survey  No. 198/1 - Extent ac. 1-98 cents.
4.  Patta  No. 42- survey  No. 198/2  Extent   Ac. 0.55 cents
5.  In  the said  application filed by the appellant under  O. 21 R. 58
C.P.C
.  it was   contended as follows;  the applicant  is a mining  company  represented  by its  Managing  partner.  He is no doubt  the son  of the Judgment-debtor.  The  application  learnt  that the 2nd   respondent obtained a decree against   the first  repsondent and in execution  of the said  decree  brought   the schedule   mentioned four  items to  sale   as if they  belonged   to the first respondent  in the E.P.  it is contended  that the  schedule   properties  are   the Mica Mine   plots   covered by survery No. 182, 198/1, 198/2  and 183  of about ac. 8-11 cents   They   originally  belonged to the  judgment-debtor   (1st   respondent)   and the   land was fit  only for  mining   work.  Hence  the judgment  debtor   gave  his  consent in 1977 for grant   of  a mining  lease in favour   of the appellantcompany   and  in  accordance  with the consent  of  the judgmetn-debtor   the  Assistant  Director of Mines  and Geology  Nellore  leased out  the said lands  to the  appellant  in  his  proceedings   NO.  4763/ M-1/78  dated  28-2-1979  and since    then the appellant   alone   has  been  in  possession  and  enjoyment   of  the   same  as lessee  under  Government  Memo  No. 3160/ Mines  II /78-2  dated 17-1-1979.  As such and because  of the lease.  The Judgment  debtor  has no right  or interest in  the  said  properties  and it is only  the  appellant that  has been in possession of  the  same and  therefore  the attachment of  these  properties  made on 15-3-1980  in the  above  E.P.  is not vallid  and  hence  has  to be vacated  (obviously  15-3-1980  is a mistake  for 19-3-1980.)
6.  To this  application a counter  was  filed  by the  2nd  respondent-decree-holder  as follows: the land  is  the  patta land  of  the  Judgment-debtor  and they  are living  Jointly  and   doing    mining   business jointly .  The judgment-debtor   was  previously  doing   mining   in the schedule  lands.  As he   failed  to pay  the dead   rent  and  others   dues  to the Government  the lease  granted in  favour   of  the judgment-debtor   was cancelled.   Subsequently   the  judgment-debtor   instigated  the claimant to apply  for  lease  of  the schedule   land for  doing   mining  work  and   he  might   have  issued a no objection    certificate  for  granting    lease in favour   of the  claimant  thus  the claimant  obtained  only  leasehold  rights   for doing   mining    work  in the schedule  property.   Even   though   the claimant  wasgranted  in favour  of the claimant  is liable   to  be cancelled  at any  moment   for  not  carrying  on mining  operations.  It is contended that   the  attachment  need   not  be raised.  The   schedule  lands   could be brought  for  sale  subject to the  leasehold  rights  of the  appellant.  Hence  the petition  should be dismissed.
7.  In the  lower  Court neither  party  examined  any witnesses but Ext. A-1  was marked  as  being   the Government  order    granting  the lease  in  favour  of the claimants.  No documents  were  marked  for  the  respondent  decree-holder  the Court below  on a consideration  of the facts  of the case rejected  the claim application  on the facts of  the case  rejected  the claim  application  on the ground  that the  claimant  is none  other than the son of  the  Judgment-debtor  and that the  decree-holder  is contending  that the judgment-debtor  is  also a partner   of the firm   and that the   claimant  did not produce    the partnership   deed.  Therefore it is  possible   that there might  be  collusion  between  the claimant  and the Judgment-debtor.  It also  held that the  decree-holder is contending  that no mining   operations were being  conducted and  that the mining  lease   is  likely   to be cancelled  and   that  in any even  if the claimant has  got mining  rights   that is not  a  hindrance to  proceed  against the schedule   property   which  admittedly   belongs   to the judgment-debtor  it also  in   his  counter   that  the  decree-holder has no  objection   to the  sale  being  held   subject to the mining rights  of the claimant.  For those reasons  the lower   Court  rejected  the  claim  application   It is   against   this order    that the  appellant    has  filed  this appeal.
8.   In  this  appeal  it is  contended  by the learned  counsel  for  the appellant  that the lower  Court  acted  on surmises and has not  given   any categorical   findings  with reference  to the  rival  contentions of  the  parties.  It is  also  contended that in view  of Ext.  A-1  the  lease  in  favour  of he appellant   granted  by the Government  cannot be disputed  and that  the  claimant is entitled  to the surface  rights  of the Judgment-debtor  in view  of  the consent   letter given  by the  judgment-debtor   in  favour  of the claimant  will  not  be able  to  work  the Mica  mine  as the Court  auction-purchaser of  the surface  rights  would   obstruct   the  claimant  from   entering   the land  and   coducting   the mining   operations the learned  counsel also relied  upon  the amended  provisions of O. 21  R. 89  C.P.C.
9.  On the  other  hand  the learned  counsel  for  the decree-holder  contended  that the  lease is not a real  one and that   the claimant  is none other  than  the   son  of the Judgment debtor  and there  is  nothing  wrong  even if the sale is held  subject to the mining  rights of   the appellant.  The  learned counsel  for  the  respondent-decree-holder  also raised  a contention that  subsequent   to the  filing of this C.,M.A though  this Court  granted  stay  on  22-8-80  before  the same  was   brought  to the notice  of the  lower Court   the properties  in the three  villages  consisting of various  items   including these   four  items  were  sold  on 25-8-1980  for Rs. 25,795/-  and that therefore  this  appeal  has  become   infructuous.
10.  Before   dealing  with the  other aspects  arising  in the  appeal we shall first  deal with the effect  of the Court  sale conducted   by  the lower  Court   during  the pendency  of this  appeal in this  Court.
11.  The Judgment-debtor  gave a consent  letter in 1977  in favour  of the claimant and on that  basis  the Assistant Director of Mines  granted a  lease on 28-2-1979  in accordance with the Government  memo  dated 17-1-79.  The attachment  so far as the  lands in  Utukuru  are concerned  was made on 19-3-1980.  Thereafter  the appellant filed  the claim petition  on 25-4-1980.  It was  rejected   by the  lower  Court   under  the  impugned  order dated   7-7-1980.  The C.M.A  was  preferred to this Court   on 18-8-1980  and interim   stay was obtained  on 22-8-80  Before  the  stay  order  was communicated tothe lower  Court  the  sale was   held in  respect  of  all the items  in all the three   villages on 25-8-80  for a sum of Rs. 25,795/-  it is common  ground  that  so  far as  the  four items  with which we are concerned  they were  sold for a sum of  Rs. 9,260.  The  decree-holder  was the  auction-purchaser  in  respect  of the items.  However later  this  Court  granted stay  of  confirmation of sale.
12.  Though the decree-holder contended  that the  Judgment-debtor  is a partner in the claimant firm no evidence  has been adduced  by the  decree-holder in that   regard.  Hence  this contention  cannot be  accepted.  Though  the existence  of  the lease   is doubted.   Though  the existence  of  the lease  is doubted  by the  decree-holder in view  of Ext.  A-1  which  contains  the order   of the assistant Director  of Mines  and the lease  deed in  Form  K  Under   the Mineral  concession Rules  1960  there can be no  doubt  about the  lease.
13.  The first question  therefore is: whether this appeal can be  proceeded with even  though  during   the  pendency  of the appeal  arising  out of the  claim  application the properties  have been sold.
14.  Admittedly  this Court  subsequently  granted an order  staying  the confirmation of the sale  that order was communicated  and   even now  the  confirmation of the sale  has  not taken place.  The provisions of O. 21 R. 59
C.P.C
. show  that where  before  a claim is preferred  or objection made and the  property attached had already  been  advertised  for sale,  the Court may, if  the property is immovable,  make  an order,  that pending  the  adjudication  of the claim  or objection  the property shall not  be sold, or   that pending  such adjudication, the   property may be  sold but  the sale shall  not be  confirmed and  any such  order  may be made subject  to such terms  and  conditions  as to security  or otherwise  as  the  Court  thinks  fit.  This  provision  therefore  provides   that pending  adjudiciation of a claim in respect  of immovable   property the Court may proceed with the sale but  stay the confirmation.  Obviously  this has been made with a view  to expedite   the sale  proceedings  so that  in the event   of the claim being  rejected the further  proceedings  can go on expeditiously.  But  it is clear that as long as the sale  is not confirmed the status   quo  ante  can be  restored  in case  the claim   is allowed.  It has been held   that  once the claim petition is allowed  the sale will be treated  as void   because   the interest of the judgment-debtor  that was  sold did not  in fact belong  to him and the  Court auction-purchaser would   not  get any title to the property as the judgment-debtor  had no interest therein and  because the claimant continues to retain  his  interest in  those properties vide Bibi umatul  Rasul  v. Lakho Kuer (AIR  1941 pat 405).  To  the same effect is the decision in Madholal v. Gajrabi (aIR  1951 Nag 194), Where  the learned  Judge v. R. Sen quoted the following  observations of Niyogi, J in an earlier   unreported Judgment of  the Nagpur  High Court as follows  (at p. 197):
"The terms of O. 21 R. 63  are imperative  and they declare that  any order passed by the executing  Court  is  subject to the result   of such a suit.
In phul
Kumari v. Ghanshyam Misra
, 91907) ILR 35 Cal  202 : (35  Ind App 22 (pC) their   Lordships  of  the privy council  pointed out that  the object  of a suit  under S. 283, Civil P.c.   of 1882  which corresponds to O. 21, R. 63 of the present code is in effect to set aside a summary decision.  When  the claimant succeeds in getting  a decree in  his  favour   declaring  his title to the property attached and that the  property is not liable   for attachment  and sale  in  execution of a particular  decree the executing  court's power  to sell the property in that execution proceeding  must  cease.  The claimant's success  in a suit  under O. 21 R. 63 ousts  the Jurisdiction of the executing Court.
If  that is the result, the sale must be pronounced to be a  nullity and consequently  not capable of being confirmed  under O. 21, R. 92, civil P.c.".
After  quoting the said observations of  Niyogi, J., Justice  sen also referred to the provisions of
S. 52
of Transfer of property Act and observed that eve otherwise the Court sale is subject  to the  general principle of lis pendens and the sale  will be subject  to the result  of  the claim suit.  The legal  position can be  summarised  as  follows:
15.  Whenever a  claim  is preferred under O. 21, R. 58 C.P.c. against  attachment of immovable properties the fact that the properties  are  sold  or the sale confirmed will  not deprive  the Court  of  its jurisdiction  to adjudicate  on the claim.  The inquiry  into the claim can be  proceeded  with by the  trial   Court  or the appellate  Court (under the amended code) and in the event of the claim being  allowed, the  sale and  the confirmation of sale shall  to  that extent  be treated as a nullity and of no effect, as the Judgment debtor   had  no title which  could  pay  to the Court  auction-purchaser.
16.  Hence  we hold  that this  C.M.A.  has not become  infructuous  The preliminary  objection  is therefore  overruled.
17.  The next   and more  important question raised by the  learned counsel for the respondent-decree-holder is that the consent   letter  issued  by the   Judgment-debtor   in favour  of  the claimant does not  create any right  in the surface which could  be the basis of the claim by the  lessee of the subsoil  rights.
18.  It may be noted that Mica Mine  is below  the surface  of the  land  belonging to the Judgment-debtor  the Government has  granted a lease of the Mica  mine  in favour  of the claimant anterior  to the attachment.  The Judgment-debtor  has also  given a  consent   letter in 1977 in favour   of the claimant  anterior  to the attachment  dated 19-3-1980,  permitting  him to enter  upon  his  land with a view  to exploit  the mineral which is the subject matter of the lease.  The grant of the consent  letter  was not  specifically   denied  in the counter  of the decree-holder.
19.  It  is obvious  that unless  the lessee  of the subsoil  rights is  entitled to enter  upon  the land  and  use  the surface of the land for  the  purpose  of exploitation of the mine  the lease of the subsoil  will be  rendered wholly   nugatory and useless.  The  purpose of the lessee of the subsoil  rights in obtaining the  consent  letter from the owner  of the  surface  rights is to  enable him to have  exclusive possession of the surface and reap the benefits of the lease of the subsoil rights profitably.  Viewing in that light, the consent letter from owner is absolutely necessary for a profitable enjoyment of the subsoil rights.  Subject to these rights, the sale must be taken to have been held.
20.  Therefore, on these facts, the legal position can be summarised as follows :
A lessee from the Government of the subsoil rights obtains a consent letter to enable him to enter the land for the purpose of the more profitable exploitation of the subsoil rights. By virtue of the consent letter the lessee is entitled to the exclusive possession of the surface of land to the exclussion of the owner, as long as the lease of the subsoil rights lasts. Therefore such a lessee who prefers a claim petition under O.21, R. 58,
C.P.C
. is entitled not only to the subsoil rights but to the exclussive possession of the surface of the land so long as the subsoil lease lasts. The landowner possesses only the remaining interest in the land. Therefore a Court auction-purchaser of the rights of the owner in such circumstances owns only the residuary rights in the surface and will not be entitled to obstruct the enjoyment of the surface rights by the grantee of the consent :letter. As the rights of the claimant lessee are declared in the proceedings under O. 21. R. 58, C. P. C. there is no need to set aside the sale but if is sufficient to declare that the auction-purchaser gets only the residuary interest, and even i the right to possession of the surface rights or subsoil rights are sold, it would only be nullity. (Vide Madholal v. Gajrabi (AIR 1951 Nag 194). (supra) ).
21. We, therefore, hold that the attachment made by the decree-holder in respect of the items mentioned in the schedule to the claim petition should be released not only in respect of the right of the claimant to the subsoil rights granted by the Government but also in respect of the right to the exclusive possession of the surface of these items so long as the subsoil lease lasts. The Court auction-purchaser would not be entitled to interfere with the surface rights created in favour of the claimant in such a way as would interfere with or make it impossible to the claimant to exploit the Mine pursuant to the lease of the subsoil rights granted by the Government in favour of the claimant.
22. The appeal is accordingly allowed, to the extent stated above, the order of the is allowed to that extent. There shall be a declaration that the claimant is entitled not only to the subsoil rights created in his favour under the lease executed by the Asstt. Director of Mines. Nellore on 28-2-79 but also to the exclusive. possession of the surface in relation to the lands mentioned in the schedule to the claim petition in such a manner that his possession and enjoyment of the surface rights will not be interfered with or obstructed by the Court auction-purchaser or his successors-in-interest. The sale of the items shall be subject to the above rights declared in favour of the claimant and the Court sale dated 25-8-1980 shall be declared to have passed to the Court auction-purchaser only the remaining interest of the judgment-debtor. The appeal is allowed as indicated above. but in the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
23. Order accordingly.