[Cites
17
, Cited by
6
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Bollapalli Venkat Rao vs Chaturvedula Subbaiah And Anr. on 26 July, 1982
Equivalent citations: AIR1983AP166, AIR 1983 ANDHRA PRADESH 166
JUDGMENT


 

  Kodandaramayya, J.
1.  This  civil Revision  petition is referred for decision of a Division Bench by our  learned  brother  Rama Rao, J. The   question referred is whether a second  Appeal lies to this Court against  the appellate   order  passed on an application under O. 21 R. 58
C.P.C
2.  The petitioner herein filed an application under O. 21 r. 58
C.P.C
before the subordinate  judge  Narasaraopet,  to raise the attachment in respect of  petition schedule properties challenging the attachment  effected at the  instance of the 1st respondet-decree- holder  who  had  obtained a decree against the 2nd  respondent-Judgment-debtor.  The contention of the petitioner is that the  execution  proceedings in respect of the  petition schedule properties are illegal  as the property belongs to him  and  not to the  judgment-debtor.  At present  was are not concerned with the  merits of the  case and  is enough if we notice  that the object of the  petitioner was overruled by the executing Court.  A civil  Miscellaneous appeal was filed against  the said order of the executing Court dated 18th July 1979 on the file of the I additional Judge  Guntur and the  Appellate Court in its  judgment  dated  6-12-1979  confirmed the order of the executing Court.  Against the said judgment  the  petitioner herein filed the present  Civil revision petition and the respondent   took a  prelimiary  objection stating  that   under  O. 21 R. 58  (4)
C.P.C
as amended by Act 104 of 1976  no civil   revision petition lies but an appeal  lies to this  Court.
3.  It  may be stated at the outset  that the learned counsel  for  the revision-petitioner has filed  in the  first instance a  second appeal but when the  office took an objection he converted the same  into a civil revision  petition.  At the  time  of the final hearing as the  matter relates to procedure of general importance the learned  Judge referred the  matter to a Division bench.  That is how  it has come  before us.
4.  The learned counsel for the petitioner himself has now realised the legal position and  submitted  that a second appeal lies to this  Court,  but not the  civil revision  petition.  As this case was referred to a Division Bench for the determination of  this   question,  we have examined the legal position and delivering  the Judgment without resting  our conclusion on any concession made by the counsel.
5.  The question whether a second  appeal lies or a civil revision petition lies depends upon the construction of  the  amended provision  of O. 21 R. 58, C.P.C the Amending  Act 1976 substituted new Rr. 58  and 59  and omitted Rr. 60  to 63  to O. 21
of C.P.C
Under the  amended provision of R. 58 in order to prevent the protraction of litigation, it  has been provided that all questions including  questions of title shall be finally detemined in execution proceedings and  this  provision is in Keeping witht he  tenor of
s. 47
of the code.  The remedy of the suit  is preserved if the executing  Court refuses to entertain the claim but if an adjudiciation shall have   the same force and  subject to the same  conditions as to appeal or otherwise  as if it were  a decree.  The crucial words  in the rule with which we are  concerned in this case may be extracted:
O. 21 R. 58 (4)
C.P.C
.  reads as follows:-
'Where any claim  or objection has been adjudicated upon under  this  rule, the order made  thereon  shall have  the same   force and subject  to the same  conditions as to appeal or otherwise as if it were a decree".
The   question that falls for determination is though under the said  provision, appeal lies to the  appellate Court   under the code, whether  a second  appeal  also lies which is  not  expressly conferred under  said  provision.  The  answer  to this  question can be arrived at according to us mainly on the  arrived at according to us mainly on hte construction of the provision and on gathering the  intention of the
Amending Act
also by examining the precedents to touching the question.
6.  First of all  the  provision  occurs  in the civil procedure code and it refers to the  procedure  in all established courts and it is not any special law made by the  parliament.  The  leading  case on the subject is National  Telephone company Limited v. His  Majesty's postmaster general 1913 ac 546 a Judgment  of House of lords which was followed by Indian courts and accepted  by the Supreme Court  also.  As per
sec. 1
of the telephones arbitration Act, 1909 any difference between postmaster general  and another  relating  to telephones shall be referred to the arbitration and such  proceedings shall be governed by the provisions of the Railway and canal Traffic Act,  1888.  An  appeal against the order  passed by the  canal commission and preliminary objection was taken that the ocurt of appeal has no jurisdiction to entertain it and the said  objection has been overruled and the  matter was further carried to the House of Lords and all the  learned law lords agreed that the objection is not  tenable   and the Court of appeal correctly entertained the appeal.  A  well know dicta of viscount haldane L.C. occurring  at page  552 reads as follows:
"When a question is stated to be referred to an established Court without more it  in  my opinion, imports that  the ordinary incidents of the procedure of that  Court are to attach  and also that any general right of appeal from its decision likewise attaches".
At page 562  Lord Parker of Waddington observed as follows:
"Where by statute matters are referred to the  determination of a Court of record with no further provision, the  necessary implication is, I think that the Court will determine the matters, as  a Court.  Its jurisdiction is enlarged, but all the incidents of such jurisdiction, including the right  of appeal from its decision, remain the same'.
Though the facts of that case laying down the above  rule  are not exactly similar to the  facts of  the  present  case the principle enunciated therein clearly applies.  Further in the  present case the right of appeal is conferred by the  very provision itself which says  that the order passed on an adjudication shall have the same force and subject to the same conditions as to appeal as if  it  were a decree.  If the  law is that even though no right of appeal is specifically conferred that if a question is referred to  an established Court  all incidents attached to the procedure of that  Court including the right of appeal is attracted there cannot be  any doubt regarding the  right of  further appeal.  The above case was referred by the Supreme Court and a the principle therein  was accepted in N.S. Thread co. V.  James Chawdwik and  Bros.,  which arose under the
Trade Marks Act, 1940
there the  question was whether a further   appeal lies to a Division    Bench against  the  judgment  of a single  judge only an  appeal  was provided under S. 76  of the  said Act.  Their Lordships held that once the Trade marks  Act confers  right  of appeal to the High Court and says nothing more about it the High Court seized as such of  the  appellate  jurisdiction  conferred by sec. 76, it can exercised by a single  judge, his judgment   becomes  subject  to appeal under clause 15  of the  letters patent, there being   nothing  to the contrary to  the
Trade Marks Act
. No doubt the Supreme Court rules that if a prohibition is enacted for a  further appeal as in the case of arbitration Act of 1940 as per
S. 39 (2)
of the Act  that the proceedings are referred to a civil Court or to an established  Court would  not  confer a further right  of appeal (see
Union of India v. Mohindra
supply  co., ).
7.  In Adikappa v. Chandrasekhara, AiR  1948  PC 12 Lord  simonds laid down  that "Where a  legal right is  in dispute and the ordinary courts of the country  are seized of such dispute the courts are governed by the  ordinary rules of procedure  applicable thereto and an appeal lies if  authorised by such  rules, notwithstanding  that the legal right claimed arises under special  statute which does not in  terms confer a  right of appeal".  This  case  arose under  the madras Agricultural Relief Act whereunder the civil Court was empowered to decide the question under
Sec. 19
of the Act relating to the  protection given to the agriculturists under the said Act.  The mere  provision under
sec. 19
of the Act relating tothe  protection given to the agriculturists under the said Act.  The mere provision conferring a power on a Court to determine whether  a judgment  debtor is entitled tot he protection under the said  Act was held  to carry with it  the  further right  of appeal without  specifically conferring  the same  on the litigant.
8.  In the present   case  though the right of appeal is conferred, the question debated is whether any further right of second  appeal  arises.  Two   judgments of the privy council may be referred to  where the  further right of the second  appeal is said  to be implied when such right was given to be  adjudicated by the  regular civil courts.
9.
In secretary of state  for
India v. Chellikani Rama Rao
, (1916) ILR  39 Mad 617: (AIR  1916  PC 21)  under the Mad 617: (AIR  1916 pc  21) under the Madras Forest Act V of 1882  an appeal is provided against the order of the  forest  settlement  officer where the  claim of the private  party is rejected in respect of forest  lands  but no further appeal is provided to the High Court  the High Court entertained further appeal against the judgment of the district  judge.   When the matter is carried  to the privy council against  the Judgment of the High Court besides challenging  the Judgment  of  the High Court on merits,  the   appellant therein raised  the object that ll further proceedings in the High Court against the Judgment  of the Disteict Judge  are  incompetent as no further appeal was conferred  under the statute to the claimant.  Lord shaw who delivered the judgment overruled the said  contention and  held that where the proceedigs of this  character reached the District  Court, that Court is appealed  to as one of the ordinary courts of the  country, with regard to whose procedure, orders, and decrees the  ordinary rules of the  civil Procedure code will apply.   His Lordship approved this legal position as obtained in madras and has been acted upon since 1888  on the strength of the Full bench judgment in kamaraju v.  Secretary of  state for India, (1888)  ILR  11 mad 309.  His Lordship distinguished Rangoon Botatough distinguished Rangoon botatoung company v. Collector of Rangoon, (1913)  ILR  40 Cal 21  where under the proceedings  of the  land acquisition Act in appeal is provided to the High Court out  of a reference to a  civil Court after an award is passed, as  those proceedings were from the begining to the end are  arbitration proceedings  to the end are  arbitration proceedings.
In fact in view of
the said  judgment
in (1913)  ILR  40  Cal  21 where in the privy council held a further appeal to it was incompetent as the proceedings under the land  acquisition Act  are awards  but not decrees, the land  acquisition Act was amended in 1921 declaring that the awards passed under  the Act shall be deemed to be decrees within the meaning of
section  2 (2)
of the civil procedure code Similarly in
Maung Ba Than v. Ma Pin
, AIR  1934  PC  81.  Lord  thankerton examined the further right of appeal to the privy council where as per
section 75
of the  Provincial  Insolvency Act the order of the district  Judge  is made final subject to the limited right of appeal given to the High Court  His Lordship followed (1916)  ILR  39 Mad 617: (AIR  1916 PC  21) and ruled that "when a right of appeal is given to one of the ordinary courts of the country  the procedure  orders  and  decrees of that Court will be governed by the ordinary rules of the civil procedure code.  An Appeal to privy council  is therefore  maintainable  from the decision of the  High Court  under
S. 75
of the said Act".
10.  Mr. P.L.N. Sarma also drew our attention to the two judgments which arose under the Hindu marriage Act prior to the amendment  to
sec. 28
of the Hindu marriage Act by
Amending Act
68 of 1976.
In
Bai Umiyabhen v. Ambalal
,  the question of maintainability of further second appeal againt the judgment of the lower appellate Court was considered by  justice bhagwati as he then was sitting  in a Division Bench.  His lordship rules thatthe decision under
S. 10
of the  Hindu Marriage Act is not a decree within the meaning of
section  2 (2)
of section  28 as it  stood unamended which enacted  that  all  decrees  and  may be appealed from under any law for the time being  in force the said language viz., the words decrees and orders" contained in sec. 28  of the Hindu marriage Act according to  their plain and natural sense  include not only original decrees and orders but also the  appellate decrees and orders but also the appellate decrees and orders,  these precedents are enough to show  that the right of appeal or the  further right of second  appeal or the  further  right  of  second appeal  need not  be conferred  once the  proceedings are referred for  adjudication  to regular civil courts.
11.  It may be useful  to refer  in this connection that
section 2 (2)
of the  civil P.c. before  its amendment by Act 104  of 1976 included in  its enlarged definition the determination of any question within sec. 47 and the said reference to s. 47 was omitted by the
Amending Act
.  Now the  right of appeal in execution matters is taken away.  As per  the said unamended  definition without any specific right of appeal being  conferred courts entertained appeals  and  further appeals in respect of  matters determined under sec. 47 as they were declared to be  decrees within the meaning of
section 2 (2)
civil P.C.  the amended provision of order 21, Rule 58, civil P.C. besides adopting  the tenor of section 47 in sub-rule (2), besides declaring  such adjudicating orders  as decrees also declared the  incident  or right of appeal shall  be attached to it.  The  only omission is that the further right of appeal was not  declared.  In view  of the established legal  position it is   unnecessary for the  legislature to specifically confer such further right of appeal.  The   view  of ours is  supported not  only as  per  the construction of the said  provision both on principle and on  the   authority but also as per the  objects and reasons  assigned by the parliament while  introducing  the Bill for  amending  the code by Act 104 of 1976.  The statement  and objects of clause 75 of the bill reads as  follows:-
"Caluse 75 - Sub-clause (XXV) - rules 58 to 63  with claims and objections in execution.  At present the adjudication in execution has limited scope and the matter can be further agitated by way of a regular suit.  In order to  prvent  protraction of litigation, it is  thought desirable  to have all questions (including questions of title) settled finally in execution  proceedings itself.  This would be  in  keeping with the  tenor of S. 47  wherein it is  provided that all  questions arising between parties to the suit ralating to the execution discharge and satisfaction  of  the decree shall be determined by the Court executing the    decree and not by a  separate suit.  Rules 58 to 63  are being substituted accordingly".
Further the present provision was introduced as per the 14th 27th and  44th reports of the law commission In 27th report, the  law  commission of India suggested in Appendix  I the  proposal  to introduce a draft amendment  to O. 21, Rule 58  which is enacted without  any modification  Reason  full enquiry into  title  will be held and suit    will  be barred under  the changed  scheme.  They also observed at page 198  that since orders under O. 21 R. 58
C.P.C
will  now be appealable as decrees the appeal shall  attract full Court fee and  for the  purpose of Court fee these orders  should  be  treated as orders under S. 47 Thus the  intention of the  legislature  and adopting  the change suggest by  the law commission  verbtaim would  clearly indicate that the provision of Or. 21, R. 58 c.P.C must  be  an exhaustive remedy as a suit and the   orders passed thereon must be treated as decrees without  restricting any rights of appeal.  We are  clearly of  the  opinion that in the absence embodied in or. 21.,  rule 58,
C.P.C
the party of  the  proceedings  under or. 21 rule  58
C.P.C
is claearly entitled to the further appeal under the code  viz., the second appeal.
12.  The matter having arisen in excution  the appellant has to  file a civil  Miscellaneous  second appeal as it obtained before the amendment to S. (2)  c.P.C  Accordingly we hold that  the Civil Revision petition is not  maintainable  as this Court cannot  entertain the revision petition in view of the prohibition contained in s. 115 (2) of  the  civil  procedure code,  when an appeal  lies to this Court.  The remedy of  the  revision petitioner is to file an  appeal.  We accordingly permits him  to convert the  revision petition into civil  Miscellaneous second Appeal  and direct the appeal to be heard by a single judge  in usual course.  Two weeks time  is granted to the petitioner to convert the  civil  revision petition   into civil Miscellaneous second  Appel  No costs of  reference.
13. Order accordingly