[Cites
18
, Cited by
3
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Teluguntla Hema Bala Sundari And Ors. vs Pandiri Sakuntalamma And Ors. on 6 August, 1982
Equivalent citations: AIR1983AP49, AIR 1983 ANDHRA PRADESH 49
JUDGMENT
1. Questions of considerable  importance fall for discussion and decision  in this civil miscellaneous appeal  which arises out of proceedings in execution.  Broadly  stated they are:
(i)  Whether a charge created  by the operation of S. 55 (4) (b) of the T.P. Act for  the unpaid  purchase money in a decree for specific  performance  can be enforced by bringing the property to sale without a further suit under O. 34,  R. 14 of the civil  P.C.
(ii)  Whether an application under section 47 of the civil  P.C. is maintainable when the issue involved for decision is not one arising between  the parties to the  suit in which a decree was  passed, but one arising between two auction purchasers representing the  same person in different suits?
(iii)  Whether the Doctrine of Lis pendens incorporated in
s. 52
of the T.P. Act can be  invoked to invalidate involuntary alienations such as execution sales to enforce a compromise decree in a suit then pending?
2.   The essential and relevant facts giving rise to the questions may be briefly stated:
One Teluguntla yesoda  Ratnam obtained a decree for money in c.S. No.  108  of 1971  on the file of the  subordinate Judge's Court, vijayawada, against  her husband Teluguntla sundara satyanarayana Rao, and his minor son teluguntla Balakrishna venkata prakash in execution of the decree she filed E.P.  No. 21 of 1972  and brought the property of the  judgment-debtors to sale.  The  property was put to auction on 14-9-1972.  The decree-holder became the auction-purchaser.  The  sale was confirmed on 23-10-1972 and the  decree-holder took delivery of the property on 6-12-1972  under the delivery receipt. Ex A-4  she has  been in possession and enjoyment of the  said  property since then.
3.  Teluguntla sundara satyanarayana rao and his  minor son teluguntla Balakrishna Venkata prakash judgment debtors in O.S. no. 108  of 1971  had earlier filed O.s. No.  78  of 1966 before the Court ofthe subordinate judge,  vijayawada, against pandiri sakuntalamma and two others for specific performance of an agreement of sale  dated 1-4-1965  and for a direction to the said pandiri sakuntalamma to execute the registered sale deed.  The suit  was decreed on 4-10-1966 and sakuntalamma was directed to execute  the sale  deed and also pay the  costs.  Against the said decree.  Sakuntalamma filed an appeal,  A.S. No. 474 of 1968  in the High Court  the matter was compromised on 14-9-1970  and the compromise  decree, Ext, A-1, was accordingly passed.
Even before the compromise decree Sakuntalamma executed the sale deed on 30th March, 1968.  She  filed an Execution petition E.P. 158  of 1973  in O.S. No. 78  of 1966 to recover the unpaid  purchase money due under the  compromise decree against  Teluguntla sundara satyanarayana Rao and his minor  son, Teluguntla Balakrishna venkata prakash.  It appears, yesoda Ratnam,  meanwhile created an equitable mortgage on the  property in favour of one  Shaik Raza Ahmed.  The transferee of the said mortgage, filed E.A. No.  38 of  1975  to raise the attachment.  It was dismissed on 22-4-1975  in  the Court auction Mandavalli  chalapathi  Rao become the auction purchaser at the said auction.
4.  Teluguntla yesoda Ratnam, the  plaintiff in O.S. No. 108  of 1971,  filed E.A. No. 839  of 1975  in O.S. No. 78  of 1966 on 30-6-1975  under
S. 47
of the civil  P.C. to set aside the sale on the ground that P. Sakuntalamma had no right to bring the  property to sale,  which was already sold and delivered to her on 6-12-1972 in execution of the  decree obtained by her in O.S. No. 108  of 1971  and tha the  sale  held behind her  back was vitiated by fraud and misrepresentation.   She  also prayed for postponement of the  confirmation of sale till the  disposal of her application, which was ordered.  In her application,  she  impleaded the decree- holder and the auction-purchaser in O.S. No. 78 of 1966  as respondents 1and  2  and the common judgment-debtors in O.S. No. 108 of 1971 and O.S. No. 78 of 1966, who are no  other than her husband  and minor  son as respondents 3 and  4.
5.  The application was resisted by sakuntalamma and chalapathi  rao, R-1 and R-2 respectively.  Contending that the decree in O.S. No. 108  of 1971 as well as the  execution proceedings have been collusive and stage managed in favour of the petitioner and her husband  have been staying together allthrough and that  the  petitioner and her husband have been staying  together  allthrough, and that  the  petition schedule  properly  was sold  for the realisation of the unpaid purchase money, for which admittedly the property stood as first charge under the  provisions of
S. 55
of  the T.P. Act.  It was also contended on behalf of th respondents 1 and 2 that unless the decree in O.S. No. 78 of  1966   was satisfied, no subsequent  purchaser whether  under  a decree or under a document   inter vivos  will acquire  a right superior to that of the  decree-holder in O.
S. 78
of 1966 and that the  allegation that the decree-holder played fraud in the conduct  of the  sale  was absolutely false since the petitioner and her husband, the judgment-debtor in O.S. No. 78 of 1966 were staying in the same house.  It was also contended that the application in execution under
S. 47
, Civil P.C. and O. 21 R. 90.
C.P.C
. was not maintainable.
6.  The  learned subordinate judge held that the application schedule property stood as the first  charge for the satisfaction of the unpaid purchase  money under the compromise decree,  Ex. A-1 dated 14-9-1970  in O.S. No. 78 or 1966 and the lien of the vendor was not  extinguished by the date of the  sale, which could  only be  after the decree was satisfied.  The  learned subordinate judge also held that the case of the petitioner that she was not  aware of the charge in respect of the  unpaid purchase money was understandable,  since she is  no other  than the wife of  the  judgment-debtor living with him in  the suit   Schedule  house and that the case of the  decree-holder.  Pandiri Sakuntalamma in O.s. No. 78 of 1966, that the petitioner has been set up  to defraud the decree-holder cannot be untrue.  As regards the maintainability of the  Application under
S. 47
of the civil P.C. the learned Judge held that the application of this type was not maintainable.  Consequently the application of the  petitioner was dismissed.
7.  During  the pendency of the  application, the petitioner teluguntla yesoda ratnam died and her legal representatives were brought on record.  The legal  representatives of the  petitioner have now  preferred  this present  appeal.
8.  The learned counsel for the appellants, Mr. T. Veerabhadrayya, submits that the amount due under the compromise decree, Ex. A-1, was not impressed  with the character of unpaid purchase money.   That it wasonly a decree for money, that there was no  charge created by the operation of law, the  provisions of
S. 100
of the T.P. Act and  O. 34 Rr.  14 and 15
of the C.P.C
would  apply and that the charge  could not be enforced without prior suit  under O. 34, R. 14,
C.P.C
. on the other hand  the  learned Advocate General appearing for  the second respondent and Mr. C. Narasimhacharya, advocate for hte  first respondent maintain that the  sum of Rs. 750/-  agreed to be paid  under the  compromise decree in O.s. No. 78 of 1966 by the  petitioner can only represent the  additional purchase money and that there has been no evidence adduced on behalf of the petitioner to establish that the said  amount agreed to be paid under the compromise decree represents some amount other than additional sale  consideration.
In the absence of any evidence argues the learned Advocate general, the said amount should be deemed to partake the character of additional sale consideration.  The amount paid by the  petitioner, as long as it remained in Court deposit, continued to be the  money of the vendor, that the sale  deed executed by the first respondent only recites that the amount has been deposites in Court,  that even during the pendency of the appeal, the money in deposit   continued  to be the vendor's money and in case the first respondent's appeal had been allowed, the vendor would have taken back the money.  So goes the argument of the learned Advocate General.  Since the compromise decree itself  states that the decree shall be executed through Court.  It is  submitted, the  respondent could  enforce the decree for the  unpaid purchase money without  filing any suit  the further argument  of the learned counsel for the  respondents 1 and 2 is that the sale  in favour of the  petitioner was hit by the  provisions of
S. 52
of the T.P. Act asteh purchase by the  petitioner of the property in  question was admittedly during the pendency of the  lis between the first respondent and  respondents 3 and 4 in O.S.  No. 78 of  1966.  The learned counsel for  repondent 1 and 2 also tried to sustain the  finding of the Court below that  the  execution application was not maintainable under S.  47,C.P. C.
9.  The pivotal point of  the  controversy between the parties in this  appeal is whether a charge created  by the  operation of the S. 55 (4) (b) of the T.P. Act for the  unpaid  purchase money in a decree for  specific performance can be enforced by  bringing the property to sale without a further suit under O> 34, R. 14 of the civil P.C.
10.  The second point is whether  the  application is  maintainable under
S. 47
of the civil P.C when the dispute is one between rival auction-purchasers who represent the same  person in different suits, and lastly whether the  Doctrine of Lis pendens incorporated in
S. 52
of the T.P. Act can be involved to  involuntary alienations such as  execution sales to enforce a compromise decree in a suit then pending.
I.  Decree for specific performance under
S. 35 (c)
of the specific Relief Act;
S. 55 (4) (b)
of T.p. Act; O. 34. Rr. 14 and 15 of the civil P.C. &
section 100
of the T.P. Act- Applicability:
II.  Ths suit  O.S. No. 78 of 1966 was one for  specific performance of an agreement of sale dated 1-4-1965  and for a direction tot he first respondent before us to execute a registered sale deed.  The suit was  decreed on 4-10-1966 and the  1st  respondent was directed to execute the sale  deed within one month from the  date of the decree and  also pay costs of the suit.  Against the  said decree the first respondent preferred A.S. No. 474  of 1968  to this  Court.  While the appeal was pending respondents 3 and 4 attached the purchase money lying in deposit in the Court in execution of the decree  for  costs and  recovered a sum of Rs. 3,000 and  odd.  A balance of Rs. 23,000 and odd was left inn  deposit in Court towards purchase money.  A compromise decree.  Ex.  A-1  was passed in the appeal on 14-9-1970. The compromise decree in A.s. no. 474  of 1968  is to the  following effect:
"(1)  that the appeal and cross-objections be and  hereby are dismissed;
(2)  that the  respondents (plaintiffs)  shall pay to the appellant (1st defendant) a sum of Rs. 750  (Rupees seven hundred and fifty only)  within four months from the date of this  order in default  the respondent (plaintiffs)  do also pay the  interest at 5 1/2%  per annum on the  aforesaid sum of Rs. 750 till the date of  realisation and  the said decree shall be executed through the Court:
(3)  that  the  parties shall have no further claims as against  each other; and
 

(4)  that each party to bear its own costs both in the High Court  and the Court below".
11.  It is thus clear that unde the compromise decree the plaintiffs in the suit, Viz respondents 3 and 4 were directed to pay a sum of Rs. 750  to the defendant - 1st respondent.  What does this sum represent? It can only  partake the character of sale consideration in the absence of any evidence as to what it represents because the suit is one for  specific  performance of agreement of sale.  Further  the compromise decree recites that the  plainiffs shall also pay the  interest at  5 and half % per annum till the  date of realisation  and that the said decree shall be executed through Court.  Moreover, the  plaintiffs had also with drawn the costs from out of the purchase money lying in deposit in the Court  The balance left in deposit in the Court towards purchase money was only Rupees 23,380-75  Ps.  After  the compromise decree the plaintiffs never made good the balance of the purchase money.  The sale  deed had been executed by the  defendant on 30-3-1968.  Thus a part of  the sale consideration remained unpaid  under the compromise  decree.
Section 55 (4)  (b)
of the T.P. Act provides that  the seller shall be entitled where the  ownership of the  property  has passed on to the  buyer before  payment of the  whole of the  purchaser money, to a charge upon the property in the hands of the buyer for the amount of the unpaid purchase money  and for interest on such amount  from the date on which the possession had been delivered.  Therefore by the  operation of
S. 55 (4) (b)
the seller had the  first charge on the property that was passed on to the buyer.  But the question is, whether the seller can enforce the charge without further suit under o.34, R. 14
C.P.C
.  the question does not appear to be free from difficulty.
12.   The learned counsel Mr. Veerabhadrayya submits that a  charge even If it is a statutory charge, falls within the sweep of
S. 100
of the T.P. Act, that the provisions of
S. 67
of the T.P. Act are applicable to a charge-holder and he, like a simple mortgage is entitled to sue for the sale of the charged property.  He submits that O. 34, R. 15 of the  civil P.c. provides that all the  provisions contained in that order which apply to a simple mortgage shall also apply to a charge within the meaning of
S. 100
of the T.P. Act and a suit for a preliminary decree under O. 34  R. 14 would alone be the  remedy in such a case.  He  placed   reliance on the decision of the Madras High Court  in
Vuddagiri Ammanna v. Gada
subbayya, (1935)  69  Mad  LJ  854, and  of this Court in
Maddali Tiruvengalam v. Saladi Ammanna
, .
13.  In the first of the two cases, the  Madras High Court  held that in a case whether the decree was one for payment of money and declared that the plaintiff had a  charge on the schedule property,  the decree-holder could not bring  the property to sale without getting  a preliminary decree  for sale  under O. 34,  R. 14,
C.P.C
.  That was a case where the  plaintiff brought a suit  on promissory note executed by the  defendants.  A decree was granted  for the  amount claimed against  the defendants with costs  and a charge was also given on the  properties, for the  amount of the decree which was admitted to be the unpaid purchase money.
14.  In the  second case, again the  decree was  one  on the foot of a promissory note executed by the defendants  in respect of unpaid purchase money.  Chandrasekhra sastry. J., held that the  decree-holder could not bring the property to sale without getting  the  preliminary decree for sale  under O. 34,
C.P.C
.   The learned Judge observed that the decree did not create the charge but  merely declared it i.e., declaring  statutory charge.  It is clear from these  decisions that   the  decrees  there are money decrees and they merely declared  the statutory charge on hte property.  So the  procedure in order 34 is found to be applicable  for  thier enforcement.  But  the decree in this  case is a decree for specific  performance of an agreement of sale.  It is not merely declaratory.  It is  executable.  It confers rights and  reliefs on both the parties to the suit.
The right to the relief is not possessed by the plaintiff alone.  It may and not unfrequently, happen that after the decree has been passed for specific performance of contract, some further relief becomes necessary in consequence of one or the other of the parties committing default in the  performance of  something which ought under the decree to be performed by him or on his part as for instance where a vendor  refuse or is unabl eto execute a proper conveyance of the  property, or a purchaser to apy the  purchase money.  In the event of any breach of the  express terms of the  decree by any one of the parties the party can enforce the decree.  Further the decree itself here so provides and is therefore enforceable without a further suit.  The view taken by the  madras High Court in Akshayalingam pillai v. Avayambala Ammal, AIR  1933 mad  386  also accords with our view To  the same  effect are the  decisions of the Bombay High Court in bai karim Bibi v. Abde raheman, AIR  1923  Bom 26 and of the calcutta High Court in herambha chandra Maitra v. Jyotishchandra sinha, AIR  1932 Cal 579.  II Maintainability of the application under  s. 47 of the civil  P.C.
15.  The learned Advocate-General argues that  an application under
S. 47
is not maintainable as the dispute is one between two rival auction  purchasers who represent the same  person in different execution sales.  On the other hand, Mr. Veerabhadrayya the  learned counsel for the appellant asserts that the application clearly falls under
S. 47
, C.P.c. and that the section  ought to  be construed liberally.  According  to  him, the petitioner is only a representative of the judgment-debtor in this  suit i.e., respondents 3 and 4 and the  question is one relating to execution.
16.  To attract the  provision of
S. 47
of the civil P.C., two  conditions must be fulfilled. (1) the Question  must be one arising between the parties to the suit  in which the  decree was passed or their  representatives.   (2)  the said  question must relate tothe execution,  discharge or satisfaction of the decree.  Under Expln. II to
S. 47
a purchaser of property under an execution of sale  shall be deemed to be a  party to the  suit  in which the decree was passed.
17.  One  of the essential conditions for the applicability of the section is, that the question arising in the  application must be one between the parties to the suit in which the decree was passed or their representatives.  Now let us proceed to examine the facts in this application  filed by the  petitioner under
section 47
,  c.P.c. and test  the soundness of the  petitioner's plea.
18.  The petitioner is the decree-holder in O.S. No. 108  of 1971  on the file of the subordinate Judge's Court, vijayawada.  She  obtained a money decree against her husband and minor son who are respondents 3 and 4.  In execution of  the decree, she  filed E.P.No. 21 of  1972   and brought the property of the  Judgment-debtors to sale. With  the permission  of the  Court she  purchased the property in a Court auction on 14-9-1972  and took delivery  of the  property under a delivery note dated 6-12-1972.  Thus the decree   was satisfied in O.s. No. 108 of 1971.   The first respondent is the decree-holder in O.s. No. 78 of  1966, a suit  for specific performance of an agreement of sale dated 11-4-1965, the decree for specific performance was passed on 14-9-1970.  In execution of the said  decree in E.P. No. 158  of 1974  the same  property was sold on 24-4-1975 respondents 3 and 4 are the  judgment-debtors.  The second respondent is the  auction-purchaser.
The petitioner then filed this application under
S. 47
C.P.c. to declare that the auction-sale in favour of the second respondent was illegal and  void.  Pending disposal of the sale she obtained stay of confirmation of the  sale.  It is thus clear and as distinct as cheese from chalk that the dispute is not between the parties to the suit.  The petitioner is undisputedly not a party to  the suit O.S. No. 78 of 1966.  The dispute is between two auction-purchasers viz., the petitioner and  the 2nd  respondent in different suits.  But  the  learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner is the decree-holder and auction-purchaser and  so retains the character of decree-holder in O.S. No.  108  of 1971.  We  think  not.  The decree in O.S. No. 108   of 1971 had already been satisfied by delivery of possession of the  property to her on 6-12-1972.  Nothing further remained to be done in  execution of her decree.  So she was  no longer the decree-holder and remained to be an auction-purchaser.  Therefore, the  proceedings in the presetn application do not relate to execution or satisfaction of  the decree obtained by her in O.S. No. 108 of 1971.  On the  other hand, the  application relates to her right to the  property for which the remedy lies in a separate suit and not in an  application under sec. 47 of the civil  P.c.
19.  A special Bench of the madras High Court in Krishna Iyer v. Subramania Iyer AIR  1939  Mad 369  held that a suit alone was a  proper remedy for the assignee of the  decree-holder auction purchaser to recover the possession and not an  application under
S. 47
, c.P.C.  In that case, the decree-holder in execution of the decree purchased the property was in possession of a tenant of the Judgment-debtor. Subsequent to the auction sale the  tenant surrendered the possession of the  property to the judgment-debtor.  The  suit for possession was brought against the judgment-debtor by the  assignee of the decree-holder auction -purchaser the learned judges held that "as soon as the   auction sale took place, the  judgment-debtor's  rights in the property ceased and when his tenant surrendered the possession to him he went into possession without  any rights.  He was no longer the judgment-debtor but a  trespasser.  Hence the suit for possession against him by the  assignee  of the  decree-holder auction-purchaser did not fall wihtin  the purview of
sec. 47
and therefore was not barred by that section".
20.
In puthiya veettil chandanathil
Mukkayi v. Thottathi
parambil  pathavumma,   Krishnaswami nayudu, J. Observed that when  a decree-holder auction-purchaser got  posession of the property, there was  nothing that remained to be done  in furtherance of the  excution of the  decree and therefore the application under
S. 47
, C.P.C. subsequently to recover possession from  him was not maintainable  since  it would  not be an application for execution satisfaction  or discharge of the  decree.
21.  The Supreme Court  in harnandrai
Badridas v. Debidutt
bhagwati Prasad   also held  (at P. 2426):
"After all, a  decree-holder purchases the property in execution of his  decree with the  permission  of the  Court.  There  is no reason why he should  not retain his character  of a party to the  suit until the delivery of possession to him of the property purchased by him".
It is  thus clear that a  decree-holder will shed his character as  such moment the execution of the decree is over.  In  a case  where he is the  auction-purchaser,  he only retains the character of a party to the suit until the possession of the property purchased by him had been delivered to him.  There is no dispute that  the petitioner took delivery of the property purchased by her on 6-12-1972.  Therefore she shed the character as a decree-holder.
22.  The learned counsel, however, submits that
sec. 47
should be liberally construed as it has been enacted for the  purpose of checking  endless litigation and eliminating unnecessary delay which a fresh trial might entail.  He invited our  attention  to the decision of the privy council in prosunno coomar sanyal v. Kasi Das Sanyal, (1892)  19 Ind App 166 Which  was cited with approval in harnandrai
Badridas v. Debidutt Bhagwati
prasad   (supra).  The Supreme Court observed: "
S. 47
in our view should be construed liberally.  As far back in 1892  (1892) 19 Ind App 166 (pc) the privy council spoke strongly in favour of puttin a liberal construction on sec. 244 of the  code of civil procedure of 1882  which corresponds to
sec. 47
of the code of 1908.  The privy council reiterated this in ganapathy v. Krishnamachariar, (1918)  45  Ind App 54:  (AIR  1917 PC 121)."
So construed the petitioner would not cease to be a  decree-holder, pleads the learned counsel.  We are unable to accede to this contention what then is the capacity of the  petitioner? She can  only be a  representative of her judgment-debtor, respondents 3 and 4.  The  2nd respondent as the auction-purchaser in O. S. No. 78 of 1966  is also a representative of the judgment-debtors, respondents 3 and 4.  Therefore, the  dispute relates to the rights to two rival  auction-purchasers representing the  same party in different suis.  Such a question in our view will not fall within the  ambit of S. 47, c.P.C.
23.  A Full Bench of the madras High Court  in thondam
Annamali Mudali v. Tiruttani
ramasami Mudali, AiR  1914 mad 161 held that when the dispute between two persons who both represent the same party, the aggrieved party's remedy in such a case is only by way of a suit  or their representatives, but a contest between  the persons claiming under one of the  parties the case does not fall within the  decision of the  Judicial committee in (1892)   IlR 19 cal 683  (PC)  (P.K. Sanyal's case ) and this being the  position the dispute cannot be settled in an application under
S. 47
C.P.C."
24.  The dispute there, as here is not one between the parties to the suit or their representatives, but one between the petitioner and the 2nd respondent both of whom claim under one of the  parties to suit  in O.S. No. 78 of 1966 viz., respondents 3 and 4 Therefore the application under
section 47
C.P.C is not maintainable the learned counsel for the appellant made some what feeble attempt to contend that the 2nd respondent was not a representative of the judgment-debtor since the sale was not confirmed in his favour and that the question in this case was only between the decree-holder and the Judgment-debtors.  In support of  his  submission, he relied on a decision of the madras High Court in official Receiver, Tirunelveli v. P.R. M. &Co.  Wherein it was observed that the auction-purchaser's title remains unprotected until the sale is confirmed.   But in that case, the dispute was between the Judgment-debtor  and the  decree-holder in the suit unlike here.  Moreover, the  confirmation of the sale was interrupted by the  intervention of the petitioner.  Therefore, we are unable  to agree that the contest in the application is one between the judgment-debtor and the decree-holder in the suit.  We  accordingly hold that  the application of the petitioner under
S. 47
, C.P.C. is not maintainable.
III.  Applicability of the  doctrine of Lispendens:
25.  The learned counsel for the respondents question  the very validity of the sale in favour of the  petitioner in O.s. No. 108 of 1971.  They plead that the sale in favour of the petitioner is hit by the doctrine of Lis pendens.  The Doctrine which is incorporated in
S. 52
of the the T.P. Act reads:
"52.  During the pendency in any Court having authority within the limits of India excluding the state of jammu  and Kashmir or established beyond such limits by the central Government of  any suit or proceeding which is not collusive and in which any right to immoveable property is directly and specifically in question, the  property  cannot be transferred or otherwise dealt with by any party to the suit or proceeding  so as  to affect the rights of any other party thereto under any decree or order which  may be made therein, except under the authority of the Court and   onsuch terms as it may impose.
Explanation:for the purposes of this  section the pendency of a suit or proceeding shall be deemed to commence from the date of the presentation of the plaint or the  institution of the proceeding in a Court of competent jurisdiction,  and to continue until the suit or  proceeding has been disposed of by a final decree or order  and complete satisfaction or discharge of such decree or order has been obtained, or has become  unobtainable by reason of the  expiration of any period of limitation prescribed for the  execution thereof by any law for the  time being in force".
26.  The principle of the maxim pendente lite nihil innovetur is incorporated in the section.  The section provides that during the pendency of any suit in which hte right to immoveable property is in question, neither party to the litigation can  transfer or otherwise deal with such property so as to affect the rights of the opponent.
27.  The Explanation makes it clear that the  Lis shall be deemed to commence from the  date of the presentation of hte plaint and  to continue until  the suit or proceeding has been disposed of by a final decree or order, and complete satisfaction or discharge of such decree or order  has been  obtaned.  In  this case, the Lis in respect of the immoveable property commenced by the  institution of the  suit O.S. No. 78 of 1966 and continued till the date of the  sale to the  petitioner on 14-9-1972.  The compromise decree was entered into  on 14-9-1970  the decree had not been satisfied by the  date of the sale on 14-9-1972.  The property was sold in execution of the decree on 24-4-1975.
28.  It is, However, contended on behalf of the appellant that the Doctine of Lis pendens is not  attracted to the case of a suit which resulted in a compromise  decree.  According to the learned counsel, the  compromise decree is a creature of an agreement on which it is  based and  is subject to all the  incidents of such agreement.  Only the principles governing the construction of a contract can be applied to  such an agreement.  In support of the submission, our attention is invited to the  decision of the Allahabad  High Court in Habib mian v. Mukhtar Ahmad,   (FB) . there the question of applicability of the doctrine of Lis pendens did not  arise for decision.
29.  The privy council in gouri Dutt maharaj v. Sukur Mohommed, AiR  1948  PC 147  enunciated the rule that the  Doctrine of Lis-pendens is applicable even to a    suit which  resulted in a compromise decree, provided the other requirements of
S. 52
of the T.P.  Act are satisfied.
Section 52
of the T.P.  Act or
S. 2 (2)
to the civil P.C.  draws no  distinction between a contested decree and a compromise decree.  We have no hesitation  to hold that a transfer pendente lite, whether the decree is on  contest or result of a compromise falls within the mischief of
S. 52
of the T.P. Act.
30.  Even after the transfer is  hit by
S. 52
of the T.P. Act, it is maintained that hte charge created on the  property cannot be enforced having regard to the provisions of
Sec. 100
of the T.P. Act,  since the transfer is for consideration and wihtout  notice of the charge.  It  is  now well  settled that the  principle  of Lis pendens applies where the plaintiff seeks to enforce a pre-existing  charge and the  transfer  pendente lite is not protected by
S. 100
of T.P. Act.
31.  A Division Bench of the madras High Court in
Arunachalam v. K. N.  Lingaiah
,   had occasion to consider the combined effect of Ss. 52  and 100 of  the
T.P. Act
.  That was a case of compromise decree, but the decree was not satisfied.  Before the decree was satisfied,  there was a  purchase of the  property by a third party.  The learned judge observed (at P. 72):
'reading
S. 100
in conjunction with
S. 52
of the T.P. Act, it will be seen that a purxhase of properties subject to a charge created by a compromise decree the satisfaction or discharge of which has not  been obtained or has not  become barred by limitation does not  get  any assistance from the proviso to
S. 100
of the Act even though he is a purchaser  for value without notice of the charge.  So long as the decree is not satisfied and is kept alive.  The  purchase is hit by the  rule of lis pendens irrespective of whether  the purchase is a bona fide transaction or not'.
In this case, the purchase by the petitioner was before the compromise decree was before  the compromise decree was satisfied .  Therefore the sale is clearly hit by the provisions of
S. 52
of the T.P. Act.
32.  It is also equally well settled that  the  Doctrine incorporated in
section 52
of the T.P. Act is applicable to involuntary sales also.  The Supreme Court in samarendra nath sinha v. Krishna Kumar nag.   held that it is true that
S. 52
does not  strictly apply to involuntary alientations like Court sales but principle  of lis pendens applies to such alienations.
33.  Mr. T. Veerabhadrayya, however, submits that the  compromise  decree does not relate to immoveable   property but a money decree and  so  the sales  in favour of the  petitioner was not  hit by  the provisions of
s. 52
of the T.P. Act. As already noticed the suit  O.S. No. 78  of 1966 was a suit for specific performance of a contract of sale  of immoveable property.   The charge was in respect of the  unpaid purchase money.  We,  therefore, see no real substance in the contention of the learned counsel.  One arrow, if fatal, is fatal enough.  The  mischief of
S. 52
of the T.P. Act  shoots at the  foundation of the  application in the case.
34.  In the result, the appeal fails and it is accordingly, dismissed with  costs.
35.  The learned counsel for the  appellant makes an   oral application for  leave to appeal  to the Supreme Court.  In our opinion no substantial question of law of general  importance which  requires to be decided by the Supreme Court in involved in this case.  Therefore, the  request is rejected.
36. Appeal  dismissed.