[Cites
12
, Cited by
4
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Barnikana Appalanaidu And Ors. vs Barnikana Appayyamma on 15 September, 1982
Equivalent citations: AIR1983AP177, AIR 1983 ANDHRA PRADESH 177
JUDGMENT
1. An  extent of Ac. 0. 62 cent's in T.s. No. 807-2l of Anakapalle town was subject matter of land acquisition in respect of which the land  acquisition officer made his award no. 81/ 76 Dt. 6-8-1976.  During the award enquiry there was a  dispute regarding  the compensation,   between the respondent (8th claimant) who  is the owner  of  the  land and the appellants (claimant 3 to 5) in whose  favour the respondent and two others executed the sale  agreement Ex. B-3  dated 14-5-1975  agreeing to sell the property to them for Rs. 5,800/- and the  appellants have taken  possesion of the property in terms of the said  sale agreement Ex. B-3.  The respondent disputed the truth of  Ex. B-3  agreemtn.  In view of the  dispute regarding the entitlement of the parties to receive the compensation amount of  Rs. 17,254-55 ps.,  the land  acquisition officer made the reference to the civil Court under S. 30 of the land acquisition. Act. That reference was tried by the II addl.  Subordinate Judge,  visakhapatnam, in O.P. No. 40/77.  The  learned subordinate Judge found as  of fact that  Ex. B-3 agreement is true and  the appellants have take possession of the land in terms  thereof and were in  possession of the land by  the date of the acquisition.  In this  appeal, the  correctness of  this   finding has not  been  disputed by the respondent.
2.  The appellants  stand  with reference to the  compensation amount is that they are entitled to protect their possession under
S. 53-A
of the T.P. Act; out of the sale  consideration of Rs. 5,800/-  they have paid already the sum of  Rs.  5, 300/-  and had to pay only the  balance of Rs. 500/-  at the time of the registration of the sale deed;  they were always prepared to perform their part of the contract; they are therefore entitled to be paid the  entire compensation amount and the right of the respondent is only to receive that balance sale price  of Rs. 500/-  out of the compensation amount.  The case put  forward on behalf of the respondent  is that consequent  on the acquisition of land, the  agreement of sale is affected  by the  doctrine  of frustration and the appellants are therefore entitled to receive back only the sum of Rs. 5,300/- with  interest at 6% per annum thereon from the date of payment till the land was taken possession, such amount totalling to Rs.  5.650-50 ps. And she is entitled to be paid the balance amount of Rupees 11,604-05 ps.  On her own behalf  and on behalf of her  daughter-in-law  and grandson who together constituted the members of a joint  family.  The learned subordinate judge placing reliance upon a bench decision of the Bomby High Court  in
M.A. Khan v. P.J.
surana   and that of  the  nagpur High Court in Mohd.  Abdul  Jabbar v. Lalmia (AIR  1947  Nag  254) accepted the contention of the respondent  and  accordingly directed payment  of the  amount of only Rs. 5,650-50 ps. In  favour  of the  appellant and the balance sum of Rs. 11,604-05 ps. In favour of the respondent.  Claimants 3 to 5 have accordingly preferred this  appeal questioning the correctness of the said  judgment.
3.  The main point that arises for determination in this appeal  is how in view  of the  truth  of Ex. B-3  agreement, the  compensation amount should be approtioned between the claimants and the respondent.  Ex. B-3 agreement  dated 14-5-1975  which was executed not only by the  respondent but also by her  daughter-in-law and her grandson appala Naidu, Minor represented by his mother and antural guardian Mangamma, in favour of the appellants reads  in its  material terms as follows:-
"With a view  to  discharge our sundry debts and for our  family expenses, we  have agreed to sell the property to you  for Rs. 5,800/-  you have paid us this day Rs. 3,000/-  in cash.  Out of the balance of Rs. 2,800/-   you should  pay us  Rs. 2,300/-  within a month from this date and get  such payment duly endorsed on this agreement.  The  further balance of Rs. 500/-  is payable to us at the time of registration.  There is some  restriction regarding the registration in  view of the Government orders.  As soon as such restriction regarding the registration of document is cancelled, we agree to register  the document in your favour ..... you have been in possession of the property even earlier and there is therefore no need to give you separate possession of the property".
Under Ex. B-4 endorsement dated 29-6-1975,  the three vendors referred to above  have acknowledge the receipt of  Rs. 2,300/- and  reiterated that the  balance amount of Rs. 500/-  should be paid  to them at the time of registration.  It is therefore, clear from  the  aforesaid  documents that the appellants made a payment of Rs. 3,000/-  on the date of Ex. B-3  and continued to be in possession of the property in terms of the agreement thereafter  and paid a further sum of Rs. 2,300/-  in  furtherance of the contract.  The balance amount  of Rs. 500/-  was payable at the time  of registration.  Under Ex. B7 dated 14-8-1976  the  appellants communicated to the respondent, her  daughter-in-law and  her  grandson theri readiness to pay the  balance amount  of Rs. 500/-  and have informed them that the prohibition regarding the alienation of urban lands is removed and called upon them to receive the balance amount of Rs. 500/-  and execute the registered document. The  respondent and her  daughter in law received the notices  under EXs.  B- 8  and B-9 and they have sent  no reply.
The appellants have therefore  observed  all the conditions required  of them to seek protection under
section 53-A
of  the T.P. Act meanwhile   however
section 4(1)
notification under the  land acquisition Act concerning  this land was published on 13-2-1976.  Possession  of the land  under the land acquisition Act was takne by the Government on  6-8-1976, on the taking of  such possession, the  land  vested  absolutely in the Government free from  all encumbrances under
section 16
of the land  acquisition Act.
4.  One necessary consequence of
section 53-a
of the T.P. Act. Is
   

 "The transferor or any person claiming  under  him shall be debarred from enforcing  against the transferee and persons claiming under him any right  in respect of the property of which the transferee has taken or continued in possession other than a right expressly provided by the  terms of the  contract'.  The only right which  the respondent  could enforce against  the claimants was to  recover the balance amount of rupees  500/-  as against  the appellants'  the respondent cannot enforce  against them any right in respect  of the suit  property.  On the date  on which  the notification for acquisition was issued,  the respondent  was having  only the right to recover the balance sale consideration Rs. 500/-  the claimants were having  the right to continue in undisturbed possession of the land  subject only to  their  obligation to pay  to the  respondent the balance amount of Rs. 500/-  which the appellants had in fact offered to pay to the  respondent.  As a consequence of the acquisition, all private rights  in the land existing  in  favour of either the appellants or the respondent  have been extinguished but the  rights  which they respectively had in  the land  become  attached to the compensation amount In Dossibai nanabhoy
Jeejeebhoy v. P. M. Bharucha
91958-60 Bom LR 1208) , a Division Bench of the bombay High Court held:
"The land Acquisition Act is intended in the public  interest to extinguish private rights in land: it does not  purport to affect the rights of persons interested in the land  to calim a share in the compensation awarded the frustration  of the contract to lease (it was a lease transaction
in that case
)  therefore,  does not affect the rights of the second  and third claimants to apportionment of  compensation.
In this connection we may refer to the observations made by  the calcutta High Court in surendra
Nath v. Pyari
charan  (AIR  1938  cal 740) as to the  legal effect of  acquisition proceedings.  It was observed:
"The acquisition transforms the property into a  certain  sum of money but the rights of the parties relatively to this sum  ought to be the  same as they were with reference to the property.  Where a  property is subject to a  lease,  theoretically speaking   the total compensation for the property should be the  sum  total of the compensation payable  in respect of the interests of lessor and lessee'.
If  by  compulsory acquisition land is  transformed into money  we fail to appreciate why the  person  who had a  right to the land  should be denied a right in the compensation money  into which land is transformed'.
The aforesaid observations, in my view,lay down the law correctly in regard to the apportionment  of compensation in respect of  land  covered by the sale agreement which is governed by the   provisions of
section 53-A
of the Transfer of  property Act.  As a consequence of the acquisition, the  Government have acquired the right  of the respondent  to recover only the  balance sale consideration of Rs. 500/-  and the Government have acquired in the same  process the  right  of the  appellants to continue in undisturbed possession of the land  which they  have contracted earlier to purchase from the respondent.  The learned subordinate Judge felt that the  decision of a bench of the Nagpur   High Court  in Mohammad Abdul  Jabbar v. Lalmia (AiR  1947  Nag  254)  (supra) had application to the facts of  the  present case.  In that case, there was agreement for sale executed by one Noorumiya on 16-1-1934  is favour of Mohammad Abdul Sattar.   Mohammad abdul  sattar  made  an effort to register that  agreement on 14-5-1934, but it could  not be registered.
Mohammad Abdul  sattar thereafter  filed  the suit for specific performance on 15-1-1937.  Defendants 1 to 3 who were  impleaded as the heirs of Noorumiya resisted the suit on the  ground of  fraud and the 4th defendant having  executed the contract of sale.  There was a notification made  under the land  acquisition Act on 20-4-1937.  Various amounts were  referred to as having  formed  part of the sale consideration in the contract of sale.  The finding of the Court was that only Rs. 100/-  was paid as earnest money on 16-1-1934, the date on which  the contract of sale was  entered into out of the  second  item of consideration of Rs. 1056/-   due as khata balance, the  Court found that  Rs. 1000/-  out of it cannot be included.  On  merits, the  Court found  that  sepcific performance was not to be ordered.  The claim made by Mohamad abdul  jabbar, the  legal representative of Mohammad abdul  sattar, to get at the  compensation money was rejected the Court observin gthat the said mohammad abdul  sattar or his legal representative had no right or interest  in that property.  This case did not consider the rights  of parties as Government  by
S. 53
-
A of the T.P.  Act
.  Having  regard  to the facts of that case the said right was considered only as falling under
S. 54
of the T.P. Act in the  material  terms  of which a contract for the sale of  immoveable  property does not by itself create any interest in or  charge on such property.  Being so the learned subordinate Judge is not correct  in holding that the  decision in Abdul  jabbar's case (AiR  1947  nag 2540 9supra) has  any application to the facts of the  present case.
5.  I may advert to facts in Mohammad Ali khan v.
P.j. Surana
,  (supra). In  that case, as in the  present case the findings were that there was a sale agreement executed by Mohammad Ali Khan in favour of surana in respect of Ac. 30.00 of land at the rate of Rs. 4,000/-  per  acre.  Surana paid Rs. 10,000/-  and agreed to pay the balance amount of Rs. 1,10,000/-  at the  time of the execution of the sale deed surana was given possession of the property under the agreement.  The land was notified under the land acquisition Act on 25-3-1965  and possession of the land was taken by the state of maharashtra on 9-10-1965.  In  respect of that land  of the entire extent  of ac. 30.00 the land acquisition officer awarded compensation to be paid to surana. In  appeal, it was submitted for m.A. Khan that the contract of sale  has become in capable of performance and the parties are, therefore relegated to their rights under the agreement as if it  were a  mere contract for sale and that being  so, surana became entitled only to receive 1/12th of the compensation amount which, in the context would entitle surana to collect only Rs. 2,875/- as against the sum of Rs. 10,000/-  paid by  surana as earnest money to m.A. Khan the submission made on behalf of surana was that he was entitled to receive the entire compensation amount.  A reference under
S. 18
of the land acquisition Act was pending by the  date the Division Bench  of the Bombay High Court  disposed of this  dispute regarding the apportionment of compensation of Rs. 34,500/-  deshmukh, j. Speaking  for  the Bench, held   (at P. 222):-
"In  our view to a situation like this the provisions of
section 55
and more particularly sub-sec. (6) cl. (B).  Would  be attracted.  Claimant No. 2 (P.J. surana) is undoubtedly a buyer and the expression 'buyer' as used in sub-sec (6)  of
section 55
also includes a person who has agreed to buy. So far as  the  buyer is concerned, sub-sec. (6) conceives of  both the positions where  the ownership is transferred to a buyer and where  the ownership is yet to be  transferred to him.  Sub-cl.  (A) deals with a  situation where the ownership of the property is passed to a buyer.  As soon  as that  happens that buyer is entitled  to the benefit of any improvement in or increase in value of the property, and  to the rents and  profits thereof.  In other words, he is entitled to all the attributes of full ownership of the   property.  However,  where the agreement is yet to culminate  into transfer of ownership but where the buyer is willing to perform his part of the  contract, his rights are indicated in sub-cl. (B) of sub-sec.  (6) of
S. 55
".
It looks to me that the Court was faced with the necessity to adjust equities between the parties having regard to the peculiar circumstances of that case.  By the date  the  reference under
S. 30
was disposed  of by the  Bench, the  reference under
S. 18
of the land acquisition Act was still pending and there was  no knowing  about the compensation amount that would be ultimately fixed by the  civil Court.  If
section  53-A
of the T.P. civil Court.   If
section  53-a
of the T.P. Act was to be invoked  and P.J. surana was to be compensated for his right to continue in possession, he would walk away with the entire compensation amount of Rs. 34,500/-  when, in terms  of the  contract of sale,  m.A. khan had still to  receive the balance amount of Rs. 1,10,000/-  It looks to  me that it  was essentially to adjust the equities between the  parties in the peculiar circumstances of  that case, it was held that P.J. Surana should  be paid  back the amount of Rs. 10,000/-  advanced by him as earnest money with interest at 6% during the relevant period   and  the  balance amount of compensation was directed to be paid to M.A. Khan.  The observations  made in this case no doubt support the submission made by Mr. Subrahmanya narsu, learned counsel  appearing for the respondent  but those observations run counter to the observations made by another Division  Bench of the same High Court in
Dossibai Nanabhoy Jeejeebhoy v. P.M. Bharucha
, (1958) 60 Bom LR 1208 (supra).
As between these conflicting views expressed in the two decisions referred to above I feel that the  law has been laid down correctly in dossibai Nanabhoy Jeejeebhoy v.P.
M.  Bharucha
(supra) as that takes into account  the extent of  rights belonging to the claimants and the respondents in a case falling under
S. 53-A
of the T.P. Act.  To direct refund only of the amounts  paid by the  claimants to the respondents is to deny them their  right  to continue in undisturbed possession under
section 53-A
of the T.P. Act to award the  respondent any amount in excess of Rs. 500/-  which alone is payable to  her in terms of EX. B-3 sale agreement is to permit  her to  claim  a right  in respect  of the property against the express provisions under
section 53-A
of the T.P. Act debarring  her  from  making  such a  claim.  That apart the rights of parties with reference  to the  compensation amount if worked  out with reference to their individual rights in the land, subject matter of acquisition, will not result  in any anomalies.  The respondent's right is only to recover Rs. 500/- as the balance sale  consideration due to   her  in terms of Ex. B-3 sale  agreement as she still continues to be  the  owner of the land and as a  person interested in the land  she is  entitled to the solatium on Rs. 500/-  at 155 such solatium works out to Rupees 75/-  The total  compensation payable  to the respondent is therefore Rs. 575/-  the compensation amount was deposited into Court on 10-3-1977 which on verification is found not have included  the  statutory rate of interest at  4% payable  on such compensation from the date of  possession till date of  deposit.
6.  The appeal is accordingly  allowed, directing the  amount of Rs. 16,679-55 ps. To be paid to the appellants and Rupees 575/-  to be paid to the respondent. As the appellants have substantially suceeded in the appeal,  they are entitled to recovery the costs of   this  appeal from the respondent.  If the  compensation amount has been invested by the Court below  and the  amount secured on the  amounts aforesaid  may be calculated and paid to the  parties accordingly.
7. Appeal allowed.