[Cites
7
, Cited by
5
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
S. Goverdhan vs Rani Laxmidevamma College Of Arts, ... on 29 October, 1982
Equivalent citations: AIR1983AP125, AIR 1983 ANDHRA PRADESH 125
ORDER
1. The  petitioner herein seeks a writ  of Mandamus directing the first respondent to admit him in the  first year B.Com., in Telugu medium  for the  academic year 1982-1983.
2.  The relevant averments in brief as  stated in the  affidavit of the petitioner are that  he applied to the first respondent-college  for admission to the first year B.Com. on 15-7-1982   for the  academic year 1982-83.  He secured 488  marks in the qualifying examination.  A candidate with 427 marks has been  provided with a seat, whereas he has  not  been admitted.  He  further avers that he  belongs to Backward class and the rules  of admission give preferential treatment by reservation, but the said Rule has not  been implemented.  Therefore the rejection is illegal and contravenes
articles 15 (4) 46
of the  Constitution of India.  Further the first  respondent-college is  affiliated to the  osmania university and  also is admitted to grant-in-aid  since 1-4-1980  and  so is receiving funds from the  Government  of  Andhra pradesh and   therefore this court's jurisdiction is invoked under
art. 226
of the Constitution.
3.  In the counter filed by the principal of the  first respondent-college, it  is stated that the college does not come within the definition   of "Authority"   as envisaged under
Art. 12
of hte Constitution of India.  Therefore no writ lies against it.  Under the Education code,  the Act and the rules  made  thereunder,  the director  of Higher Education  is the  appellate authority against a decision made by the college.  The petitioner in fact,  has already preferred an appeal to the Director of Higher education and therefore  on this  ground also the  writ petition should  not be entertained.  It is  true that  the  petitioner passed Intermediate and secured 488  marks  and belongs to backward Class "D'  Group.  The  petitioner discontinued his studies and did not  study during the last academic year 1981-82.
4.  Sub-clause 7 of guideline-3 of the brochure annexed to the prospectus, indicates that admission will be given to students who have completed Intermediate without any break after SSC and for those  Intermediate students without  any gap after  getting  through the Intermediate  examination and in case of non-availability of such students only, the  students with break in academic studies will be considered.  Admittedly the petitioner passed Intermediate examination in June 1981  and did not pursue  his studies in hte last academic year and therefore there is a gap.  Hence he will not  be treated on par with regular students.  In fact there is heavy rush for  admission to B.Com Ist year in Telugu medium and only those who have  passed in one attempt without any gap, have been given admission.  Further, the  2nd  respondent belonging to B.C.'B' group and the  3rd respondent was given admission under   the category  of  extra-curricular activities and therefore the  grievance  made against them is not  justified No candidate with a  gap and who  has secured lesser marks than the petitioner had been accoroded admission.  It is  further avered that the petitioner is a  trouble shooter.  He entered  the college premises along with few others on 27-7-1982   and went inside the lecture  hall and  disturbed the  classes and created law and  order problem.  He also made speeches and raised slogans against the state and the Government  and a crime is  registered against  him bearing cr. No. 126/82  under Ss. 452  and 353,
I.P.C
. at Wanaparthy police station.  The petitioner absconded but  later surrendered  in the  Munsif Magistrate's Court, Wanaparthy on 28-7-1982   As per the instructions issued by the  director of  higher education in Rc. No. 263/K-I-I/80,  dt. 17-10-1980  students who were arrested by the  police for involvement in criminal cases, should be rusticated till the  cases are  decided the petitioner  has indulged in such acts even before   his admission to the  college and therefore, in oroder to maintain discipline law and  order, it is not  desirable to admit the petitioner on this ground also.  All the  seats meant for B.Com  first year have been filled up and  the  admissions are now closed.  In view of the above petitioner cannot be admitted.
5.  The  contentions of the  learned counsel for the  petitioner are  that there is no regulation or instruction by the  Government or the director of Higher Education restricting the admission to such of those students who pass the qualifying examination without any break and therefore the rule  framed by the college is  ultra vires the rule making power.
6.  Secondly, there is no rule issued by the director of Higher education not to accord admission to students against whom a criminal  case is pending.
7.   Thirdly  the defence that the college cannot be defined as an authority within the meaning of
art. 12
of the consitution is baselessas the istitution is aided by the  Government and is also regulated by various acts, Rules and Regulations issued by the  Government hence the same is controlled by the Government  and therefore  it  becomes an agent of  the  Government against whom the writ  can lie.
8.  Insofar as the first contention  is  concerned there  is force in  the contention of the  learned counsel for the  petitioner. No Rule or Regulation has been brought to my notice  which shows any  preferential claim  to  such of those students, who have passed the qualifying  examination without any break  before seeking  admission to  the  next higher course. Therfore a Rule  cannot restrict the scope of regulations that guide the college authorities to follow  the guidelines  laid down by them  in the matter of admission to the course. Hence the refusal on that basis  in my view is not justified.
9.  Coming to the next contention that the  instructions issued by the Director   of  Higher Education is that  a  student who is  pursuing  studies should be rusticated,  if a criminal case is  pending  against him.  The  admitted case of the  petitioner herein is that he is  certainly involved  in a criminal case and  that too for creating  disturbances and law and order problem  in the very college where in he is seeking  admission.  Consequently a criminal case is pending against  him  and therefore it is a fortiori case.  The  object  behind the rule is quite obvious and that is to maintain discipline and also the  standards of academic career.  Therefore, if a  criminal  case is already pending  surely the very admission  to the college must  be barred  so long as the criminal case is  pending hence the refusal  on the basis  of this ground is justified and therefore the contention of the learned counsel  for the petitioner in this  behalf fails and the same  is rejected.
10.  Coming to the  last contention that the  1st respondent-college is not an 'authority'within the meaning of Art. 12 of the Constitution   and  therefore the writ  shall not lie; the facts which are not in dispute are that the  college is affiliated to the osmania university and is also admitted to grant-in-aid by the  Government  and so receives finances from the  Government Further it is also bound  by the Act, Rules and regulations and  instructions issued by the  Government of and  on.
11.  The question hearin is whether it is an authority within the meaning of art 12 of the Constitution against which a writ  shall lie.
Art.  226
of the Constitution reads:
"226  (1)  :notwithstanding anything in
Art. 32
every High Court  shall have power throughout the territories in relation to which it  exercises jurisdiction to  issue to any person or authority including in  appropriate cases, any Government within those territories directions orders or writs,  including writs in the nature of habeas corpus mandmus, prohibition quo   warranto and certiorari,  prohibition quo warranto and  certiorari,  or  any of  them for  the  enforcement of any of the rights conferred by part  III and  for any other purpose'.
(2)   .........................
12.  So what is manifest from the  above Article  is that a  writ  can even be issued against a person or any authority and  of course in appropriate cases against  any Government also  not only for  the  enforcement of any of the rights conferred by part III  but for "any other purpose'.  While  dealings with this  aspect Justice choudary in a decision reported in
T. Gattaiah v. Commr of Labour, Hyd
. (1981)  1 APLJ  280 : (1981 Lab  IC  942)  held (at p. 949):
"The very wide and special language of
Art.  226
of the Constitution occurring  as it does in a primordial document like the  Constitution must be given its full meaning.  In doing so the  fact that the Constitution itself declares that the
General Clauses Act
would apply to its interpretation must  be given  its full  meaning.  In doing so the fact that  the Constitution itself  declares that the
General Clause Act
would  apply to  its interpretation must be taken  note  of .  According  to the  General clauses Act the word 'person' refers no only to a natural person but even to a legal person If so done there is no doubt  that a writ  under
art. 226
of the Constitution would be  available not only against  an authority or Government but also against a  private person.  The  restrictive meaning suggested to be given to the word  render  that  word a surplusage because according  to that interpretation the word person can only mean another Government authority.  The rule  of interpretation  that the meaning of a word should be ascertained from the asociation it keeps cannot therefore be applied  to the word person occurring in
art.  226
of the Constitution'.
Concurring with Justice choudary.  I have no hesitation in holding that a writ could be issued within the meaning of
art. 226
of the Constitution even against  a person let alone any authority within the meaning  of
art. 12
, as occurring in the said Article.  But,  however, I may state  that a  writ  could be issued  against  a person who seeks the writ, has sufficient legal interest.  In fact the person against.  Whom a writ is issued need not even be  a public  official or an official body.  What is sine  quo non  for  the  issue of a writ against person or authority is that   he  should be obligated to perform a public  duty.  In short, the jurisdiction under
Art. 226
springs into action whenever there is  infraction in the discharge of public duty, whether it is by a person in authority in the state.
13.  In this  case, it is the  duty of  the college authority to follow the Rules and regulations issued by the Government  and any Act at variance  causing  infraction of it, will certainly give rise to the issuance of mandamus  directing him to discharge the public duty.  The test is not as to what extent the 'Authority  oftains financial aid in its managemetn so as to amount to hold that it is controlled' or agent  of the Government .  therefore, the  respondents' contention in this   behalf  that a writ cannot lie against the first respondent has no substance and therefore the same is  rejected.
14.  In the  result the writ petition is dismissed.  No costs.
Petition dismissed.