[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Krishna Kumar Kedia vs Union Of India on 30 April, 2025
Author:
B. R. Gavai
Bench:
B. R. Gavai
2025 INSC 608




                                                                       NON-REPORTABLE


                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 280 of 2019

                               KRISHNA KUMAR KEDIA                      …APPELLANT(S)

                                                              VERSUS

                               UNION OF INDIA
                               THROUGH DIRECTOR, CBI                   …RESPONDENT(S)



                                                        JUDGMENT
AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH, J.
1. This appeal has been preferred against the judgment
                               and order dated 06.04.2018 passed by the High
                               Court of Judicature at Patna whereby appeal filed by
                               the Appellant against the order of conviction and
                               sentence dated 26.06.2015 by the Learned Special
                               Judge CBI-II, Patna stands dismissed. The Appellant
                               herein was convicted under Section 407, 420, 465,
Signature Not Verified      471 of
Indian Penal Code
, 1860 (hereinafter referred
Digitally signed by
as “
IPC
”) and punished for sentences for the said
   NARENDRA PRASAD
   Date: 2025.04.30
   18:22:43 IST
   Reason:
Criminal Appeal No. 280 of 2019                 Page 1 of 18
offences to run concurrently with fine and default
   stipulations in following manner: -
Provision      Imprisonment      Fine        In Default
Section 407
5
years RI   Rs. 25,000/-   6 Months SI
Section 420
5
years RI   Rs. 25,000/-   6 Months SI
Section 465
2
years RI   Rs. 5,000/-    3 Months SI
Section 471
2
years RI   Rs. 5,000/-    3 Months SI
2. The facts in brief leading to the registration of a case
   against the Appellant was a complaint lodged by the
   Executive Engineer, Saharsa Division stating therein
   that a supply order no. 413(E) dated 17.01.1994 has
   been placed for supply of 1091.95 MT of Bulk
   Bitumen valued at INR 54,07,920/- (Rupees Fifty-
   Four Lakhs, Seven Thousand Nine Hundred and
   Twenty Only) which, as a matter of fact, was forged
   and without proper sanction, delivery of which was
   taken by M/s Cosmo Transport from Indian Oil
   Corporation (IOC), Haldia and was required to be
   delivered to the Road Construction Department
   (RCD), Saharsa Division but was not so delivered.
Criminal Appeal No. 280 of 2019                     Page 2 of 18
3. The said complaint was registered as PS Case No.
   291/96 leading to the investigation wherein four
   persons were identified/arrayed as accused. Krishna
   Kumar Kedia, proprietor of M/s Cosmo Transport,
   the Appellant herein was the main accused and
   Maheshwari Prasad, Panchu Mahto and Bhagwan
   Prasad Poddar were accused no. 2, 3 and 4
   respectively. It would not be out of way to mention
   here that Panchu Mahto (Accused No. 3) was the
   officer who managed things and passed the working
   order     nominating      M/s     Cosmo     Transport      for
   transportation      of   the    aforesaid   Bulk    Bitumen
   whereas Bhagwan Prasad Poddar (Accused No. 4)
   was an Executive Engineer and the informant of
   Saharsa PS Case No. 291/26. Maheshwari Prasad
   was a person who according to the prosecution had
   prepared, forged and fabricated documents at the
   instance of Krishna Kumar Kedia, the proprietor of
   M/s Cosmo Transport, who was the mastermind and
   main accused in the misappropriation of the entire
   quantity of Bulk Bitumen.
4. During the course of trial, Panchu Mahto (Accused
   No. 3) and Bhagwan Prasad Poddar (Accused No. 4)
Criminal Appeal No. 280 of 2019                       Page 3 of 18
died leading to the dropping of the proceedings
   against them. Accused No. 2, Maheshwari Prasad
   was granted pardon and turned approver who
   appeared as PW-5. Appellant was thus, the only
   person who faced the trial wherein he was held guilty
   of having committed offences under
Section 407
,
420
,
465
,
471
of IPC.
5. Learned Senior Counsel for the Appellant has
   referred to the evidence of the witnesses and
   thereafter put forth the following submissions:
i) There is no evidence on record to show that the
       wrongful gain has been obtained by the Appellant
       and corresponding wrongful loss has been caused
       to the State of Bihar. The ingredients of the
       offences for which the Appellants has been
       convicted have not been proved rather the
       evidence does not support the same. No loss has
       been caused to the Government Exchequer as the
       same has not been proved by the prosecution.
ii) The mere statement of Maheshwari Prasad, (PW-
5) accused turned approver with regard to the
       forged and fabricated documents which contains
       his signatures as has been stated by him cannot
Criminal Appeal No. 280 of 2019               Page 4 of 18
be relied upon. Merely because the alleged person
       Mr. MP Sinha, the Executive Engineer had denied
       his   signatures      would   not   be   enough.   No
       independent witness has been produced such as
       handwriting expert, nor has any report been
       placed on record which would establish the
       signatures to be not that of the person concerned.
iii) The evidence which has been produced, by the
       prosecution fails to establish that the Appellant
       had any knowledge or belief with regard to the
       documents being forged which were being used for
       lifting the Bulk Bitumen from the Indian Oil
       Corporation, Haldia.
iv) Similarly, nothing has come on record which
       would establish that there was forgery and
       unauthorized order for supply of Bulk Bitumen at
       the end of the department without there being any
       demand.
v) The Indian Oil Corporation does not allow lifting
       of Bulk Bitumen without proper authorization and
       in any case after the lifting of the consignment the
       same was delivered at the godown at Saharsa with
       the receipt having been issued on the Consignee
       Receipt Certificate (CRC).
Criminal Appeal No. 280 of 2019                   Page 5 of 18
6. Prayer has thus been made for setting aside the
     conviction and sentence and acquitting the Appellant
     of the charges by allowing the present appeal.
7. Learned Senior Counsel for Appellant in alternatively
     prayed that a lenient view may be taken in terms of
     sentence, in case the conviction is upheld. She
     contends that the alleged occurrence in the present
     case is of 1993-94 i.e. more than 30 years old and the
     present case has caused tremendous mental agony
     to the Petitioner for the last more than the 25 years.
     The Appellant is 71 years old infirm person suffering
     from various old age ailments. He had already
     undergone more than 1 year and 6 months of actual
     custody period at the time of grant of bail by this
     Court.
8.   On the other hand, Learned Additional Solicitor
     General, appearing for the State has supported the
     judgement of High Court. His submissions are as
     follows: -
(i) while referring to the evidence as led by the
     prosecution and submitted that during the course of
Criminal Appeal No. 280 of 2019                 Page 6 of 18
investigation it transpired that at the instance of the
   Appellant, an Order was created to be placed for
   supply of Bulk Bitumen by forging the signatures of
   Mr. MP Sinha, Executive Engineer of Saharsa
   Division.
(ii)    The Appellant authorized two of his office
   employees namely Ashish Maity (PW-13) and Sudip
   Chakrawarti (PW-25) to lift the consignment of Bulk
   Bitumen from Indian Oil Corporation at Haldia.
These persons appeared in Court and proved the
   factum of receipt of Bitumen from the Indian Oil
   Corporation at Haldia, which was sent to Alampur,
   Kolkata. They also proved the signatures on the
   authorization letter issued and signed by the
   Appellant in their presence.
(iii)   Maheshwari      Prasad   who   was   initially   an
   accused but had turned approver, appeared as PW-5
   and admitted that he had affixed forged signatures of
   Mr. MP Sinha, Executive Engineer, Saharsa Division
   on the authority letter on various Consignee Receipt
   Certificate (CRC) on the instructions of the Appellant
   for which he was paid. The factum of the forged
   signatures on the orders for supply of Bulk Bitumen
Criminal Appeal No. 280 of 2019                   Page 7 of 18
has also been established on the admission of this
     witness.
(iv)   Apart from that, it is asserted that the
     signatures on the Orders placed for Bulk Bitumen
     were of Panchu Mahto, Director, Purchase and
     Transport, Head Office, RCD, Patna and Bhagwan
     Prasad Poddar, Executive Engineer, RCD, Saharsa
Division,    arrayed     as   Accused   No.   3   and   4
respectively, stands established on the basis of the
     evidence led by the prosecution, which factum in any
     case is not disputed as it is admitted case of the
     Appellant that it is on the basis of those orders that
     the delivery of the consignment was taken. Prayer
     has thus been made for dismissal of the appeal as
     being devoid of merit.
9.   After hearing the submission of both the parties, the
     contention of the Counsel for the Appellant cannot be
     accepted in the light of the fact that the author of the
     document Maheshwari Prasad, the approver (PW-5)
     himself has acknowledged the said fact that he had
     forged the signatures of Mr. MP Sinha, the Executive
     Engineer at the behest of the Appellant and further
     the person who is alleged to have signed the said
Criminal Appeal No. 280 of 2019                   Page 8 of 18
document has denied the signatures of being his. No
   dent has been created in the cross-examination with
   regard to the evidence led by the prosecution.
10. The case of the prosecution rests not only upon the
   evidence of Maheshwari Prasad, the accused turned
   approver     who     had       forged   and   fabricated   the
   documents on the asking of the appellant but also on
   the documentary evidence produced to substantiate
   the allegations apart from the oral evidence of the
   witnesses. As many as 26 prosecution witnesses were
   examined.
11. The case of the prosecution was that without there
   being any demand for supply of Bulk Bitumen from
   the Road Construction Department, Saharsa Division
   to the Head Office, the Head Office proceeded to issue
   a supply order No. 413(E) dated 17.01.1994 which
   was by Panchu Mahto (Accused No 3) since deceased.
   It came to light that this order had been placed
   without     taking     mandatory        approval   from    the
   Engineer-in-Chief, Road Construction Department,
   Saharsa Division. The order for transportation was
   placed by the then Executive Engineer, Bhagwan
   Prasad Poddar (Accused No. 3) since deceased with
Criminal Appeal No. 280 of 2019                       Page 9 of 18
M/s Cosmo Transport. Not only was the said bulk
   order placed but another authority letter no. 104,
   Sahasra dated 19.04.1995 for release of 10% extra
   Bulk Bitumen was also falsely created by means of
   committing forgery.
12. Therefore, the Bulk Bitumen and the 10% extra
   quantity thereof was lifted from Haldia delivery point
   and the same was siphoned off illegally. The
   documents which have been created as forged and
   fabricated at the instance of the accused were signed
   by Maheshwari Prasad. It has come in the evidence
   as also in the documents produced that 20 forged
   signatures of the Executive Engineer, Mr. MP Sinha,
   were forged by Maheshwari Prasad which were duly
   exhibited.
13. MP Sinha, Executive Engineer (PW-3) has appeared
   and denied the signatures to be his on the said
   documents and has positively stated that they do not
   belong to him. With the author of the said signatures
   (Maheshwari Prasad - PW5) having acknowledged the
   said factum of forging signatures, the prosecution
   had been successful in establishing the forgery at the
   behest of the Appellant. In the cross-examination no
Criminal Appeal No. 280 of 2019              Page 10 of 18
dent has been created with regard to the evidence of
    the witnesses.
14. Not only this, witnesses have been produced who
    were    employees/representatives   of   M/s   Cosmo
    Transport who have also acknowledged the fact that
    they had received Bulk Bitumen from Haldia on
    behalf of the M/s Cosmo Transport Company.
    Manas Saha (PW-11), an employee of M/s Cosmo
    Transport Company from 1984-95 stated that the
    company was mainly engaged in transportation of
    Bulk Bitumen. The Appellant had executed power of
    attorney in his favour and on the basis thereof, he
    used to go to the oil company wherefrom CRC,
    delivery order was being issued. He had further
    stated that he had gone with the supply order no.
    413(E) dated 17.01.1994, RCD, Saharsa Division and
    had lifted Bulk Bitumen in total quantity. Thereafter,
    he sold it to factory located at Alampur, Kolkata on
    the instruction of the Appellant. During cross-
    examination he had stated that the aforesaid Bulk
    Bitumen was sold in his presence.
15. It has also come in the evidence that after loading of
    the Bulk Bitumen, on the directions of the Appellant
Criminal Appeal No. 280 of 2019              Page 11 of 18
the vehicles were being sent to Howrah as well as
   Alampur which indicated that the Bulk Bitumen was
   not sent to Saharsa Division where it was intended to
   be delivered as per the order placed at Indian Oil
   Corporation, Haldia.           Ashish Maity (PW-13) had
   stated     that    in   the     year   1993-94,     he    was
   representative of M/s Cosmo Transport to receive
   Bulk Bitumen from Haldia on behalf of M/s Cosmo
   Transport. He further stated that after loading of bulk
   bitumen, as per direction of the Appellant the vehicle
   was being sent to Howrah as well as Alampur.
16. Sudip Chakarwarti (PW-25), had deposed that he had
   worked under M/s Cosmo Transport from 1993-97.
   Ashish Maity (PW-13) used to receive the bulk
   bitumen on behalf of M/s Cosmo Transport. He used
   to receive the same under authorization letter being
   issued by the Appellant in favour of Ashish Maity and
   Tapan Poddar. The authorization letter was exhibited
   during Trial. He had further stated that after lifting
   the bulk bitumen from Haldia, the same was sent to
   Alampur, Kolkata.
17. The factum with regard to non-receipt of the Bulk
   Bitumen      at   Saharsa       Division   has    also   been
Criminal Appeal No. 280 of 2019                      Page 12 of 18
established from the evidence of the departmental
   employees which include various Junior Engineers
   who were working at the relevant time as also the
   Assistant Engineers, who have all, on the basis of the
   documentary evidence established non-receipt of any
   Bulk Bitumen during the period when the Bulk
   Bitumen delivery was taken from Haldia.
18. PW-6, PW-9 and PW-20 are Junior Engineers who
   were posted at Saharsa Division during the relevant
   time. They deposed that after receipt of bulk bitumen
   the same is being entered in the stock register. The
   stock register of all the junior engineers of different
   sub-divisions happens to be independent. They had
   further stated that they had not received bitumen in
   pursuance       of   supply    order   no.    413(E)   dated
   17.01.1994       and    also   exhibited     Stock   Account
   Register of their respective sub-divisions. There was
   no entry inconsonance with supply order no. 413(E)
   dated 17.01.1994 because of the fact that there was
   no supply against the aforesaid order.
19. PW-7, PW-10, PW-17 and PW-18 had deposed that
   they were Assistant Engineers at RCD, Saharsa
   Division during relevant time and during their
Criminal Appeal No. 280 of 2019                     Page 13 of 18
tenure, they had not received bulk bitumen relating
   to supply order no. 413(E) dated 17.01.1994.
20. Similarly, evidence of the PW-14, PW-20, PW-22 who
   were Executive Engineers as also the PW-2, PW-15,
   the officials of the accounts branch has also come on
   record which would indicate that there was no
   demand for supply of Bulk Bitumen or that there was
   even any requirement for the same.
21. All these aspects establish the fact with regard to
   there being absence of any requirement, demand or
   even delivery of Bulk Bitumen in pursuance to
   unauthorized order no. 413(E) dated 17.01.1994 for
   supply      of   Bulk     Bitumen   relating    to   Road
   Construction Department, Saharsa Division.
22. Another aspect which comes to light is the statement
   of the Appellant recorded under
Section 313
of CrPC.
   What is apparent from his statement on perusal
   would be that the factum of an order being there for
   supply of Bulk Bitumen which was made the basis
   for receiving the supply product i.e. Bulk Bitumen
   from Haldia by M/s Cosmo Transport stands
Criminal Appeal No. 280 of 2019                   Page 14 of 18
admitted. Even the receipt of the full quantity of the
   said Bulk Bitumen stands acknowledged.
23. What has been sought to be projected by the
   Appellant is that the said Bulk Bitumen has been
   duly supplied at Road Construction Department,
   Saharsa Division. The evidence sought to be relied
   upon by the Appellant is the Consignee Receipt
   Certificates (CRCs), which, as per the evidence on
   record, is a forged and fabricated document, created
   at the behest of the Appellant and signed by
   Maheshwari Prasad (PW-5), the approver. On the
   basis of the above evidence, which has been led by
   the prosecution, the courts below having considered
   in detail the evidence have found the Appellant guilty
   of the charges levelled against him leading to his
   conviction and sentence. This is being sought to be
   challenged in the present appeal which we found to
   be without any basis.
24. As stated above, the non-receipt of Bulk Bitumen
   stands established at the end of the Prosecution
   leading to the guilt of the Appellant having been
   established.     No    admissible   evidence   has    been
   produced by the Appellant in respect of due delivery
Criminal Appeal No. 280 of 2019                   Page 15 of 18
of Bulk Bitumen to Road Construction Department,
   Saharsa Division after having taken delivery of Bulk
   Bitumen as per his own admitted case in his
   statement under
Section 313
CrPC.
25. Thus, all the offences as has been alleged to have
   been committed by the Appellant stands established
   and proved beyond doubt leaving no scope for any
   interference.
26. The findings of the Trial Court and the High Court
   with regard to conviction are affirmed.
27. As regards the quantum of punishment is concerned,
   the Appellant has been sentenced to undergo
   rigorous imprisonment for a period of five years along
   with a fine under
Sections 407
and
420
of the IPC on
   each count. In addition, the Appellant has been
   sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a
   period of two years along with a fine under
Sections
   465
and
471
of the IPC on each count. All the
   sentences have been directed to run concurrently. As
   per the record, the Appellant has already undergone
   a period of 1 year and 6 months of the said sentences.
Criminal Appeal No. 280 of 2019              Page 16 of 18
28. The offences under which the Appellant is convicted
    do not provide for any minimum imprisonment to be
    imposed and the maximum imprisonment provided
    under
Section 407
and
420
IPC is seven years.
29. The records produced before this Court indicate that
    the Appellant is a 71-year-old individual who is
    afflicted with various age-related ailments. The
    medical documentation further reveals that the
    Appellant is a diabetic person and has a history of
    having suffered three heart attacks. That apart, the
    incident is of the year 1994 i.e. more than 30 years
    old causing mental trauma and agony as faced by the
    Appellant. All these factors in the facts and
    circumstances of this case persuade us to take a
    lenient view.
30. Therefore, this Court is of the view that the sentences
    imposed under
Section 407
and
420
of IPC be
    reduced to 2 years and 6 months of rigorous
    imprisonment from 5 years with fine and default
    punishment unchanged as imposed on each count
    and to run concurrently with other sentences. This
    reduced sentence would meet the end of justice.
Criminal Appeal No. 280 of 2019                Page 17 of 18
31. It is reported that the appellant is on bail.
    The bail bonds of the appellant stand cancelled and
    he is directed to surrender within four weeks from
    today       to      serve     out     the       remaining
    sentence, failing which, the        concerned      police
    authorities shall take him into custody.
32. The present appeal is partly allowed in the above
    terms.
33. Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
……...……….……………………..J.
                                      [ B. R. GAVAI ]




                            ……..………..……………………..J.
                           [ AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH ]



    NEW DELHI;
APRIL 30, 2025
Criminal Appeal No. 280 of 2019                 Page 18 of 18