[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Ravish Singh Rana vs State Of Uttarakhand on 28 April, 2025
Author:
Sanjay Karol
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 635


                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2438 OF 2025
                              (@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRL.) NO. 2776 OF 2025)


             RAVISH SINGH RANA                                                 .… APPELLANT(S)

                                                        VERSUS

             STATE OF UTTARAKHAND & ANR.                                       … RESPONDENT(S)




                                                        O R D E R
1.       Leave granted.
2.       This appeal impugns judgment and order of the

                         High    Court    of   Uttarakhand1,     dated    11.12.2024,      by

                         which Criminal Misc. Application No. 922 of 2024

                         filed by the appellant for quashing FIR No. 482 of

                         2023 and proceedings arising therefrom, including

                         the    cognizance     order     dated   13.02.2024,      has   been

                         dismissed.
3.        Briefly stated the facts giving rise to the

                         instant appeal are as follows:
(i)    The   second    respondent      lodged   a     First
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
RAJNI MUKHI
Date: 2025.05.06               Information      Report2       at   Police       Station3
   18:02:32 IST
   Reason:
1 High Court
             2 FIR
             33 PS
Page 1 of 12
Khatima,       District           Udham        Singh       Nagar    on

          23.11.2023 against the appellant, inter-alia,

          alleging      that     on    06.02.2021,            the    informant

          got     introduced          to     the       appellant       through

          Facebook;      after       introduction,            they    began    a

          live-in relationship; during this period the

          appellant       rented        a    room        at    Khatima       and

          established physical relationship many times

          with     a    promise        to        marry      the     informant;
physical       relationship             continued         though    at

          times informant was abused and beaten; later,

          when the informant insisted on marriage, the

          appellant       refused           to     marry       and     instead

          threatened           the     informant;             and     forcibly

          established            physical              relationship           on

          18.11.2023.
(ii) The aforesaid FIR was registered under
Sections 376
,
323
,
504
and
506
of the Indian

          Penal Code, 18604
(iii)    To    quash       the     aforesaid         FIR    and    the

          consequential          proceedings,               the      appellant

          filed    Criminal          Misc.       Application        No.922    of

          2024 before the High Court by invoking its

          powers       under    Section          528   of     the    Bharatiya

          Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 20235 (equivalent to
44
IPC
55 BNSS
Page 2 of 12
section       482
of        the      Code     of   Criminal

           Procedure, 19736).
(iv)     In    the        aforesaid        application,        the

           appellant, inter alia, stated that admittedly

           both parties were adults; they lived together

           under one roof for over two years; during

           this period, they had physical relationship

           voluntarily;         and,      later,     they     codified     an

           agreement/settlement on 19.11.2023. Thus, the

           allegations         are        nothing     but     mala      fide,

           concocted      with       a     view     to     blackmail      the

           appellant      and    his       family.       Moreover,      those

           allegations have no support from any injury/

           medical report. And, in any case, an offence

           punishable under
Section 376
IPC is not made

           out.
(v)    The    High    Court       by    the     impugned     order

           dismissed the petition on the ground that the

           allegations          made       in      the      FIR   disclose

           commission      of        a    cognizable        offence      and,

           therefore, the same cannot be quashed.
(vi)    Aggrieved         by    the     order     of   the    High

           Court, the appellant is in appeal before us.
4.    We     have    heard          learned     counsel      for     the

     appellant    and     Ms.        Vanshaja        Shukla       for     the

66
CrPC
Page 3 of 12
respondents.
Submissions on behalf of appellant
5.        The contention of the learned counsel for the

     appellant         is     that   admittedly        the     parties      have

     executed      a    settlement        deed    on   19.11.2023,         which

     reads as under:
“The   agreement   has   been   made   today
           19.11.2023 between the first party (name
           and address of the second respondent) and
           the second party (name and address of the
           appellant). On the advice of the respected
           persons with the condition that both are
           living together since 12th August so we must
           conduct Mangbhari and live like husband and
           wife in the room and we would hand over our
           papers today to the Advocate to register
           their marriage and they would get the
           registration done going to the Court. If
           the second party violates the agreement,
           the legal action can be taken against us.
We both the parties know each other since
           February, 2021. We love each other.”
6.     Based    on     the     aforesaid    settlement,            the   learned

counsel for the appellant contended that the allegation

that       appellant           forcibly          established             physical

relationship         with      the    informant        on     18.11.2023      is

palpably       false.        Had     it   been     so,      the     settlement

agreement, which was entered on 19.11.2023, would not

have      stated       that     parties     love       each    other.       This

settlement      clearly        establishes        that      till    19.11.2023

there was no untoward incident, and the parties were in

love with each other.
7.     It is urged on behalf of the appellant that the
Page 4 of 12
High Court overlooked this settlement agreement, as a

result       grave         injustice          has     been      caused        to    the

appellant.
Submissions on behalf of respondents
8.      Per contra, Ms. Vanshaja Shukla, who appeared for

the respondents, submitted that the agreement clearly

stated that if marriage is not formalized then legal

action will be taken. In these circumstances, since

admittedly the marriage has not been registered and

formalized, legal action has rightly been taken against

the     appellant.         Besides           that,    the    FIR      alleges      that

physical relationship was established under a promise

of marriage and as marriage has not taken place, it was

proved       that     there    was       a    false     promise       of   marriage,

therefore         consent          for       physical       relationship           stood

vitiated. Hence, even an offence of rape is made out.

In this light, Ms. Vanshaja Shukla cited a decision of

this     Court        in   Pramod        Suryabhan       Pawar      vs.    State     of

Maharastra and Another7.
9.      We have considered the rival submissions and have

perused the materials on record.
Discussion/ Analysis
10.     An    overview        of    the       facts     makes      it   clear      that

relationship           between       the       appellant        and     the    second

respondent (the informant) had been there since 2021.

77 (2019) 9 SCC 608
Page 5 of 12
This relationship was not merely of knowing each other

but of living together as a couple under one roof in a

rented      accommodation.                 The      FIR   does    not      allege      that

physical         relationship              was        established       only      because

there      was    a        promise       of      marriage.       Besides,        physical

relationship continued for over two years without a

complaint             in     between.            In     such     circumstances,           a

presumption would arise of there being a valid consent

for       initiating               and         maintaining            the        physical

relationship that spanned over two years.
11.     In Pramod Suryabhan Pawar (supra), this Court held

that     where         the       promise       to     marry     is    false      and    the

intention        of        the    maker,         at    the     time   of    making      the

promise, itself was not to abide by it, but to deceive

the     woman          to     convince           her      to    engage      in    sexual

relations,            there       is   a      “misconception          of    fact”      that

vitiates the woman’s “consent”. However, a mere breach

of a promise cannot be said to be a false promise.

Therefore, to establish a false promise, it would have

to be demonstrated that the maker of the promise had no

intention of upholding his word at the time of making

the promise.
12.
In
Deepak Gulati v. State of Haryana8
, this Court

observed:
“21. Consent may be express or implied,
            coerced or misguided, obtained willingly or
88 (2013) 7 SCC 675
Page 6 of 12
through deceit. Consent is an act of
            reason, accompanied by deliberation, the
            mind weighing, as in a balance, the good
            and evil on each side. There is a clear
            distinction between rape and consensual sex
            and in a case like this, the court must
            very carefully examine whether the accused
            had actually wanted to marry the victim, or
            had mala fide motives, and had made a false
            promise to this effect only to satisfy his
            lust, as the latter falls within the ambit
            of cheating or deception. There is a
            distinction between the mere breach of a
            promise and not fulfilling a promise. Thus,
            the court must examine whether there was
            made, at an early stage, a false promise of
            marriage by the accused; and whether the
            consent involved was given after fully
            understanding the nature and consequences
            of sexual indulgence. There may be a case
            where the prosecutor agrees to have sexual
            intercourse on account of her love and
            passion for the accused, and not solely on
            account of misrepresentation made to her by
            the accused, or where an accused on account
            of circumstances which he could not have
            foreseen, or which were beyond his control,
            was unable to marry her, despite having
            every intention to do so. Such cases must
            be treated differently. An accused can be
            convicted for rape only if the court
            reaches to a conclusion that the intention
            of the accused was mala fide, and that he
            had clandestine motives.”
13.
In
Sonu @ Subash Kumar v. State of Uttar Pradesh
&

another9 this Court quashed the FIR and the proceedings

arising therefrom upon noticing that (1) relationship

between       appellant    and   the   second   respondent   was    of

consensual nature; (2) parties were in relationship for

a period of one-and-a-half years; and (3) subsequently,

appellant        had   expressed   disinclination    to   marry    the

second respondent which led to registration of FIR.
99 (2021) 18 SCC 517
Page 7 of 12
14.    In    the    instant      case     also,    we     find    that     the

relationship        between      the     appellant       and     the    second

respondent (the informant) was spread over two years.

Further,       they    not    only       admit    of     having        physical

relations with each other but also of living together

in a rented accommodation as a live-in couple. In our

view, if two able-minded adults reside together as a

live-in couple for more than a couple of years and

cohabit with each other, a presumption would arise that

they    voluntarily        chose    that    kind    of    a     relationship

fully       aware     of   its     consequences.          Therefore,       the

allegation that such relationship was entered because

there was a promise of marriage is in the circumstances

unworthy of acceptance, particularly, when there is no

allegation that such physical relationship would not

have    been    established        had   there     been    no    promise    to

marry.
15.    Moreover, in a long drawn live-in relationship,

occasions may arise where parties in that relationship

express their desire or wish to formalize the same by a

seal of marriage, but that expression of desire, or

wish, by itself would not be indicative of relationship

being a consequence of that expression of desire or

wish. A decade or two earlier, live-in relationships

might not have been common. But now more and more women

are financially independent and have the capacity to
Page 8 of 12
take conscious decision of charting their life on their

own terms. This financial freedom, inter alia, has led

to     proliferation          of         such       live-in       relationships.

Therefore, when a matter of this nature comes to a

court, it must not adopt a pedantic approach rather the

Court may, based on the length of such relationship and

conduct of the parties, presume implied consent of the

parties     to   be     in    such       a    relationship        regardless     of

their desire or a wish to convert it into a marital

bond.
16.    In   that    view      of    the       matter,      in    our    considered

view, the long-drawn relationship of the appellant and

the    second    respondent          including         the      circumstance      of

their living together and cohabiting with each other,

that too, in a separate rented accommodation, would

give rise to a presumption that their relationship was

based on a valid consent.
17.    The settlement agreement, dated 19.11.2023, which

is not disputed by the second respondent, points out

that    the      parties           had       been     in        love.    In    such

circumstances, we are of the view that on ground of

refusal to marry, the appellant cannot be subjected to

prosecution        for       the     offence         of     rape.       The    other

allegations        of    assault             and    abuse       have     not    been

supported by any material particulars. Even the alleged

sexual assault on 18.11.2023 is negated by the recital
Page 9 of 12
in    the    settlement   agreement    that     parties    love    each

other.
18.    For    all   the   reasons    above,    in    our   view,   the

impugned first information report and the consequential

proceedings in pursuance thereof are nothing but abuse

of the process of the court and the same deserves to be

quashed. The appeal is allowed. The impugned judgment

and order of the High Court is set aside. The impugned

first       information     report    and      the    consequential

proceedings are hereby quashed.
19.    The pending applications, if any, stand disposed

of.
............................J
                                                        [ SANJAY KAROL ]



                                            ............................J
                                                        [ MANOJ MISRA ]

NEW DELHI;
APRIL 28, 2025.
Page 10 of 12
ITEM NO.24               COURT NO.16                SECTION II-B

               S U P R E M E C O U R T O F       I N D I A
                       RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.)     No.   2776/2025
[Arising   out of impugned  final judgment  and order dated
11-12-2024 in CRMA No. 922/2024 passed by the High Court of
Uttarakhand at Nainital]

RAVISH SINGH RANA                                 Petitioner(s)

                                  VERSUS

STATE OF UTTARAKHAND & ANR.                       Respondent(s)

(IA No. 47067/2025 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED
JUDGMENT, IA No. 47066/2025 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T. AND
IA   No.   47065/2025   -   PERMISSION  TO   FILE   ADDITIONAL
DOCUMENTS/FACTS/ANNEXURES)

Date : 28-04-2025 This matter was called on for hearing today.

CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KAROL
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJ MISRA


For Petitioner(s) :Mr. Gautam Barnwal, Adv.
Mr. Ajeet Kumar Yadav, Adv.
Mr. Nishant Gill, Adv.
Mr. Saksham Kumar, Adv.
Mr. Aakash, Adv.
Mr. Mukesh Kumar, AOR

For Respondent(s) :Ms. Vanshaja Shukla, AOR
                   Mr. Ajay Bahuguna, Adv.
Mr. Siddhant Yadav, Adv.
Mr. Garvesh Kabra,AOR
                      Ms. Pallavi Kumari, Adv.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                             O R D E R
1.   Leave granted.
2.   The appeal is allowed in terms of signed reportable

order.
Page 11 of 12
3.   Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
(RAJNI MUKHI)                              (PREETI SAXENA)
ASTT. REGISTRAR-cum-PS                    COURT MASTER (NSH)
(Signed order is placed on the file)
Page 12 of 12