[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
S.D. Jayaprakash And Ors. Etc vs The Union Of India on 29 April, 2025
Author:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
2025 INSC 594                                                                      REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                   CIVIL APPEAL Nos.        OF 2025
                            ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) Nos. 19539-19540 OF 2021


             S.D. JAYAPRAKASH AND ORS. ETC.                                      ...APPELLANT(S)


                                                            VERSUS


             THE UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                           …RESPONDENT(S)


                                                     JUDGMENT
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J.
1.             Leave granted.
2.             These appeals arise from the Karnataka High Court’s order

             dated 23.03.2021 1 by which it held that the appellants, who were

             initially appointed on contractual basis and subsequently

             regularised, will not be entitled to seniority, service benefits, and

             pension for the period of their contractual service. Upon

             consideration of the relevant rules and the decision of this Court

             in
State of H.P. v. Sheela Devi
, 2 we have partly allowed the present
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
KAPIL TANDON
Date: 2025.04.29
18:42:44 IST
Reason:
1
In W.P. No. 4712/2016 (S-CAT) c/w W.P. No. 4714/2016 (S-CAT).
2
2023 SCC OnLine SC 1272.
1
appeals and directed the respondent, i.e., Union of India to grant

pensionary benefit to the appellants in accordance with law.
3.      The short facts that are necessary are as follows. The

appellants were appointed as Data Entry Operators under the Plan

Scheme called ‘Rationalisation of Data Processing Facilities’ on

temporary and contractual basis between 1996 and 1999.

Pursuant to an order of the Central Administrative Tribunal 3 dated

01.04.2013 4, the respondents issued an Office Memorandum

dated 05.01.2015 to regularise the appellants’ service from a

prospective date, i.e., from the date of issuance of this order.

Pursuantly, the appellants were appointed on a regular basis by

order dated 01.04.2015, w.e.f. 05.01.2015. The appellants

preferred an Original Application before the CAT, with a prayer to

regularise their services from the date of initial appointment or at

least from the date of completing 10 years of service, and to protect

their pay and to grant seniority, service benefits and pension by

counting their period of contractual service. The CAT allowed the

same by order dated 19.01.2016 and directed as follows:
“31. Therefore, after considering the entire facts and circumstances
      of the case, we order as follows:
3
Hereinafter “CAT”.
4
In O.A. No. 339/2011 before CAT, Bangalore. The High Court upheld the same in W.P. Nos. 57381/2013 (S-
CAT) and connected matters by order dated 22.04.2014.
2
1. The pay and other allowances drawn by the applicants prior to
      their appointment on regular basis on 1.4.2015 shall be protected and
      they shall be allowed the pay being drawn by them immediately prior
      to their regularisation as their basic pay as on 1.4.2015. Their annual
      increment shall be determined accordingly.
2. The applicants from whose salary, the GPF and other contributions
      made right from the date of their appointment on contract basis shall
      be entitled to come under the old pension scheme and the entire
      period of service right from the date of initial appointment on contract
      basis shall be counted towards pensionary benefits.
3. For the purpose of seniority, ACP and other service benefits etc.,
      the regular service of the applicants shall be reckoned from the date
      of completion of 10 years of service from their initial appointments on
      contract basis.
32. The Respondents are directed to fix the salary of the applicants
      and grant the consequential benefits in terms of the above direction
      within a period of two (2) months from the date of receipt of a copy of
      this order.”
4.     The respondents challenged the above order by way of a writ

petition, which was partly allowed by the impugned order. The

High Court set aside the CAT’s directions to the extent of counting

the period of contractual service for grant of seniority, service

benefits, and pension on the ground that the initial appointment

was     on    a   contractual      basis      and   not    pursuant      to      the

recommendation of the Staff Selection Commission. It held that

the    appellants      will   be   entitled    to   regularisation      and      its

consequential benefits only from 01.04.2015. However, the Court

upheld the CAT’s direction regarding protection of pay while fixing

the pay scale.
3
5.         We have heard Mr. MC Dhingra, learned senior counsel for

the appellants. He relied on this Court’s decision in
Sheela Devi
(supra) to contend that as per Rule 17 of the Central Civil Services

(Pension) Rules, 1972 5, the appellants would be entitled to

pensionary benefits by including the period of contractual service.
On the other hand, Mr. Vatsal Joshi, learned counsel for the

respondents has sought to differentiate
Sheela Devi
(supra) only

on the ground that the initial appointment in this case was not

against sanctioned posts.
6.         Before commencing our analysis, it is necessary to note the

scope of prayers made before the CAT and High Court, and before

this Court. The prayer before the CAT is for regularisation with

retrospective effect, protection of pay, and grant of seniority and

service and pension benefits by counting the period of contractual

service. Pursuant to the High Court’s impugned order dated

23.03.2021, only the appellants’ pay has been protected while

their prayers for seniority, service and pension benefits by

including the contractual period have been rejected. The

submissions before this Court have been limited to the grant of

pensionary benefits by including the contractual period, through
5
Hereinafter “Pension Rules”.
4
reliance on the decision in
Sheela Devi
(supra). The issues relating

to grant of retrospective regularisation, seniority and service

benefits during the contractual period have not been argued before

us. We are therefore confining ourselves to the issue of pension.
7.   Rule 17 of the Pension Rules deals with counting of service

on contract for the purpose of granting pension, which squarely

covers the issue in the present case. It is extracted below for ready

reference:
“17.    Counting of service on contract -
(1) A person who is initially engaged by the Government on a
     contract for a specified period and is subsequently appointed to the
     same or another post in a substantive capacity in a pensionable
     establishment without interruption of duty, may opt either :-
(a) to retain the Government contribution in the Contributory
         Provident Fund with interest thereon including any other
         compensation for that service; or
(b) to agree to refund to the Government the monetary benefits
         referred to in Clause (a) or to forgo the same if they have not been
         paid to him and count in lieu thereof the service for which the
         aforesaid monetary benefits may have been payable.
(2) The option under sub-rule (1) shall be communicated to the
     Head of Office under intimation to the Accounts Officer within a
     period of three months from the date of issue of the order of
     permanent transfer to pensionable service, or if the Government
     servant is on leave on that day, within three months of his return
     from leave, whichever is later.
(3) If no communication is received by the Head of Office within the
     period referred to in sub-rule (2), the Government servant shall be
     deemed to have opted for the retention of the monetary benefits
     payable or paid to him on account of service rendered on contract.”
5
8.         This rule fell for consideration and interpretation in
Sheela

Devi
(supra), where this Court held that although Rule 2(g) of the

Pension            Rules           excludes   contractual   employees   from     their

application, Rule 17 applies once such contractual employee is

regularised on a later date. The effect is that upon regularisation,

the Pension Rules become applicable and Rule 17 requires that

past service as a contractual employee is to be taken into account

for calculating pension.
6 In this light, and considering that Rule

17 requires the regularised employee to exercise an option to either

retain the Government’s contribution to Contributory Provident

Fund, or to refund such amount or forgo the same if they have not

been paid in lieu of counting the service period for which such

benefits may have been payable, this Court in
Sheela Devi
(supra)

issued the following directions:
“11. In view of the above reasoning, this court is of the opinion that
         there is no merit in the appeal however, the following directions are
         issued:-
(i) The state shall take immediate steps to indicate the mode and
         manner of exercising option by all the employees concerned (who had
         been regularized after spells of contractual employment) regardless
         of the dates on which they were engaged i.e. prior to the year 2003
         or subsequently, within a time frame, of within eight weeks from
         today.
(ii) After receiving the options within the time indicated in the notice,
         the concerned employee(s) who exercise the relevant options should
         be notified about the amounts they would have to remit in case any
         amount towards contribution is required, clearly.
6
Sheela Devi
(supra), para 9.
6
(iii) The options should be processed and completed within eight
     weeks from the last date of receiving options.
(iv) Time limit for payment too should be indicated and entire process
     should be completed within four months and all orders fixing
     pensions or family pension as the case may be, shall be issued.”
9.
In light of the clear language of Rule 17 of the Pension Rules

as well as its interpretation in
Sheela Devi
(supra), the contractual

service period rendered prior to the appellants’ regularisation in

2015 must be counted towards the payment of their pensionary

benefits in accordance with the mechanism set out in Rule 17.
In

line with the directions issued in
Sheela Devi
(supra) extracted

hereinabove, we direct the respondent Union of India to take

immediate steps and indicate the mode and manner for the

appellants to exercise the option provided under Rule 17 of the

Pension Rules as well as to notify the amounts that the appellants

would have to remit in case they opt for grant of pension under the

Rules.
10. With the above reasoning and directions, we partly allow the

present appeals arising from SLP (C) Nos. 19539-19540/2021 and

set aside the impugned order of the High Court dated 23.03.2021

in W.P. No. 4712/2016 (S-CAT) c/w W.P. No. 4714/2016 (S-CAT)

to the extent indicated hereinabove.
7
11. No order as to costs.
12. IA Diary No. 44115/2025 for bringing on record LRs of

appellant no. 21 is allowed. Pending applications, if any, stand

disposed of.
………………………………....J.
                            [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA]




                                    ………………………………....J.
                                       [JOYMALYA BAGCHI]

NEW DELHI;
APRIL 29, 2025
8