[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Amruddin Ansari (Dead)Through Lrs vs Afajal Ali on 22 April, 2025
REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 566
                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   EXTRA-ORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                         Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (C) No.11442/2023


             AMRUDDIN ANSARI (DEAD)THROUGH LRS & ORS.              Petitioner(s)


                                                      VERSUS


             AFAJAL ALI & ORS.                                     Respondent(s)


                                                    O R D E R
J.B. PARDIWALA, J.
1.             This petition arises from the judgment and order passed
             by the High Court of Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur dated 24.10.2019
             in Second Appeal No.424/2005 by which the Second Appeal filed
             by the respondents herein (original plaintiffs) came to be
             allowed and thereby, the judgment and order passed by the
             First Appellate Court reversing the decree passed by the Trial
             Court came to be set aside.
2.             For the sake of convenience, the petitioners herein shall
             be referred to as the original defendants and the respondents
             herein shall be referred to as the original plaintiffs.
3.
Signature Not Verified
The facts giving rise to this petition may be summarized
Digitally signed by
Deepak Guglani
as under:
Date: 2025.04.24
   16:48:10 IST
   Reason:
1
a. The history of this litigation goes something like this.
In the first instance, the father of the original plaintiffs
instituted a Civil Suit No.37A/1996 in the Court of Ld.
Civil   Judge,       Ramanujganj,    District-     Sarguja,     Chhattisgarh
for declaration, cancellation of sale deed and a permanent
injunction. It appears from the materials on record that the
said suit came to be dismissed under the provisions of Order
IX Rule 2 of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 (for short “
the
C.P.C
.”).      In    such    circumstances,      the   father   of   original
plaintiffs preferred an application under Order IX Rule 4
for   restoration       of   the   suit.   The    said   application   under
Order IX Rule 4 of the C.P.C
. came to be dismissed. The
matter was not carried further. The order passed by the
Trial Court rejecting the application filed under
Order IX
Rule 4 of the C.P.C
. attained finality.
b. Later, the original plaintiffs (legal heirs) instituted a
fresh suit bearing No.27A/2001 in the Court of Civil Judge,
1st   Class,        Ramanujganj,    Tehsil       Paal,   District-Sarguja,
Chhattisgarh for the same reliefs.
c. The Trial Court framed the following issues:
“1. Whether the Plaintiffs are having ownership
  right over the suit property mentioned in Appendix-A
  attached to the suit?
2. Whether the executed Sale Deed dated
  19.12.86 is having no effect on the plaintiffs being
  fake, fabricated and illegal?
3. Whether the Plaintiffs are entitled for
  grant of a decree of permanent injunction against the
  defendants with respect to the suit land that the
  Defendant Nos.1,2,3, 4 and 5 themselves and their
  relatives, friends, servants and agents be restrained
  from claiming ownership or entering into the suit
  property or creating any hindrance thereupon?
2
4.   Whether daughters of Late Rahmat Ali are
 necessary parties to the suit?
5.   Whether the principal of res judicata is
 applicable in the present suit?
6. Whether there is lesser court fee paid in
 the suit?
7. Relief and costs?”


d. All the aforesaid issues came to be answered in favour of

the plaintiffs.
e. The   original   defendants   being   dissatisfied   with   the

judgment and decree passed by the Trial Court challenged the

same before the District Court in First Appeal. The First

Appeal came to be allowed. The judgment and decree passed by

the Trial Court was set aside.
f. Being dissatisfied with the judgment and order passed by

the First Appellate Court, the plaintiffs went before the

High Court in Second Appeal.
g. The High Court formulated the following three substantial

questions of law for its consideration:
“i) "Whether the learned first Appellate Court was
 justified in holding that since the decree holder did
 not deposit the deficit court fees within the period
 allotted by the trial Court, the decree becomes in
 executable, is correct particularly in view of the
 fact that the deficit court fees has been deposited by
 the plaintiff/decree holder with the permission of the
 trial Court?"
3
ii) "Whether the finding. of the first Appellate
     Court that the instant suit was not maintainable in
     view of the doctrine to res judicata, is justified in
     the absence of any evidence that the earlier suit was
     between the same parties and for the same relief?"
iii) "Whether the finding of the appellate Court
     that the document titled as Vazib Dava of Ex.P.1, by
     which the patta holder Abdul Rajak has relinquished
     his right in favour of the plaintiffs could be ignored
     only on the ground that the same has not been proved
     by examining the attesting witnesses particularly in
     the light of the fact that the same has not been
     disputed by the defendants?”



 h. The High Court, while allowing the Second Appeal answered

 all the three substantial questions of law referred to above

 in favour of the plaintiffs. The judgment and order passed

 by the First Appellate Court was set aside and the judgment

 and decree passed by the Trial Court came to be restored.
4.    In such circumstances referred to above, the original

defendants are before this Court with the present petition.
5.    We heard Mr. Mr. Abhinav Jaganathan, the learned counsel

appearing   for   the    original   defendants   (petitioners)   and

Ms. V. Mohana, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the

respondent Nos.1 and 2 respectively (original plaintiffs).
6.    The   learned     counsel   appearing   for   the   defendants

(petitioners) has three-fold submissions to canvass before us.
4
First,       according      to     him,   the     second   suit    itself    was       not

maintainable. He would submit that once an application under
Order IX Rule 4 of the C.P.C
. stands rejected and if such

order is not challenged before the higher Court and attains

finality, then a second suit for the same cause of action and

for    the    very    same       relief   is    not   maintainable.       His    second

submission is with respect to the evidentiary value of the

document i.e. Wajib Dava (Exhibit P-1). According to him, the

Wajib Dava of 1952 could be said to be hit by
Section 54
of

the last principles of Mohammedan Law read with
Section 6(a)
of the Transfer of the Property Act, 1882. He would also

submit that being an unregistered document, the same could not

have been read into evidence for the purpose of establishing a

valid    title       over    the    property.      Thirdly,      according      to     the

learned counsel the fresh suit filed by the plaintiffs could

be said to be hit by the doctrine of res judicata.
7.     On the other hand,
Ms. V. Mohana
, the learned Senior

Counsel      appearing       for    the   plaintiffs       would   submit       that   no

error not to speak of any error of law could be said to have

been    committed      by    the     High   Court     in   passing    the    impugned

judgment and order. She would submit that the High Court is

right in taking the view that the suit was maintainable and

was not hit in any manner by the provisions of
Order IX Rule 4

of the C.P.C
. As regards the document i.e. Wajib Dava (Exhibit

P-1),     she    submitted         that     the    same    has     been   very       well
5
considered     by    the    High     Court   in   all    respects.   In    such

circumstances
referred to above
, the learned Senior Counsel

prayed that there being no merit in the petition, the same may

be dismissed.
ANALYSIS
8.    Having    heard      the     learned   counsel     appearing   for    the

parties and having gone through the materials on record, two

questions fall for our consideration:
i)    Whether    after      the   dismissal    of    the   petition    for

     restoration of suit under
Order IX Rule 4 of the C.P.C
. a

     fresh suit is maintainable?
ii) Whether after dismissal of the suit for default, a

     fresh suit is barred by res judicata?
9.
Order IX Rule 4 of the C.P.C
. reads thus:
“ORDER IX -Appearance of parties and consequence
     of non-appearance
4. Plaintiff may bring fresh suit or Court may
     restore suit to file.- Where a suit is dismissed
     under rule 2 or rule 3, the plaintiff may (subject
     to the law of limitation) bring a fresh suit; or
     he may apply for an order to set the dismissal
     aside, and if he satisfies the Court that there
     was sufficient cause for [such failure as is
     referred to in rule 2], or for his non-appearance,
     as the case may be, the Court shall make an order
     setting aside the dismissal and shall appoint a
     day for proceeding with the suit.”
6
10.    It   appears     that   the   High    Court   placed    reliance   on   a

decision     of    the    Privy      Council    in
Bhudeo     vs.    Musammat

Baikunthi1
. In
the said decision
, the Privy Council took the

view that the two remedies prescribed under
Order IX Rule 4 of

the   C.P.C
.      are   not    mutually     exclusive.   The   Privy    Council

looked into the prefix “or” and ultimately held as under:
"1. The point raised is whether the two remedies
      allowed to a plaintiff whose suit has been dismissed
      under Order IX, Rule 2 or 3, namely, the remedy of
      bringing a fresh suit or applying to have the
      dismissal set aside, are mutually exclusive. The words
      of Order IX, Rule 4, are materially the same as the
      words of
Section 99
, Act XIV of 1882, upon this point.
      The wording is not very happy. The use of the word
      "or" presents many difficulties. In spite of the fast
      that the word "or" is used and in spite of the fast
      that the remedy of bringing a fresh suit is placed
      first and the remedy of having the order set aside is
      plated second, I am of opinion that the lower
      Appellate Court is right. I cannot read into the words
      of the section the meaning that when a person, in good
      faith believing his suit to have been wrongfully
      dismissed, comes into Court to have that order set
      aside and fails to succeed, that person insure the
      penalty of not being permitted to bring another suit
      upon the same facts. The selection of the remedy of
      bringing a fresh suit involves the plaintiff in the
      necessity of paying a fresh Court-fee       and a man
      would naturally wish to take his chance of getting his
      suit restored and avoiding payment of a fresh Court-
      fee. It does riot seem likely that it was the
      intention of the Legislature that if be took this
      chance, he was to be deprived of all other remedy in
      event of failure. The whole of the argument on the
      side of the appellant practically rests upon the use
      of the solitary word "or," and I do not think that
      there is sufficient force in that argument to support
      the appellant's contention. I, therefore, dismiss this
      appeal with costs."
1 (1921) 63 I.C. 239
7
11.    We are in respectful agreement with the view taken by the

Privy Council as regards the interpretation of
Order IX Rule 4

of the C.P.C
.
12.    There is one another reason to take the view that a fresh

suit    is   maintainable   even   after   the   rejection   of   the

application filed under
Order IX Rule 4 of the C.P.C
., keeping

in mind Order IX Rule 8 and Order IX Rule 9 respectively
of

the C.P.C
.
13.
Order IX Rule 8 of the C.P.C
. reads thus:
“8. Procedure where defendant only appears— Where the
      defendant appears and the plaintiff does not appear
      when the suit is called on for hearing, the Court
      shall make an order that the suit be dismissed, unless
      the defendant admits the claim or part thereof, in
      which case the Court shall pass a decree against the
      defendant upon such admission, and, where part only of
      the claim has been admitted, shall dismiss the suit so
      far as it relates to the remainder.”
14.
Order IX Rule 9 of the C.P.C
. reads thus:
“9. Decree against plaintiff by default bars fresh
      suit— (1) Where a suit is wholly or partly dismissed
      under rule 8, the plaintiff shall be precluded from
      bringing a fresh suit in respect of the same cause of
      action. But he may apply for an order to set the
      dismissal aside, and if he satisfies the Court that
      there was sufficient cause for his non-appearance when
      the suit was called on for hearing, the Court shall
      make an order setting aside the dismissal upon such
      terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit. and
      shall appoint a day for proceeding with suit.
8
(2) No order shall be made under this rule unless
      notice of the application has been served on the
      opposite party.”
15.    The plain reading of
Order IX Rule 4 of the C.P.C
. does

not bar the filing of a fresh suit, of course, subject to

limitation and if that were the intention, we might have found

in it a provision similar to that in
Order IX Rule 9 of the

C.P.C
.
referred to above
, which states that where a suit is

dismissed under the Rule 8, the plaintiff shall be precluded

from bringing a fresh suit in respect of the same cause of

action.
16.    The basic difference between the two provisions i.e. Rule

4 and Rule 9 of
Order IX CPC
is that in the case where the

suit is dismissed under Rule 2 or Rule 3 of Order IX, the

remedy provided is under Rule 4 of
Order IX of the C.P.C
. In

case of such dismissal, the plaintiff either brings a fresh

suit on the same cause of action or he may apply for setting

aside the order of dismissal and for restoration of suit.

Whereas if the suit is dismissed under Rule 8 of
Order IX of

the C.P.C
., the plaintiff cannot bring a fresh suit on the

same   cause   of   action.   The   only   remedy   available   to   the

plaintiff is to move an application for setting aside the

order of dismissal and for restoration of suit.
9
17.    From bare reading of the aforesaid two provisions i.e.

Rule 4 and Rule 9 of
Order IX of the C.P.C
., it is manifestly

clear    that    under     Rule      4    of
Order    IX     of    the     C.P.C
.,     the

legislature in express term has not precluded the plaintiff

from filing a fresh suit on the same cause of action in the

event suit is dismissed under Rule 2 or Rule 3 of
Order IX of

the C.P.C
., whereas Rule 9 of Order IX debars the plaintiff

from filing a fresh suit in a case where the suit is dismissed

under    Rule    8   of
Order     IX    of     the   C.P.C
.       The     only    remedy

provided for such dismissal is to file an application under

Rule 9 of
Order IX of the C.P.C
. for restoration of suit.
18.
In the case of
Govind Prasad v. Har Kishen
reported in

AIR     1929    Allahabad        131,      a     similar       question       arose       for

consideration as to the maintainability of the second suit. In

that case the suit filed by the plaintiff was dismissed under
Order IX Rule 3 of the C.P.C
., in consequence of neither party

having appeared when the suit was called for hearing. The

plaintiff-appellant             to   have        the    suit    restored           but    the

restoration      application         was       dismissed.      The        plaintiff      then

brought a new suit upon the same cause of action. The learned

Judge    dismissed        the    suit      holding      that        the    same     is    not

maintainable. In the Civil Revision filed before the Allahabad

High    Court,   the      learned        Judge    Weir,    following         the    earlier

decisions (39 I.C.191 and 63 I.C.239), set aside the order of
10
dismissal of suit and held that a fresh suit on the same cause

of action is maintainable.
19.   In   the   case   of   Mt.   Balkesia   v.   Mahant   Bhagwan   Gir

reported in AIR 1937 Patna 9, a similar question came for

consideration before a Division Bench of the Patna High Court.

In that case also taking the similar view the learned Judge

James, observed:
“Mr. Khurshaid Husnain argues, in the second place, that
 the present suit should be regarded as barred by reason
 of the provisions of O.9, R. 4. O.9, R.4, provides that
 where a suit is dismissed under R. 2, or R. 3, the
 plaintiff may bring a fresh suit, or he may apply for an
 order to set the dismissal aside. Mr. Khurshaid Husnain
 argues that these two provisions are mutually exclusive,
 so that if the plaintiff elects to avail himself of his
 right to apply to have the order of dismissal set aside,
 he is thereby precluded from availing himself of the
 right to institute a fresh suit. The only decisions in
 point which have been brought to our notice by Mr.
 Khurshaid Husnain are adverse to this argument : 63 I C
 239 of Stuart, J., A I R 1926 All 678 of Daniels, J.,
 and.50) All 837 of Weir, J., all of the Allahabad High
 Court. In all these cases it has been held that the
 alternative   provisions  of   R.4   are  not   mutually
 exclusive, and that a plaintiff whose application for a
 restoration of his suit has been dismissed is not
 precluded from instituting a fresh suit. I do not
 consider that any ground has been made out which
 justifies us in differing from the view expressed by the
 learned Judges whom I have named. It appears to us that
 a reasonable reading of the rule provides that the
 plaintiff may bring a fresh suit or he may apply for a
 setting aside the dismissal. If he satisfies the Court
 and obtains an order setting aside the dismissal, he
 proceeds with his original suit. If having applied for
 an order to set aside the order of dismissal, he fails
 to satisfy the Court and his application is dismissed,
11
he is left to his alternative remedy which is that he
 may, subject to the law of limitation, bring a fresh
 suit.”
20.   Agreeing with the view, the learned Judge Rowland, has

observed:
“Rowland, J.—I agree. With reference to the argument
 that the dismissal of a suit under O. 9, R. 3, Civil P.
 C., may, coupled with the dismissal of an application
 for rehearing, operate to preclude the plaintiff from
 suing again on the same cause of action, I would like to
 add a few words. It seems to me that
S. 9
. Civil P.C.,
 is fatal to the appellants' argument. This section
 declares that the Courts shall have jurisdiction to try
 all suits of a civil nature excepting suits of which
 their cognizance is either expressly or impliedly
 barred. That is subject to such provisions as those of
S. 11
which bars suits on matters already judiciously
 decided between the parties or of O. 9, R. 9, which
 precludes a plaintiff from suing again on the same cause
 of action where his suit has been dismissed under R. 8,
 that is to say on appearance of the defendant and in the
 absence of the plaintiff. In the absence of some such
 provision as that with which O. 9, R. 9 commences, a
 dismissal under O. 9, R. 3 would still, in my opinion,
 not operate to preclude the plaintiff from suing again
 even if O. 9, R. 4 did not expressly save his right of
 suit. R. 4 in effect does not create but declares the
 right of bringing a fresh suit while at the same time
 permitting the plaintiff in the alternative to proceed
 with his original suit. The former option the plaintiff
 has as of right; the other option is available to him
 only if he can satisfy the Court that he had sufficient
 cause for the non-appearance or other default which led
 to the dismissal of the suit. On the other points I have
 nothing to add.”
21.   In the light of the provisions contained in Order IX and

the law discussed hereinabove, it can be safely concluded that
12
in case of dismissal of suit under
Order IX Rule 4 of the

C.P.C
. the plaintiff has both the remedies of filing of fresh

suit or application for restoration of the suit. If he chooses

one remedy, he is not debarred from availing himself of the

other remedy. Both these remedies are simultaneous and would

not exclude either of them.
22.   The next question i.e. question No. (II), that falls for

consideration is as to whether after dismissal of suit in

default under Rule 2 and Rule 3 of
Order IX of the C.P.C
., a

fresh suit is barred by the principle of res judicata.
23.   The principle of res judicata is based on the common law

maxim “nemo debet bis vexari pro una et eadem causa”, which

means that no man shall be vexed twice over the same cause of

action. It is a doctrine applied to give finality to a lis.

According to this doctrine, an issue or a point once decided

and attends finality, should not be allowed to be reopened and

re-agitated in a subsequent suit. In other words, if an issue

involved   in   a   suit   is   finally   adjudicated   by   a   Court   of

competent jurisdiction, the same issue in a subsequent suit

cannot be allowed to be re-agitated. It is, therefore, clear

that for the application of principle of res judicata, there

must be an adjudication of an issue in a suit by a court of

competent jurisdiction.
13
24.   The term “judgment” has been defined in
Section 2(9)
of

the C.P.C. which means a statement given by a Judge of the

grounds of a decree or order.
25.   The term “decree” has been defined under
Section 2(2)
of

the C.P.C. which reads as under : -
“(2) “Decree” means the formal expression of an
 adjudication which, so far as regards the Court
 expressing it, conclusively determines the rights of the
 parties with regard to all or any of the matters in
 controversy in the suit and may be either preliminary or
 final. It shall be deemed to include the rejection of a
 plaint and the determination of any question within
 section 144, but shall not include-
(a) any adjudication from which an appeal lies as an
 appeal from an order, or
(b) any order of dismissal for default.”
26.   From   a   plain   reading    of   the   term   “decree”,   it   is

manifestly clear that to constitute a decree, there must be a

formal   expression      of   an   adjudication   which    conclusively

determines the right of the parties with regard to all or any

of the matters in controversy in the suit, but the decree

shall not include any adjudication from which an appeal lies

as an appeal from an order or any order of dismissal for

default. It is, therefore, evidently clear that a dismissal of

a suit or application for default particularly under Rule 2 or
14
Rule 3 of
Order IX of the C.P.C
. is not the formal expression

of an adjudication upon any right claimed or the defence set

up in a suit. An order of dismissal of a suit or application

in default is also not appealable order as provided under
Order XLIII of the C.P.C
. If we read
Order XLIII C.P.C
., we

will find that orders passed under
Order IX, Rule 9 of the

C.P.C
. or
Order IX Rule 13 of the C.P.C
. are made appealable,

but order passed under
Order IX Rule 4 of the C.P.C
. is not

appealable. It is, therefore, clear that an order of dismissal

of a suit or application in default under Rule 2 or Rule 3 of
Order IX of the C.P.C
. is neither an adjudication or a decree

nor it is an appealable order. If that is so, such order of

dismissal of a suit under Rule 2 or Rule 3 of
Order IX of the

C.P.C
. does not fulfill the requirement of the term “judgment”

or “decree”, inasmuch as there is no adjudication. In our

considered opinion, therefore, if a fresh suit is filed, then

such an order of dismissal cannot and shall not operate a res

judicata.
27.   So   far    as    the    document   Wajib   Dava    (Exhibit    P-1)   is

concerned,       we    are    convinced   with    the    line   of   reasoning

assigned by the High Court.
15
28.   In   view   of   the   aforesaid,   we   see    no   good   ground   to

interfere with the impugned judgment passed by the High Court.

In the result, this petition fails and is hereby dismissed.
29.   Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
……………………………………………………….J.
                                                        (J.B. PARDIWALA)




                                                     ……………………………………………………….J.
                                                           (R. MAHADEVAN)
NEW DELHI.
22 APRIL 2025.
16