[Cites
21
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Satish Chander Sharma vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 16 April, 2025
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
,
Surya Kant
2025 INSC 491
                                                                             REPORTABLE


                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                    WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 179 OF 2018


                            SATISH CHANDER SHARMA & ORS.                 PETITIONER(S)




                                                        VERSUS



                            STATE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH & ORS.              RESPONDENT(S)


                                                   JUDGMENT
UJJAL BHUYAN, J.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
2.      This is a petition filed by three petitioners under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India. Petitioners are retired

                            officers of Himachal Pradesh State Forest Development

                            Corporation Limited (briefly ‘the Corporation’ hereinafter).
Signature Not Verified   They are aggrieved by denial of pensionary benefits to them in
Digitally signed by
SATISH KUMAR YADAV
Date: 2025.04.16
16:43:26 IST
Reason:
terms of the Himachal Pradesh Corporate Sector Employees
     (Pension, Family Pension, Commutation of Pension and

     Gratuity) Scheme, 1999 discontinued vide the notification

     dated 02.12.2004, which though carved out an exception for

     those who had opted for the scheme and had superannuated

     prior to 02.12.2004.        Hence, they seek a direction to the

     respondents for payment of pension to them upon their

     superannuation in terms of the said scheme at par with

     similarly situated employees who had retired prior to

     02.12.2004, by counting their pensionable service from the

     date of joining till the date of their superannuation.
3.           This issue was earlier raised by a group of petitioners

     before the Himachal Pradesh High Court (‘High Court’

     hereinafter) by filing writ petitions under
Article 226
of the

     Constitution of India, the lead case being
P.D. Nanda Vs. State

     of H.P.1, CWP No.
4425 of 2009. The High Court had allowed

     the writ petitions vide the judgment and order dated

     19.12.2013 by directing the State to provide pension to the

     retired employees of the Corporation in terms of the aforesaid
1
2013 SCC Online HP 5151
2
scheme.
This decision was reversed by a two-Judge Bench of

      this Court in
State of H.P. Vs. Rajesh Chander Sood2
.
4.           Thereafter, the present writ petition came to be filed

      before this Court seeking the same relief. Various contentions

      have been raised including the one that the decision in
Rajesh

      Chander Sood
(supra) has ignored several binding precedents

      of this Court and is, therefore, a decision rendered per

      incuriam.
5.           This Court issued notice vide the order dated

      20.03.2018.
In the said order, a two-Judge Bench of this

      Court, after observing that since correctness of this Court’s

      judgment         in
Rajesh   Chander   Sood
(supra)   has   been

      questioned, requested the learned Chief Justice to place the

      matter before a three-Judge Bench. This is how the matter has

      been placed before the present Bench and heard accordingly.
6.           Though learned senior counsel for the respondent-

      State has raised a preliminary objection as to maintainability

      of the present writ petition, we are of the view that such an
2
(2016) 10 SCC 77
3
objection may be considered while considering the stand of the

respondents.
7.       At the outset, it would be apposite to advert to the

relevant facts.
8.       The      Corporation   was   incorporated   under   the
Companies Act, 1956
pursuant to a notification dated

26.03.1974 issued by the Government of Himachal Pradesh. It

is completely owned and controlled by the State Government

inasmuch as 100% of the share capital of the Corporation is

owned by the State of Himachal Pradesh.
9.       Petitioner No. 1 was appointed as a Clerk in the

Corporation on 29.10.1975. On 27.03.1981, he was promoted

to the post of Junior Assistant. He was further promoted to the

post of Senior Assistant(Senior Accountant) on 07.11.1984. He

was promoted to the post of Office Manager(Junior) on

03.04.1989 and, thereafter, to the post of Office Manager

(Senior) on 17.11.2011. Petitioner No. 1 superannuated from

service on 31.01.2013.
4
9.1.    Petitioner No. 2 was appointed as a Clerk in the

Corporation on 15.02.1988. He was promoted to the post of

Senior Clerk on 15.02.1993 and, thereafter, to the post of

Junior Assistant on 01.01.1996. He was further promoted to

the post of Senior Assistant on 07.09.2009 whereafter he was

promoted to the post of Office Manager (Junior) from which

post he superannuated on 30.09.2016.
9.2.    Petitioner No. 3 was appointed to the post of Clerk in

the Corporation on 05.12.1981. He was promoted to the post

of Senior Clerk on 24.05.1985 and, thereafter, to the post of

Junior Assistant on 25.04.1992. He was further promoted to

the post of Senior Assistant on 24.12.1993. On 08.11.2013,

petitioner No. 3 was promoted to the post of Office Manager

(Junior) whereafter he superannuated on 30.11.2014.
10.     It is stated that following the revision of pay scales of

government   employees     by       the   State   Government,   the

Corporation also allowed such revision of pay scales.
11.     Since the employees of government corporations like

the Corporation enjoyed parity with employees of the State

Government qua all conditions of service, such as, pay scales,
5
allowances etc., the State Government issued a notification

dated   29.10.1999    whereby    employees    of   government

corporations i.e. state public sector undertakings like the

Corporation were extended parity even as regards pensionary

benefits. This scheme was called the Himachal Pradesh

Corporate   Sector   Employees   (Pension,   Family   Pension,

Commutation of Pension and Gratuity) Scheme, 1999 (referred

to hereinafter as ‘the 1999 Scheme’) and came into effect on

and from 01.04.1999. It was mentioned that all pensionary

benefits of the employees of the corporate sector were to be

determined in accordance with the provisions
laid down in
the

Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972 and the Central

Civil Services (Commutation of Pension) Rules, 1981, as

amended, and adopted by the Himachal Pradesh Government

for the state government employees. The 1999 Scheme

contemplated exercise of option by the employees of the

corporate sector as to whether he or she would be governed

under the existing statutory provisions or be governed under

the 1999 Scheme which contemplated creation of a pension

fund. The entire amount of contribution of the concerned
6
public sector undertaking including interest thereon to the

Contributory Provident Fund (CPF) upto 31.03.1999 were to

be transferred to the corpus fund (pension fund) to be

administered and maintained by the Government of Himachal

Pradesh in the Finance Department. It was clarified that the

existing employees who had opted for the 1999 Scheme would

automatically forfeit their claim to the employers’ share of CPF

including interest thereon to the State Government upto

31.03.1999. However, the amount of their subscriptions

alongwith interest would be transferred to the General

Provident Fund (GPF) account, to be allotted and maintained

by the concerned public sector undertaking.
12.     It is stated that the Corporation had amended its

byelaws in order to implement the 1999 Scheme. The three

petitioners had exercised their option in favour of the 1999

Scheme since this scheme provided for higher pensionary

benefits.
13.     It appears that reservations were expressed regarding

the financial stability of the 1999 Scheme. In the above

backdrop, the State Government constituted a High Level
7
Committee (‘Committee’ hereinafter) in 2003 (21.01.2003) to

review the financial viability of the 1999 Scheme. After a

detailed analysis, the Committee submitted a report on

28.10.2003. The Committee was of the view that the 1999

Scheme was not viable on a self-sustaining basis for the

following reasons:
i)       uncertainty in the rate of interest regime;
ii)      declining recruitment in the corporate sector
               would deplete the size of the corpus to be created
               and it would be difficult to honour liabilities
               accruing after 10-12 years;
iii)     the pension plan envisages payment of pension to
               corporate sector employees as is being paid to the
               government employees. Government employees at
               present are entitled to pension @ 50% of the basic
               pay last drawn with linkage to their dearness
               allowance. This return does not appear to be
               possible from the pension fund proposed to be
               created for corporate sector employees.
14.         After considering the aforesaid report, Government of

Himachal Pradesh in the Finance Department issued a

notification dated 02.12.2004 whereby the 1999 Scheme was

repealed with immediate effect. It was clarified that consequent

upon the repeal, barring the employees who had retired from

service w.e.f. 01.04.1999 till the date of notification i.e.

02.12.2004, other employees would continue to be covered
8
under those provisions which were applicable to them as on

31.03.1999.    While    clarifying   that   the   public   sector

undertakings would be the pension sanctioning/ disbursing

authority, the employers’ share of CPF including interest

thereon was transferred to the respective public sector

undertakings who were required to form a pension fund. In so

far those employees of the public sector undertakings who had

retired from service during the period w.e.f. 01.04.1999 till the

date of publication of the notification i.e. 02.12.2004, the

repeal notification stated as follows:
Notwithstanding such repeal, the employees of
      Himachal Pradesh corporate sector who retired from
      service w.e.f. 01.04.1999 till the date of publication of
      this notification shall continue to be governed under the
      provisions of the scheme so repealed; provided such
      retired employees had opted for such scheme and had
      otherwise become eligible for pension under the scheme.
15.     A large number of writ petitions were filed before the

High Court assailing the notification dated 02.12.2004 and

seeking a direction that pension of the retired employees of the

Corporation should be paid as per the 1999 Scheme. High

Court vide the judgment and order dated 19.12.2013 allowed

all the writ petitions. The cut-off date 02.12.2004 was declared
9
ultra vires but instead of declaring the notification dated

02.12.2004 as unconstitutional, the same was read down by

including the writ petitioners and similarly situated employees

who had become members of the 1999 Scheme and had retired

after 02.12.2004 as well as those employees who were already

in service when the 1999 Scheme was notified and had become

members of that scheme and would retire henceforth as

eligible for pension under the 1999 Scheme.
16.     The aforesaid decision of the High Court was assailed

by the State before this Court in
Rajesh Chander Sood
(supra).
A two-Judge Bench of this Court held that it was well within

the authority of the State Government in exercise of its

administrative powers which it had exercised by issuing the

impugned repeal notification dated 02.12.2004 to fix a cut-off

date for continuing the right to receive pension for some and

denying the same to others. The
Bench further held
that the

government was free to alter its earlier administrative decision

and policy though it should be in consonance with all legal and

statutory obligations. The Bench noted that it was not a case

where the rights which had accrued to the employees under
10
the Employees’ Provident Fund Scheme, 1995 under which the

employees were covered prior to their opting for the 1999

Scheme,   had    in   any   manner   been   altered   to   their

disadvantage. All that the repeal notification dated 02.12.2004

says is that the concerned employees would be entitled to all

the rights which had accrued to them under the Employees’

Provident Fund Scheme, 1995 and not under the 1999

Scheme. In so far the bona fides of the State Government were

concerned, the Bench observed that the State Government as

a welfare measure had ventured to honestly extend some post-

retiral benefits to the employees of independent legal entities

like the Corporation on the mistaken belief, arising out of a

miscalculation, that the same could be catered out of the

available resources. This measure was adopted by the State

Government not in its capacity as the employer of the

respondent-employees but as a welfare measure. When it

became apparent that the welfare measure extended by the

State Government could not be sustained as originally

understood, the same was withdrawn. Thus, the action of the

State Government was bona fide. State Government had taken
11
a conscious decision and the classification made by the State

Government by fixing 02.12.2004 as the cut-off date was

reasonable and justifiable in law; it also had a nexus to the

object sought to be achieved. In the circumstances, the

decision of the High Court was interfered with.
17.     Mr. Gopal Sankaranarayan, learned senior counsel

for the petitioners submits that the present proceeding is

concerned with the pensionary rights and entitlement of the

petitioners. This is also concerned with the correctness of the

judgment rendered in
Rajesh Chander Sood
(supra).
This

Court while issuing notice vide the order dated 20.03.2018,

prima facie, agreed with the contention of the petitioners that

the judgment in
Rajesh Chander Sood
(supra) required re-

consideration by a three-Judge Bench.
17.1.   Learned senior counsel submits that the judgment in
Rajesh Chander Sood
(supra) is not good law and is per

incuriam as it fails to consider binding precedents of coordinate

and larger benches of this Court. Further, in
the said

judgment
, the Bench contradicted itself by acknowledging the
12
vested right of the employees under the 1999 Scheme but

denying the benefits accruing therefrom to them.

17.2.
Learned senior counsel has referred to paragraphs 69,

70, 71 and 72 of the judgment in
Rajesh Chander Sood
(supra)

and submits that the Bench had recorded a finding that having

exercised their option for the 1999 Scheme and having forgone

all their rights under the Employees Provident Fund Scheme,

1995, the employees concerned would be covered by the 1999

Scheme. As soon as they came to be covered by the 1999

Scheme, a contingent right came to be vested in them. As a

matter of fact, the Bench had rejected the contention of the

State that the rights of the employees under the 1999 Scheme

would be vested only upon attaining the age of superannuation

and accepted the contention advanced by the employees that

any employee governed by a pension scheme, would be entitled

to the benefits therefrom on attaining the qualifying service

immediately on his enrolment in the said scheme, particularly,

when they had expressly chosen to forgo their rights under the

Employees’ Provident Fund Scheme, 1995.
13
17.3.        Adverting to clause 1(2) of the 1999 Scheme, it is

      submitted by the learned senior counsel for the petitioners

      that the terms of clause 1(2) are clear and unambiguous. By

      way of incorporation, the Central Civil Services (Pension)

      Rules, 1972 and the Central Civil Services (Commutation of

      Pension) Rules, 1981, stood applicable to the employees upon

      their opting for the 1999 Scheme.
17.4.
In
Rajesh Chander Sood
(supra), after acknowledging

      the vested right of the pensioners, this Court considered the

      issue of cut-off date. He submits that while this Court has

      upheld fixation of a cut-off date for extending better and higher

      pensionary benefits, there are no precedents whereby a cut-off

      date for discontinuing the right to receive pension, inter se, a

      homogeneous class has been sustained.
He submits that

      reliance placed on the decisions of this Court in
R.R. Verma Vs.

      Union of India3
and
BALCO Employees’ Union Vs. Union of

      India4
, was wholly misplaced as those two decisions were

      rendered in different contexts.
3
(1980) 3 SCC 402
4
(2002) 2 SCC 333
14
17.5.   He further submitted that the judgment in
Rajesh

Chander Sood
(supra) sustaining the retrospective withdrawal

of the 02.12.2004 notification whereby and whereunder

pensionary rights of only those who had superannuated

between 01.04.1999 and 02.12.2004 were saved as opposed to

saving such rights of all those employees who were in service

between 01.04.1999 and 02.12.2004 was explicitly contrary to

the principles
laid down by
this Court in a large number of

judgments. If the 1999 Scheme had to be repealed due to the

purported object i.e. financial burden on the State, repealing

of the same by not saving the rights of all those already covered

under the 1999 Scheme would be violative of
Article 14
of the

Constitution of India.
17.6.   Learned senior counsel submits that the cut-off date

postulated by the notification dated 02.12.2004 providing that

benefits under the 1999 Scheme would be available to those

who had retired between 01.04.1999 and 02.12.2004 (date of

the notification) thereby dividing a homogeneous class without

having any reasonable nexus with the object sought to be

achieved would be violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution of
15
India.
In this connection, he has referred to and relied upon

      the Constitution Bench decision of this Court in
D.S. Nakara

      Vs. Union of India5
.
He submits that prior judgments of this

      Court wherein similar cut-off dates based on the date of

      retirement were struck down by this Court were not considered

      in
Rajesh Chander Sood
(supra).
17.7.        Mr. Gopal Sankaranarayan, learned senior counsel

      submits that the right to receive pension is a vested right and

      once the petitioners had opted for the 1999 Scheme, the same

      could not have been withdrawn, that too, unilaterally on the

      ground that the State did not have the financial means to

      support the scheme. Right to receive pension is not dependent

      upon the finances of the State. It was improper for the State

      Government to shrug away its responsibility post-introduction

      of the 1999 Scheme by labelling it as a self-financing pension

      fund created under the 1999 Scheme. This critical aspect was

      over-looked in
Rajesh Chander Sood
(supra).

      17.8.        He further submits that contention of the employees

      based on
Article 300A
of the Constitution of India was also
5
(1983) 1 SCC 305
16
summarily rejected by the Bench without any independent

analysis. When this Court had recognized that the 1999

Scheme created a vested right on the employees, such a

statutory right to receive pension would be in terms of the

Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972. Such a statutory

right therefore has to be construed as a property right under
Article 300A
of the Constitution of India.
17.9.   He, therefore, submits that
Rajesh Chander Sood
(supra) is not a good law and is per incuriam. The present writ

petition seeking pensionary rights of the petitioners as per the

1999 Scheme may, thus, kindly be allowed by this Court.
18.     Per contra, Mr. Devadatt Kamat, learned senior

counsel representing the State of Himachal Pradesh submits

that the present writ petition filed under
Article 32
of the

Constitution of India is totally misconceived inasmuch as the

issue raised in the writ petition i.e. entitlement of the

petitioners to pension under the 1999 Scheme at par with

similarly situated employees of the Corporation who had

retired between 01.04.1999 and 02.12.2004 has already been
17
decided by this Court in
Rajesh Chander Sood
(supra) . On this

ground alone, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.

18.1.
Thereafter, learned senior counsel has adverted to the

facts of the present case and submits that all the issues raised

in the present proceeding were raised in
Rajesh Chander Sood
(supra) and adjudicated by this Court.
18.2.    Learned senior counsel submits that the High Court

had allowed the earlier batch of writ petitions vide the

judgment and order dated 19.12.2013. This was challenged by

the State before this Court in
Rajesh Chander Sood
(supra)

which came to be decided on 28.09.2016. Though the present

petitioners had superannuated before that, they did not join

the aforesaid proceedings. As a matter of fact, they did not also

participate in the proceedings before the High Court. Much

after their superannuation, they filed the present writ petition.

There is, thus, considerable delay and laches on the part of the

petitioners in approaching this Court which would, therefore,

disentitle them to any relief.
18.3.    Learned senior counsel vehemently argues that the

present writ petition is nothing but a collateral challenge to a
18
binding judgment of this Court in
Rajesh Chander Sood
(supra).
It is not open to the petitioners to raise the same set

of grounds urged in
Rajesh Chander Sood
(supra) which were

rejected by this Court. A writ petition cannot be filed to doubt

the correctness of a decision of this Court, he submits.

18.4.   Learned senior counsel submits that the principle of

per incuriam is not at all attracted to the facts of the present

case. There is no glaring omission of law and precedent to

constitute per incuriam.
18.5.   On the merits of the case, learned senior counsel

submits that financial viability or non-viability was a valid

consideration taken into account by the State while issuing the

repeal notification. The High Level Committee had examined

the issue threadbare and, thereafter, submitted report. Based

on the report of the High Level Committee, the repeal

notification was issued.
18.6.   Learned senior counsel submits that petitioners were

not employees of the State Government and, therefore, they

cannot seek service benefits including retiral benefits at par

with State Government employees. State Government had
19
introduced the 1999 Scheme as a welfare measure for the

employees of public sector undertakings like the Corporation

as a welfare State and not as an employer. But when it was

found that available resources were inadequate for funding the

1999 Scheme, the same was withdrawn. However, the interest

of those employees who had opted for the 1999 Scheme and

had retired before issuance of the repeal notification were

protected inasmuch as they were held to be entitled to the

benefits under the 1999 Scheme. The intention was not to

deprive the employees who had retired during the subsistence

of the 1999 Scheme.
18.7.    Therefore, he submits that fixation of the date of

issuance of the repeal notification as the cut off date for

allowing those employees who had retired prior thereto to be

entitled to the benefits under the 1999 Scheme, cannot be said

to be arbitrary and violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution of

India.
18.8.    Learned senior counsel asserts that the 1999 Scheme

was an outcome of a policy decision of the State Government.

Withdrawal of the same is also within the realm of policy
20
making. There is no arbitrariness in such withdrawal.

Principle of natural justice cannot be extended to such a

situation. In the circumstances, learned senior counsel

Mr. Kamat submits that there is no merit at all in the writ

petition, besides being not maintainable. He, therefore, seeks

dismissal of the writ petition.
19.     Submissions made by learned counsel for the parties

have received the due consideration of the Court. A large

number of decisions have been cited at the Bar by both the

sides. Those have been considered. However, reference would

be made to only those decisions found relevant and necessary.
20.     At the outset, let us examine as to how the High Court

had dealt with the issue.
In
P.D. Nanda
(supra), High Court

held that the moment the employees became members of the

1999 Scheme, they had acquired a vested right and therefore

they were required to be heard before they were taken out of

the ambit of the 1999 Scheme. High Court observed that when

the 1999 Scheme was framed and notified on 29.10.1999

having effect from 01.04.1999, the State Government was

aware of all the legal implications but there was remissness on
21
the part of the State Government as well as the public sector

undertakings towards implementation of the 1999 Scheme.

The public sector undertakings were required to immediately

transfer the funds at their disposal towards creation of the

corpus fund. When the employees had opted for the 1999

Scheme, they automatically ceased to be members of the

previous 1995 Scheme. Therefore, withdrawal of the 1999

Scheme was improper. Though the High Court found the

notification dated 02.12.2004 to be bad in law, it expressed

the view that to effectuate the purport of the 1999 Scheme,

the said notification was required to be read down by

including those employees who became members of the

scheme and had retired before 02.12.2004 as entitled to the

benefits under the 1999 Scheme, instead of declaring the

same to be unconstitutional. High Court also rejected the

contention of the State Government that the 1999 Scheme

could not be implemented due to financial crunch. While

allowing the writ petitions, High Court declared the cut-off

date of 02.12.2004 to be ultra vires. The repeal notification dated

02.12.2004 was read down by including those writ petitioners
22
and similarly situated employees for the purpose of pensionary

benefits. High Court held as follows:
80. Accordingly, in view of the analysis and discussion
      made hereinabove, all the writ petitions are allowed. The
      cut-off   date   02.12.2004   is   declared   ultra   vires.
Notification dated 02.12.2004 is read down to save it
      from unconstitutionality, irrationality, arbitrariness or
      unreasonableness by including the petitioners and
      similarly situated employees also, who had become
      members of the scheme notified on 29.10.1999 and have
      retired after 02.12.2004 and those employees who were
      already in service when the pension scheme was notified
      on 29.10.1999 and had become members of that scheme
      and   shall retire hereinafter, for the purpose of
      pensionary benefits after applying the principle of
      severability.    The    Regional      Provident       Fund
      Commissioner, Shimla is directed to transfer the entire
      amount of the CPF to a corpus fund to be administered
      and maintained by the Government of Himachal
      Pradesh in the Finance Department including upto date
      interest, within a period of two weeks. Thereafter, the
      Pension Sanctioning Authority is directed to sanction
      the pension/gratuity/commutation of pension after
      proper scrutiny of the cases forwarded by the concerned
      Public Sector Undertaking and issue pension payment
      order to the Pension Disbursing Authority strictly as per
23
para 6 of the scheme notified on 29.10.1999 with
      interest @ 9% per annum, within a period of 12 weeks
      from today. Pending application(s), if any, also stand
      disposed. No costs.
21.     This decision of the High Court was challenged by the

State Government before this Court in
Rajesh Chander Sood
(supra). This Court first posed the question as to whether a

vested right came to be created in the employees of the

corporate bodies when they came to be governed by the 1999

Scheme. On due consideration, this Court expressed the view

that such employees who had exercised their option to be

governed by the 1999 Scheme came to be regulated by the said

scheme immediately on their having submitted their option. In

addition, all those employees who did not exercise any option

were automatically deemed to have opted for the 1999 Scheme.

As soon as the concerned employees came to be governed by

the 1999 Scheme, a contingent right stood vested in them. On

the question as to whether such a contingent right was binding

and irrevocable, this Court held that the same was not binding

on the State Government. Before dealing with the said issue,

this Court examined the question as to whether the State
24
Government was justified in postulating a cut-off date by

which some of the employees governed by the 1999 Scheme

(those who had retired prior to 02.12.2004 were entitled to

draw pension under the 1999 Scheme whereas those who had

not retired by the time the repeal notification was issued on

02.12.2004 were denied such benefit), the above question was

answered by this Court in the following manner:
75. Having given our thoughtful consideration to the
      issue   canvassed,    and    having   gone   through    the
      judgments cited, we are of the considered view that this
      Court has repeatedly upheld a cut-off date, for extending
      better and higher pensionary benefits, based on the
      financial health of the employer. A cut-off date can,
      therefore, legitimately be prescribed for extending
      pensionary benefits, if the funds available cannot
      assuage the liability, to all the existing pensioners. We
      are, therefore, satisfied to conclude that it is well within
      the authority of the State Government, in exercise of its
      administrative powers (which it exercised, by issuing the
      impugned Repeal Notification dated 02-12-2004) to fix a
      cut-off date, for continuing the right to receive pension
      in some, and depriving some others of the same. This
      right was unquestionably exercised by the State
      Government, as determined by this Court, in
R.R. Verma
25
case [
R.R. Verma v. Union of India
, (1980) 3 SCC 402:
1980 SCC (L&S) 423] , wherein this Court held that the
        Government was vested with the inherent power to
        review. And that the Government was free to alter its
        earlier administrative decisions and policy. Surely, this
        is what the State Government has done in the present
        controversy. But this Court in the abovementioned
        judgment, placed a rider on the exercise of such power
        by the Government. In that, the exercise of such power
        should be in consonance with all legal and statutory
        obligations.
21.1.     A contention was raised on behalf of the employees

that by application of the principle of estoppel/ promissory

estoppel, the State should not have gone back on the 1999

Scheme by issuing the repeal notification dated 02.12.2004.
This Court repelled the above contention as under:
79. We are of the considered view that the principle of
        estoppel/promissory estoppel cannot be invoked at the
        hands of the respondent employees, in the facts and
        circumstances of this case. It is not as if the rights which
        had accrued to the respondent employees under the
        Employees' Provident Fund Scheme, 1995 (under which
        the respondent employees were governed, prior to their
        being governed by the 1999 Scheme) have in any
        manner been altered to their disadvantage. All that was
26
taken away, and given up by the respondent employees
by way of foregoing the employer's contribution up to 31-
3-1999 (including the accrued interest thereon), by way
of transfer to the corpus fund, was restored to the
respondent employees. All the respondent employees,
who have been deprived of their pensionary claims by
the Repeal Notification dated 02-12-2004, would be
entitled to all the rights which had accrued to them,
under the Employees' Provident Fund Scheme, 1995. It
is, therefore, not possible for us to accept that the
respondent employees can be stated to have been made
to irretrievably alter their position, to their detriment.
Furthermore, all the corporate bodies (with which the
respondent employees, are engaged) are independent
juristic entities, as held in
State of Assam v. Barak
Upatyaka     D.U.       Karmachari    Sanstha [State     of
Assam
v. Barak Upatyaka D.U. Karmachari Sanstha,
(2009) 5 SCC 694 : (2009) 2 SCC (L&S) 109] . The mere
fact that the corporate bodies under reference, are fully
controlled by the State Government, and the State
Government is the ultimate authority to determine their
conditions of service, under their articles of association,
is   inconsequential.    Undoubtedly,    the   respondent
employees are not government employees. The State
Government, as a welfare measure, had ventured to
honestly extend some post-retiral benefits to employees
of such independent legal entities, on the mistaken
27
belief, arising out of a miscalculation, that the same can
        be catered to, out of available resources. This measure
        was adopted by the State Government, not in its
        capacity as the employer of the respondent employees,
        but as a welfare measure. When it became apparent that
        the welfare measure extended by the State Government,
        could not be sustained as originally understood, the
        same was sought to be withdrawn.
21.2.     Therefore, this Court held that it was not possible in

law to apply the principle of estoppel/ promissory estoppel to

the facts of the present controversy.
21.3.     As regards the financial viability of the 1999 Scheme,

this Court held thus:
84. Moving to the next contention. A serious dispute has
        been raised before us, in respect of the financial viability
        of the 1999 Scheme. Insofar as the appellant State is
        concerned, it was asserted on its behalf, that a High-
Level Committee was constituted by the Finance
        Department of the State Government on 21-1-2003. The
        said committee comprised of Managing Directors of the
        public sector undertakings and corporations concerned.
        The task of the High-Level Committee was to examine
        the financial viability of the 1999 Scheme. The said
        committee submitted a report dated 28-10-2003,
28
returning a finding that the 1999 Scheme was not
financially viable, and would not be self-sustaining. It is,
therefore, that a tentative decision was taken by the
State Government, to withdraw the 1999 Scheme.
85. To determine the modalities for withdrawing the
1999 Scheme, on the basis of the above report, the
matter was jointly examined by the Finance Department
and the Law Department of the State Government,
wherein, in consonance with the advice tendered by the
Law Department it was decided that the 1999 Scheme
should not be withdrawn retrospectively. Based on the
advice of the Law Department, it was finally decided that
those who had commenced to draw pensionary benefits
under the 1999 Scheme, would not be deprived of the
same. And that, the 1999 Scheme should be withdrawn
prospectively,   for   those   whose    right   to   receive
pensionary benefits had not arisen, as they had not yet
retired from service. In the above view of the matter, it
was contended on behalf of the State Government that
the action of the State Government in issuing the Repeal
Notification dated 2-12-2004, was certainly not an
arbitrary exercise of the power of administrative review.
It was submitted that the same was based on two
factors. Firstly, the financial unviability of the scheme.
And secondly, those who had already commenced to
draw pensionary benefits under the 1999 Scheme, were
not to be affected. It was, therefore, pointed out that the
29
classification made by the State Government was
reasonable and justifiable in law, and it also had a nexus
to the object sought to be achieved.
86. It is in the above scenario that the legality and
justiciability of the 1999 Scheme, will have to be
examined. The submission advanced at the behest of the
respondent employees was that it was not permissible
for the State Government to advance any such plea,
because the State Government must be deemed to have
examined the financial viability of the Scheme, before
the 1999 Scheme was given effect to. And that, it does
not lie in the mouth of the State Government, after giving
effect to the 1999 Scheme, to assert that the 1999
Scheme was not financially viable. It was insisted that
even if data pertaining to the financial viability of the
Scheme, as was sought to be relied upon was correct,
financial deficiencies, if any, could be catered to by the
State Government, from the vast financial resources
available to it. And further, that the 1999 Scheme in
terms of the determination rendered by the High Court,
even if permitted to be repealed, should not impact the
rights of the respondent employees, towards pensionary
benefits.
87. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the
above contention. It is not possible for us to accept the
instant     contention,   advanced   on   behalf   of   the
30
respondent employees. The calculations projected at the
behest of the State Government, to demonstrate the
financial unviability of the Scheme, have not been
disputed. The same have been detailed in paras 10 and
11 above. The basis thereof, projected by the High-Level
Committee, admittedly constitutes the rationale for
issuing the Repeal Notification dated 02-12-2004. We
are of the view that the consideration at the hands of the
State Government was conscious and pointed, and was
supported by facts and figures. It is apparent that out
of 17 corporations/boards who were invited to express
their views on the issue, only 7 had actually done so. It
is not the case of the respondent employees that any one
of those who had expressed their views, contested the
fact that the pension scheme was not self-financing.
Those who expressed their views affirmed that the
pension scheme could be salvaged only with government
support. Those who did not express their views,
obviously had no comments to offer. The position
projected by the State Government, therefore, cannot be
considered to have been effectively rebutted. Certain
facts and figures, have indeed been projected, on behalf
of the respondent employees. These have been recorded
by us in paras 60 and 61. Financial calculations cannot
be made casually, on a generalised basis. In the absence
of any authenticity, and that too with reference to all the
20 corporate entities specified in Schedule I of the 1999
31
Scheme, the projections made on behalf of the
respondent    employees,    cannot    be   accepted,   as
constituting a legitimate basis, for a favourable legal
determination. Since the respondent employees have
not been able to demonstrate that the foundational basis
for withdrawing the 1999 Scheme, was not premised on
any arbitrary consideration, or alternatively, was not
founded on any irrelevant consideration, it is not
possible for us to accept the contention that the
withdrawal of the 1999 Scheme, was not based on due
consideration, or that, it was irrational or arbitrary or
unreasonable. We are also satisfied that the action of the
State Government, in allowing those who had already
started earning pensionary benefits under the 1999
Scheme, was based on a legitimate classification,
acceptable in law. In the above view of the matter, the
action of the State Government cannot be described as
arbitrary, and as such, violative of
Article 14
of the
Constitution of India. We are also satisfied in concluding
that the understanding of the State Government (which
had resulted in introducing the 1999 Scheme) on being
found to be based on an incorrect calculation, with
reference to the viability of the corpus fund (to operate
the 1999 Scheme), had to be administratively reviewed.
And that the State Government's determination in
exercising its power of review, was well founded.
32
21.4.      Having held so, this Court accepted the contention

canvassed on behalf of the State that budgetary allocations are

a matter of policy decision and that the High Court should not

have transferred the financial liability of the Corporation to run

the 1999 Scheme to the State Government. This Court held as

follows:
88. It is also not possible for us to accept that any court
        has the jurisdiction to fasten a monetary liability on the
        State Government, as is the natural consequence, of the
        impugned order passed by the High Court, unless it
        emerges from the rights and liabilities canvassed in the
        lis itself. Budgetary allocations, are a matter of policy
        decisions. The State Government while promoting the
        1999 Scheme, felt that the same would be self-financing.
The State Government never intended to allocate
        financial resources out of State funds, to run the
        pension scheme. The State Government, in the instant
        view of the matter, could not have been burdened with
        the liability, which it never contemplated, in the first
        place. Moreover, it is the case of the respondent
        employees themselves, that a similar pension scheme,
        floated for civil servants in the State of Himachal
        Pradesh,   has    also   been   withdrawn.     The   State
        Government has demonstrated its incapacity, to provide
        the required financial resources. We are, therefore, of
33
the view that the High Court should not (as it could not)
        have transferred the financial liability to run the 1999
        Scheme, to the State Government. Similar suggestions
        made by the corporate bodies concerned, cannot
        constitute a basis for fastening the residuary liability on
        the Government.
21.5.     This Court rejected the contention of the employees

that they should be treated similarly like government

employees. Claim for parity with government employees was

held to be wholly misconceived. Thereafter, this Court held

that the State Government had the competence to repeal the

1999 Scheme. By doing so, the State Government had not

curtailed the right of the employees to receive pension; they

would continue to receive pension under the erstwhile pension

scheme but would not get the additional benefits under the

1999 Scheme.
22.       Though learned senior counsel for the petitioners had

argued that the judgment in
Rajesh Chander Sood
(supra) is

per incuriam, we are unable to hold so. This Court had given

elaborate reasons while allowing the civil appeal of the State

thereby reversing the judgment of the High Court, including
34
upholding the cut-off date of 02.12.2004. Merely because

according to the petitioners the reasons given in the judgment

while accepting the stand of the State may not be in sync with

previous decisions, it cannot be said to be a judgment rendered

per incuriam. The concept of per incuriam is too well settled to

warrant a detailed analysis here.
The judgment rendered in
Rajesh Chandra Sood
(supra) by no stretch can be said to have

ignored any binding precedent. Hence, the same cannot be

said to be a judgment rendered per incuriam.
23.     From the above, it is evident that the contentions that

are being raised now were all advanced before this Court in
Rajesh Chander Sood
(supra) and those were all adjudicated.

It is not open for the petitioners to once again seek the same

reliefs as was sought in the earlier round of litigation which

were negatived by this Court. High Court had allowed the claim

of the employees (petitioners of the previous round and

similarly situated employees like the present petitioners).

When this Court had set aside the judgment of the High Court,

it is evident that the claim of not only those petitioners but

similarly situated employees (like the present petitioners) were
35
also negatived.
Therefore, there cannot be any challenge either

      directly or collaterally to the decision of this Court in
Rajesh

      Chander Sood
(supra) in a proceeding under
Article 32
of the

      Constitution of India.
24.
In
Naresh   Shridhar   Mirajkar   Vs.   State   of

      Maharashtra6
, a nine-Judge Bench of this Court considered

      the question as to whether a judicial order passed by the High

      Court prohibiting publication in newspapers of evidence given

      by witnesses pending the hearing of the suit was amenable to

      be corrected by a writ of certiorari under
Article 32(2)
of the

      Constitution of India. Other issues were also gone into by this

      Court but that may not be relevant for the purpose of the

      present discourse. After deliberating on the facts and law, this

      Court opined that validity or propriety of such an order passed

      by the High Court could not be raised in writ proceedings

      taken out for the issuance of a writ of certiorari under Article
32. This Court declared that it was impossible to accept the

      argument of the petitioners that judicial orders passed by the
6
AIR 1967 SC 1
36
High Courts in or in relation to proceedings pending before

      them are amenable to be corrected by this Court under
Article

      32
of the Constitution of India.
25.          This Court in
Sub-Inspector Sadhan Kumar Goswami

      Vs. Union of India7
, considered a writ petition filed under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India seeking to reopen a

      judgment of this Court rendered under
Article 136
of the

      Constitution of India. After an analysis of the facts, this Court

      declared that merely because the petitioners were not parties

      to the previous decision, they could not file a writ petition

      under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India. In fact, this Court

      took serious exception to the filing of such writ petitions.
26.
Rupa Ashok Hurra Vs. Ashok Hurra8
was a case where

      a Constitution Bench of this Court considered the question as

      to whether a writ petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution

      of India can be maintained to question the validity of a

      judgment of this Court after the petition for review of
the said

      judgment
was dismissed.
While deliberating upon the said
7
(1997) 2 SCC 225
8
(2002) 4 SCC 388
37
question, this Court referred to its previous decision in
A.R.

     Antulay Vs. R.S. Nayak9
where a seven-Judge Bench of this

     Court held that an order of this Court was not amenable to

     correction by issuance of a writ of certiorari under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India.
Rupa Ashok Hurra
(supra), of

     course, went on to hold that to prevent abuse of its process

     and to cure gross miscarriage of justice, this Court may

     reconsider its judgment(s) in exercise of its inherent power. For

     that, this Court provided for a curative jurisdiction post-

     dismissal of review petition by filing curative petition. In the

     present proceedings, we are not required to delve into the

     contours of curative jurisdiction.
27.         This Court in
Omprakash Verma Vs. State of Andhra

     Pradesh10
reiterated the well-settled principle that a judgment

     of the Supreme Court cannot be collaterally challenged on the

     ground that certain points had not been considered.
28.         Again, in the case of Indian Council for
Enviro-Legal

     Action Vs. Union of India11
, this Court held that a writ petition
9
(1988) 2 SCC 602
10
(2010) 13 SCC 158
11
(2011) 8 SCC 161
38
filed under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India assailing the

      correctness of a decision of the Supreme Court on merits or

      seeking reconsideration is not maintainable.
Referring to its

      earlier decision in
Khoday Distilleries Ltd. Vs. Registrar

      General
, Supreme Court of India         12,   the Court held that

      reconsideration of the final decision of the Supreme Court after

      review petition is dismissed by way of a writ petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India cannot be sustained.

      Judgment and order of this Court passed under
Article 136
of

      the Constitution of India is not amenable to judicial review

      under
Article 32
of the Constitution.
29.          Thus, law is well settled that a decision rendered by

      this Court, be it at the stage of special leave petition or post

      grant of leave while exercising jurisdiction under
Article 136
of

      the Constitution of India, cannot be assailed directly or

      collaterally under
Article 32.
Remedy of an aggrieved litigant is

      to file for review. If the grievance persists even thereafter, he

      may invoke the curative jurisdiction subject to compliance of

      the requirements of such jurisdiction. But certainly it is not
12
(1996) 3 SCC 114
39
open for him to file a writ petition under
Article 32
of the

      Constitution of India seeking the same relief.
30.          Therefore, it is crystal clear that the present writ

      petition is thoroughly misconceived and is liable to be

      dismissed. However, before parting with the record, we would

      like to emphasize and reiterate the principle of finality of an

      adjudication process. Finality of a lis is a core facet of a sound

      judicial system. Litigation which had concluded or had

      reached finality cannot be reopened. A litigant who is aggrieved

      by a decision rendered by this Court in a special leave petition

      or in a civil appeal arising therefrom can seek its review by

      invoking the review jurisdiction and thereafter through a

      curative petition. But such a decision cannot be assailed in a

      writ proceeding under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India. If

      this is permitted, then there will be no finality and no end to

      litigation. There will be chaos in the administration of justice.
31.
In
Green View Tea & Industries Vs. Collector
13, this

      Court expressed the view that finality of an order of the

      Supreme Court should not lightly be unsettled.
This salutary
13
(2002) 1 SCC 109
40
principle was reiterated by this Court in Indian Council for
Enviro-Legal Action Vs. Union of India14
.
32.          Thus, having regard to the discussions made above,

      we are of the unhesitant view that the present writ petition

      filed under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India is wholly

      misconceived. The decision of this Court in
Rajesh Chander

      Sood
(supra) is clearly binding on the petitioners. That being

      the position, there is no merit in the writ petition which is

      accordingly dismissed.
33.          Considering the fact that petitioners are retired

      employees and senior citizens, we refrain from imposing any

      cost.
..……………………………J.
                                            [SURYA KANT]


                                            ……………………………..J.
                                            [DIPANKAR DATTA]



                                             ……………………………..J.
                                             [UJJAL BHUYAN]

      NEW DELHI;
APRIL 16, 2025.
14
(2011) 8 SCC 161
41