[Cites
5
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Raju Narayana Swamy vs State Of Kerala on 23 April, 2025
Author:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
2025 INSC 563
                                                                            REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3215 OF 2025

                              Raju Naryana Swamy                        …..Appellant(s)

                                                     VERSUS

                            State of Kerala & Ors.                      …..Respondent(s)

                                                JUDGMENT
Joymalya Bagchi, J.
1.      Appellant is an IAS officer of the 1991 batch in the Kerala

                         cadre. He has a brilliant academic record and is the seniormost

                         officer of the said batch. He was promoted to the grade of

                         Principal Secretary w.e.f. 1.06.2016. The next promotion was to

                         the grade of Chief Secretary. The selection to the Chief Secretary

                         grade is governed by Clause VI of the ‘Principles regarding

                         Promotion of Members of IAS’ as per Note 1 appended to Rule

                         3(1) of the IAS (Pay) Rules, 2016. The zone of consideration

                         comprises all members of the Service who have completed a
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
KAPIL TANDON
tenure of 30 years. The selection is to be made by a Screening
   Date: 2025.04.23
   18:27:20 IST
   Reason:
Committee consisting of the Chief Secretary, one officer working
Page 1 of 13
in the promotional grade cadre and another officer of the same

grade serving in Government of India.
2.      The Guidelines framed for functioning of Screening

Committee, inter alia, provide meetings of the Committee shall

be convened on a yearly basis to fill up existing as well as

anticipated vacancies in the cadre from the panel of eligible

candidates. A combined reading of relevant clauses1 governing



     1General Guidelines      for Promotion etc. and functioning of Screening
     Committees
     “Cl. 4.1 The proposals should be completed and submitted to the Committee
     well in time. No proposal for holding a Committee meeting should be sent until
     and unless at least 90% of the up-to-date and complete ACRs are available.
     Every effort should be made to keep the ACR dossiers up-to-date lest this
     aspect is advanced as the reason for not holding the Committee meetings in
     time. The officer referred in para 2 above would be responsible for monitoring
     and the completion of the ACR dossiers as per the extant instruction in this
     regard. In respect of cases relating to confirmation and assessment of the
     work and conduct of probationers, he would ensure the timely submission of
     the Assessment Reports etc.
     Cl. 6. Each Committee should decide its own method and procedure for
     objective assessment of the suitability of the candidates. While merit has to
     be recognized and rewarded,. advancement in an officer’s career should not
     be regarded as a matter of course. It should be earned by dint of hard work,
     good conduct and result oriented performance as reflected in the annual
     confidential report and based on strict and rigorous selection process. The
     misconception about “Average” performance also requires to be cleared. While
     “Average” may not be taken as adverse remark in respect of an officer, it
     cannot also be regarded as complimentary to the officer. Such performance
     should be regarded as routine and undistinguished. Nothing short of above-
     average and noteworthy performance should entitle an officer to recognition
     and suitable rewards in terms of career progression.
     Cl. 7.1 The Annual Confidential Reports are the basic inputs on the basis of
     which assessment is to be made by each Committee. The evaluation of ACRs
     should be fair, just and non-discriminatory. The Committee should consider
     ACRs for equal number of years in respect of all officers falling within the zone
     of consideration for assessing their suitability for promotion. Where one or
     more ACRs have not been written for any reason, the Committee should
     consider the available ACRs. If the Reviewing Authority or the Accepting
     Authority as the case may be, has overruled the Reporting Officer or the
     Reviewing Authority respectively, the remarks of the Accepting Authority
     should be taken as the final remarks for the purposes of assessment. While
     making the assessment, the Committee should not be guided merely by the
     overall grading that may be recorded in the ACRs but should make its own
     assessment on the basis of the overall entries made in the ACRs.
Page 2 of 13
the procedure for selection would show until and unless 90% of

updated and complete ACRs/PARs of an officer are available,

his proposal for promotion shall not be submitted to the

Committee. However, even if requisite percentage of ACRs have

not been written for any reason, the Committee is empowered to

consider available ACRs, subject to the appraisal of ACRs for

equal number of years in respect of all officers falling in the zone

of consideration. While making an assessment, the Committee

need not be guided merely by ACR gradings but is entitled to

make its own assessment of overall entries made in the ACRs.

There shall be no benchmark for assessing suitability of the

officers for promotion.
3.      The Committee shall also consider any major or minor

penalty or displeasure of any higher authority conveyed to the




     Cl. 7.2 In the case of each officer, an overall grading should be given which
     will be either “Fit” or “Unfit”. There will be no benchmark for assessing
     suitability of officers for promotions.
Cl. 7.3 Before making the overall grading, the Committee should take into
     account whether the officer has been awarded any major or minor penalty or
     whether any displeasure of any higher authority has been conveyed to him.
     Similarly, the Committee would also take note of the commendations received
     by the officer during his service career. The Committee would also give due
     regard to the remarks indicated against the column of integrity.
     The list of candidates considered by the Committee and the overall grading
     thus assigned to each candidate would form the basis for preparation of the
     panel for promotion.”
Page 3 of 13
officer in addition to commendation, if any, received during his

service career.
4.      Clause     23    of   the    Guidelines      permits      review   of

proceedings of the Selection Committee only if material facts

were not taken into consideration or if there were grave errors

in the procedure.
5.      In the present case, Screening Committee convened on

14.12.2020 for assessing suitability of eligible officers of 1991

Batch. Though the appellant was to complete 30 years of service

and 90% of his ACRs had not been written, he was assessed

along with other eligible officers as a ‘special case’ based on his

available ACRs. Upon assessment, the Screening Committee

found him ineligible for promotion holding as follows:
“4.       The Committee have examined entire ACRs/PARs of 30
     years in respect of the above officers and found that 90% of the
     ACRs/PARs are available in respect of all the officers except Dr.
     Raju Narayanaswamy. The Committee also noticed that no proposal
     for holding a committee meeting should be sent until and unless at
     least 90% of the up-to-date ACRs are available. As such as per para
     4.1 of Principles regarding Promotion of Members of the Indian
     Administrative Service and Composition of Departmental Promotion
     Committees, the name of Dr. Raju Narayanaswamy is not fit to be
     placed before the Screening Committee for considering as the
     ACRs/PARs of about five years are missing. However, Screening
     Committee has verified entire ACRs/PARs of Dr. Raju
     Narayanaswamy as a special case. The gradings/remarks
     recorded in his available ACRs/PARs are also not satisfactory. The
     Committee found that the performance of the officer has been below
Page 4 of 13
noteworthy over the years. After detailed discussion, the Committee,
           has come to the conclusion that the name of Dr. Raju
           Narayanaswamy, IAS is not fit to be included in the panel for
           promotion to the Apex Scale i.e. Chief Secretary Grade of IAS, the
           vital position in Administration. Hence, the Committee has decided
           not to recommend his name.”
6.         Aforesaid decision of the Screening Committee was

   approved by the Council of Ministers.
7.         Being aggrieved by the decision, appellant made a

   representation for review under Clause 23 of the Guidelines

   (supra). Since no steps were taken, appellant approached

   Central Administrative Tribunal2. CAT disposed of the matter

   directing the Review Committee to take a decision on the

   representation of the appellant within three months.
8.         Appellant being one of the seniormost officers, the

   Review Committee comprised the then Chief Secretary of the

   State. Appellant was given an opportunity of hearing before the

   hearing officer. After considering the report of the hearing

   officer, the Review Committee by order dated 27.04.2021

   rejected the application, inter alia, holding as follows:
“5.       On examining the report of the hearing officer, it is found
           that, there have been at least five instances where the officer has
           been rated poorly by the officials in the chain of command writing
           his Confidential Reports and his leadership quality and
           interpersonal skills have been rated as not befitting an officer who

2 Central Administrative Tribunal (‘CAT’ for short), Ernakulam Bench in O.A. 110/2021.
Page 5 of 13
has to lead a team. Also, there have been records in the ACRs/PARs
          regarding his absence from important meetings. The officer has been
          observed to be a serial litigant as per an ACRs/PARs. The officer in
          course of hearing threatened that he would be filing cases for
          defamation against the officers who wrote his ACRs/PARs. During
          the service period, the ACRs/PARs of the officer are not available for
          eleven instances. Among them 01.01.2001 to 16.09.2002 (1 year 8
          months 16 days) & 27.6.2008 to 31.03.2010 (1 year 9 months and
          5 days) are the longest periods in which the APARs of the officer are
          not available. Further, during the period from 19.3.2019 to
          17.3.2020, the Officer has been on unauthorised absence which has
          not been regularised so far.”
9.        Review Committee further noted the adverse remarks in

   the ACRs/PARs were substantiated by relevant records. Other

   than ACRs/PARs, the Committee observed instances of lack of

   interpersonal skills evident from the conclusion of the Fact

   Finding report and observations by CAT3 enumerating detailed

   instances of indiscipline and improprieties of the officer.
10.       Aggrieved by such decision, appellant approached CAT4.

   CAT dismissed the application which was challenged by

   appellant before the High Court.
11.       The High Court noted 90% of appellant’s ACR were not

   available and the Screening Committee was handicapped in

   considering his case for want of ACRs. The Court also observed

   appellant failed to demonstrate that he had submitted self-



3 CAT, Madras Bench in O.A. No. 310/1011/2019.
4 CAT, Ernakulam Bench in O.A. 180/199/2021.
Page 6 of 13
appraisal forms for preparing ACRs. Accordingly, High Court

   without going into the correctness of the decision of the Review

   Committee gave liberty to appellant to approach the authorities

   for preparation of his ACRs and consider his promotion to the

   grade of Chief Secretary after ensuring availability of 90% of his

   ACRs.
12.     Mr. R. Basant, learned Senior Counsel and Mr. Subhash

   Chandran, learned counsel appearing for the appellant contend

   the Review Committee travelled beyond the reasons recorded by

   Screening Committee to justify rejection of claim for promotion.

   Instead of assessing the appellant solely on his post-2016

   grading i.e. ‘outstanding’ and ‘very good’, Committee relied on

   adverse entries prior to 2016 which had been ‘washed off’

   pursuant to appellant’s promotion. The Review Committee also

   illegally took into consideration the observations in the Fact

   Finding report, which was neither a part of ACRs nor

   communicated to the appellant. Even the findings in the CAT

   order5 not being a part of the ACRs ought not to have been

   looked into. These are serious procedural irregularities which

   were glossed over by the High Court. Without examining the


5 CAT, Madras Bench in O.A. No. 310/1011/2019
Page 7 of 13
matter from this perspective, High Court merely gave appellant

liberty to approach the authorities for fresh consideration after

generation of 90% of ACRs.
13.      In reply, Mr. Giri with Mr. Jayanth Muth Raj, learned

Senior Counsels for the respondent-State argued though 90% of

appellant’s ACRs were not written, he was considered as a

‘special case’. Post his promotion in 2016, only two ACRs were

available. This necessitated the Committee to look into prior

ACRs/PARs of the appellant. Even if one ignores the notings in

prior ACRs, service records for 2019-20 show the appellant had

unauthorizedly absented himself for about a year i.e. from

19.03.2019 to 16.03.2020. Promotion to the highest grade i.e.

Chief Secretary grade is a sensitive matter and requires

examination of the entire service record. Respondents 3 and 4

have also supported these contentions through their written

submissions.
14.      The nub of the challenge thrown to the decision of the

Review     Committee      is     that    it   had    considered

additional/extraneous materials in rejecting the appellant’s

prayer for review.
Page 8 of 13
15.        It is contended the Review Committee could not have

   considered the adverse entries made in ACRs/PARs prior to the

   appellant’s promotion in 2016.
16.
In support of the plea, reliance is placed on
Baidyanath

   Mahapatra v. State of Orissa6
,
Pyare Mohan Lal v. State of

   Jharkhand & Ors.7
and High Court of Judicature at
Patna v.

   Shyam Deo Singh & Ors.8 Cited
authorities deal with impact of

   pre-promotion adverse entries in ACRs on the issue of

   compulsory retirement, though in passing it is observed such

   prior entries may not be considered for further promotion.
17.
In
Badrinath vs. Government of Tamil Nadu & Ors.9
the

   impact of prior entries in ACRs on promotion squarely fell for

   decision. This Court summarized the law as:
“58. From the above judgments, the following principles can be
            summarised:
(1) Under
Article 16
of the Constitution, right to be “considered” for
            promotion is a fundamental right. It is not the mere “consideration”
            for promotion that is important but the “consideration” must be
            “fair” according to established principles governing service
            jurisprudence.
(2) Courts will not interfere with assessment made by
            Departmental Promotion Committees unless the aggrieved officer
            establishes that the non-promotion was bad according
            to Wednesbury principles or it was mala fides.
            (3) Adverse remarks of an officer for the entire period of service can
            be taken into consideration while promoting an officer or while

6 (1989) 4 SCC 664
7 (2010) 10 SCC 693
8 (2014) 4 SCC 773
9 (2000) 8 SCC 395
Page 9 of 13
passing an order of compulsory retirement. But the weight which
       must be attached to the adverse remarks depends upon certain
       sound principles of fairness.
(4) If the adverse remarks relate to a distant past and relate to
       remarks such as his not putting his maximum effort or so on, then
       those remarks cannot be given weight after a long distance of time,
       particularly if there are no such remarks during the period before
       his promotion. This is the position even in cases of compulsory
       retirement.
(5) If the adverse remarks relate to a period prior to an earlier
       promotion they must be treated as having lost their sting and as
       weak material, subject however to the rider that if they related to
       dishonesty or lack of integrity they can be considered to have not
       lost their strength fully so as to be ignored altogether.
       (6) Uncommunicated adverse remarks could be relied upon even if
       no opportunity was given to represent against them before an order
       of compulsory retirement is passed.”

                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
18.    Applying the ratio to the facts of the case, it appears that

the Committee was entitled to consider the entire service record

of the appellant while considering him for promotion to the

highest echelons of civil service. But the adverse entries prior to

his earlier promotion would lose their sting and be treated as

‘weak material’ unless they relate to dishonesty or lack of

integrity.
19.      Admittedly, adverse entries in ACRs prior to earlier

promotion in 2016 do not relate to dishonesty and cannot by

themselves constitute a ground to deny promotion to the next

higher grade. But if the service record of the officer post

promotion shows a similar trend of lack of discipline or

interpersonal skills as reflected in the earlier entries, it may lend
Page 10 of 13
assurance to conclusion of the Committee that the earlier

promotion has not invigorated the officer concerned and he

continues to dwell in similar aberrations justifying the denial of

further promotion.
20.     The Review Committee had examined the entire service

record of appellant and noted that in 2019-20 appellant had

absented himself for about a year without justifiable cause. A

show cause notice was also issued in this regard. Subsequently

the said period has been treated as ‘non-duty’ i.e. absence

without leave. This conduct was taken into consideration to

deny promotion to appellant to the highest echelon of civil

service. It cannot be said that the decision of the Review

Committee was solely based on adverse entries in ACRs/PARs

prior to promotion or on uncommunicated observations in the

Fact Finding report.
21.    The submission that the Review Committee looked into

additional material and supplied new reasons to justify denial

of promotion is erroneous. The rationale expressed by Screening

Committee was merely amplified by the Review Committee in

light of the submissions and material placed by appellant.
Page 11 of 13
During hearing of his review application, appellant alleged his

reporting authorities were biased and threatened to sue them

for defamation. Refuting such claim, Review Committee

observed noting the appellant’s brilliance he had been awarded

high grades to give him a chance for correction, which he failed

to utilize.   Such observation shows a fair and objective

assessment     by    Review     Committee    after   taking   into

consideration both commendations and adverse conduct of

appellant.
22.    Individual excellence may sometimes lead to superiority

complex and hinder commitment to discipline, decorum and

collegiality. Keeping in mind the essential requisite of collective

leadership in highest echelons of civil service, the Committee

was justified in giving due weightage to lack of adherence to

discipline and collegiality.
23.     Mr. Basant’s argument that no benchmark score was

fixed as per Rule 2 of IAS (Pay) Rules, 2016 is of little

consequence. Clause 7.2 of the Guidelines unequivocally states

that no benchmark is to be fixed. Be that as it may, failure to

fix benchmark score cannot be treated as a marker of
Page 12 of 13
arbitrariness or discrimination since appellant was considered

  as a ‘special case’ though 90% of his ACRs were not available.
24.   In view of the aforesaid, it cannot be said the decision of

  the Committee is either mala fide or so unreasonable that a man

  of ordinary prudence would not have come to such a conclusion.

  It may also be relevant to bear in mind that Screening

  Committee decision had not been assailed by appellant.
25. Much water has flown since then. In 2021 as well as 2022,

  appellant’s case was again considered and rejected by the

  Screening Committee.    Thereafter, the High Court has again

  given opportunity to the appellant to approach the authorities

  concerned   for   generation    of   90%   of   the   ACRs   and

  reconsideration of his case. Given this situation, no case for

  interference is made out and the appeal is dismissed.
….……..…..……...……………………….J.
                             (PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA)



                             ….……..…..……...……………………….J.
                                         (JOYMALYA BAGCHI)
New Delhi,
April 23, 2025
Page 13 of 13