[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Amit Kumar vs Nihal Singh on 23 April, 2025
Author:
Sanjay Karol
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
NON-REPORTABLE

                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
2025 INSC 584                              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CIVIL APPEAL No(s).           /2025
                            (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) No. 8929/2024)


                         AMIT KUMAR                                                   APPELLANT(S)

                                                      VERSUS

                         NIHAL SINGH & ORS.                                          RESPONDENT(S)

                                                          O R D E R
Leave granted.
2.     On perusal of the Office Report dated 22.04.2025, it is

                         noted that respondent Nos.1 and 3 were served on 03.05.2024 and

                         respondent No.2 was again served on 13.09.2024. However, there

                         is no appearance on behalf of the said respondents. Hence, they

                         are placed ex parte.
3.     Briefly   stated,   the    facts   of   the   case   are   that   the

                         appellant, along with respondent No. 3, had purchased the suit

                         schedule property situated at Khasra No. 13/2 in Village of

                         Nagla Bhambhu Jaat, Tehsil Sasni, District Hathras, from Smt.

                         Satyawati Devi under a registered sale deed dated 12.08.1997.

                         The respondent No. 1 was a tenant on the property and it was

                         rented to him to run a service station. Therefore, he possessed

                         a room, a shed, a water tank, etc. on the rented property which
Signature Not Verifiedhe had constructed. The monthly rent that used to be paid by
Digitally signed by
RADHA SHARMA
Date: 2025.04.29
17:11:45 IST
Reason:
respondent No. 1 was Rs. 500/- (Rupees Five Hundred only). But

                         since March 2021, the respondent No. 1 had stopped paying the
1
monthly rent. In June 2021, the appellant got to know that the

respondent No. 1 had sub-let the property to respondent No. 2

and therefore he was making an unlawful gain from the property

and depriving the appellant of the monthly rents.
4.      The appellant and respondent No. 3 then filed a suit being

Small Cause Case No. 8/01 before the Court of Civil Judge (Jr.

Div.) Hathras, seeking the eviction of respondent Nos. 1 and 2

from the schedule property and recovery of the arrears of rent

and damages. By order dated 10.07.2019, the Small Causes Judge,

Hathras decreed the suit and directed respondent No. 1 to hand

over possession of the disputed suit schedule property to the

appellant and to pay the arrears of rent for the period from

01.03.2021 to 07.07.2021 at the rate of Rs. 500/- (Rupees Five

Hundred only) per month.
5.      Being   aggrieved    by   the        decree   dated     10.07.2019,     the

respondent Nos. 1 and 2 filed a revision petition being Small

Cause    Revision   No.   16/2019          before   the   Court   of   Additional

Sessions Judge, Hathras. The said revision petition was allowed

by   the   Revisional     Court   on       25.05.2023     and   the    matter   was

remanded to the trial court to be decided afresh by hearing

both parties. The Revisional Court held that the trial court

has to first decide the issue if the schedule property is an

open land, on the basis of which it will be decided if the

Small Causes Court has the jurisdiction to decide the suit.
2
6.       Being    aggrieved        by    the       order      dated     28.10.2023,          the

appellant and respondent No. 3 filed a petition under
Article

227
of    the    Constitution          of        India      before     High    Court        of

Judicature        at     Allahabad.        By       the       impugned        order      dated

28.10.2023,       the    High    Court     has      upheld       the    findings       of    the

Revisional Court to the extent of remanding the matter to the

trial court to decide as to, whether, the schedule property was

an open land and accordingly if the Small Causes Court had the

jurisdiction       to     decide    the       suit.        The    present       appeal       has

therefore been filed by the appellant to challenge the impugned

order dated 28.10.2023 passed by the High Court in Matters

Under
Article 227
No. 8579 of 2023.
7.    Since there has been no representation on behalf of the

respondents       who     have    been    placed          ex-parte,      we     have     heard

learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant only.
8.    Learned          senior    counsel       submitted         that    the     Revisional

Court as well as the High Court were not right in remanding the

matter to the Trial Court by setting aside the judgment and

decree     of    the    Trial    Court     so      as    to    decide    on     point       No.2

contained in ‘paragraph 12’ of the Revisional Court’s order

inasmuch as the dispute as to whether the schedule property was

open land or not had to be adjudicated upon afresh.
9.    Learned senior counsel for the appellant submitted that

the entire controversy raised by the respondents-defendants was

wholly     unwarranted      inasmuch          as    in        ‘paragraph       18’     of    the
3
written      statement      of     the       respondents-defendants,      it   was

categorically stated that there were several structures on the

disputed plot and therefore it cannot be considered to be an

open land simpliciter so as to raise an issue to the effect

that the       Small Causes Courts had no jurisdiction to entertain

the suit.
10.    He drew our attention to ‘paragraph 18’ of the written

statement filed by the respondents/defendants (Annexure P-4 of

the memorandum of the Special Leave Petition) and contended

that    in     view   of    the    categorical       admission    made    by   the

respondents herein, the controversy did not arise at all. In

the circumstances, learned senior counsel for the appellant

contended that the U.P. Act No. 13 of 1972 relied upon by the

Revisional Court was not applicable and the suit for eviction

was maintainable.
11.    In this regard it was submitted that U.P. Act No.13 of

1972, called the
Uttar Pradesh Urban Buildings (Regulation of

Letting, Rent and Eviction) Act, 1972
applies only to urban

properties whereas the suit scheduled property is in a rural

area. In this regard, our attention was drawn to the aforesaid

Act. It was contended that the categorical admission made on

behalf of the respondents herein would imply that the suit for

eviction was maintainable before the Small Causes Court, Civil

Judge, Hathras which has rightly decreed the suit. Therefore,

the    order    of    the   High    Court       affirming   the   order   of   the

Revisional Court as well as the order of the Revisional Court
4
may be set aside and the judgment and decree of the Trial Court

may be given effect to.
12.    We have considered the submissions of learned counsel for

the appellant in light of the material on record. We find that

the appellant herein had purchased the suit schedule property

under a registered sale deed dated 12.08.1997, from one Smt.

Satyawati Devi; defendant No.1 was the tenant of the property

consisting of a room, a shed, a water tank, etc. The monthly

tenancy was Rs. 500/- (Rupees five hundred only). Defendant No.

1 had paid the rents till 28.02.2001, after which the tenancy

was used as a service station. From 01.03.2001 onwards, the

appellant has not received rents.
13.    In the circumstances, the appellant was constrained to

file Small Causes Case No. 8/2001 seeking the relief of arrears

of rents as well as the eviction of the tenants from the suit

schedule property; that in the said suit as noted above, the

defendants have admitted the fact that the property in question

had construction as well as there was land appurtenant thereto.

Paragraph 18 of the written statement of the defendants reads

as under:
“18.   That on the disputed plot, several structures
      have been erected, including a solid built room, a
      water tank, a service station, and two steps.
      Additionally, a jet pump has been installed, and an
      approved electricity connection is registered under
      the name of defendant No.1.         Furthermore, the
      surrounding foundation has been completely filled.”
5
14.    When there has been an admission on the part of the

defendants/respondents herein that the suit schedule property

consisted of a room, a water tank, a service station and a jet

pump installed with electricity connection which was being used

for the purpose of washing of vehicles, then it cannot be said

that the suit schedule property was an open land as such.
15.    Since the Trial Court had adjudicated the suit and had

granted    the    decree      in   favour    of   the    appellant    herein    by

directing the eviction of the tenants/defendants/respondents,

issue No.2 raised in the Revision Petition filed by them being

Revision Small Causes No.16/2019 was wholly otiose. This was

because all that the Revisional Court had to note was whether

the decree granted by the Trial Court was just and proper or

not.     When    the    respondents         herein      had   not    raised    any

jurisdictional issue with respect to the jurisdiction of the

Small Causes Courts to entertain the suit, in the face of the

categorical admission made by them in paragraph 18 of their

written statement, issue No.2 raised was unnecessarily raised.

On that point, the matter was remanded to the Trial Court which

order has been affirmed by the High Court in the impugned

order.
We find that in the facts and circumstances of this case,

raising    of    the   said    issue   was    wholly      unnecessary   and    the

correctness or otherwise of the decree only had to be seen. In

view of the admission of the respondents herein, we do not

think that any issue touching upon the jurisdiction of the
6
Small Causes Court to adjudicate the suit arose at all.
16.   In the circumstances, we set aside the impugned order of

the High Court, which has affirmed the order the Revisional

Court. Consequently, the judgment and decree of the Trial Court

is sustained.
17.   The     respondents/defendants          are   directed    to    handover

vacant   possession    of    the    suit       schedule    property   to   the

appellant herein on or before 31st October, 2025.
During the said period, the respondents shall not cause

any damage to the said property. They shall not create any

third-party interest; they shall pay the rents and arrears of

rents as decreed in the suit.
18.   In the event there is any failure on the part of the

respondents    to   comply   with       the    aforesaid   conditions,     then

liberty is reserved to the appellant herein to seek execution

of this order.
This appeal is allowed and disposed of in the aforesaid

terms.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
……………………………………………………………….,J.
(B.V. NAGARATHNA)



                                              ………………………………………………………………..,J.
(SANJAY KAROL)

NEW DELHI;
APRIL 23, 2025.
7
ITEM NO.6                    COURT NO.7                      SECTION XI

                 S U P R E M E C O U R T O F     I N D I A
                         RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (C) No(s). 8929/2024
[Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 28-10-2023
in MUA227 No. 8579/2023 passed by the High Court of Judicature at
Allahabad]

AMIT KUMAR                                            Petitioner(s)

                                   VERSUS

NIHAL SINGH & ORS.                                    Respondent(s)

(IA No. 85876/2024 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T.)

Date : 23-04-2025 This matter was called on for hearing today.

CORAM :
HON'BLE MRS. JUSTICE B.V. NAGARATHNA
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KAROL

For Petitioner(s)    Mr. C. Mohan Rao, Sr. Adv.
Mr. K. B.Upadhyay, Adv.
Mr. Shailesh Tiwari, Adv.
Mr. Raja Ram Tripathi, Adv.
Ms. Kalpana, Adv.
Mr. Pushkar Anand, AOR

For Respondent(s) :
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                               O R D E R

            Leave granted.
The appeal is allowed and disposed of in terms of

    the signed non-reportable order which is placed on the

    file.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed

    of.
(RADHA SHARMA)                                     (DIVYA BABBAR)
ASTT. REGISTRAR-cum-PS                           COURT MASTER (NSH)
8