[Cites
19
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
N. Eswaranathan vs State Represented By The Deputy ... on 17 April, 2025
Author:
Bela M. Trivedi
Bench:
Bela M. Trivedi
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
 2025 INSC 509                          CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                   SLP (CRIMINAL) Diary No(s). 55057/2024

                         N. ESWARANATHAN                                       Petitioner(s)

                                                            VERSUS


                         STATE REPRESENTED BY THE DEPUTY                   Respondent(s)
                         SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE

                                                       O R D E R
In view of the divergent opinions expressed

                         by   us   on    the   issue   of   acceptance    of   the   apology

                         tendered by the concerned Advocates, the matter be

                         placed before the Hon’ble Chief Justice of India for

                         appropriate orders.
......................J.
                                                                          [BELA M. TRIVEDI]




                                                                   ......................J.
                                                                 [SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA]



                         New Delhi;
Signature Not Verified
17-04-2025.
Digitally signed by
NITIN TALREJA
Date: 2025.04.17
19:12:43 IST
Reason:
REPORTABLE

           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
          CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

          SLP(CRL.) DIARY NO. 55057 OF 2024

N. ESWARANATHAN                       …PETITIONER(S)


                            VERSUS


STATE REPRESENTED BY THE DEPUTY
SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE   …RESPONDENT(S)


                       J UDGM ENT


BELA M. TRIVEDI, J.
1.    Once again, this Court is called upon to discharge a
      very unpleasant and painful duty as the Court has
      noticed that the Petitioner and his Advocates Mr. P.
      Soma Sundaram, AOR and Mr. S. Muthukrishnan,
      have made a brazen attempt to take this Court for a
      ride by filing vexatious Petition, distracting the
      course of administration of justice and misusing the
      Process of Law. Just few months back this Court
      had to direct the CBI to conduct an investigation
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                Page 1 of 30
against a few Advocates who were found to have
      been involved in committing fraud on Court and in
      misusing the Process of the Court (
Bhagwan Singh
      vs. State of U.P. and Others
).1 Just few weeks back
      this Court had issued certain directions in a
      proceeding arising out of the said case, for the strict
      compliance of the Supreme Court Rules, 2013
      framed by the Supreme Court in exercise of its
      powers under
Article 145
of the Constitution of India,
      for regulating the Practice and Procedure of the
      Court to be followed by the persons practising in the
      Supreme Court. This is yet another case, in which
      the Advocates appearing for the Petitioner have
      been found to have misused the Process of the
      Court.   Unfortunately,    the Advocates    who    are
      supposed to be the Officers of the Court and the
      Champions for the cause of justice, sometimes
      indulge themselves into a kind of unethical and
      unfair practices, and when caught by the Court, they
      tender an unconditional apology on the specious
      ground of inadvertent mistake.
2.    The relevant facts emerging from the record of the
      case are as under: -
1 2024 SCC Online SC 2599
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                   Page 2 of 30
i.     The Petitioner – N Eswaranathan (Accused
             No.35) alongwith the other accused, was
             convicted     by     the   Sessions   Court     at
             Dharamapuri vide the Judgment and Order
             dated 29.09.2011 in Sessions Case No.1 of
             2008 for the offences punishable under
             Sections 147, 342 readwith 149 and
Section
             355
of Indian Penal Code (
IPC
), and
Sections
             3(2)(iii)
,
3(1)(v)
and
3(1)(x)
of the Scheduled
             Castes and Schedules Tribes (Prevention of
             Atrocities)   Act,     1989.   The     maximum
             punishment awarded to the Petitioner for the
             said offences was rigorous imprisonment for a
             period of three years.
ii.    Being aggrieved by the said Judgment of
             Conviction and Sentence passed by the
             Sessions Court, the Petitioner alongwith the
             other accused had filed various Criminal
             Appeals before the High Court, which came to
             be dismissed vide the common impugned
             Judgment and Order dated 29.09.2023 by the
             High Court.
iii.   The aggrieved Petitioner therefore filed a SLP
             being SLP (Crl.) D.No.5111 of 2024 (First
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                     Page 3 of 30
SLP), through the Advocate-on-Record Mr. P.
            Soma Sundaram. In the said SLP, the
            Petitioner sought exemption from surrendering
            pending the SLP. The said prayer came to be
            granted by the Chamber Court vide the Order
            dated 01.04.2024. When the said SLP was
            listed for hearing on 29.04.2024 before us, it
            was dismissed after hearing the learned
            Advocates appearing for the Petitioner, with
            specific direction to the Petitioner to surrender
            within two weeks. The precise Order passed
            by this Court reads as under: -
“ORDER
1.Application seeking permission to file
                   the Special Leave Petition is granted.
2. Delay condoned.
3. Having heard learned counsel for the
                   petitioner at length and carefully
                   perusing the material placed on record,
                   we are not inclined to interfere with the
                   impugned order passed by the
                   HighCourt.
4. The Special Leave Petition and all the
                   pending applications are, accordingly,
                   dismissed.
5. The petitioner shall surrender before
                   the Trial Court within two weeks from
                   today.”

      iv.   The Petitioner instead of complying with the
            said direction of surrendering within two
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                        Page 4 of 30
weeks, again filed the present SLP being SLP
            (Crl.)   D.No.55057/2024      (Second     SLP),
            engaging the same Advocate-on-Record Mr. P.
            Soma Sundaram on 26.11.2024, that is about
            7 months after the dismissal of the earlier SLP,
            challenging the same impugned Judgment
            dated 29.09.2023 passed by the High Court.
v.    The AOR Mr. P. Soma Sundaram also filed
            various applications being I.A. No. 40358 of
            2025 seeking exemption from filing official
            translation, I.A. No. 40361 of 2025 seeking
            exemption from filing certified copy of the
            impugned judgment and order, I.A. No. 40364
            of 2025 seeking exemption from surrendering,
            I.A. No.40366 of 2025 seeking Condonation of
            delay occurred in filing the SLP, I.A. No.40369
            of 2025 seeking permission to file additional
            documents and I.A. No.40370 of 2025 seeking
            Condonation of Delay occurred in re-filing the
            SLP etc. All these applications were filed by
            him with his own signatures, and below the
            said applications, the affidavits were filed by
            the Advocate Mr. S. Muthukrishnan stating
            therein that he was the Arguing Counsel of the
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                  Page 5 of 30
Petitioner and was conversant with the facts
             and circumstances of the case and competent
             to swear the affidavit.
vi.    When the application seeking exemption from
             surrendering was listed before the Chamber
             Court on 21.02.2025, the Chamber Court
             allowed the said application by granting
             exemption to the petitioner from surrendering
             for a period of two months.
vii.   When the SLP was listed before us on
             28.03.2025,     we   noticed   certain   incorrect
             statements having been made in the Synopsis
             of the SLP and therefore enquired about the
             presence of Mr. P. Soma Sundaram, AOR. The
             learned Senior Advocate Mr. R. Nedumaran
             who was present on behalf of the Petitioner as
             an Arguing Counsel stated that the AOR Mr. P.
             Soma Sundaram had gone to some interior
             village of Tamil Nadu and was not reachable.
             We therefore passed the following Order on
             28.03.2025: -
“ORDER
1. Today, when the matter was called
                   out in the first session, Mr. R.
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                    Page 6 of 30
Nedumaran, learned senior counsel
                   appeared for the petitioner. Since, while
                   going through the synopsis, we had
                   found that there were certain incorrect
                   statements made therein, We asked Mr.
                   R. Nedumaran about the presence of
                   Mr. P. Soma Sundaram, the Advocate on
                   Record appearing for the petitioner. He
                   stated that the learned AOR, Mr. P.
                   Soma Sundaram, is not in the town at
                   present and he is in remote village of
                   Tamil Nadu. We asked him to make his
                   presence available through virtual mode
                   at 02:00 p.m.
2. At 02:00 p.m. when the matter was
                   called out, one Mr. P.V. Yogeshwaran,
                   learned Advocate appeared and stated
                   that he tried to contact the AOR, Mr. P.
                   Soma Sundaram telephonically, but he
                   is not reachable as he is in some remote
                   village of Tamil Nadu and therefore, he
                   is not in a position to even appear
                   through     virtual  mode.     Mr.   P.V.
                   Yogeshwaran, also stated that he
                   belongs to the same village where Mr. P.
                   Soma Sundaram, has gone and
                   therefore, he knows that there is a
                   connectivity problem there.
3. Mr. S. Nagamuthu, learned senior
                   counsel, who is also present in the
                   Court and had earlier appeared in the
                   group matter with which, the present
                   special leave petition is sought to be
                   tagged, assures this Court that the
                   learned AOR shall be available before
                   this Court on 01.04.2025.
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                        Page 7 of 30
4. It is therefore directed that the
                   learned Advocate on Record, Mr. P.
                   Soma       Sundaram,      shall   remain
                   physically present before this Court on
                   01.04.2025 at 10:30 a.m. along with all
                   the tickets of his travel to Tamil Nadu
                   and back, as it is stated at the Bar that
                   he is at present in the remote village of
                   Tamil Nadu and therefore, not in a
                   position to enter his appearance.
5. List the matter on 01.04.2025 at
                   10:30 a.m. before this combination of
                   Bench.”

      viii. When the matter was listed before us on
            01.04.2025, the AOR Mr. P. Soma Sundaram
            and the Advocate Mr. Muthukrishnan appeared
            before     the       Court   and      tendered     an
            unconditional apology with regard to the
            incorrect statements made by them in the SLP.
Since the Court was quite annoyed with the
            misconduct committed by the Advocates and
            the Petitioner, the Court on 01.04.2025,
            passed the following Order: -
“ORDER
1. Pursuant to the Order passed by this
                   Court on 28.03.2025, learned AOR, Mr.
                   P. Soma Sundaram and learned
                   counsel, Mr. S. Muthukrishnan, are
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                        Page 8 of 30
present in the Court along with the travel
                   tickets (as they say) and tender an
                   unconditional apology before this Court
                   with regard to the incorrect statements
                   made in the SLP.
2. When we partly dictated the order, the
                   representatives of Supreme Court Bar
                   Association (SCBA) and the Supreme
                   Court Advocates-on-Record Association
                   (SCAORA), who were already present in
                   the Court along with some senior
                   advocates, requested the Court to hold
                   back the order dictated, and further
                   requested to simply give the concerned
                   advocates, without recording the facts
                   and the observations, an opportunity to
                   explain on affidavit, the circumstances
                   under which the second SLP has been
                   filed.
3. With due reference to the said
                   request made at this juncture, we simply
                   call      upon      the      petitioner-N.
                   ESWARANATHAN and his advocates,
                   Mr. P. Soma Sundaram and learned
                   counsel, Mr. S. Muthukrishnan, to
                   explain as to under what circumstances,
                   the second SLP that is the present one
                   was filed on the distorted facts and
                   incorrect statements, after the dismissal
                   of the first SLP, and why the application
                   seeking exemption from surrendering
                   was filed in this SLP though, in the
                   earlier SLP, it was specifically directed
                   by this Court that the petitioner shall
                   surrender within two weeks.
4. Let the affidavits be filed within one
                   week from today i.e. before 08.04.2025
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                        Page 9 of 30
in the Office. The learned AOR, Mr. P.
                   Soma Sundaram, may produce the
                   travel tickets along with his affidavit.
5. Registry is directed to send a copy of
                   this Order to the petitioner to enable him
                   to file his affidavit with detailed
                   explanation as stated hereinabove. The
                   concerned advocates are also directed
                   to inform the petitioner about this order.
6. The petitioner is also directed to
                   remain personally present before this
                   Court on 09.04.2025 at 10:30 a.m.
7. List the matter on 09.04.2025 at
                   10:30 a.m. before the same combination
                   of Bench.”


      ix.   On 09.04.2025, the Court perused the affidavit
            of Mr. P. Soma Sundaram and another affidavit
            filed by the Son of the Petitioner named Leoraj
            Eswaranathan. The learned Advocate Mr.
            Muthukrishnan stated that he had e-filed his
            affidavit in the office but the same was not
            found to be on record. He therefore submitted
            another copy of his affidavit to the Court for
            perusal. On inquiry, it was found that neither
            the AOR Mr. P. Soma Sundaram had filed his
            travel tickets alongwith his affidavit, nor Mr.
            Muthukrishnan had filed his affidavit in the
            office. The Petitioner - N Eswaranathan had
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                       Page 10 of 30
also neither filed any affidavit nor had
            remained present before the Court, though
            specifically   directed     in   the   Order        dated
            01.04.2025. The Son of the Petitioner Mr.
            Leoraj Eswaranathan had filed his affidavit
            stating that his father could not travel to New
            Delhi because of his medical condition. The
            Court, therefore passed the following Order on
            09.04.2025.
“ORDER
1. At the outset, learned advocate, Mr.
                   S. Muthukrishnan, submits the hard
                   copy of the affidavit filed by him and
                   prays that the same be taken on record
                   as he has already efiled the same in the
                   Registry yesterday.
2. The hard copy of the affidavit filed by
                   Mr. S. Muthukrishnan is taken on record.
3. The affidavits filed by learned
                   Advocate on Record, Mr. P. Soma
                   Sundaram and the son (Leoraj
                   Eswaranathan) of the petitioner (N.
                   Eswaranathan), are also taken on
                   record.
4. Since, the petitioner has not remained
                   present before this Court today despite
                   being specifically directed by this Court
                   vide Order dated 01.04.2025, let non-
                   bailable warrant be issued against the
                   petitioner-N. Eswaranathan. On being
                   arrested, he shall be produced before
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                       Page 11 of 30
the concerned Trial Court, which shall
                    handover him to the concerned Jail
                    Authorities.
5. Learned Advocate on Record, Mr. P.
                    Soma Sundaram and learned advocate,
                    Mr. S. Muthukrishnan, have tendered
                    unconditional apology in their respective
                    affidavits.
6. The other learned senior counsels
                    appearing for the SCBA and SCAORA,
                    have also requested the Court to accept
                    the unconditional apology tendered by
                    Mr. P. Soma Sundaram, learned AOR
                    and Mr. S. Muthukrishnan, learned
                    counsel and pass appropriate orders.
7. Heard learned counsels appearing for
                    the parties.
8. Arguments concluded.
9. Judgment is reserved.”
3.    Now, as transpiring from the affidavit filed by the
      AOR     Mr.    P.   Soma      Sundaram,      there    is   no
      explanation offered by him as to under what
      circumstances, the second SLP that is the present
      one, was filed by him on behalf of the Petitioner, and
      that too stating distorted facts and incorrect
      statements, after the dismissal of the first SLP, and
      as to why the application seeking exemption from
      surrendering was filed in this SLP on behalf of the
      Petitioner, though while dismissing the earlier SLP,
      in which he himself was the AOR for the Petitioner, it
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                       Page 12 of 30
was specifically directed by us that the Petitioner
      shall surrender within two weeks. Of course, Mr. P.
      Soma Sundaram has tendered an unconditional
      apology in his affidavit, for the mistake he committed
      of having not mentioned the factum of the dismissal
      of the first SLP (Crl.) D.No.5111 of 2024, however he
      has stated that the omission was neither wilful nor
      wanton. Similarly, the Advocate Mr. Muthukrishnan,
      who    has    filed   the   affidavits   in   the   various
      applications filed in the present SLP, has also not,
      offered any explanation in this regard, and has
      tendered an unconditional apology in his affidavit
      filed pursuant to the Order passed by the Court on
      01.04.2025.
4.    Mr. Leoraj Eswaranathan, Son of the Petitioner - N
      Eswaranathan, has stated in his affidavit inter alia
      that his father had suffered a stroke on 15.02.2025
      and taken treatment at the Government Mohan
      Kumara Mangalam Medical College Hospital at
      Salem, Tamil Nadu, and that because of his medical
      condition he could not travel to New Delhi to appear
      before the Court as directed. The said affidavit filed
      by the Son of the Petitioner does not inspire any
      confidence in as much as the so-called medical
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                      Page 13 of 30
papers e-filed by him do not bear the name or stamp
      of any hospital nor of the doctor. Even if it is
      believed that the Petitioner had taken treatment in
      the said hospital, it appears that he was admitted on
      15.02.2025 and discharged on 16.02.2025. There is
      no mention about the so-called stroke suffered by
      him, as stated by his Son in his Affidavit. There is
      also nothing on record to show that his health
      condition was so bad even after two months of his
      so-called stroke that he could not remain present
      before the Court on 09.04.2025, though he was
      specifically directed by the Court vide the Order
      dated 01.04.2025 to remain present.
5.    From the said affidavits filed by the AOR Mr. P.
      Soma      Sundaram         and   his   colleague   Mr.
      Muthukrishnan it appears that the same have not
      been filed in compliance with order passed by the
      Court on 01.04.2025. Mr. P. Soma Sundaram has
      also not even produced his travel ticket to show that
      he was in some interior village of Tamil Nadu, when
      the Court required his presence on 28.03.2025. The
      Court when asked on 01.04.2025 a specific query as
      to why he had not produced all his travel tickets, Mr.
      P. Soma Sundaram had no answer. Similarly, when
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                  Page 14 of 30
the Court asked as to why he had filed second SLP
      on behalf of the Petitioner after the dismissal of the
      first SLP, though he was AOR in both the Petitions,
      and why the Petitioner had not surrendered after the
      dismissal of the first SLP, Mr. P. Soma Sundaram
      had no explanation to offer, except stating that he
      was tendering an unconditional apology for his
      mistake.
6.    From the afore-stated state of affairs, we are
      constrained to reach to the following irresistible
      conclusions: -
(i)    The AOR Mr. P. Soma Sundaram has misused
             the process of law by filing the second SLP
             that is the present one on behalf of the
             Petitioner after the dismissal of the first SLP,
             challenging the same impugned Judgment
             passed by the High Court.
(ii)   Mr. P. Soma Sundaram did not give proper
             and correct legal advice to the Petitioner that
             after the dismissal of the first SLP, the
             Petitioner was required to surrender within two
             weeks, and that he could not have filed the
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                  Page 15 of 30
second SLP challenging the same impugned
              judgment of the High Court.
(iii)   Mr. P. Soma Sundaram, instead of giving
              correct legal advice to the Petitioner, has
              himself filed various applications with his own
              signatures and with the affidavits sworn by his
              colleague Mr. Muthukrishnan on behalf of the
              Petitioner and that too without stating the
              correct facts.
7.    The afore-stated undisputed facts constrain us to
      hold that Mr. P. Soma Sundaram as an AOR has not
      only failed to discharge his duties towards his client
      i.e. Petitioner and towards the Court, but has also
      misconducted himself by misusing the process of
      law and misleading the Court. Such acts of Mr. P.
      Soma Sundaram are nothing but the acts of fraud
      on      Court   and      causing   obstruction      in   the
      administration of justice. As held in
Chandra
      Shashi vs. Anil Kumar Verma,2
anyone who takes
      recourse to fraud, deflects the courts of judicial
      proceedings,      the      same    interferes     with   the
      administration of justice, and such persons are
      required to be properly dealt with, not only to punish


2 (1995) 1 SCC 421
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                        Page 16 of 30
them for the wrong done, but also to deter others
      from indulging in similar acts which shake the faith
      of people in the system of administration of justice. It
      is further observed in Para-8 thereof that: -
“8. To enable the courts to ward off unjustified
            interference in their working, those who indulge
            in immoral acts like perjury, prevarication and
            motivated falsehoods have to be appropriately
            dealt with, without which it would not be
            possible for any court to administer justice in
            the true sense and to the satisfaction of those
            who approach it in the hope that truth would
            ultimately prevail. People would have faith in
            courts when they would find that
            (truth alone triumphs) is an achievable aim
            there; or                     (it is virtue which
            ends in victory) is not only inscribed in emblem
            but really happens in the portals of courts.”
8.    A Three-Judge Bench of this Court in similar
      circumstances has made very apt observations after
      reviewing the judicial precedents and texts in
      respect of the conduct of an advocate, in Mohit
      Chaudhary, Advocate, In Re3. The observations
      are worth reproducing hereinbelow: -
“16. We consider it appropriate to review some
            of the judicial precedents and texts in respect
            of the conduct of an advocate. We recognise
            the duty of an advocate to put his best case for
            the litigant before the Court. This, however,
3 (2017) 16 SCC 78
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                        Page 17 of 30
does not absolve him of the responsibility as
            an officer of the Court. It is a dual responsibility.
            The right of an Advocate-on-Record in the
            Supreme Court, is not an automatic right
            coming from the enrolment at the Bar.
            Something more has to be done. The rigours of
            an examination have to be gone through,
            which tests the advocate, not only on his legal
            ability of drafting and knowledge of law, but on
            ethical practices. It is only after going through
            the rigorous exercise that an advocate is
            enlisted as an Advocate-on-Record, giving him
            the right to act and file pleadings before this
            Court, in accordance with the Supreme Court
            Rules, 2013.
17. ……………………………………
18. To borrow the words of P.B. Sawant, J.
            in Vinay Chandra Mishra, In re [Vinay Chandra
            Mishra, In re, (1995) 2 SCC 584]: (SCC p. 616,
            para 38)
                “38. … Brazenness is not outspokenness
                and arrogance is not fearlessness. Use of
                intemperate language is not assertion of
                right nor is a threat an argument. Humility is
                not servility and courtesy and politeness are
                not lack of dignity. Self-restraint and
                respectful attitude towards the court,
                presentation of correct facts and law with a
                balanced mind and without overstatement,
                suppression, distortion or embellishment
                are requisites of good advocacy. A lawyer
                has to be a gentleman first. His most
                valuable asset is the respect and goodwill
                he enjoys among his colleagues and in the
                court.”
19. That the practice of law is not akin to any
            other business or profession as it involves a
            dual duty — nay a primary duty to the Court
            and then a duty to the litigant with the privilege
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                          Page 18 of 30
to address the Court for the client is best
            enunciated in the words of Mookerjee, J.
in
Emperor v. Rajani                  Kanta
            Bose [Emperor
v. Rajani Kanta Bose, 1922
            SCC OnLine Cal 15 : ILR (1922) 49 Cal 732 :
71 IC 81] : (SCC OnLine Cal)

                “… The practice of law is not a business
                open to all who wish to engage in it; it is a
                personal right or privilege … it is in the
                nature of a franchise from the State….”
            That you are a member of the legal profession
            is your privilege; that you can represent your
            client is your privilege; that you can in that
            capacity claim audience in court is your
            privilege. Yours is an exalted profession in
            which your privilege is your duty and your duty
            is your privilege. They both coincide.
20.Warvelle's Legal Ethics, 2nd Edn. at p. 182
            sets out the obligation of a lawyer as:
“A lawyer is under obligation to do nothing
               that shall detract from the dignity of the
               court, of which he is himself a sworn officer
               and assistant. He should at all times pay
               deferential respect to the Judge, and
               scrupulously observe the decorum of the
               courtroom.”
21. The contempt jurisdiction is not only to
            protect the reputation of the Judge concerned
            so that he can administer justice fearlessly and
            fairly, but also to protect “the fair name of the
            judiciary”. The protection in a manner of
            speaking, extends even to the Registry in the
            performance of its task and false and unfair
            allegations which seek to impede the working
            of the Registry and thus the administration of
            justice, made with oblique motives cannot be
            tolerated. In such a situation in order to uphold
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                       Page 19 of 30
the honour and dignity of the institution, the
            Court has to perform the painful duties which
            we are faced with in the present proceedings.
            Not to do so in the words of P.B. Sawant, J.
            in Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, In
            re [Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, In
            re, (1995) 3 SCC 619], would: (SCC p. 635,
            para 20)
                “20. … The present trend unless checked is
                likely to lead to a stage when the system
                will be found wrecked from within before it
                is wrecked from outside. It is for the
                members of the profession to introspect
                and take the corrective steps in time and
                also spare the courts the unpleasant duty.
                We say no more.””
9.    We too have nothing more to add to the afore-stated
      words of wisdom reiterated by the Three-Judge
      Bench with regard to the conduct of the Advocates.
      As such, we have already taken serious notice of
      the advertent and inadvertent errors committed by
      the Advocates practising in the Supreme Court while
      discharging their duties, and cautioned them time
      and again to be more careful but all in vain.
10.
In
Saumya      Chaurasia       vs.    Directorate     of
      Enforcement,4
it was observed as under: -
“13. It cannot be gainsaid that every party
            approaching the court seeking justice is
            expected to make full and correct disclosure of
            material facts and that every advocate being
4 (2024) 6 SCC 401
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                     Page 20 of 30
an officer of the court, though appearing for a
            particular party, is expected to assist the court
            fairly in carrying out its function to administer
            the justice. It hardly needs to be emphasised
            that a very high standard of professionalism
            and legal acumen is expected from the
            advocates particularly designated senior
            advocates appearing in the highest court of the
            country so that their professionalism may be
            followed and emulated by the advocates
            practising in the High Courts and the District
            Courts. Though it is true that the advocates
            would settle the pleadings and argue in the
            courts on instructions given by their clients,
            however their duty to diligently verify the facts
            from the record of the case, using their legal
            acumen for which they are engaged, cannot be
            obliviated.”
11.   This very Bench taking serious note of the
      misconduct committed by the Advocates-on-Record
      practising   in   the   Supreme       Court,    and       other
      Advocates in case of
Bhagwan Singh vs. State of
      U.P. & Others
(supra) observed as under: -
“29. To create or to assist creating false
            documents and to use them as genuine
            knowing them to be false in the Court
            proceedings, to falsely implicate somebody in
            the false proceedings filed in the name of the
            person who had no knowledge whatsoever
            about the same are the acts attributable to the
            offences punishable under the Bhartiya Nyaya
            Sanhita, 2023. They are also acts of frauds
            committed not only on the person sought to be
            falsely implicated and on the person in whose
            name such false proceedings are filed without
            his knowledge and consent, but is a fraud
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                       Page 21 of 30
committed on the Courts. No Court can allow
            itself to be used as an instrument of fraud and
            no Court can allow its eyes to be closed to the
            fact that it is being used as an instrument of
            fraud. As held by this Court in
V.
            Chandrasekaran & Anr. vs. Administrative
            Officer & Ors
.
“The judicial process cannot become an
                instrument of oppression or abuse, or a
                means in the process of the court to subvert
                justice, for the reason that the court
                exercises its jurisdiction, only in furtherance
                of justice. The interests of justice and public
                interest coalesce, and therefore, they are
                very often one and the same. A petition or
                an affidavit containing a misleading and/or
                an inaccurate statement, only to achieve an
                ulterior purpose, amounts to an abuse of
                process of the court.”
30. The matter assumes serious concern when
            the Advocates who are the officers of the Court
            are involved and when they actively participate
            in the ill-motivated litigations of the
            unscrupulous litigants, and assist them in
            misusing and abusing the process of law to
            achieve their ulterior purposes.
31. People repose immense faith in Judiciary,
            and the Bar being an integral part of the
            Justice delivery system, has been assigned a
            very crucial role for preserving the
            independence of justice and the very
            democratic set up of the country. The legal
            profession is perceived to be essentially a
            service oriented, noble profession and the
            lawyers are perceived to be very responsible
            officers of the court and an important adjunct of
            the administration of justice. In the process of
            overall depletion and erosion of ethical values
            and degradation of the professional ethics, the
            instances of professional misconduct are also
            on rise. There is a great sanctity attached to
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                         Page 22 of 30
the proceedings conducted in the court. Every
            Advocate putting his signatures on the
            Vakalatnamas and on the documents to be
            filed in the Courts, and every Advocate
            appearing for a party in the courts, particularly
            in the Supreme Court, the highest court of the
            country is presumed to have filed the
            proceedings and put his/her appearance with
            all sense of responsibility and seriousness. No
            professional much less legal professional, is
            immuned from being prosecuted for his/her
            criminal misdeeds.”
12.
In the Miscellaneous Applications filed on behalf of
      the SCBA and SCAORA in the aforesaid Criminal
      Appeals, this Bench had again dealt with various
      provisions of
Advocates Act
and Supreme Court
      Rules, 2013, and issued various directions to the
      Advocates     practising     in   the   Supreme       Court,
      emphasizing strict compliance of the Practice and
      Procedure
laid down in
the said Rules, 2013.
13.   It would not be out of place to refer to the relevant
      provisions contained in the
Contempt of Courts Act,
      1971
, with regard to the “Contempt of Court”.
“2(a) "contempt of court" means civil contempt
            or criminal contempt;
(b) "civil contempt" means wilful disobedience
            to any judgment, decree, direction, order, writ
            or other process of a court or wilful breach of
            an undertaking given to a court;
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                       Page 23 of 30
(c) "criminal contempt" means the publication
            (whether by words, spoken or written, or by
            signs, or by visible representations, or
            otherwise) of any matter or the doing of any
            other act whatsoever which—
(i) scandalises or tends to scandalise, or
            lowers or tends to lower the authority of, any
            court; or
(ii) prejudices, or interferes or tends to interfere
            with, the due course of any judicial proceeding;
            or
(iii) interferes or tends to interfere with, or
            obstructs      or  tends     to   obstruct,  the
            administration of justice in any other manner.”
14.   Rule 10 of Order IV of Supreme Court Rules, 2013
      pertaining to the Advocate-on-Record found guilty of
      misconduct or of conduct unbecoming of an
      Advocate-on-Record being relevant is also quoted
      below:
“10. When, on the complaint of any person or
            otherwise, the Court is of the opinion that an
            advocate-on-record has been guilty of
            misconduct or of conduct unbecoming of an
            advocate-on-record, the Court may make an
            order removing his name from the register of
            advocates on record either permanently or for
            such period as the Court may think fit and the
            Registrar shall thereupon report the said fact to
            the Bar Council of lndia and to State Bar
            Council concerned”.
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                          Page 24 of 30
15.   On thorough and careful examination of the record
      of both the SLPs, we are convinced that the AOR
      Mr. P. Soma Sundaram, had attempted to interfere
      and    obstruct        the     administration     of   justice,
      tantamounting to Contempt of Court under
Section
      2(c)(iii)
of the Contempt of Courts Act, and had
      committed serious misconduct and the conduct
      unbecoming        of     an       Advocate-on-Record         as
      contemplated in Rule 10 of Order IV of the Supreme
      Court Rules, 2013.
16.   The Advocate Mr. S. Muthukrishnan who had
      assisted the AOR Mr. P. Soma Sundaram in filing the
      SLP and other applications, by putting his signatures
      on the affidavits filed on behalf of the Petitioner,
      without any authority or law, is also equally
      responsible and guilty of having misused the
      process of law and causing obstruction in the
      administration     of        justice.   The     Petitioner   N.
      Eswaranathan who himself has been held guilty of
      committing the offences alleged against him in
      Sessions Case No. 1 of 2008 by the Trial Court, and
      confirmed by the High Court and upheld by this
      Court, has also attempted to misuse the process of
      the Court and of Law with the able assistance of the
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                          Page 25 of 30
AOR Mr. P. Soma Sundaram and the Advocate Mr.
      S. Muthukrishnan, and hence he is also found guilty
      of committing Contempt of Court within the meaning
      of
Section 2(c)(iii)
of the Contempt of Courts Act.
17.   This takes us to the next question, whether the
      Court should let the Petitioner and his Advocates go
      scot-free without any consequences, accepting their
      unconditional apology, on the specious ground of
      inadvertent mistake committed by them? Though
      some of the Senior Advocates practising in the
      Supreme Court and the Office Bearers of the SCBA
      and SCAORA had urged the Court to pardon the
      advocates by accepting their apology, I am unable to
      persuade myself to let them go scot-free without any
      punishment. It is required to be borne in mind that
      the judges are selected from the rank of lawyers
      only. As someone has rightly said “the Integrity of
      the Judiciary is the safeguard of the Nation, but the
      Character of the Judges is, practically, the Character
      of the Lawyers. Like begets like. A degraded Bar will
      inevitably produce a degraded Bench, and just as
      certainly may we expect to find the highest
      excellence in judiciary drawn from the ranks of an
      enlightened, learned and moral Bar.”
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                  Page 26 of 30
18.   With due deference to the requests made by the
      Senior Advocates and the other Representatives of
      the Bar Associations, who have stood up in support
      of the errant Advocates, the extreme step of holding
      the Advocates Mr. P. Soma Sundaram and Mr.
      Muthukrishnan guilty of committing the Contempt of
      Court and referring them to the Bar Council of India
      for taking disciplinary action against them is not
      proposed,    however,      some   action   is   definitely
      required to be taken against them for their grave and
      seriousness misconduct of misusing the process of
      law and the conduct unbecoming of an Advocate. It
      deserves to be noted that we repeatedly come
      across the incidents of the litigants suffering
      because of the negligence and carelessness of their
      Advocates but we do not take any serious actions
      against the Advocates, taking lenient view, believing
      that to err is Human. However, our leniency should
      not be construed as the licence to commit errors or
      to behave in absolutely irresponsible manner. Being
      an officer of the Court, every Advocate is as much
      responsible for his role in the judicial proceedings,
      as a judicial officer or a staff member would be.
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                   Page 27 of 30
19.   As stated earlier, the persons found taking recourse
      to   fraud,   deflecting   the   course   of   judicial
      proceedings, and interfering with the administration
      of justice should be properly dealt with, not only to
      punish them for the wrong done by them, but also to
      deter others from indulging in similar acts which
      shake the faith of people in the system of
      administration of justice. Ideally, the Advocates
      practising in the Supreme Court should be the Role
      models for the Advocates practising in the other
      Courts of the Country. The Judges are also selected
      from the ranks of lawyers, and the character of the
      Judges is nothing but the reflection of the character
      of the Advocates. The people of the nation are
      perfectly justified in expecting the highest level of
      excellence and integrity from the Judges. Such
      expectations could be fulfilled only when we have an
      enlightened, and erudite Bar possessing high level
      of integrity, ethics and morals. The very motto of the
      Supreme Court “यतत धरर सततत जयय- Where there is
      Dharma-righteousness, there will be victory” is
      not only for the inscription in the emblem; it has to
      really happen in the portals of the Courts.
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                  Page 28 of 30
20.   In view of the above discussion and findings, and
      taking recourse to the provisions contained in Order
      IV Rule 10 of the Supreme Court Rules, 2013, and
      following the precedent set by Three Judge Bench in
      Mohit Chaudhary, Advocate, Re (supra), it is
      directed that the name of Mr. P. Soma Sundaram
      shall be removed from the Register of Advocates-on-
      Record for a period of one month from today. It is
      further directed that the Advocate Mr. Muthukrishnan
      shall pay cost of Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees One Lakh)
      from his own pocket to be deposited by him with the
      SCAORA to be utilized for the welfare of the
      Advocates.
21.   We have already issued non-bailable warrant
      against the Petitioner - N Eswaranathan. On his
      arrest, he shall be produced before the concerned
      Trial Court, who shall send him to the concerned jail
      for undergoing the sentence imposed by the Trial
      Court and confirmed by the High Court and the
      Supreme Court.
22.   Before parting, it is expected and hoped, that the
      Senior Advocates practising in the Supreme Court
      shall show serious concern about the repeated
      incidents of misconduct by the Advocates practising
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                Page 29 of 30
in the Supreme Court and take affirmative actions to
      uplift and raise the standard of Professionalism,
      Ethics and Moral in the Legal Profession, to have a
      better Bar and in turn a better Judiciary in the
      Country.
23.   The Special Leave Petition stands dismissed.
24.   All the pending applications are also dismissed.
……………………………………J.
                            [BELA M. TRIVEDI]



NEW DELHI;
17th APRIL, 2025
SLP (Crl.) D.No. 55057 of 2024                Page 30 of 30
REPORTABLE
           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
          CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

             SLP (CRL.) DIARY NO. 55057 OF 2024

 N. ESWARANATHAN                           …PETITIONER(S)


                                  VERSUS


 STATE REPRESENTED BY THE                  …RESPONDENT(S)
 DEPUTY SUPERINTENDENT
 OF POLICE


                           JUDGMENT


SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA, J.
1.     I have perused the judgment of my sister. I agree with my
sister that Mr. P.Soma Sundaram, Advocate on Record and Mr.
S.Muthukrishnan, Advocate, have not kept in mind the honour
and dignity of the institution. They have also failed to discharge
their duties to the Court. The “Standards of Professional Conduct
and Etiquette” of the Bar Council of India Rules cast a duty upon
Advocates to restrain and prevent their client from resorting to
sharp or unfair practices. It is well settled that an Advocate
SLP (Crl.) D. No. 55057 of 2024                        Page 1 of 18
cannot forget what he owes to himself and more importantly to
the Court and not to mis-state facts. In Mohit Chaudhary, in Re.
(2017) 16 SCC 78, this Court has observed that the fundamentals
of the profession require an Advocate not to be immersed in a
blind quest of relief for his client. The dignity of the institution
cannot be violated in this quest as “law is no trade, briefs no
merchandise.”
2.     Highlighting the importance of an Advocate on Record,
this Court in Rameshwar Prasad Goyal, In Re (2014) 1 SCC
572 has observed as under:
“22. An AOR is the source of lawful recognition
       through whom the litigant is represented and
       therefore, he cannot deviate from the norms
       prescribed under the Rules. The Rules have been
       framed to authorise a legally trained person with
       prescribed qualification to appear, plead and act on
       behalf of a litigant. Thus, not only is his physical
       presence but effective assistance in the court is also
       required. He is not a guest artist nor is his job of a
       service provider nor is he in a professional business
       nor can he claim to be a law tourist agent for taking
       litigants for a tour of the court premises. An AOR is
       a seeker of justice for the citizens of the country.
       Therefore, he cannot avoid court or be casual in
       operating and his presence in the court is necessary.
       There are times when pleadings and records have to
       be explained and thus, he has to do a far more
       serious job and cannot claim that his role is merely
       a formal one or his responsibilities simply optional.
       An AOR is accountable and responsible for
SLP (Crl.) D. No. 55057 of 2024                          Page 2 of 18
whatever is written and pleaded by putting his
       appearance to maintain solemnity of records of the
       court.”
3.     In the aforesaid judgment, this Court has also cast a duty
upon the Advocates on Record not to be conspicuous by his
absence though his presence is maintained on record. Mr. P.
Soma Sundaram, as an Advocate on Record, therefore, ought not
to have filed the second Special Leave Petition (SLP) when a
Special Leave Petition (SLP) had already been dismissed by this
Court on 29.04.2024 against the impugned order dated
29.09.2023 passed by the High Court.
4.     I, however, feel that the punishment imposed upon Mr. P.
Soma Sundaram, Advocate on Record and Mr. S.Muthukrishnan,
Advocate, is too harsh. Undoubtedly, the very motto of the
Supreme Court is यतो धर्मस्ततो जय: (Yato Dharmastato Jayah)
i.e., “Where there is Dharma – righteousness, there will be
victory”, but at the same time, we also cannot forget क्षर्ा धर्मस्य
र्ूलर्: (Kshama Dharmasya Moolam) i.e., “Forgiveness is the
root of Dharma”. In fact in the epic Mahabharata, there is a
significant passage regarding forgiveness which reads as under:
“क्षर्ा धर्म: क्षर्ा यज्ञ: क्षर्ा वेदा; प्रतततिता।
       क्षर्या सवमलोक: स्थितं क्षर्या सवं प्रतततितर्।।
SLP (Crl.) D. No. 55057 of 2024                             Page 3 of 18
Forgiveness is dharma: forgiveness is sacrifice:
forgiveness upholds the Vedas. The world is held
       together by forgiveness – everything rests on
       forgiveness.”
5.     Mr. P.Soma Sundaram, Advocate on Record and Mr.
S.Muthukrishnan, Advocate, at the very first opportunity have
tendered their absolute and unconditional apology and have
promised not to repeat the misconduct in future. Affidavit
tendering unconditional apology have also been filed by Mr.
P.Soma      Sundaram,        Advocate   on    Record     and    Mr.
S.Muthukrishnan, Advocate, which read as under:
“I, P.Soma Sundaram S/o G.Ponnu Pillai, aged
       about 52 years old, having office at 626, Additional
       Chamber Building, D Block, 6th Floor, Supreme
       Court of India, New Delhi, Pin – 110 001, do hereby
       solemnly affirm and sincerely states as follows:-
1)      That I am the Advocate on Record in this
               instant Special Leave Petition (Criminal). In
               pursuance of the order dated 01.04.2025
               passed by this Hon’ble Court in this instant
               case, I hereby state the circumstances leading
               to the filing of this second/instant Special
               Leave Petition (Criminal) Diary No.
               55057/2024.
2)      That the petitioner in this instant Special
               Leave Petition N.Eswaranathan was
               convicted by the Principal Sessions Judge,
               Dharmapuri, Tamil Nadu, in Sessions Case
               No. 1 of 2008 on 29.09.2008 for the following
               offences;
SLP (Crl.) D. No. 55057 of 2024                          Page 4 of 18
a)      Convicted under
Section 147
of IPC
                       and sentenced to undergo rigorous
                       imprisonment for 2 years.
b)      Convicted under Section 342 r/w 149
                       of
IPC
and sentenced to undergo
                       rigorous imprisonment for one year
                       and with a fine of Rs. 1000/- and that
                       in default to undergo simple
                       imprisonment for three months.
c)      Convicted under
Section 3(2)(iii)
of
                       Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
                       Tribes (Prohibition of Atrocities) Act,
                       1989 and sentenced to undergo
                       rigorous imprisonment for three years,
                       and with a fine of Rs. 1000/- and that
                       in default to undergo simple
                       imprisonment for three months.
d)      Convicted under
Section 3(1)(x)
of
                       Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
                       Tribes (Prohibition of Atrocities) Act,
                       1989 and sentenced to undergo
                       rigorous imprisonment for three years
                       and with a fine of Rs. 1000/- and that
                       in default to undergo simple
                       imprisonment for four months.
e)      Convicted under
Section 355
of IPC
                       and sentenced to undergo rigorous
                       imprisonment for one year.
f)      Convicted under
Section 355
of IPC
                       and sentenced to undergo rigorous
                       imprisonment for one year.
g)      Convicted under Section 3(1)(v) of
                       Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
                       Tribes (Prohibition of Atrocities) Act,
SLP (Crl.) D. No. 55057 of 2024                           Page 5 of 18
1989 and sentenced to undergo
                       rigorous imprisonment for three years,
                       and with a fine of Rs. 1000/- and that
                       in default to undergo simple
                       imprisonment for nine months.
3)      Along with the petitioner there were a total
               number of 269 Accused persons who were
               tried together in the Court of the Principal
               Sessions Judge, Dharmapuri, Tamil Nadu, in
               Sessions Case No. 1 of 2008.
4)      That the Hon’ble High Court of Judicature at
               Madras passed the common impugned order
               and judgment dated 29.09.2023 dismissing a
               batch of Criminal Appeals preferred by the
               convicts against the judgment dated
               29.09.2011 passed by the Principal Sessions
               Judge, Dharmapuri, Tamil Nadu, in Sessions
               Case No. 1 of 2008, and thereby confirmed
               the conviction of the Trial Court.
5)      As some of the other convicted persons have
               preferred Special Leave Petitions against
               their conviction challenging the above said
               common impugned order of the Hon’ble High
               Court, the petitioner also wished to the prefer
               a Special Leave Petition before this Hon’ble
               Court. Thereafter, the petitioner informed
               Advocate S.Muthukrishnan that he had not
               preferred a Criminal Appeal before the
               Hon’ble High Court against the conviction of
               the Trial Court. Advocate S.Muthukrishnan
               was informed by the petitioner that he was
               not having any of the documents relating to
               the litigation such as chargesheet, copy of the
               deposition,
Section 313
Cr.P.C. statement etc.
SLP (Crl.) D. No. 55057 of 2024                           Page 6 of 18
6)      The      petitioner    instructed    Advocate
               S.Muthukrishnan to prefer a Special Leave
               Petition before this Hon’ble Court, and the
               petitioner handed over a website copy of the
               impugned judgment downloaded from the
               official website of the Hon’ble High Court of
               Madras to Advocate S.Muthukrishnan. The
               said downloaded website copy did not
               contain the names of all the appellants as
               well as the name of the petitioner, and it only
               mentions the Criminal Appeal numbers.
7)      Thereafter, the first Special Leave petition
               was drawn by Advocate S.Muthukrishnan
               with an application seeking permission to file
               a Special Leave Petition, and then its
               accompanying affidavit was signed by the
               petitioner before a Notary Public at
               Eduthanur Post, Villupuram District,
               Tamilnadu. The said first Special Leave
               Petition (Criminal) was filed in the Hon’ble
               Supreme Court on 01.02.2024 vide SLP
               (Criminal) Diary No. 5111/2024 (hereinafter
               mentioned       as     first   SLP)     titled
N.Eswaranathan Vs. State Represented by
               the Deputy Superintendent of Police
through
               Advocate on Record P.Soma Sundaram
               challenging the impugned judgment and
               order dated 29.09.2023 passed by the
               Hon’ble High Court of Madras in Criminal
               Appeal No. 618 of 2011. The said Criminal
               Appeal No. 618 of 2011 was the lead matter
               in the batch of appeals before the Hon’ble
               High Court. The website copy of the
               impugned judgment downloaded from the
               official website of the Hon’ble High Court of
SLP (Crl.) D. No. 55057 of 2024                           Page 7 of 18
Madras was filed in this first Special Leave
               Petition.
8)      The said first Special Leave Petition
               (Criminal) was listed before the Hon’ble
               Chamber Judge on 01.04.2024, and the
               petitioner was exempted from surrendering.
               Thereafter, the said first Special leave
               petition (Criminal) Diary No. 5111/2024
               came up for hearing before this Hon’ble
               Court on 29.04.2024, and this Hon’ble Court
               was pleased to dismiss the first Special Leave
               Petition and all the pending applications, and
               this Hon’ble Court had further directed that
               the petitioner shall surrender before the Trial
               Court with two weeks from the date of the
               order.
9)      It was after the dismissal of the above said
               first Special Leave Petition (Criminal) that
               the     petitioner     informed     Advocate
               S.Muthukrishnan that he had come to know
               that he had actually filed a Criminal Appeal
               being Criminal Appeal No. 653 of 2011
               challenging the judgment of the Trial Court.
               Thereafter, the second/instant Special Leave
               Petition    was     drawn     by Advocate
               S.Muthukrishnan, and then its accompanying
               affidavit was signed by the petitioner before
               a Notary Public at Eduthanur Post,
               Villupuram District, Tamil Nadu.
10)
Article 136
of the Constitution provides
               discretionary jurisdiction to this Hon’ble
               Court to render complete justice. This
               Hon’ble Court is vested with plenary powers
               to set aside any order or judgment passed by
               any court or tribunal in the territory of India
SLP (Crl.) D. No. 55057 of 2024                           Page 8 of 18
wherein this Hon’ble Court is of the opinion
               that the impugned judgment or order is in
               violation of fundamental rights and shocks
               judicial conscience notwithstanding the fact
               that this Hon’ble Court had previously
               declined to exercise its power under
Article
               136
of the Constitution against the same
               impugned order. Thus, under the given
               circumstances, this Hon’ble Court is not
               precluded from exercising its power under
Article 136
to examine the legal validity of
               the impugned order.
11)     It is pertinent to mention that the petitioner
               belongs to a Scheduled Caste and the
               petitioner has also been convicted under
               various sections of the
Scheduled Castes and
               Scheduled Tribes (Prohibition of Atrocities)
               Act, 1989
, and the prosecution and
               conviction under the said Act violates due
               process of law and the rule of law.
12)     The said second/instant Special Leave
               Petition (Criminal) was filed in the Hon’ble
               Supreme Court on 26.11.2024 vide
               SLP(Criminal) Diary No. 55057/2024
               (hereinafter mentioned as Second SLP) titled
N.Eswaranathan Vs. State Represented by
               the Deputy Superintendent of Police
through
               Advocate on Record P.Soma Sundaram
               challenging the impugned judgment and
               order dated 29.09.2023 passed by the
               Hon’ble High Court of Madras in Criminal
               Appeal No. 653 of 2011. The website copy of
               the impugned judgment downloaded from the
               official website of the Hon’ble High Court of
SLP (Crl.) D. No. 55057 of 2024                          Page 9 of 18
Madras was filed in this second Special
               Leave Petition.
13)     The said /instant second Special Leave
               petition was listed before the Hon’ble
               Chamber Judge on 21.02.2025, and the
               petitioner was exempted from surrendering.
14)     It is humbly submitted that the deponent
               tenders unconditional apology for the
               mistake of not having mentioned the factum
               of the filing of the first Special Leave Petition
               (Criminal) Diary No. 5111/2024 against the
               impugned order dated 29.09.2023 passed by
               the Hon’ble High Court of Madras in
               Criminal Appeal No. 618 of 2011 in Para No.
               3 of this second/instant Special Leave
               Petition (Criminal). This omission is neither
               wilful nor wanton.
15)     It is also humbly submitted that the factum of
               having filed the first Special Leave Petition
               (Criminal) and its dismissal order dated
               29.04.2024 has been mentioned in pages G,
               H and I of the List of Dates and Events, and
               a copy of the dismissal order passed in the
               first Special leave Petition (Criminal) Diary
               No. 5111/2024 has been filed as Annexure P-
               6 at Pages 406-407 of this second/instant
               Special Leave Petition (Criminal).
16)     Thus, it is humbly prayed that this Hon’ble
               Court may graciously be pleased to accept
               the unconditional apology of the deponent
               and thus render justice.
I, S.Muthukrishnan S/o. G.Seenivasan, aged about
       44 years old, having office at 5A/11006, Sat Nagar,
       WEA, Karol Bagh, New Delhi, Pin : 110005, do
SLP (Crl.) D. No. 55057 of 2024                            Page 10 of 18
hereby solemnly affirm and sincerely states as
       follows:-
1)      That I completed law at Dr. Ambedkar Govt.
Law College, Chennai in the year 2005 and
               got enrolled as an Advocate at Delhi Bar
               Council in the year 2006. I am the Advocate
               in this instant Special Leave Petition
               (Criminal). In pursuance of the order dated
               01.04.2025 passed by this Hon’ble Court in
               this instant case, I hereby state the
               circumstances leading to the filing of this
               second/instant Special Leave Petition
               (Criminal) Diary No. 55057/2024.
2)      That the petitioner in this instant Special
               Leave Petition N.Eswaranathan was
               convicted by the Principal Sessions Judge,
               Dharmapuri, Tamil Nadu, in Sessions Case
               No. 1 of 2008 on 29.09.2008 for the following
               offences;
a)      Convicted under
Section 147
of IPC
                       and sentenced to undergo rigorous
                       imprisonment for 2 years.
b)      Convicted under Section 342 r/w 149
                       of
IPC
and sentenced to undergo
                       rigorous imprisonment for one year
                       and with a fine of Rs. 1000/- and that
                       in default to undergo simple
                       imprisonment for three months.
c)      Convicted under
Section 3(2)(iii)
of
                       Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
                       Tribes (Prohibition of Atrocities) Act,
                       1989 and sentenced to undergo
                       rigorous imprisonment for three years,
                       and with a fine of Rs. 1000/- and that
SLP (Crl.) D. No. 55057 of 2024                          Page 11 of 18
in default to undergo simple
                       imprisonment for three months.
d)      Convicted under
Section 3(1)(x)
of
                       Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
                       Tribes (Prohibition of Atrocities) Act,
                       1989 and sentenced to undergo
                       rigorous imprisonment for three years
                       and with a fine of Rs. 1000/- and that
                       in default to undergo simple
                       imprisonment for four months.
e)      Convicted under
Section 355
of IPC
                       and sentenced to undergo rigorous
                       imprisonment for one year.
f)      Convicted under
Section 355
of IPC
                       and sentenced to undergo rigorous
                       imprisonment for one year.
g)      Convicted under
Section 3(1)(v)
of
                       Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
                       Tribes (Prohibition of Atrocities) Act,
                       1989 and sentenced to undergo
                       rigorous imprisonment for three years,
                       and with a fine of Rs. 1000/- and that
                       in default to undergo simple
                       imprisonment for nine months.
3)      Along with the petitioner there were a total
               number of 269 Accused persons who were
               tried together in the Court of the Principal
               Sessions Judge, Dharmapuri, Tamil Nadu, in
               Sessions Case No. 1 of 2008.
4)      That the Hon’ble High Court of Judicature at
               Madras passed the common impugned order
               and judgment dated 29.09.2023 dismissing a
               batch of Criminal Appeals preferred by the
               convicts against the judgment dated
SLP (Crl.) D. No. 55057 of 2024                          Page 12 of 18
29.09.2011 passed by the Principal Sessions
               Judge, Dharmapuri, Tamil Nadu, in Sessions
               Case No. 1 of 2008, and thereby confirmed
               the conviction of the Trial Court.
5)      As some of the other convicted persons have
               preferred Special Leave Petitions against
               their conviction challenging the above said
               common impugned order of the Hon’ble High
               Court, the petitioner also wished to the prefer
               a Special Leave Petition before this Hon’ble
               Court. Thereafter, the petitioner informed the
               deponent that he had not preferred a
               Criminal Appeal before the Hon’ble High
               Court against the conviction of the Trial
               Court. Further, the deponent was informed
               by the petitioner that he was not having any
               of the documents relating to the litigation
               such as chargesheet, copy of the deposition,
Section 313
Cr.P.C. statement etc.
6)      The petitioner instructed the deponent to
               prefer a Special Leave Petition before this
               Hon’ble Court, and the petitioner handed
               over a website copy of the impugned
               judgment downloaded from the official
               website of the Hon’ble High Court of Madras
               to the deponent. The said downloaded
               website copy did not contain the names of all
               the appellants as well as the name of the
               petitioner, and it only mentions the Criminal
               Appeal numbers.
7)      Thereafter, the first Special Leave petition
               was drawn by the deponent with an
               application seeking permission to file a
               Special Leave Petition, and then its
               accompanying affidavit was signed by the
SLP (Crl.) D. No. 55057 of 2024                          Page 13 of 18
petitioner before a Notary Public at
               Eduthanur Post, Villupuram District,
               Tamilnadu. The said first Special Leave
               Petition (Criminal) was filed in the Hon’ble
               Supreme Court on 01.02.2024 vide SLP
               (Criminal) Diary No. 5111/2024 (hereinafter
               mentioned       as     first   SLP)     titled
N.Eswaranathan Vs. State Represented by
               the Deputy Superintendent of Police
through
               Advocate on Record P.Soma Sundaram
               challenging the impugned judgment and
               order dated 29.09.2023 passed by the
               Hon’ble High Court of Madras in Criminal
               Appeal No. 618 of 2011. The said Criminal
               Appeal No. 618 of 2011 was the lead matter
               in the batch of appeals before the Hon’ble
               High Court. The website copy of the
               impugned judgment downloaded from the
               official website of the Hon’ble High Court of
               Madras was filed in this first Special Leave
               Petition.
8)      The said first Special Leave Petition
               (Criminal) was listed before the Hon’ble
               Chamber Judge on 01.04.2024, and the
               petitioner was exempted from surrendering.
               Thereafter, the said first Special leave
               petition (Criminal) Diary No. 5111/2024
               came up for hearing before this Hon’ble
               Court on 29.04.2024, and this Hon’ble Court
               was pleased to dismiss the first Special Leave
               Petition and all the pending applications, and
               this Hon’ble Court had further directed that
               the petitioner shall surrender before the Trial
               Court with two weeks from the date of the
               order.
SLP (Crl.) D. No. 55057 of 2024                          Page 14 of 18
9)      It was after the dismissal of the said first
               Special Leave Petition (Criminal) that the
               petitioner informed the deponent that he had
               come to know that he had actually filed a
               Criminal Appeal being Criminal Appeal No.
               653 of 2011 challenging the judgment of the
               Trial Court. Thereafter, the second/instant
               Special Leave Petition was drawn by the
               deponent, and then its accompanying
               affidavit was signed by the petitioner before
               a Notary Public at Eduthanur Post,
               Villupuram District, Tamil Nadu.
10)
Article 136
of the Constitution provides
               discretionary jurisdiction to this Hon’ble
               Court to render complete justice. This
               Hon’ble Court is vested with plenary powers
               to set aside any order or judgment passed by
               any court or tribunal in the territory of India
               wherein this Hon’ble Court is of the opinion
               that the impugned judgment or order is in
               violation of fundamental rights and shocks
               judicial conscience notwithstanding the fact
               that this Hon’ble Court had previously
               declined to exercise its power under
Article
               136
of the Constitution against the same
               impugned order. Thus, under the given
               circumstances, this Hon’ble Court is not
               precluded from exercising its power under
Article 136
to examine the legal validity of
               the impugned order.
11)     It is pertinent to mention that the petitioner
               belongs to a Scheduled Caste and the
               petitioner has also been convicted under
               various sections of the Scheduled Castes and
               Scheduled Tribes (Prohibition of Atrocities)
SLP (Crl.) D. No. 55057 of 2024                          Page 15 of 18
Act, 1989, and the prosecution and
               conviction under the said Act violates due
               process of law and the rule of law.
12)     The said second/instant Special Leave
               Petition (Criminal) was filed in the Hon’ble
               Supreme Court on 26.11.2024 vide
               SLP(Criminal) Diary No. 55057/2024
               (hereinafter mentioned as Second SLP) titled
N.Eswaranathan Vs. State Represented by
               the Deputy Superintendent of Police
through
               Advocate on Record P.Soma Sundaram
               challenging the impugned judgment and
               order dated 29.09.2023 passed by the
               Hon’ble High Court of Madras in Criminal
               Appeal No. 653 of 2011. The website copy of
               the impugned judgment downloaded from the
               official website of the Hon’ble High Court of
               Madras was filed in this second Special
               Leave Petition.
13)     The said /instant second Special Leave
               Petition was listed before the Hon’ble
               Chamber Judge on 21.02.2025, and the
               petitioner was exempted from surrendering.
14)     It is humbly submitted that the deponent
               tenders unconditional apology for the
               mistake of not having mentioned the factum
               of the filing of the first Special Leave Petition
               (Criminal) Diary No. 5111/2024 against the
               impugned order dated 29.09.2023 passed by
               the Hon’ble High Court of Madras in
               Criminal Appeal No. 618 of 2011 in Para No.
               3 of this second/instant Special Leave
               Petition (Criminal). This omission is neither
               wilful nor wanton.
SLP (Crl.) D. No. 55057 of 2024                            Page 16 of 18
15)     It is also humbly submitted that the factum of
               having filed the first Special Leave Petition
               (Criminal) and its dismissal order dated
               29.04.2024 has been mentioned in pages G,
               H and I of the List of Dates and Events, and
               a copy of the dismissal order passed in the
               first Special leave Petition (Criminal) Diary
               No. 5111/2024 has been filed as Annexure P-
               6 at Pages 406-407 of this second/instant
               Special Leave Petition (Criminal).
16)     Thus, it is humbly prayed that this Hon’ble
               Court may graciously be pleased to accept
               the unconditional apology of the deponent
               and thus render justice.”
6.     The apology appears to be honest and genuine and comes
from a penitent heart. Both Advocates have expressed their
remorse with a promise not to repeat the misconduct in future.
Several eminent leaders of the Supreme Court Bar Association
(SCBA), Office Bearers of the SCBA and Supreme Court
Advocates-on-Record Association (SCAORA) have appealed to
this Court for mercy which should not be ignored.
7.     Suspending an Advocate -on-Record for a period of one
month would cast a stigma on the future of the Advocate-on-
Record. It is said that Mr. P.Soma Sundamram, Advocate-on-
Record, comes from a very remote village in the State of Tamil
Nadu and this stigma can possibly cost him his entire future. Mr.
S.Muthukrishnan, Advocate, also comes from a very remote
village in the State of Tamil Nadu and imposing costs of Rs.
SLP (Crl.) D. No. 55057 of 2024                         Page 17 of 18
1,00,000/- will be too onerous on him. Both the Advocates have
an unblemished track record which persuades me to take a lenient
view.
8.      Though the conduct of the Advocates has been
reprehensible and not worthy of being pardoned, however,
considering the plea made by the Senior Advocates, Office
Bearers of the Supreme Court Bar Association (SCBA) and
Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association (SCAORA)
and keeping in mind the absolute and unconditional apology
tendered by the Advocates expressing remorse and promise made
by them not to repeat the misconduct in future, the unconditional
apology tendered by them is accepted and they are warned of and
directed to be careful in not repeating any such misconduct in
future. They are also directed to ensure that they shall appear
before all cases where they have entered appearances. The case
stands closed.
……………………………………J.
                                  [SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA]

NEW DELHI
April 17th, 2025.
SLP (Crl.) D. No. 55057 of 2024                       Page 18 of 18