[Cites
28
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Chellammal vs State Rep. By The Inspector Of Police on 22 April, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
2025 INSC 540                                                                       REPORTABLE
                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2065 OF 2025
                                    [Arising out of SLP (CRL.) NO. 368 OF 2020]


            CHELLAMMAL AND ANOTHER                                               …APPELLANTS
                                                         VERSUS
            STATE REPRESENTED BY THE
            INSPECTOR OF POLICE                                                  …RESPONDENT


                                                    JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
1. This appeal, by special leave, assails the judgment and order dated

                            5th November, 20191, passed by a learned Judge of the High Court of

                            Judicature at Madras, partly allowing the appellants’ criminal appeal2

                            under
Section 374(2)
, Code of Criminal Procedure3.
2. The two appellants, mother-in-law and husband, respectively, of the

                            deceased were jointly tried4 for commission of offences punishable under

                            Section 304-B and
Section 498A
, Indian Penal Code5. The Sessions

                            Judge (Mahila Court), Coimbatore6, vide its judgment and order dated

                            25th May, 2012, acquitted the appellants of the charge under
Section

                            304-B
, IPC but convicted them under
Section 498-A
, thereof. While the
Signature Not Verified
impugned order
              1 by
Digitally signed
JATINDER KAUR
Date: 2025.04.22
Crl. A No. 345/2012
2
18:03:22 IST
   Reason:
3
Cr. PC
4
S.C. No.37 of 2009
5
IPC
6
Sessions Judge
1
1st appellant was sentenced to a year’s rigorous imprisonment, the 2 nd

appellant was sentenced to two years’ rigorous imprisonment. Both the

appellants were sentenced to fine too.
3. The High Court, vide the impugned order, maintained the conviction

of the appellants under
Section 498A
, IPC, together with the sentence

of a year’s rigorous imprisonment imposed on the 1st appellant; however,

the sentence of two years rigorous imprisonment imposed on the 2nd

appellant was reduced to a year’s rigorous imprisonment. The sentence

of fine was not touched.
4. It has been ascertained in course of hearing that the appellants have

not been in prison even for a single day.
5. We have heard Mr. N. Rajaraman, learned counsel for the appellants

and Mr. V. Krishnamurthy, learned senior counsel and Additional

Advocate General for the respondent-State Tamil Nadu at some length.
6. The date of offence relates back to 11th January, 2008. It was the

birthday of the girl child of the 2nd appellant and the deceased. A quarrel

erupted over how to celebrate the child’s birthday with the deceased and

the 1st appellant having different ideas. The 1st appellant had her way

with the support of the 2nd appellant. This infuriated the deceased, who

was only 19 years old, to set herself ablaze. Ultimately, she passed away

on 16th January, 2008 because of the burn injuries sustained by her. In

the dying declaration of the deceased (dated 11th January, 2008), we

find that she truthfully declared that the appellants never demanded

dowry. This paved the way for the appellants’ acquittal for the graver
2
offence of dowry death. However, we have found allegations in the dying

declaration of the deceased that the appellants occasionally beat her as

well as hurled abuses towards her by calling her a mental patient. The

Sessions Judge and the High Court having returned finding of facts on

appreciation of the evidence on record that the appellants are guilty of

the offence under
Section 498A
, IPC, we do not propose to interfere with

the conviction.
7. However, 17 years have passed since the date of the incident. Prior

to the incident of crime, the appellants were not involved in any crime.
During these 17 years too, they did not indulge in any further crime. On

the other hand, they have looked after the child of the 2nd appellant and

the deceased well and she is now an adult of 19 years, pursuing her

education.
8. Based on such facts and circumstances and urging us to consider the

negative impact that could befall the now adult girl child of the 2 nd

appellant and the deceased if her grandmother and father were to be

imprisoned, Mr. Rajaraman implored this Court to set aside the sentence

of imprisonment by enhancing the fine.
9. Unfortunately, that is not a permissible course of action in view of
Section 498A
, IPC. It ordains that a woman’s husband or the husband’s

relative, if found guilty of subjecting the woman to cruelty, shall be

punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years

and shall also be liable to fine. Thus, fine is not an alternative to

imprisonment. What, therefore, survives for consideration is the
3
question of grant of probation, either under the Cr. PC or the Probation

     of Offenders Act, 19587.
10. Bare perusal of the order on sentence of the Sessions Judge and the

     impugned order of the High Court reveal that both the courts omitted to

     consider, and we assume it to be inadvertent, whether the appellants

     could be granted the benefit of probation either under sub-section (1) of
Section 360
, Cr. PC 8 or
Section 4
of the Probation Act.
11. Insofar as relevant for the purpose of the present appeal, Section

     360, Cr. PC enabling release on probation of good conduct ordains that

     when any person not under twenty-one years of age is convicted of an

     offence punishable with fine only or with imprisonment for a term of

     seven years or less, and no previous conviction is proved against the

     offender, if it appears to the Court before which he is convicted, regard

     being had to the age, character or antecedents of the offender, and to

     the circumstances in which the offence was committed, that it is
7
Probation Act
8
360. Order to release on probation of good conduct or after admonition.—(1) When
any person not under twenty-one years of age is convicted of an offence punishable with
fine only or with imprisonment for a term of seven years or less, or when any person under
twenty-one years of age or any woman is convicted of an offence not punishable with death
or imprisonment for life, and no previous conviction is proved against the offender, if it
appears to the Court before which he is convicted, regard being had to the age, character
or antecedents of the offender, and to the circumstances in which the offence was
committed, that it is expedient that the offender should be released on probation of good
conduct, the Court may, instead of sentencing him at once to any punishment, direct that
he be released on his entering into a bond, with or without sureties, to appear and receive
sentence when called upon during such period (not exceeding three years) as the Court may
direct and in the meantime to keep the peace and be of good behaviour:
Provided that where any first offender is convicted by a Magistrate of the second class not
specially empowered by the High Court, and the Magistrate is of opinion that the powers
conferred by this section should be exercised, he shall record his opinion to that effect, and
submit the proceedings to a Magistrate of the first class, forwarding the accused to, or taking
bail for his appearance before such Magistrate, who shall dispose of the case in the manner
provided by sub-section (2).
4
expedient that the offender should be released on probation of good

     conduct, the Court may, instead of sentencing him at once to any

     punishment, direct that he be released on his entering into a bond, with

     or without sureties, to appear and receive sentence when called upon

     during such period (not exceeding three years) as the Court may direct

     and in the meantime to keep the peace and be of good behaviour.
12. Similarly, Section 3619, Cr. PC mandating special reasons to be

     recorded in certain cases, provides that in any case where the Court

     could have dealt with an accused person under Section 360 or under the

     provisions of the
Probation Act
, but has not done so, it shall record in its

     judgment the special reasons for not having done so.
13. Apart from Section 360 providing for the benefit of probation, which

     was also previously provided by
Section 562
of Code of Criminal

     Procedure, 1898, we noticed that the Parliament in 1958 had enacted

     the
Probation Act
with the avowed object of providing scope of

     reformation to convicts who deserve such benefits. Sub-section (3) of
Section 110
of the Probation Act stipulates that it (the Act) shall come

     into force in a State on such date as the State Government may by
9
361. Special reasons to be recorded in certain cases.—Where in any case the Court
could have dealt with,—
(a) an accused person under Section 360 or under the provisions of the
Probation of
Offenders Act, 1958
(20 of 1958), or
(b) a youthful offender under the
Children Act, 1960
(60 of 1960), or any other law for the
time being in force for the treatment, training or rehabilitation of youthful offenders,
but has not done so, it shall record in its judgment the special reasons for not having done
so.
10
1. Short title, extent and commencement.—(1) …
(2) …
(3) It shall come into force in a State on such date as the State Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for
different parts of the State.
5
notification in the Official Gazette appoint. Section 411 thereof, to the

     extent relevant for ascertaining who is entitled to the benefit of

     probation, stipulates that when any person is found guilty of having

     committed an offence not punishable with death or imprisonment for life

     and the court by which the person is found guilty is of opinion that,

     having regard to the circumstances of the case including the nature of

     the offence and the character of the offender, it is expedient to release

     him on probation of good conduct, then, notwithstanding anything

     contained in any other law for the time being in force, the court may,

     instead of sentencing him at once to any punishment, direct that he be
11
4. Power of court to release certain offenders on probation of good conduct.—
(1) When any person is found guilty of having committed an offence not punishable with
death or imprisonment for life and the court by which the person is found guilty is of opinion
that, having regard to the circumstances of the case including the nature of the offence and
the character of the offender, it is expedient to release him on probation of good conduct,
then, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the
court may, instead of sentencing him at once to any punishment, direct that he be released
on his entering into a bond, with or without sureties, to appear and receive sentence when
called upon during such period, not exceeding three years, as the court may direct, and in
the meantime to keep the peace and be of good behaviour:
Provided that the court shall not direct such release of an offender unless it is satisfied that
the offender or his surety, if any, has a fixed place of abode or regular occupation in the
place over which the court exercises jurisdiction or in which the offender is likely to live
during the period for which he enters into the bond.
(2) Before making any order under sub-section (1) is made, the court shall take into
consideration the report, if any, of the probation officer concerned in relation to the case.
(3) When an order under sub-section (1), the court may, if it is of opinion that in the interests
of the offender and of the public it is expedient so to do, in addition pass a supervision order
directing that the offender shall remain under the supervision of a probation officer named
in the order during such period, not being less than one year, as may be specified therein,
and may in such supervision order or impose such conditions as it deems necessary for the
due supervision of the offender.
(4) The court making a supervision order under sub-section (3) shall require the offender,
before he is released, to enter into a bond, with or without sureties, to observe the conditions
specified in such order and such additional conditions with respect to residence, abstention
from intoxicants or any other matter as the court may, having regard to the particular
circumstances, consider fit to impose for preventing a repetition of the same offence or a
commission of other offences by the offender.
(5) The court making a supervision order under sub-section (3) shall explain to the offender
the terms and conditions of the order and shall forthwith furnish one copy of the supervision
order to each of the offenders, the sureties, if any, and the probation officer concerned.
6
released on his entering into a bond, with or without sureties, to appear

     and receive sentence when called upon during such period, not

     exceeding three years, as the court may direct, and in the meantime to

     keep the peace and be of good behaviour.
14.
Section 19
of the Probation Act12, however, provides that subject to

     the provisions of
Section 18
thereof, Section 562 of the Code (i.e., the

     Code of Criminal procedure, 1898) shall cease to apply to the States or

     parts thereof in which it (the
Probation Act
) is brought into force.
15. Having looked at
Section 19
of the Probation Act, we needed a

     clarification as to whether the provisions thereof were brought into force

     in the State of Tamil Nadu.
16. While the hearing was in progress, Mr. Nagamuthu, learned senior

     counsel was found to be present in Court. His assistance was sought by

     us.
17. Mr. Nagamuthu immediately assisted us by referring to various

     precedents and later handed over a compilation of judgments on the

     issue of probation.
18. Based on the same and other precedents, we propose to decide the

     surviving issue in this appeal as to whether the High Court was justified

     in not extending the benefit of probation to the appellants.
12
19. Section 562 of the Code not to apply in certain areas.—Subject to the provisions
of
Section 18
, Section 562 of the Code shall cease to apply to the States or parts thereof in
which this Act is brought into force.
7
19. Responding to our query as to whether the
Probation Act
has been

       brought into force in the State of Tamil Nadu, as ordained in
Sections

       1(3)
and
19
thereof, Mr. Nagamuthu referred us to the decision of this

       Court in
State v. A. Parthiban13
. While submitting that the provisions

       of the
Probation Act
were brought into force in the State of Tamil Nadu

       in the year 1964, our attention was pointedly drawn to paragraph ‘10’ of
the said decision
.
20. On the question whether it is a mandatory duty cast upon the court

       to record reasons for not invoking Section 360, Cr. PC or
Section 4
of

       the Probation Act, Mr. Nagamuthu, invited our attention to the order

       passed in
Chandreshwar Sharma v. State of Bihar14
. Relevant

       excerpt from such order reads as follows:
“3. … From the perusal of the judgment of the learned Magistrate as
               well as the court of appeal, and that of the High Court, it transpires
               that none of the forums below had considered the question of
               applicability of
Section 360
of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Section
               361 and Section 360 of the Code on being read together would indicate
               that in any case where the court could have dealt with an accused
               under Section 360 of the Code, and yet does not want to grant the
               benefit of the said provision then it shall record in its judgment specific
               reasons for not having done so. This has apparently not been done,
               inasmuch as the Court overlooked the provisions of
Sections 360
and
361
of the Code of Criminal Procedure. As such, the mandatory duty
               cast on the Magistrate has not been performed. …”
21. However, Mr. Nagamuthu was prompt in submitting that the decision

       in
Chandreshwar
(supra) had no occasion to deal with the
Probation

       Act
and, therefore, it is not expressly held that the
Probation Act
also

       casts such duty; however, the same being a beneficial legislation, he
13
(2006) 11 SCC 473
14
(2000) 9 SCC 245
8
submitted that this Court may draw analogy from Sections 360 and 361,

     Cr. PC and hold that after recording a conviction it is mandatory for the

     courts to consider the stated circumstances and, instead of sentencing

     the offender at once to any punishment, determine whether he deserves

     extension of the benefit of
Section 4
of the Probation Act.
22. Mr. Nagamuthu also cited the following decisions where law has been

     laid down to the effect as noted below:
(
i)   Ishar Das v. State of Punjab15
, where it has been held that
Section 4(1)
of the Probation Act makes no distinction between

                a convict below 21 years or otherwise and it is applicable to all

                ages.
(
ii) Dalbir Singh v. State of Haryana16
, where this Court

                emphasized that the courts have to form an opinion that it is

                expedient to release the offender on probation and such

                opinion is mandatory.
(iii) Jagdev Singh and other v. State of Punjab 17, holds that it

                is permissible for the Supreme Court to deal with the plea of

                application of the
Probation Act
for the first time in special

                circumstances, where the relevant material relating to the

                circumstances in which an offence is committed is on the

                record and that this Court may justifiably grant such benefit to

                an appellant while finding him guilty; however, in the absence
15
(1973) 2 SCC 65
16
(2000) 5 SCC 82
17
(1974) 3 SCC 412
9
of materials, such a prayer may well be disallowed if made for

               the first time on appeal by special leave.
(iv) While granting benefit of
Section 4
of Probation Act, this Court

               in
Rajbir v. State of Haryana18
held that the circumstances

               of the case, the nature of the offence and the character of the

               offender have to be taken into account.
(v) In
MCD v. State (NCT of Delhi
)19, construing the word “shall”

               appearing in sub-section (2) of
Section 4
of the Probation Act

               as mandatory, this Court held that before granting an order for

               probation, it is essential to obtain the report of the Probation

               Officer; however, the court may not be bound thereby.
23. At the dawn of this century, this Court in Commandant, 20th
Battalion, ITB Police v. Sanjay Binjola20
dwelled on the object of the
Probation Act
and what was held has been echoed, fairly recently, in
Lakhvir Singh v. State of Punjab21
. After noticing the Statement of

     Objects and Reasons22 of the Probation Act, the coordinate Bench in the

     latter decision observed that the SoR explains the rationale for the

     enactment and its amendments : to give the benefit of release of

     offenders on probation of good conduct instead of sentencing them to

     imprisonment. Thus, the increasing emphasis on the reformation and

     rehabilitation of offenders as useful and self-reliant members of society
18
(1985) Supp SCC 272
19
(2005) 4 SCC 605
20
(2001) 5 SCC 317
21
(2021) 2 SCC 763
22
SoR
10
without subjecting them to the deleterious effects of jail life is what is

       sought to be subserved.
24. The decision in
Hari Singh v. Sukhbir Singh23
provides the guiding

       light as to how first-time offenders are to be dealt. It was observed

       therein that:
“8. … Many offenders are not dangerous criminals but are weak
               characters or who have surrendered to temptation or provocation. In
               placing such type of offenders, on probation, the court encourages
               their own sense of responsibility for their future and protects them
               from the stigma and possible contamination of prison. In this case, the
               High Court has observed that there was no previous history of enmity
               between the parties and the occurrence was an outcome of a sudden
               flare up. These are not shown to be incorrect. We have already said
               that the accused had no intention to commit murder of any person.
               Therefore, the extension of benefit of the beneficial legislation
               applicable to first offenders cannot be said to be inappropriate.”
25.
In
Gulzar v. State of Madhya Pradesh24
, the following instructive

       passages are found:
“11. Where the provisions of the
PO Act
are applicable the employment
               of Section 360 of the Code is not to be made. In cases of such
               application, it would be an illegality resulting in highly undesirable
               consequences, which the legislature, who gave birth to the
PO Act
and
               the Code wanted to obviate. Yet the legislature in its wisdom has
               obliged the court under Section 361 of the Code to apply one or the
               other beneficial provisions; be it Section 360 of the Code or the
               provisions of the
PO Act
. It is only by providing special reasons that
               their applicability can be withheld by the court. The comparative
               elevation of the provisions of the
PO Act
are further noticed in sub-
               section (10) of Section 360 of the Code which makes it clear that
               nothing in the said section shall affect the provisions of the
PO Act
.
               Those provisions have a paramountcy of their own in the respective
               areas where they are applicable.
12. … The scope of
Section 4
of the PO Act is much wider. It applies to
               any person found guilty of having committed an offence not punishable
               with death or imprisonment for life. Section 360 of the Code does not
               provide for any role for Probation Officers in assisting the courts in
               relation to supervision and other matters while the
PO Act
does make
23
(1988) 4 SCC 551
24
(2007) 1 SCC 619
11
such a provision. While
Section 12
of the PO Act states that the person
       found guilty of an offence and dealt with under
Section 3
or 4 of the
PO
       Act
shall not suffer disqualification, if any, attached to conviction of an
       offence under any law, the Code does not contain parallel provision.
Two statutes with such significant differences could not be intended to
       co-exist at the same time in the same area. Such co-existence would
       lead to anomalous results. The intention to retain the provisions of
       Section 360 of the Code and the provisions of the
PO Act
, as applicable
       at the same time in a given area, cannot be gathered from the
       provisions of Section 360 or any other provision of the Code. Therefore,
       by virtue of
Section 8(1)
of the General Clauses Act, where the
       provisions of the Act have been brought into force, the provisions of
       Section 360 of the Code are wholly inapplicable.”
26. On consideration of the precedents and based on a comparative

study of Section 360, Cr. PC and sub-section (1) of
Section 4
of the

Probation Act, what is revealed is that the latter is wider and expansive

in its coverage than the former. Inter alia, while Section 360 permits

release of an offender, more twenty-one years old, on probation when

he is sentenced to imprisonment for less than seven years or fine,
Section 4
of the Probation Act enables a court to exercise its discretion

in any case where the offender is found to have committed an offence

such that he is punishable with any sentence other than death or life

imprisonment. Additionally, the non-obstante clause in sub-section gives

overriding effect to sub-section (1) of
Section 4
over any other law for

the time being in force. Also, it is noteworthy that Section 361, Cr. PC

itself, being a subsequent legislation, engrafts a provision that in any

case where the court could have dealt with an accused under the

provisions of the
Probation Act
but has not done so, it shall record in its

judgment the special reasons therefor.
12
27. What logically follows from a conjoint reading of sub-section (1) of
Section 4
of the Probation Act and Section 361, Cr. PC is that if Section

360, Cr. PC were not applicable in a particular case, there is no reason

why
Section 4
of the Probation Act would not be attracted.
28. Summing up the legal position, it can be said that while an offender

cannot seek an order for grant of probation as a matter of right but

having noticed the object that the statutory provisions seek to achieve

by grant of probation and the several decisions of this Court on the point

of applicability of
Section 4
of the Probation Act, we hold that, unless

applicability is excluded, in a case where the circumstances stated in sub-

section (1) of
Section 4
of the Probation Act are attracted, the court has

no discretion to omit from its consideration release of the offender on

probation; on the contrary, a mandatory duty is cast upon the court to

consider whether the case before it warrants releasing the offender upon

fulfilment of the stated circumstances. The question of grant of probation

could be decided either way. In the event, the court in its discretion

decides to extend the benefit of probation, it may upon considering the

report of the probation officer impose such conditions as deemed just

and proper. However, if the answer be in the negative, it would only be

just and proper for the court to record the reasons therefor.
29. For the foregoing reasons and in the light of the factual matrix, we

are unhesitatingly of the opinion that the Sessions Judge and the High

Court by omitting to consider whether the appellants were entitled to

the benefit of probation, occasioned a failure of justice. Consequently,
13
there was no worthy consideration as to whether the appellants could

       be extended the benefit of probation.
30. We are conscious that in
MCD
(supra), since followed in
State of

       Madhya Pradesh v. Man Singh25
, this Court has held that the report

       of the probation officer referred to in sub-section (2) of
Section 4
of the

       Probation Act is a condition precedent and, therefore, must be complied

       with by the trial courts and the high courts. Importantly, it has also been

       held that the courts may not be bound by such report. In such view of

       the matter, we need to make appropriate directions.
31. Accordingly, while maintaining the conviction recorded against the

       appellants but looking to the facts and circumstances, we are inclined to

       remit the matter to the High Court for limited consideration of the

       question of grant of probation to the appellants upon obtaining a report

       of the relevant probation officer. It is ordered accordingly.
32. Till such time the appropriate Bench of the High Court decides the

       question as indicated above, the order of this Court dated 10th January,

       2020, granting the appellants exemption from surrendering will

       continue.
33. This appeal, accordingly, stands disposed of on the aforesaid terms.
34. Pending applications, if any, stand closed.
25
(2019) 10 SCC 161
14
35. Before parting, we record our sincere appreciation for the invaluable

assistance rendered to us by Mr. Nagamuthu.
……..……..……………J.
                                                 (DIPANKAR DATTA)




                                                 ….……..………………J.
                                                     (MANMOHAN)
 NEW DELHI.
APRIL 22, 2025.
15