[Cites
19
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
N. Vijay Kumar vs Vishwanath Rao N on 22 April, 2025
Author:
Sanjay Karol
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
,
Pankaj Mithal
2025 INSC 537




                                                                                NON-REPORTABLE

                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 5305 OF 2024



                            N. VIJAY KUMAR                                      … APPELLANT


                                                                       Versus


                            VISHWANATH RAO N.                                   … RESPONDENT




                                                               JUDGMENT
SANJAY KAROL J.
1.         The present appeal is filed assailing the judgment dated
                            21st December 2020 passed by the High Court of Karnataka at
                            Bengaluru in Criminal Appeal No.94 of 2011, whereby the High
                            Court reversed the order of acquittal passed by the Court of XV
Signature Not Verified   Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Bangalore City1 and
Digitally signed by
RAJNI MUKHI
Date: 2025.04.22
17:13:35 IST
Reason:                  1
Hereinafter referred to as ‘Trial Court’
Crl.Appeal No.5305/2024                              Page 1 of 21
convicted the appellant-accused under Section 138 of the
Negotiable Instruments Act, 18812.
2.       The factual matrix giving rise to the present appeal is as
follows :
2.1.       The appellant3 and the respondent4 had known each
       other for over a decade and shared a friendly relationship.
The case of the complainant is that he extended a hand loan
       of Rs.20,00,000/- (twenty lakh rupees) to the accused, to
       help him produce a Kannada feature film titled ‘Indian
       Police History’.           In discharge of this alleged loan, the
       accused issued a cheque bearing No.015138, dated 14th
       October 2008, in favour of the complainant. However, upon
       presentation for encashment, the cheque was dishonoured
       on 20th October 2008 with an endorsement ‘Refer to
       Drawer’, indicating insufficient funds in the accused’s
       account.
2.2.       Consequently, the complainant issued a statutory
       legal notice dated 25th October 2008, demanding repayment
       of the amount. The accused, through his reply dated 7th
       November 2008, denied any liability and raised the
       following contentions:
2
Hereinafter the ‘
N.I. Act
’
3
Hereinafter referred to as the ‘Accused’
4
Hereinafter referred to as the ‘Complainant'
Crl.Appeal No.5305/2024                             Page 2 of 21
(i)      The cheque in question was issued merely as
          a security instrument for a smaller loan of
          Rs.3,50,000/- (three lakh fifty thousand rupees),
          availed by the appellant-accused for production of
          Indian Police History, which was completed in 2003.
This loan had already been settled in terms of a
          Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) dated 29th
          March 2008, which recorded a full and final settlement
          of Rs.5,50,000/- (five lakh fifty thousand rupees),
          inclusive of interest.
(ii)     At the time of availing the said loan of
          Rs.3,50,000/-, the accused had handed over two blank
          signed cheques to the complainant as security.
          However, when the accused sought their return upon
          signing the MoU, the complainant informed him that
          the cheques had been misplaced but assured that they
          would not be misused. The same was also recorded in
          the MoU. It was only upon receiving the legal notice,
          that the accused became aware that the complainant
          had allegedly misused one of these cheques.
(iii)    The accused had lodged a police complaint,
          being NCR No.256/2008 dated 24th July 2008,
          reporting the loss of the two cheques at the instance of
Crl.Appeal No.5305/2024                     Page 3 of 21
the complainant and alleging that the complainant had
               failed to return them despite repeated requests.
        2.3.      Since the alleged amount remained unpaid, the
        complainant preferred a complaint against the accused
        under
Section 200
of the Code of Criminal Procedure 19735,
        being CC No.1191 of 2009, before the Trial Court, in
        relation to an offence punishable under
Section 138
of the
        N.I. Act.
2.4.      After considering the oral and documentary
        evidence, the Trial Court vide judgment dated 20th
        November 2010, acquitted the accused, holding that the
        accused had successfully rebutted the presumption under
Section 139
of the N.I. Act. To hold the same, reliance was
        placed on
Rangappa v. Sri Mohan6
. The relevant extract of
        the Trial Court judgment in the instant case is as follows :
“I have gone through
the said decision
very carefully
               with due respect to their lordships. The
ratio
laid down
               in
the aforesaid decision is applicable and supports the
               defence taken by the accused. Thus over all materials
               available on record and under the facts and
               circumstances of the case, the arguments advanced by
               the learned Counsel for the complainant does not holds
               water except Ex. D.2. Wherein the arguments advanced
               by the learned counsel for the accused holds water.
               Hence a doubt has arised in the mind of the court about
               the alleged loan amount of Rs. 20 lakhs to the accused.
               Hence the accused has rebutted the presumption U / s.
5
For short ‘
CrPC
’
6
(2010) 11 SCC 441
Crl.Appeal No.5305/2024                               Page 4 of 21
118 and 139 of
NI Act
and proves that there is no
            existence of legally recoverable debt by the accused to
            the complainant by relying upon the oral evidence of pw.
1, DWs. 1 to 3 and documents available on record.”

     2.5.      Aggrieved by the said order of acquittal, the
     complainant preferred an appeal before the High Court
     bearing Criminal Appeal No.94/2011. Vide the impugned
     judgment dated 21st December 2020, the High Court
     reversed the finding of acquittal returned by the Trial Court
     and convicted the accused for an offence punishable under
Section 138
of the N.I. Act and directed him to pay
     Rs.22,00,000/- (twenty two lakh rupees) within eight weeks,
     in default whereof he was to undergo simple imprisonment
     for one year. The reasoning for such a conclusion, as can
     be understood from the perusal of the judgment, is that :
“30. Having taken note of the evidence of DW.2,
            it is clear that the amounts are not given to the
            complainant. DW.3 though in his evidence, he says that
            the amount was paid in his presence and the complainant
            has affixed the signature on Ex.D2. It is elicited in the
            cross-examination that he does not know anything about
            the payment of money by the complainant to the accused
            and also how much amount was paid to him, but he
            claims that the complainant told him that the accused has
            availed an amount of Rs.3,50,000/- and insisted him to
            get the money from the accused. He also claims that in
            the Hotel, it was decided to return the amount of
            Rs.5,50,000/-. All of them have signed the documents in
            the Kanishka Hotel, DW.2 was also present and he
            claims that an amount of Rs.2 lakhs was paid, but he
            came to know that already an amount of Rs.3,50,000/-
            was paid prior to that. DW.2 says that in his presence the
Crl.Appeal No.5305/2024                             Page 5 of 21
amount was not paid and he subsequently signed the
          documents-Exs.D2. But DW.3 claims that in his
          presence only after receiving the amount of Rs.2 Lakhs,
          the complainant has signed the documents. It is
          suggested that while signing the document - Ex.D2, the
          complainant was not present and the same was denied.
          DW.1 himself says that he obtained the signature of
          DWs.2 and 3 after the complainant left the place by
          receiving the money. There are material contradictions
          in the evidence of DWs.1 to 3 for having repaid the
          amount of Rs.5,50,000/-. Though, the accused relies
          upon the document-Ex.D2, it is proved that the said
          document is forged and the evidence of the handwriting
          expert is unchallenged and also the accused did not
          examine the handwriting expert and did not dispute the
          opinion of the handwriting expert. When such being the
          case, the evidence of the accused cannot be relied upon
          and the Court cannot give any credence to the evidence
          of DW.1. For having repaid the amount, the evidence of
          DWs. 1 to 3 are contradictory to each other and even the
          document-Ex.D2 came into existence is also under the
          suspicious circumstances. The trial Judge has failed to
          appreciate these materials before the Court.
31.     The Trial Judge though considered the
          Judgment in
Rangappa
's case (supra), an observation
          has been made that the
ratio
laid down in
the aforesaid
          decision is applicable and supports the defense taken by
          the accused. The very observation is erroneous. How it
          supports the case of the defense has not been stated in
          the judgment. Instead of that the same judgment is
          helpful to the complainant since the complainant has
          caused the legal notice in terms of Ex.P4 and also
          produced Ex.PS-Postal receipt, Ex.P6-UCP receipts,
          Ex.P7- notice and Ex.P7(a)-envelope.
32.     The Judgment of this Court in Sri Yogesh
          Poojary's case (supra), is aptly applicable to the case on
          hand with regard to the service of notice is concerned
          and so also the Apex Court in the
Judgment of
          Rangappa
's case (supra), categorically held that when
          the notice is issued and the accused did not dispute the
Crl.Appeal No.5305/2024                           Page 6 of 21
issuance of cheque and signature, the presumption
          available in favour of the complainant unless the
          evidence of the complainant is rebutted. In the case on
          hand, though the accused made all efforts to rebut the
          case of complainant nothing is elicited in the cross-
examination of PW.1 and instead of the evidence, which
          he has adduced as DW.1 and also DWs.2 and 3 and the
          same falsifies the case of the accused. The very defense
          of the accused is that in one breath he borrowed an
          amount of Rs.3 Lakhs and in another breath an amount
          of Rs.3,50,000/-, totally, repaid the amount of
          Rs.5,50,000/-, In view of the admission, it is narrow
          down the case of the complainant since the accused
          admitted the transaction but only the defense is that he
          repaid the amount of Rs.5,50,000/-.”


OUR VIEW
3.    In the present special leave petition, while passing order
on the application seeking exemption from surrendering, learned
Judge in Chambers vide order dated 15th March 2021 directed
Rs.11,00,000/- (eleven lakh rupees) to be deposited with the
Registry without prejudice to the rights and contentions. Notice
was issued on 12th April 2021, and the remaining amount of
Rs.9,00,000/- (the total disputed amount being, allegedly, twenty
lakh) was directed to be deposited within eight weeks. The
operation of the impugned judgment was stayed. The amount
stood deposited in the Registry of this Court.
4.    We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused
the written submissions and material on record. The primary
question to be considered is as to whether, in the instant facts, the
Crl.Appeal No.5305/2024                          Page 7 of 21
accused has been able to discharge the burden under
Sections 118
(a) and 139 of the
N.I. Act
and whether the High Court was
justified in overturning the order of acquittal passed by the Trial
Court.
5.
The N.I. Act
raises two presumptions, one under
Section
118
; and the other in
Section 139
thereof. The Sections read as
under :
“118. Presumptions as to negotiable instruments.—
            Until the contrary is proved, the following presumptions
            shall be made:—
(a)     of consideration:—that every negotiable
               instrument was made or drawn for consideration,
               and that every such instrument, when it has been
               accepted, indorsed, negotiated or transferred, was
               accepted, indorsed, negotiated or transferred for
               consideration;
x                   x              x
139. Presumption in favour of holder.— It shall be
            presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that the holder
            of a cheque received the cheque of the nature referred to
            in
section 138
for the discharge, in whole or in part, of
            any debt or other liability.”
6.
Section 118 (a)
assumes that every negotiable instrument
is made or drawn for consideration, while
Section 139
creates a
presumption that the holder of a cheque has received the cheque
in discharge of a debt or liability. Presumptions under both are
rebuttable, meaning they can be rebutted by the accused by
raising a probable defence. This Court through various
Crl.Appeal No.5305/2024                            Page 8 of 21
pronouncements, has consistently clarified the nature and extent
of these presumptions and the standard of proof required by the
accused to rebut them. We may consider a few such
pronouncements.
6.1.
In
Mallavarapu          Kasivisweswara           Rao    v.
        Thadikonda Ramulu Firm7
, this Court observed as under :
“17. Under
Section 118(a)
of the Negotiable Instruments
               Act, the court is obliged to presume, until the contrary is
               proved, that the promissory note was made for
               consideration. It is also a settled position that the initial
               burden in this regard lies on the defendant to prove the
               non-existence of consideration by bringing on record
               such facts and circumstances which would lead the court
               to believe the non-existence of the consideration either
               by direct evidence or by preponderance of probabilities
               showing that the existence of consideration was
               improbable, doubtful or illegal.
In this connection,
               reference may be made to a decision of this Court
               in
Bharat Barrel & Drum Mfg. Co. v. Amin Chand
               Payrelal
[(1999) 3 SCC 35] . In para 12 of
the said
               decision
, this Court observed as under : (SCC pp. 50-51)

                       “12. Upon consideration of various
                       judgments as noted hereinabove, the
                       position of law which emerges is that once
                       execution of the promissory note is admitted,
                       the presumption under
Section 118(a)
would
                       arise that it is supported by a consideration.
                       Such a presumption is rebuttable. The
                       defendant can prove the non-existence of a
                       consideration by raising a probable defence.
                       If the defendant is proved to have discharged
                       the initial onus of proof showing that the
                       existence of consideration was improbable
                       or doubtful or the same was illegal, the onus
7
(2008) 7 SCC 655
Crl.Appeal No.5305/2024                                  Page 9 of 21
would shift to the plaintiff who will be
                obliged to prove it as a matter of fact and
                upon its failure to prove would disentitle him
                to the grant of relief on the basis of the
                negotiable instrument. The burden upon the
                defendant of proving the non-existence of
                the consideration can be either direct or by
                bringing on record the preponderance of
                probabilities by reference to                 the
                circumstances upon which he relies. In such
                an event, the plaintiff is entitled under law to
                rely upon all the evidence led in the case
                including that of the plaintiff as well. In case,
                where the defendant fails to discharge the
                initial onus of proof by showing the non-
existence of the consideration, the plaintiff
                would invariably be held entitled to the
                benefit of presumption arising under
Section
                118(a)
in his favour. The court may not insist
                upon the defendant to disprove the existence
                of consideration by leading direct evidence
                as the existence of negative evidence is
                neither possible nor contemplated and even
                if led, is to be seen with a doubt. The bare
                denial of the passing of the consideration
                apparently does not appear to be any
                defence. Something which is probable has to
                be brought on record for getting the benefit
                of shifting the onus of proving to the
                plaintiff. To disprove the presumption, the
                defendant has to bring on record such facts
                and circumstances upon consideration of
                which the court may either believe that the
                consideration did not exist or its non-
existence was so probable that a prudent man
                would, under the circumstances of the case,
                shall act upon the plea that it did not exist.”
From
the above decision
of this Court, it is pellucid that
          if the defendant is proved to have discharged the initial
          onus of proof showing that the existence of consideration
          was improbable or doubtful or the same was illegal, the
Crl.Appeal No.5305/2024                             Page 10 of 21
onus would shift to the plaintiff who would be obliged
               to prove it as a matter of fact and upon its failure to prove
               would disentitle him to the grant of relief on the basis of
               the negotiable instrument. It is also discernible from
the
               above decision
that if the defendant fails to discharge the
               initial onus of proof by showing the non-existence of the
               consideration, the plaintiff would invariably be held
               entitled to the benefit of presumption arising under
Section 118(a)
in his favour.”
                                                     (Emphasis Supplied)

        6.2.
In
Kumar Exports v. Sharma Carpets8
, this Court
        examined the presumptions raised by the
N.I. Act
, and held
        as follows :
“18.         Applying the definition of the word “proved”
               in
Section 3
of the Evidence Act to the provisions of
Sections 118
and
139
of the Act, it becomes evident that
               in a trial under
Section 138
of the Act a presumption will
               have to be made that every negotiable instrument was
               made or drawn for consideration and that it was executed
               for discharge of debt or liability once the execution of
               negotiable instrument is either proved or admitted. As
               soon as the complainant discharges the burden to prove
               that the instrument, say a note, was executed by the
               accused, the rules of presumptions under
Sections 118
and
139
of the Act help him shift the burden on the
               accused. The presumptions will live, exist and survive
               and shall end only when the contrary is proved by the
               accused, that is, the cheque was not issued for
               consideration and in discharge of any debt or liability. A
               presumption is not in itself evidence, but only makes a
               prima facie case for a party for whose benefit it exists.
19. The use of the phrase “until the contrary is proved”
               in
Section 118
of the Act and use of the words “unless
               the contrary is proved” in
Section 139
of the Act read
               with definitions of “may presume” and “shall presume”
8
(2009) 2 SCC 513
Crl.Appeal No.5305/2024                                  Page 11 of 21
as given in
Section 4
of the Evidence Act, makes it at
          once clear that presumptions to be raised under both the
          provisions are rebuttable. When a presumption is
          rebuttable, it only points out that the party on whom lies
          the duty of going forward with evidence, on the fact
          presumed and when that party has produced evidence
          fairly and reasonably tending to show that the real fact is
          not as presumed, the purpose of the presumption is over.
20. The accused in a trial under
Section 138
of the Act
          has two options. He can either show that consideration
          and debt did not exist or that under the particular
          circumstances of the case the non-existence of
          consideration and debt is so probable that a prudent man
          ought to suppose that no consideration and debt existed.
To rebut the statutory presumptions an accused is not
          expected to prove his defence beyond reasonable doubt
          as is expected of the complainant in a criminal trial. The
          accused may adduce direct evidence to prove that the
          note in question was not supported by consideration and
          that there was no debt or liability to be discharged by
          him. However, the court need not insist in every case that
          the accused should disprove the non-existence of
          consideration and debt by leading direct evidence
          because the existence of negative evidence is neither
          possible nor contemplated. At the same time, it is clear
          that bare denial of the passing of the consideration and
          existence of debt, apparently would not serve the
          purpose of the accused. Something which is probable has
          to be brought on record for getting the burden of proof
          shifted to the complainant. To disprove the
          presumptions, the accused should bring on record such
          facts and circumstances, upon consideration of which,
          the court may either believe that the consideration and
          debt did not exist or their non-existence was so probable
          that a prudent man would under the circumstances of the
          case, act upon the plea that they did not exist. Apart from
          adducing direct evidence to prove that the note in
          question was not supported by consideration or that he
          had not incurred any debt or liability, the accused may
          also rely upon circumstantial evidence and if the
          circumstances so relied upon are compelling, the burden
Crl.Appeal No.5305/2024                            Page 12 of 21
may likewise shift again on to the complainant. The
            accused may also rely upon presumptions of fact, for
            instance, those mentioned in
Section 114
of the Evidence
            Act to rebut the presumptions arising under
Sections 118
and
139
of the Act.
21. The accused has also an option to prove the non-
            existence of consideration and debt or liability either by
            letting in evidence or in some clear and exceptional
            cases, from the case set out by the complainant, that is,
            the averments in the complaint, the case set out in the
            statutory notice and evidence adduced by the
            complainant during the trial. Once such rebuttal
            evidence is adduced and accepted by the court, having
            regard to all the circumstances of the case and the
            preponderance of probabilities, the evidential burden
            shifts back to the complainant and, thereafter, the
            presumptions under
Sections 118
and
139
of the Act will
            not again come to the complainant's rescue.”

                                                (Emphasis Supplied)

     6.3.      A three-Judge Bench of this Court in
Rangappa
(supra) had the occasion to consider
Section 139
elaborately. The Court reiterated that where the signature
     on the cheque is acknowledged, a presumption has to be
     raised that the cheque pertained to a legally enforceable debt
     or liability, however, this presumption is of a rebuttal nature
     and the onus is then on the accused to raise a probable
     defence. It was further stated that :
“27.
Section 139
of the Act is an example of a reverse
            onus clause that has been included in furtherance of the
            legislative objective of improving the credibility of
            negotiable instruments. While
Section 138
of the Act
            specifies a strong criminal remedy in relation to the
Crl.Appeal No.5305/2024                             Page 13 of 21
dishonour of cheques, the rebuttable presumption under
Section 139
is a device to prevent undue delay in the
               course of litigation. However, it must be remembered
               that the offence made punishable by
Section 138
can be
               better described as a regulatory offence since the
               bouncing of a cheque is largely in the nature of a civil
               wrong whose impact is usually confined to the private
               parties involved in commercial transactions. In such a
               scenario, the test of proportionality should guide the
               construction and interpretation of reverse onus clauses
               and the defendant-accused cannot be expected to
               discharge an unduly high standard or proof.
28. In the absence of compelling justifications, reverse
               onus clauses usually impose an evidentiary burden and
               not a persuasive burden. Keeping this in view, it is a
               settled position that when an accused has to rebut the
               presumption under
Section 139
, the standard of proof for
               doing so is that of “preponderance of probabilities”.
Therefore, if the accused is able to raise a probable
               defence which creates doubts about the existence of a
               legally enforceable debt or liability, the prosecution can
               fail. As clarified in the citations, the accused can rely on
               the materials submitted by the complainant in order to
               raise such a defence and it is conceivable that in some
               cases the accused may not need to adduce evidence of
               his/her own.”


        6.4.      T.S. Thakur J., (as his lordship then was) in his
        supplementing opinion in
Vijay v. Laxman9
, observed as
        under:
“20. The High Court has rightly accepted the version
               given by the respondent-accused herein. We say so for
               reasons more than one. In the first place the story of the
               complainant that he advanced a loan to the respondent-
               accused is unsupported by any material leave alone any
               documentary evidence that any such loan transaction had
9
(2013) 3 SCC 86
Crl.Appeal No.5305/2024                                 Page 14 of 21
ever taken place. So much so, the complaint does not
                even indicate the date on which the loan was demanded
                and advanced. It is blissfully silent about these aspects
                thereby making the entire story suspect. We are not
                unmindful of the fact that there is a presumption that the
                issue of a cheque is for consideration.
Sections 118
and
139
of the Negotiable Instruments Act make that
                abundantly clear. That presumption is, however,
                rebuttable in nature. What is most important is that the
                standard of proof required for rebutting any such
                presumption is not as high as that required of the
                prosecution. So long as the accused can make his version
                reasonably probable, the burden of rebutting the
                presumption would stand discharged. Whether or not it
                is so in a given case depends upon the facts and
                circumstances of that case. It is trite that the courts can
                take into consideration the circumstances appearing in
                the evidence to determine whether the presumption
                should be held to be sufficiently rebutted. The legal
                position regarding the standard of proof required for
                rebutting a presumption is fairly well settled by a long
                line of decisions of this Court.”

         6.5.      This Court in the case of Baslingappa v.
Mudibasappa10,           summarized          the     principles      on
Sections 118(a)
and
139
of the N.I. Act.                The same is
         reproduced with profit as under :
“25. We having noticed the ratio
laid down by
this Court
                in the above cases on
Sections 118(a)
and
139
, we now
                summarise the principles enumerated by this Court in
                following manner:
25.1. Once the execution of cheque is admitted
Section
                139
of the Act mandates a presumption that the cheque
                was for the discharge of any debt or other liability.
10
(2019) 5 SCC 418
Crl.Appeal No.5305/2024                                  Page 15 of 21
25.2. The presumption under
Section 139
is a rebuttable
                presumption and the onus is on the accused to raise the
                probable defence. The standard of proof for rebutting the
                presumption is that of preponderance of probabilities.
                25.3. To rebut the presumption, it is open for the accused
                to rely on evidence led by him or the accused can also
                rely on the materials submitted by the complainant in
                order to raise a probable defence. Inference of
                preponderance of probabilities can be drawn not only
                from the materials brought on record by the parties but
                also by reference to the circumstances upon which they
                rely.
25.4. That it is not necessary for the accused to come in
                the witness box in support of his defence,
Section 139
imposed an evidentiary burden and not a persuasive
                burden.
25.5. It is not necessary for the accused to come in the
                witness box to support his defence.”


         6.6.      Recently, a coordinate Bench of this Court in
Rajaram v. Maruthachalam11
, through Gavai J., observed
         as under :
“27. It can thus be seen that this Court has held that once
                the execution of cheque is admitted,
Section 139
of
                the N.I. Act mandates a presumption that the cheque was
                for the discharge of any debt or other liability. It has
                however been held that the presumption under
Section
                139
is a rebuttable presumption and the onus is on the
                accused to raise the probable defence. The standard of
                proof for rebutting the presumption is that of
                preponderance of probabilities. It has further been held
                that to rebut the presumption, it is open for the accused
                to rely on evidence led by him or the accused can also
                rely on the materials submitted by the complainant in
                order to raise a probable defence. It has been held that
11
(2023) 16 SCC 125
Crl.Appeal No.5305/2024                                  Page 16 of 21
inference of preponderance of probabilities can be drawn
          not only from the materials brought on record by the
          parties but also by reference to the circumstances upon
          which they rely.”
7.    The position of law, as is evident from the above, is clear.
8.    Now, in the instant facts, let us consider whether the
presumption stands sufficiently rebutted or not. In the cross-
examination of DW-1 (appellant) it has been stated that he had
issued two blank signed cheques for availing the hand loan of
Rs.3,50,000/- (three lakh fifty thousand rupees) from the
complainant. Further, the accused in the affidavit, submitted in
the Trial Court, stated as under:
“At that time I have approached the complainant for
          hand loan of Rs. 3,50,000/- (Rupees Three Lakhs Fifty
          Thousand only). At the time of giving the above said
          amount the complainant was took two blank cheques
          signed by me for security purpose and both the cheques
          were drawn on Canara Bank, Sampangi Ramanagara,
          Bangalore- 560 027.”
9.    Very clearly, therefore, it can be seen that the cheques
issued were against an enforceable debt and held by the
complainant as such, even though there was no paperwork to that
effect. The onus, as such, was shifted upon the other party, i.e.,
the accused, to raise a probable defence against such
presumption.
10.   A perusal of the record reveals the following aspects which
constitute the accused’s ‘probable defence’ :
Crl.Appeal No.5305/2024                          Page 17 of 21
(a) Both parties were friends and the money exchanged
          hands only as a hand loan;
(b) The movie, because of which the loan was allegedly
          taken, was produced, completed and exhibited many
          years prior to the cheque being presented for
          realisation, i.e., 2003 and 2008, respectively;
(c) The parties to the dispute entered into a Memorandum
          of Understanding dated 29th March 2008 which
          recorded that the accused took Rs.3,50,000/- and in
          payment thereof, the former gave, inclusive of interest,
          Rs.5,50,000/-;
(d) The accused had lodged a complaint with the police on
          24th July 2008 asking the authorities to take steps to
          have the complainant return the said two cheques to
          him, since the loan taken by the accused was returned
          with interest, totalling to Rs.5,50,000/- (five lakh fifty
          thousand rupees);
(e) The cheque, a copy of which is appended as Annexure-
P3, was dated 14th October 2008. The date of dishonour
          was 20th October 2008, as is clear from Annexure-P7,
          i.e., the complaint under
Section 200
CrPC. Evidently,
          the presentation and subsequent dishonour were both
          after the lodging of the police complaint by the
          accused.
Crl.Appeal No.5305/2024                      Page 18 of 21
11.        Considering the sum total of the above, we find that the
probable defence on the part of the accused has been established.
Once such a defence is established, the burden again shifts upon
the complainant to now establish his case beyond a reasonable
doubt, for after all, the effect of
Section 138
of the N.I. Act is a
criminal conviction. Reference may be made to
Rajesh Jain v.
Ajay Singh12
and, more particularly Para 44 thereof, which reads
as under :
“44. Therefore, in fine, it can be said that once the
               accused adduces evidence to the satisfaction of the Court
               that on a preponderance of probabilities there exists no
               debt/liability in the manner pleaded in the complaint or
               the demand notice or the affidavit-evidence, the burden
               shifts to the complainant and the presumption
               “disappears” and does not haunt the accused any longer.
               The onus having now shifted to the complainant, he will
               be obliged to prove the existence of a debt/liability as a
               matter of fact and his failure to prove would result in
               dismissal of his complaint case. Thereafter, the
               presumption under
Section 139
does not again come to
               the complainant's rescue. Once both parties have
               adduced evidence, the Court has to consider the same
               and the burden of proof loses all its importance.
               [
Basalingappa v. Mudibasappa {Basalingappa
v. Mudi
               basappa, (2019) 5 SCC 418 : (2019) 2 SCC (Cri) 571 :
AIR 2019 SC 1983] ; see also,
Rangappa v. Sri
               Mohan [Rangappa
v. Sri Mohan, (2010) 11 SCC 441 :
               (2010) 4 SCC (Civ) 477 : (2011) 1 SCC (Cri) 184 : AIR
               2010 SC 1898}]”
12
(2023) 10 SCC 148
Crl.Appeal No.5305/2024                                Page 19 of 21
12.   In our considered view, the complainant has failed to
discharge this burden. In his cross-examination, the complainant
has stated as follows :
“During the year 2002, I have paid loan to the accused
          on 7-8 times. I have maintained the account on which
          dates I have paid the loan to the accused. In that regard,
          I have subscribed my signatures in the book which was
          with the accused. Accused issued cheques for having
          obtained 7-8 times loan from me. I have paid the amount
          to the accused two times in my house and 5-6 times in
          my lodge. I have not obtained the receipt for having
          received the loan amount by the accused.”

It has also come on record that the cheque, subject matter of
controversy, was given to the complainant in the presence of
common well-wishers. However, none of the above statements
stands scrutiny.    The alleged well-wishers who could have
proved the discussion and context in which the cheque was given,
remained unexamined. As stated by the complainant himself,
there is no official record, such as income tax documents which
would show that such an amount was extended by way of a loan
to the accused, neither have the books of account, which the
complainant allegedly maintained, being produced to evidence
the seven or eight transactions inter se the parties totalling the
claimed amount.
13.   Keeping in view the above factors, it cannot be said that
the complainant was able to discharge the burden once it had
Crl.Appeal No.5305/2024                           Page 20 of 21
shifted back upon him, with the accused having discharged the
burden of
Sections 118
and
139
of the N.I. Act.
14.   Consequent to the above discussion, we are of the view
that the Trial Court was correct in recording a finding of acquittal
in favour of the accused and reversal thereof by the High Court
in terms of the impugned judgment, with particulars as in Para 1,
was unjustified. As a result, the appeal is allowed.
15.   The judgment of the High Court is set aside, and that of
the Trial Court is hereby restored.
16.   The amount deposited in the Registry of this Court in
compliance with the orders dated 15th March 2021 and 12th April
2021, be released to the appellant along with the interest accrued
thereon.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
...................................J.
                                           (PANKAJ MITHAL)



                                          ...................................J.
                                              (SANJAY KAROL)
New Delhi;
22nd April, 2025.
Crl.Appeal No.5305/2024                       Page 21 of 21