[Cites
36
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
S.C. Garg vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 16 April, 2025
Author:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
Bench:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
,
Pankaj Mithal
1


2025 INSC 493                                                          REPORTABLE


                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(s). 438 OF 2018


             S.C. GARG                                              ... APPELLANT

                                                  VERSUS


             STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ANR.                        ...RESPONDENTS



                                             JUDGMENT
PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA, J.
1.             Challenge in this Criminal Appeal is to the final judgment

             and order dated 28.04.2017 passed by the High Court of

             Judicature at Allahabad whereby the appellant’s petition under
Section 482
of the Criminal Procedure Code, 19731 seeking

             quashment of Criminal Case No. 7489 of 2002 pending on the
Signature Not Verified
file of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Ghaziabad for offences under
Digitally signed by
SAPNA BISHT
Date: 2025.04.16
17:34:54 IST
Reason:
1
‘
Cr.P.C
.’
2
Section 420
of the Indian Penal Code, 18602, has been

dismissed.
2.            Brief facts necessary for disposal of the criminal

appeal are that the appellant/S.C. Garg3      was the Managing

Director of the Company Ruchira Papers Ltd.4 which was

engaged in manufacturing craft papers.       The Company had

business dealings with ID Packaging, a partnership concern of

respondent no. 2/R.N. Tyagi5. In conduct of business between

two entities, the parties used to maintain a running account

and Tyagi used to issue cheques from time to time in favour of

ID Packaging. Between 22.12.1997 to 30.01.1998, Tyagi

issued 11 cheques which were initially dishonoured due to

insufficiency of funds in the account.     To maintain business

relations, both the parties agreed to present the 11 cheques

again at a later stage upon instructions from Tyagi. In relation

to the liabilities other than the amount involved in the 11

cheques, Tyagi made payment by issuing 03 demand drafts in

the name of the appellant’s company.        On 08.06.1998, 11
2
‘
IPC
’
3
‘Garg’
4
‘Company’
5
‘Tyagi’
3
cheques were again presented for encashment upon which

only four cheques were cleared leaving the remaining 07

cheques to be dishonoured again. The appellant’s company

filed a complaint under Section 138 of the Negotiable

Instruments Act, 18816 against ID Packaging and Tyagi in

relation to the 07 dishonoured cheques.
3.             On 25.10.2002, the learned Magistrate convicted

Tyagi for offence under
Section 138
of the NI Act. His defence,

that there is no enforceable debt as the amount involved in 07

cheques has already been paid through the demand drafts,

was rejected with a specific finding that the demand drafts

pertained to other liabilities of Tyagi to the company and were

not towards liquidating the liability arising under the cheques

in question. Tyagi was sentenced to imprisonment till rising of

Court and pay fine of Rs. 3,20,385/- (i.e. cumulative amount

of the 7 dishonoured cheques). The appeal preferred by Tyagi

challenging his conviction under
Section 138
of the NI Act was

dismissed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge on

17.03.2005 by affirming the finding, conviction and sentence

awarded to him.
6
‘
NI Act
’
4
4.        Tyagi and his Company/ID Packaging challenged the

appellate order by preferring criminal revision and vide order

dated 10.10.2012 the High Court disposed of criminal revision

as well as two other proceedings between the parties basis

compromise    between     them.       When   the   criminal   revision

challenging his conviction was pending, the sentence was

suspended upon deposit of R. 3,20,385/-. The High Court

disposed of three different proceedings between the parties by

observing thus in paragraph nos. 5 & 6 of the order:
“5.      When these petition/appeal/ revision were
       taken up today, Sh. R.N. Tyagi, who is present in Court
       along with his counsel Sh. Rampal Tyagi and Ashok
       Tyagi expressed his desire to put an end to the entire
       controversy on the condition that the amount
       deposited by him in this Court by demand draft
       pursuant to the orders passed in the Criminal Revision
       (supra) along with interest be paid to M/s Ruchira
       Papers in full satisfaction of all their claims, subject
       matter of criminal appeal No. 752 of 2002, CMPMO No.
       305 of 2012 and in Civil Suit No. 47/1 of 2005/01,
       titled as M/s Ruchira Papers versus M/s I.D. Packings,
       decreed on 23.09.2005. Statement of Sh. R.N. Tyagi,
       who is present in Court, to this effect has been
       recorded separately, which statement has been
       accepted by Sh. Sanjeev Sood, learned counsel on
       behalf of M/s Ruchira Papers.
6.       In these circumstance, all three cases are
       being disposed of the following directions:
a)   Criminal Appeal No.752 of 2002, titled M/s
              Ruchira Papers Ltd., versus M/s I.D.
              Packings and another is disposed of as not
              pressed.
5
b)   Criminal Revision No. 52 of 2005, titled M/s
                I.D. Packings and another versus M/s
                Ruchira Papers and another is disposed of
                with the directions that the amount lying
                deposited       in     FDR        A/c      No.
                042704PR00001211         dated     11.09.2012
                along with interest satisfies the entire claim
                of the respondents M/s Ruchira Papers
                subject matter of the revision.
c)   CMPMO No. 305 of 2012, titled R.N. Tyagi
                and another versus M/s Ruchira Papers ltd.,
                is also disposed of with this direction that
                the decree passed in Civil Suit No.47/1 of
                2005/01, titled M/s Ruchira Papers versus
                M/s I.D. packing shall stand fully satisfied
                on the FDR along with interest having been
                paid to respondents M/s Ruchira Papers
                Limited.
d)   The registry is directed to remit the amount
                of aforesaid FDR account along with interest
                accrued thereon to the bank account of M/s
                Ruchira Papers Limited for which purpose
                they shall submit the photocopy of their
                current account to the Registry.”
5.         From the above extracted order of the High Court, it

appears that Garg had instituted a suit for recovery of the

amount involved under the 07 dishonoured cheques in which

ex-parte   decree     was     passed     and    that   too       has   been

compromised upon payment of Rs. 3,20,385/- by Tyagi to

Garg.
6.         When     138
NI   Act
proceedings      were      pending

between the parties, Tyagi moved an application under
Section

156 (3)
Cr.P.C. seeking registration of an FIR against Garg and
6
company inter alia alleging that despite payment of amount

involved in 07 dishonoured cheques, by way of separate

demand   drafts,   Garg   again presented   11   cheques   and

fraudulently realised the amount from 04 out of 11 cheques

thereby cheating Tyagi. FIR No. 549 of 1998 (present FIR)

came to be registered against Garg based upon the above

allegations. However, the company was not made an accused

in this FIR. The chargesheet filed against Garg on account of

being the Managing Director of the Company and Mukesh

Kumar Behal, director of M/s. M.V. Agency is again without

joining the company. The learned Magistrate took cognizance

of the alleged offence and summoned the accused persons

including the appellant vide order dated 19.06.2002. Garg

preferred a petition under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. for quashing of

the chargesheet and the summoning order dated 19.06.2002

which has been dismissed by the High Court under the

impugned judgment and order.
7.        Mr. Siddharth Aggarwal, learned senior counsel

appearing for the appellant would vehemently urge that the

appellant cannot be prosecuted for an offence allegedly

committed by the company without arraying it as an accused
7
that too without making any specific allegation against Garg.
He would submit that the impugned prosecution has been

instituted as a counterblast to the concluded proceedings

under
Section 138
of the NI Act in which Tyagi was convicted

and it eventually concluded by way of compromise before the

High Court. It is also argued that the summoning order is

without any reasoning showing complete non-application of

mind.
8.        Per contra,    Mr. Vikas Bansal, learned counsel

appearing for the respondent would submit that it is a subject

matter of trial as to whether Garg encashed the amount

involved in 04 cheques despite having received the amount by

way of demand drafts separately given to him by Tyagi after

all the cheques were dishonoured on the first occasion.
According to him, it is a clear case of receiving double

payment for the same dues, thus, committing cheating.
9.        Having heard learned senior counsel for the parties

and upon perusal of the material on record we are satisfied

that the appeal deserves to be allowed, and the impugned

chargesheet/criminal proceedings deserve to be quashed on

the reasoning hereafter stated.
8
10.      It is to be noted that in 138
NI Act
proceedings

against Tyagi, he raised a specific defence that there is no

outstanding debt qua 07 cheques as the amount involved

therein has already been paid by separate demand drafts.
Learned Magistrate in its order dated 25.10.2002 rejected the

said defence by recording a finding that no request was made

by Tyagi to the complainant company to return the bounded

cheques to the accused company when the demand drafts

were allegedly sent by the accused persons to the complainant

company. The Trial Magistrate specifically recorded a finding

in paragraph No. 16 in the following manner:
“16.      Moreover, it may be stated that the accused
       company was having business dealing with the
       complainant company. The complainant company has
       also placed on record the copy of statement of account
       Ex. P-16 pertaining to the transaction of the accused
       firm with the complainant company. In the said
       statement of account, the impugned demand draft No.
       859562 for Rs. 55,000/- D.D. No. 859879 for Rs.
       50,000/- D.D. No. 859797 for Rs. 50,000/-, D.D. No.
       4123761 for Rs. 1,50,000/- and D.D. No. 860060 for
       Rs. 1,11,357/- have been accounted for against
       liability of accused person and ultimately, liability of
       the accused firm to the tune of Rs. 3,31,151/- is
       shown outstanding in favour of the complainant
       company. From this statement of account Ex.P-16, to
       can be safety presumed that these demand drafts
       pertaining to some other liability of the accused
       persons and these demand drafts were not issued to
9
liquidate the liability of impugned cheques Ex.P-2 to
        Ex.P-8.”
11.       The above finding of the Trial Magistrate was

affirmed by the Sessions Court in its order dated 17.03.2005
by observing thus in paragraph No. 16
“16. …… I have closely scrutinised the evidence of
        DW1 and DW2, the statement of the aforesaid
        witnesses does not inspire confidence particularly in
        view of the facts that the accused himself did not
        appear in the witness box to state so. From the
        statement of account Ext.P16 placed on record by the
        complainant company, it can be gathered that the
        demand drafts No. 859562 for Rs. 55,000/- 859797
        for Rs.50,000/-, 4123761 for Rs. 1,50,000/- and
        860060 for Rs.1,11,356/- have been accounted for
        against liability of the accused persons and ultimately,
        liability of the accused firm to the tune of Rs.
        3,31,151/- which is shown outstanding in favour of the
        complainant company. Therefore, from the statement
        of account Ext.P16 it can be presumed that these
        demand drafts were pertaining to some other liability
        of the appellants and were not issued to liquidate the
        liability of the impugned cheques Ext.P2 to Ext. P8”
12.       It is thus apparent that the finding recorded by the

jurisdictional criminal court in 138
NI Act
proceedings between

the parties would be binding to both the parties in any

subsequent proceedings involving the same issue.
13.       The question as to the applicability of principle of

res judicata in criminal matters have been considered by this

Court in several decisions.
In the matters of
Pritam Singh &
10
Anr. vs. The State of Punjab7
,
Bhagat Ram vs. State of

Rajasthan8 & The State of Rajasthan
vs. Tarachand

Jain9, this Court has consistently laid down the principle that

the principle of res judicata is equally applicable in criminal

matters.
However, in two later decisions, namely,
Devendra &

Ors. vs. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.10
and
Muskan

Enterprises & Anr. Vs. The State of Punjab & Anr.11
in

which one of us was a member (Justice Prashant Kumar

Mishra), this Court observed in the context of maintainability

of second petition under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. that principle of

res     judicata      has   no   application   in   a   criminal   matter.
Considering divergence of opinion, it would be appropriate for

us to have deeper examination and reading of the law
laid

down by
this Court in the earlier decisions.
14.
In
Pritam Singh
(supra), a three Judge Bench of

this Court speaking through Natwarlal Harilal Bhagwati, J.
placing reliance on Sambasivam vs. Public Prosecutor,
7
AIR 1956 SC 415
8
(1972) 2 SCC 466
9
((1974) 3 SCC 72
10
(2009) 7 SCC 495
11
(2024) INSC 1046
11
Federal of Malaya12, decided by a Bench of Five Judges of

the Judicial Committee, opined that maxim res judicata is no

less appliable to criminal than to civil proceedings. In the said

matter, accused Pritam Singh was earlier tried for an offence

under the
Arms Act
basing recovery of a weapon from him. In

the said case Pritam Singh was acquitted. In a subsequent

trial, the same recovery was again sought to be used by the

prosecution as one of the circumstances in an offence of

murder. In these set of facts, this Court recorded the following

findings as to the applicability of principle of res judicata in

criminal matters:
“15. In regard to the recovery of Ex. P-14 the learned
               Additional Sessions Judge had not put any reliance on
               the acquittal of the accused by the learned Additional
               Sessions Judge, Faridkot, of the offence under the
Arms
               Act
, observing that any expression of opinion contained
               in the judgment was not only not binding on him but
               was irrelevant under the
Indian Evidence Act
.
               On a perusal of the evidence led by the prosecution in
               this behalf he had held that the recovery of Ex. P-14
               was proved against the accused and considered that as
               connecting Pritam Singh Lohara with the incident. The
               High Court, on the other hand, relied upon the
               observations of Lord MacDermott at p.479 in
               Sambasivam v. Public Prosecutor, Federal of Malaya,
               1950 A.C. 458(A):-
“The effect of a verdict of acquittal pronounced by a
               competent Court on a lawful charge and after a lawful
12
(1950) AC 458
12
trial is not completely stated by saying that the person
          acquitted cannot be tried again for the same offence. To
          that it must be added that the verdict is binding and
          conclusive in all subsequent proceedings between the
          parties to the adjudication.
The maxim ‘res judicata pro veritate accipitur’ is no less
          applicable to criminal than to civil proceedings. Here,
          the appellant having been acquitted at the first trial on
          the charge of having ammunition in his possession, the
          prosecution was bound to accept the correctness of that
          verdict and was precluded from taking any steps to
          challenge it at the second trial.”
15.
In
Bhagat Ram
(supra), a two Judge Bench of this

Court speaking through           H.R. Khanna, J. again applied and

approved Sambasivam (supra) and
Pritam Singh
(supra).
16.          Thereafter in Tarachand Jain             (supra), this Court

referred to
Bhagat Ram
(supra) and Sambasivam (supra)

to hold thus:
“13. ……….The question as to what is the binding effect of a
      decision in subsequent proceedings of the same original
      matter was considered by this Court in the case of
Bhagat
      Ram v. State of Rajasthan
, [(1972) 2 SCC 466 : 1972 SCC
      (Cri) 751] and it was held that the principle of res judicata is
      also applicable to criminal proceedings and it is not
      permissible in the subsequent stage of the same
      proceedings to convict a person for an offence in respect of
      which an order for his acquittal has already been recorded.
Reliance in this context was placed upon the observations of
      the Judicial Committee in the case of Samba Sivam v. Public
      Prosecutor, Federation of Malaya.
[1950 AC 458] In
Bhagat
      Ram
case [(1972) 2 SCC 466 : 1972 SCC (Cri) 751] a Single
      Judge of the High Court to whom a limited question had
      been referred because of a difference of opinion between
      two Judges of the Division Bench, not only decided the
      question referred to him, he also interfered with the
13
acquittal of the accused regarding certain offences in
      respect of which an order for acquittal had already been
      made earlier by the Division Bench. It was held that it was
      not within the competence of the Single Judge to reopen the
      matter and pass the above order of conviction in the face of
      the earlier order of the Division Bench for acquittal.
Although Bhagat Ram
case [(1972) 2 SCC 466 : 1972 SCC
      (Cri) 751] related to acquittal, the principle
laid down in
that
      case, in our opinion, holds good in a case like the present
      wherein the question is about the binding effect of the
      earlier Division Bench judgment regarding the validity of the
      sanction for the prosecution of the accused-respondent.”
17.          We shall now have a look at the subsequent matters
Devendra
(supra) and
Muskan Enterprises
(Supra) wherein

it is held that principle of res judicata is not applicable in

criminal proceedings.
In
Devendra
(supra) was a case where

after dismissal of first petition under
Section 482
Cr.P.C.
seeking quashing of the FIR, the appellants therein preferred

another application under
Section 482
Cr.P.C., after the

Magistrate took cognizance of the matter, which was dismissed

by the High Court. In this Court, it was argued by the opposite

party that the first order of the High Court dismissing the

petition under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. would operate as res

judicata. Negating the said argument, a two Judge Bench of

this Court held in para 25 as under:
“25.   Mr. Das, furthermore, would contend that the
            order of the High Court dated 17-10-2005 would
            operate as res judicata. With respect, we cannot
            subscribe to the said view. The principle of res judicata
14
has no application in a criminal proceeding. The
          principles of res judicata as adumbrated in
Section 11
of the Code of Civil Procedure or the general principles
          thereof will have no application in a case of this
          nature.”
18.
In
Muskan Enterprises
(supra), similar was the

position. The first petition under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. was

dismissed as withdrawn without liberty obtained to apply

afresh, the High Court dismissed the second petition under
Section   482
Cr.P.C.   as    not    maintainable.
Referring   to

Devendra
(supra), a two Judge Bench of this Court of which

one of us was a member (Prashant Kumar Mishra, J.) observed

thus in para 17:
“17. That the principle of res judicata has no
          application in a criminal proceeding was
          reiterated by this Court in
Devendra vs.
          State of U.P.”
19.         Reading three earlier decisions vis-à-vis the two

later decisions parallelly, we do not think that considering the

context and the stage of the proceedings in which the matters

stood and agitated before this Court, there is any diversion in

the applicability of the principle of res judicata. While three

earlier decisions in
Pritam Singh
(Supra),
Bhagat Ram
15
(supra) and        Tarachand Jain (supra) were decided basis

acquittal   in    previous   trial,    the   subsequent   decision    in
Devendra
(supra) and
Muskan Enterprises
(supra) have

been decided at the stage of quashing petition under
Section

482
Cr.P.C., thus, in both the matters, there was no final

adjudication of merits.
While in
Devendra
(supra), the first

petition was for quashing of the FIR and the second petition

was preferred after the Magistrate took cognizance of the

matter; in
Muskan
(supra), the first petition was dismissed as

withdrawn        whereas   the   second      petition   was   held   not

maintainable due to earlier withdrawal without any liberty.
Thus, these two cases are totally distinguishable.
In addition, it is important to bear that Sambasivam

(supra) was decided by
Five Judges of the Judicial Committee

and Pritam Singh
(supra) was decided by a three Judge

Bench, whereas all subsequent decisions have been rendered

by the two Judges Bench.
Therefore, Pritam Singh
(supra)

is binding insofar as the issue concerning the applicability of

principle of res judicata in a criminal proceeding is concerned.
16
20.               For the above reason it is absolutely clear that Tyagi

cannot maintain a prosecution on the basis of allegations

which were precisely his defence in the earlier proceedings

wherein he was an accused. Thus, the present criminal

proceedings deserve to be quashed on this ground alone.
21.               It is also to be seen that the business relation was

between the two companies. The cheques and the demand

drafts, as the case may be, were issued by one company to

the other company and no payment was made by Tyagi to

Garg individually.
In
Sharad Kumar Sanghi vs. Sangita

Rane13
this Court held thus in paragraph 11 & 13:
“11.     In the case at hand as the complainant's initial
               statement would reflect, the allegations are against the
               Company, the Company has not been made a party
               and, therefore, the allegations are restricted to the
               Managing Director. As we have noted earlier, allegations
               are vague and in fact, principally the allegations are
               against the Company. There is no specific allegation
               against the Managing Director. When a company has
               not been arrayed as a party, no proceeding can be
               initiated against it even where vicarious liability is
               fastened under certain statutes. It has been so held by
               a three-Judge Bench in
Aneeta Hada v. Godfather
               Travels and Tours (P) Ltd.
(2012) 5 SCC 661 in the
               context of the
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881
.
***
13
(2015) 12 SCC 781
17
13.     When the company has not been arraigned as
               an accused, such an order could not have been passed.
We have said so for the sake of completeness. In the
               ultimate analysis, we are of the considered opinion that
               the High Court should have been well advised to quash
               the criminal proceedings initiated against the appellant
               and that having not been done, the order is sensitively
               vulnerable and accordingly we set aside the same and
               quash the criminal proceedings initiated by the
               respondent against the appellant.”
22.               Again in the matter of
Dayle De’ Souza vs.

Government of India14
this Court held thus in para 22 to 30:
“22.      There is yet another difficulty for the
               prosecution in the present case as the Company has
               not been made an accused or even summoned to be
               tried for the offence. The position of law as propounded
               in
State of Madras v. C.V. Parekh
(1970) 3 SCC 491,
               reads: (SCC p. 493, para 3)
                    “3. The learned counsel for the appellant,
                    however, sought conviction of the two
                    respondents on the basis of
Section 10
of the
                    Essential Commodities Act under which, if the
                    person contravening an order made under
Section 3
(which covers an order under the
                    Iron and Steel Control Order, 1956), is a
                    company, every person who, at the time the
                    contravention was committed, was in charge
                    of, and was responsible to, the company for
                    the conduct of the business of the company as
                    well as the company, shall be deemed to be
                    guilty of the contravention and shall be liable
                    to be proceeded against and punished
                    accordingly. It was urged that the two
                    respondents were in charge of, and were
                    responsible to, the Company for the conduct
                    of the business of the Company and,
                    consequently, they must be held responsible
                    for the sale and for thus contravening the
                    provisions of clause (5) of the Iron and Steel
                    Control Order. This argument cannot be
                    accepted, because it ignores the first condition
14
(2021) 20 SCC 135
18
for the applicability of
Section 10
to the effect
    that the person contravening the order must
    be a company itself. In the present case, there
    is no finding either by the Magistrate or by the
    High Court that the sale in contravention of
    clause (5) of the Iron and Steel Control Order
    was made by the Company. In fact, the
    Company was not charged with the offence at
    all. The liability of the persons in charge of the
    Company only arises when the contravention
    is by the Company itself. Since, in this case,
    there is no evidence and no finding that the
    Company contravened clause (5) of the Iron
    and Steel Control Order, the two respondents
    could not be held responsible. The actual
    contravention was by Kamdar and Vallabhdas
    Thacker and any contravention by them would
    not fasten responsibility on the respondents.
The acquittal of the respondents is, therefore,
    fully justified. The appeal fails and is
    dismissed.”
23.       However, this proposition was later deviated
from in
Sheoratan Agarwal v. State of M.P.
(1984) 4 SCC
352. This case pertained to the pari materia provision
under
Section 10
of the Essential Commodities Act,
1955. The Court held that any one among : the
company itself; every person in-charge of and
responsible to the company for the conduct of the
business; or any Director, manager, secretary or other
officer of the company with whose consent or
connivance or because of whose neglect offence had
been committed, could be prosecuted alone. However,
the person in-charge or an officer of the company could
be held guilty in that capacity only after it has been
established that there has been a contravention by the
company as well. However, this will not mean that the
person in-charge or an officer of the company must be
arraigned simultaneously along with the company if he
is to be found guilty and punished.
24.      Relying upon the reasoning in Sheoratan
Agarwal and limiting the interpretation of C.V. Parekh
(1970) 3 SCC 491, this Court in
Anil Hada v. Indian
Acrylic Ltd.
(2000) 1 SCC 1 had held that: (
Anil Hada
case, SCC pp. 7-8, para 13)
19
“13. If the offence was committed by a
    company it can be punished only if the
    company is prosecuted. But instead of
    prosecuting the company if a payee opts to
    prosecute only the persons falling within the
    second or third category the payee can
    succeed in the case only if he succeeds in
    showing that the offence was actually
    committed by the company. In such a
    prosecution the accused can show that the
    company has not committed the offence,
    though such company is not made an
    accused, and hence the prosecuted accused is
    not liable to be punished. The provisions do
    not contain a condition that prosecution of the
    company is sine qua non for prosecution of
    the other persons who fall within the second
    and the third categories mentioned above. No
    doubt a finding that the offence was
    committed by the company is sine qua non for
    convicting those other persons. But if a
    company is not prosecuted due to any legal
    snag or otherwise, the other prosecuted
    persons cannot, on that score alone, escape
    from the penal liability created through the
    legal fiction envisaged in
Section 141
of the
    Act.”
25.       However, subsequent decisions of this Court
have emphasised that the provision imposes vicarious
liability by way of deeming fiction which presupposes
and requires the commission of the offence by the
company itself as it is a separate juristic entity.
Therefore, unless the company as a principal accused
has committed the offence, the persons mentioned in
sub-section (1) would not be liable and cannot be
prosecuted.
Section 141(1)
of the Negotiable
Instruments Act, extends vicarious criminal liability to
the officers of a company by deeming fiction, which
arises only when the offence is committed by the
company itself and not otherwise. Overruling Sheoratan
Agarwal and Anil Hada, in
Aneeta Hada v. Godfather
Travels & Tours (P) Ltd.
(2012) 5 SCC 661, a three-
Judge Bench of this Court expounding on the vicarious
liability under
Section 141
of the Negotiable
Instruments Act, has held : (
Aneeta Hada
case, SCC
pp. 686 & 688, paras 51 & 59)
20
“51.      We have already opined that the
    decision in Sheoratan Agarwal runs counter to
    the
ratio
laid down in
C.V. Parekh which is by
    a larger Bench and hence, is a binding
    precedent. On the aforesaid ratiocination, the
    decision in Anil Hada has to be treated as not
    laying down the correct law as far as it states
    that the Director or any other officer can be
    prosecuted without impleadment of the
    company. Needless to emphasise, the matter
    would stand on a different footing where there
    is some legal impediment and the doctrine
    of lex non cogit ad impossibilia gets attracted.
    ***
59. In view of our aforesaid analysis, we
    arrive at the irresistible conclusion that for
    maintaining the prosecution under
Section
    141
of the Act, arraigning of a company as an
    accused is imperative. The other categories of
    offenders can only be brought in the drag-net
    on the touchstone of vicarious liability as the
    same has been stipulated in the provision
    itself. We say so on the basis of the
ratio
laid
    down in
C.V. Parekh which is a three-Judge
    Bench decision. Thus, the view expressed
    in Sheoratan Agarwal does not correctly lay
    down the law and, accordingly, is hereby
    overruled. The decision in Anil Hada is
    overruled with the qualifier as stated in para
51. The decision in Modi Distillery (1987) 3
    SCC 684 has to be treated to be restricted to
    its own facts as has been explained by us
    hereinabove.”
26.       The proposition of law
laid down in
Aneeta
Hada was relied upon by this Court in
Anil Gupta v. Star
India (P) Ltd.
(2014) 10 SCC 373: (
Anil Gupta
case,
SCC pp. 379-80, para 13)
     “13.      In the present case, the High Court
     by the impugned judgment dated 13-8-2007
     held that the complaint against Respondent 2
     Company was not maintainable and quashed
     the summons issued by the trial court against
     Respondent     2   Company.      Thereby,    the
     Company being not a party to the proceedings
     under
Section 138
read with
Section 141
of
     the Act and in view of the fact that part of the
21
judgment referred to by the High Court in Anil
    Hada
has been overruled
by a three-Judge
    Bench of this Court in Aneeta Hada, we have
    no other option but to set aside the rest part
    of the impugned judgment whereby the High
    Court held that the proceedings against the
    appellant can be continued even in absence of
    the Company.
We, accordingly, set aside that
    part of the impugned judgment dated 13-8-
    2007 passed by the High Court so far as it
    relates to the appellant and quash the
    summons and proceeding pursuant to
    Complaint Case No. 698 of 2001 qua the
    appellant.”
27.
In
Sharad Kumar Sanghi v. Sangita Rane
(2015) 12 SCC 781, this Court observed that : (SCC p.
785, paras 11 & 13)

    “11.        In the case at hand as the
    complainant's initial statement would reflect,
    the allegations are against the Company, the
    Company has not been made a party and,
    therefore, the allegations are restricted to the
    Managing Director. As we have noted earlier,
    allegations are vague and in fact, principally
    the allegations are against the Company.
    There is no specific allegation against the
    Managing Director. When a company has not
    been arrayed as a party, no proceeding can be
    initiated against it even where vicarious
    liability is fastened under certain statutes.
It
    has been so held by a three-Judge Bench
    in
Aneeta Hada v. Godfather Travels & Tours
    (P) Ltd.
in the context of the
Negotiable
    Instruments Act, 1881
.
***
13. When the company has not been
    arraigned as an accused, such an order could
    not have been passed. We have said so for the
    sake of completeness. In the ultimate
    analysis, we are of the considered opinion that
    the High Court should have been well advised
    to quash the criminal proceedings initiated
    against the appellant and that having not
    been done, the order is sensitively vulnerable
    and accordingly we set aside the same and
22
quash the criminal proceedings initiated by
    the respondent against the appellant.”
28.      This position was again clarified and reiterated
by this Court in
Himanshu v. B. Shivamurthy
(2019) 3
SCC 797. The relevant portion of the judgment reads
thus : (SCC pp. 799-802, paras 6-7 & 12-13)

    “6.        The judgment of the High Court has
    been questioned on two grounds. The learned
    counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant
    submits that firstly, the appellant could not be
    prosecuted without the company being named
    as an accused. The cheque was issued by the
    company and was signed by the appellant as
    its Director. Secondly, it was urged that the
    observation of the High Court that the
    company can now be proceeded against in the
    complaint is misconceived. The learned
    counsel submitted that the offence under
Section 138
is complete only upon the
    issuance of a notice of demand and the failure
    of payment within the prescribed period. In
    absence of compliance with the requirements
    of
Section 138
, it is asserted, the direction of
    the High Court that the company could be
    impleaded/arraigned       at   this   stage     is
    erroneous.
7.         The first submission on behalf of the
    appellant is no longer res integra. A decision
    of a three-Judge Bench of this Court in
Aneeta
    Hada v. Godfather Travels & Tours (P) Ltd.
governs the area of dispute. The issue which
    fell for consideration was whether an
    authorised signatory of a company would be
    liable for prosecution under
Section 138
of the
    Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 without the
    company being arraigned as an accused. The
    three-Judge Bench held thus : (SCC p. 688,
    para 58)
       ‘58. Applying the doctrine of strict
       construction, we are of the considered
       opinion that commission of offence by the
       company      is   an    express   condition
       precedent to attract the vicarious liability
       of others. Thus, the words “as well as the
       company” appearing in the section make
23
it absolutely unmistakably clear that
  when the company can be prosecuted,
  then only the persons mentioned in the
  other categories could be vicariously
  liable for the offence subject to the
  averments in the petition and proof
  thereof. One cannot be oblivious of the
  fact that the company is a juristic person
  and it has its own respectability. If a
  finding is recorded against it, it would
  create a concavity in its reputation. There
  can be situations when the corporate
  reputation is affected when a Director is
  indicted.’
  In similar terms, the
Court further held
:
(
Aneeta Hada
case , SCC p. 688, para 59)
  ‘59.     In view of our aforesaid analysis,
  we arrive at the irresistible conclusion
  that for maintaining the prosecution
  under
Section 141
of the Act, arraigning
  of a company as an accused is
  imperative. The other categories of
  offenders can only be brought in the
  drag-net on the touchstone of vicarious
  liability as the same has been stipulated
  in the provision itself.’
  ***
12. The provisions of
Section 141
postulate
that if the person committing an offence under
Section 138
is a company, every person, who
at the time when the offence was committed
was in charge of or was responsible to the
company for the conduct of the business of
the company as well as the company, shall be
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall
be liable to be proceeded against and
punished.
13. In the absence of the company being
arraigned as an accused, a complaint against
the appellant was therefore not maintainable.
The appellant had signed the cheque as a
Director of the company and for and on its
behalf. Moreover, in the absence of a notice of
demand being served on the company and
without compliance with the proviso to
Section
138
, the High Court was in error in holding
24
that the company could now be arraigned as
    an accused.
29.       Applying the same proposition of law as
laid
down in
Aneeta Hada, this Court in
Hindustan Unilever
Ltd. v. State of M.P.
(2020) 10 SCC 751 applying pari
materia provision in the
Prevention of Food Adulteration
Act, 1954
, held that : (
Hindustan Unilever
case, SCC p.
762, para 23)

    “23. Clause (a) of sub-section (1) of
Section
    17
of the Act makes the person nominated to
    be in charge of and responsible to the
    company for the conduct of business and the
    company shall be guilty of the offences under
    clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
Section 17
of
    the Act. Therefore, there is no material
    distinction between
Section 141
of the NI Act
    and
Section 17
of the Act which makes the
    company as well as the nominated person to
    be held guilty of the offences and/or liable to
    be proceeded and punished accordingly.
    Clauses (a) and (b) are not in the alternative
    but conjoint. Therefore, in the absence of the
    company, the nominated person cannot be
    convicted or vice versa. Since the Company
    was not convicted by the trial court, we find
    that the finding of the High Court to revisit the
    judgment will be unfair to the appellant-
    nominated person who has been facing trial
    for more than last 30 years. Therefore, the
    order of remand to the trial court to fill up the
    lacuna is not a fair option exercised by the
    High Court as the failure of the trial court to
    convict the Company renders the entire
    conviction of the nominated person as
    unsustainable.”
30.       In terms of the ratio above, a company being
a juristic person cannot be imprisoned, but it can be
subjected to a fine, which in itself is a punishment.
Every punishment has adverse consequences, and
therefore, prosecution of the company is mandatory.
The exception would possibly be when the company
itself has ceased to exist or cannot be prosecuted due
to a statutory bar. However, such exceptions are of no
25
relevance in the present case. Thus, the present
               prosecution must fail for this reason as well.”
23.               Similarly in the matter of
Delhi Race Club (1940)

Ltd. & Ors. vs. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.15
, this Court

has held that a person cannot be vicariously prosecuted,

especially for offences under the
IPC
, merely on account of the

fact that he holds a managerial position in a company without

there being specific allegations regarding his involvement in

the offence. The following has been held in paras 13 and 14:
“13.     This Court has time and again reminded that
               summoning of an accused in a criminal case is a
               serious matter. Criminal law cannot be set into motion
               as a matter of course. It is not that the complainant
               has to bring only two witnesses to support his
               allegations in the complaint to have the criminal law
               set into motion. The order of the Magistrate
               summoning the accused must reflect that he has
               applied his mind to the facts of the case and the law
               applicable thereto. He has to examine the nature of
               allegations made in the complaint and the evidence
               both oral and documentary in support thereof. It is not
               that the Magistrate is a silent spectator at the time of
               recording of preliminary evidence before summoning
               of the accused. The Magistrate has to carefully
               scrutinise the evidence brought on record and may
               even himself put questions to the complainant and his
               witnesses to elicit answers to find out the truthfulness
               of the allegations or otherwise and then examine if
               any offence is prima facie committed by all or any of
               the accused. [See:
Pepsi Foods Ltd. v. Special Judicial
               Magistrate
, (1998) 5 SCC 749].
15
(2024) SCC online SC 2248
26
14.        Where a jurisdiction is exercised on a
               complaint petition filed in terms of Section 156(3) or
Section 200
of the CrPC, the Magistrate is required to
               apply his mind. The Penal Code does not contain any
               provision for attaching vicarious liability on the part of
               appellants Nos. 2 and 3, respectively herein who are
               none other than office bearers of the appellant No. 1
               Company. When appellant No. 1 is the Company and it
               is alleged that the company has committed the offence
               then there is no question of attributing vicarious
               liability to the office bearers of the Company so far as
               the offence of cheating or criminal breach of trust is
               concerned. The office bearers could be arrayed as
               accused only if direct allegations are levelled against
               them. In other words, the complainant has to
               demonstrate that he has been cheated on account of
               criminal breach of trust or cheating or deception
               practised by the office-bearers. The Magistrate failed
               to pose unto himself the correct question viz. as to
               whether the complaint petition, even if given face
               value and taken to be correct in its entirety, would
               lead to the conclusion that appellants Nos. 2 and 3
               herein were personally liable for any offence. The
               appellant No. 1 is a body corporate. Vicarious liability
               of the office bearers would arise provided any
               provision exists in that behalf in the statute. Statutes
               indisputably must contain provision fixing such
               vicarious liabilities. Even for the said purpose, it is
               obligatory on the part of the complainant to make
               requisite allegations which would attract the provisions
               constituting vicarious liability.”
24.               This Court in
Iqbal @ Bala & Ors. vs. State of

Uttar Pradesh & Ors.16
has underlined the court’s duty to

look into the FIR closely and with care when the challenge is

thrown on the ground that the prosecution is manifestly
16
(2023) 8 SCC 734
27
frivolous or vexatious. The following is held in paras 9, 10 and

11:
“9.      At this stage, we would like to observe
        something important. Whenever an accused comes
        before the court invoking either the inherent powers
        under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure
        (
CrPC
) or extraordinary jurisdiction under
Article 226
of
        the Constitution to get the FIR or the criminal
        proceedings quashed essentially on the ground that
        such proceedings are manifestly frivolous or vexatious
        or instituted with the ulterior motive for wreaking
        vengeance, then in such circumstances the court owes
        a duty to look into the FIR with care and a little more
        closely.
10.      We say so because once the complainant
        decides to proceed against the accused with an ulterior
        motive for wreaking personal vengeance, etc. then he
        would ensure that the FIR/complaint is very well
        drafted with all the necessary pleadings. The
        complainant would ensure that the averments made in
        the FIR/complaint are such that they disclose the
        necessary ingredients to constitute the alleged offence.
        Therefore, it will not be just enough for the court to
        look into the averments made in the FIR/complaint
        alone for the purpose of ascertaining whether the
        necessary ingredients to constitute the alleged offence
        are disclosed or not.
11.      In frivolous or vexatious proceedings, the court
        owes a duty to look into many other attending
        circumstances emerging from the record of the case
        over and above the averments and, if need be, with
        due care and circumspection try to read in between the
        lines. The Court while exercising its jurisdiction under
        Section 482CrPC or
Article 226
of the Constitution need
        not restrict itself only to the stage of a case but is
        empowered to take into account the overall
        circumstances leading to the initiation/registration of
        the case as well as the materials collected in the course
        of investigation. Take for instance the case on hand.
        Multiple FIRs have been registered over a period of
        time. It is in the background of such circumstances the
        registration of multiple FIRs assumes importance,
28
thereby attracting the issue of wreaking vengeance out
        of private or personal grudge as alleged.”
25.       For all the aforestated reasons, we unhesitatingly

conclude that the present is a fit case for allowing the appeal

to quash the impugned criminal proceedings instituted against

the appellant for offences under
Section 420
of the IPC.
Accordingly, Criminal Case No. 7489 of 2002 arising out of

Crime No. 13 of 1998 pending in the Court of Chief Judicial

Magistrate, Ghaziabad is quashed. The appeal is allowed.
………………………………………J.
                                    (PANKAJ MITHAL)



                                 .......……………………………….J.
                                (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA)
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 16, 2025.