[Cites
26
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Electrosteel Steel Limited (Now M/S Esl ... vs Ispat Carrier Private Limited on 21 April, 2025
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
REPORTABLE

2025 INSC 525
                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2896 OF 2024
                                    (arising out of SLP (C) No. 15823 of 2023)


                            ELECTROSTEEL STEEL LIMITED
                            (NOW M/S ESL STEEL LIMITED)                  APPELLANT(S)


                                                      VERSUS

                            ISPAT CARRIER PRIVATE LIMITED              RESPONDENT(S)



                                                 JUDGMENT
UJJAL BHUYAN, J.
This appeal by special leave is directed against the

                            judgment and order dated 17.07.2023 passed by the High

                            Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi in CMP No. 376 of 2023 filed

                            by the appellant.
2.        Appellant had filed CMP No. 376 of 2023 before the

                            High Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi (briefly ‘the High Court’

                            hereinafter) under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2025.04.21
18:34:48 IST
assailing the order dated 03.03.2023 passed by the learned
Reason:
Presiding    Officer,   Commercial   Court/District   Judge-1,

Bokaro in Commercial Execution Case No. 21 of 2022

(Execution Case No. 77 of 2018). It may be mentioned that by

the aforesaid order dated 03.03.2023, learned Presiding

Officer, Commercial Court/District Judge-1, Bokaro (referred

to hereinafter as ‘the Executing Court’) had dismissed the

application dated 14.05.2019 filed by the judgment debtor

(appellant), further directing the judgment debtor (appellant)

to comply with the award dated 06.07.2018 passed by the

West Bengal Micro, Small and Medium Facilitation Council,

Kolkata within fifteen days of the order.
3.          Relevant facts may be briefly noted.
4.          On 02.12.2014 and 20.12.2014, respondent filed

claim petitions before the West Bengal Micro, Small and

Medium Facilitation Council (briefly ‘the Facilitation Council’

hereinafter) for a total principal outstanding amount of Rs.

1,59,09,214.00 which were registered as Case No. 330/2014

and Case No. 331/2014. In Case No. 330/2014, the claim

amount was Rs. 1,36,69,981.33, whereas in Case No.

331/2014 the claim amount was Rs. 22,39,233.00, thus the

total amount being Rs. 1,59,09,214.00. The claims were made
2
under the provisions of the
Micro, Small and Medium

Enterprises Development Act, 2006
(hereinafter referred to as

‘the
MSME Act
’).
5.          As per the requirement of the
MSME Act
,

conciliation proceedings were initiated but attempt for

conciliation failed. Thereafter, the arbitration proceedings

were commenced on 07.06.2017.
6.          On 27.06.2017, the financial creditors of the

appellant    invoked
Section   7
of   the   Insolvency   and

Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (‘IBC’ hereinafter) before the National

Company Law Tribunal, Kolkata Bench (NCLT) which was

registered as C.P. No.(IB) 361/KB/2017.
7.          On 21.07.2017, NCLT imposed moratorium and an

interim resolution professional was appointed.
8.          On 24.07.2017, the interim resolution professional

issued a public announcement calling upon all the creditors

to submit their claims before him.
9.          In view of the moratorium declared by the NCLT,

arbitral proceedings before the Facilitation Council were kept

in abeyance.
3
10.        Respondent filed its claim before the resolution

professional,   who   partly       admitted   the   claim   of   the

respondent.
11.        On 29.03.2018, a resolution plan was submitted

by Vedanta Limited before the NCLT wherein all the claims of

operational creditors were settled at nil value.
12.        However, claim of the respondent was not included

in the resolution plan as approved by the committee of

creditors. Ultimately, the resolution plan was approved by

NCLT on 17.04.2018 under
Section 31
of the IBC on and from

which date the moratorium period came to an end.
13.        In the order dated 17.04.2018, NCLT declared that

the claims of all the operational creditors were settled at nil.

No appeal was preferred by the respondent. However, the

aforesaid order of the NCLT dated 17.04.2018 was challenged

before the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal, New

Delhi (NCLAT) in Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.175 of

2018 by some of the operational creditors. But the same was

dismissed on 10.08.2018. Other creditors also approached

NCLAT in Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.265/2018

and in analogous appeals. Specific ground taken was that in
4
the resolution plan, the resolution applicant had not taken

proper care of the operational creditors. These appeals were

also dismissed by the NCLAT vide the order dated

20.08.2018. The matter was carried forward to this Court in

Civil Appeal No. 1133 of 2019. However, this Court dismissed

the said appeal vide the order dated 27.11.2019.
14.        It appears that on lifting of the moratorium,

Facilitation Council resumed arbitral proceedings. Appellant

did not contest the arbitral proceedings. Ultimately, an award

was passed on 06.07.2018. As per the award, the Facilitation

Council   directed   the   appellant    to   pay   a   sum     of

Rs.1,59,09,214.00 along with interest to the respondent in

terms of
Section 16
of the MSME Act.
15.        Appellant did not challenge the award dated

06.07.2018 under
Section 34
of the Arbitration and

Conciliation Act, 1996 (briefly ‘the 1996 Act’ hereinafter).
16.        Respondent instituted execution proceeding which

was initially registered as Execution Case No.77 of 2018 and

thereafter as Commercial Execution Case No.21 of 2022

before the Executing Court. At the stage of execution of the

award, appellant filed a petition dated 14.05.2019 contending
5
that the arbitral award was a nullity and hence not

executable as the claim of the respondent was already settled

at nil as per the resolution plan and, therefore, nothing was

payable to the respondent.
17.       Executing Court by the order dated 03.03.2023

dismissed the petition of the appellant and directed it to

comply with the award dated 06.07.2018 within fifteen days.
18.       As noted above, this came to be challenged by the

appellant before the High Court by filing a petition under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India. High Court framed

the following questions for consideration:
a. The arbitral award having not been challenged
         under
Section 34
of the Act of 1996, whether the
         objection to execution of the arbitral award
         referrable to Section 47 of the Civil Procedure
         Code, 1908 (
CPC
) was maintainable by alleging
         that the arbitral award itself was a nullity and
         hence non-executable?
b. Whether the arbitral award in the present
         case could be assailed as a nullity and hence
         non-executable within the permissible grounds
         of raising such a plea?
c. Irrespective of maintainability of the objection
         to the arbitral award under
Section 47
of the
         CPC, whether on facts, the Facilitation Council
6
lost its jurisdiction to proceed and pronounce
         the arbitral award in view of the insolvency
         resolution plan of the petitioner which was duly
         approved under
Section 31
of the IBC?
19.          Insofar the first question is concerned, High Court

opined that the plea of nullity qua an arbitral award can be

raised in an execution proceeding under
Section 47
of the

CPC. However, the scope of interference would be very

narrow. As regards the second question, High Court rejected

the contention of the appellant that since the award suffered

from patent or inherent lack of jurisdiction and therefore was

a nullity, it can be questioned at the stage of execution

without challenging the award under Section 34 of the 1996

Act. High Court answered the third question by holding that

the Facilitation Council did not lose its jurisdiction to procced

and pronounce the arbitral award notwithstanding approval

of the resolution plan by the NCLT under
Section 31
of IBC.

Reasoning given by the High Court is that the arbitral

proceedings were initiated prior to the insolvency resolution

date, kept suspended during the moratorium period and

resumed after lifting of the moratorium; the approved

resolution    plan   simply   determined   the   claim   of   the

respondent as nil. Accordingly, vide the impugned judgment
7
and order High Court dismissed the petition filed by the

appellant under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India.
20.       Hence, the present appeal.
21.       On 04.08.2023 notice was issued in the related

SLP (C) No.15823/2023. It was submitted on behalf of the

respondent that a sum of Rs.15,48,70,890.00 was withdrawn

but gave an undertaking to deposit the said amount. This

Court directed the respondent to deposit the said amount

with the Executing Court with further direction to the

Executing Court to invest the said amount in an interest

bearing fixed deposit until further orders. In the hearing held

on 20.02.2024, leave was granted.
22.       Learned senior counsel for the appellant submits

that the High Court had erroneously held that the resolution

plan did not determine the claim of the respondent at nil and,

therefore, the Facilitation Council had the jurisdiction to

decide on the claim of the respondent.
22.1.     He submits that the High Court had misread and

misinterpreted the resolution plan which would be evident

from a perusal of the relevant paragraphs of the resolution

plan. Respondent had submitted its claim as an operational
8
creditor to the resolution professional. Such claim was the

same claim which formed the subject matter of the

proceedings before the Facilitation Council. Resolution

applicant had submitted a resolution plan in respect of the

appellant   (corporate   debtor)   in   accordance   with   the

provisions of
Section 30
of the IBC to enable the appellant to

continue as a going concern. A reading of the relevant

paragraphs of the resolution plan i.e. paragraphs 3.2(v),

3.4(ii) and 3.8(i) would indicate that the claims of the

operational creditors including the debt of the respondent

were settled at nil and, therefore, they were not entitled to

any payment.
22.2.       On 17.04.2018, NCLT approved the resolution

plan under
Section 31
of the IBC. Paragraph 50 of the order

dated 17.04.2018 specifically recorded that the claims of all

the operational creditors were settled at nil. This Court in

Civil Appeal No. 1133 of 2019 after going through the

resolution plan had observed that there was nil payment to

be made to all the operational creditors as per the resolution

plan submitted and approved.
9
22.3.         Learned   senior    counsel   submits   that   on

          17.04.2018 when the NCLT had approved the resolution

          plan, claims of the operational creditors were settled at nil.

          This became binding on the respondent and all other

          authorities as per
Section 31(1)
of the IBC.
In this connection,

          learned senior counsel has referred to and relied upon the

          decision of this Court in
Ajay Kumar Radheshyam Goenka

          Vs. Tourism Finance Corporation of India Ltd.1 In
the said

          decision
, this Court had made it abundantly clear that the

          creditor has no option but to join the process under the IBC.

          Once the plan is approved, it would bind everyone under the

          sun. He contended that the respondent had submitted its

          claim before the resolution professional but the same was not

          included in the resolution plan as was approved by the

          committee of creditors and then by the adjudicating authority

          i.e. NCLT which became binding on the respondent. Even if

          the respondent had not submitted its claim before the

          resolution professional, the approved resolution plan would

          still have been binding on the respondent.
1
(2023) 10 SCC 545
10
22.4.           He, therefore, submits that on approval of the

        resolution plan by the NCLT, claim of the respondent stood

        extinguished. Thus, respondent had no claim against the

        appellant (corporate debtor) in law. Respondent was also

        estopped from pursuing its claim before the Facilitation

        Council and also from seeking execution of the award after

        approval of the resolution plan.
22.5.           After adverting to the objectives of the IBC, learned

        senior counsel submits that the appellant (corporate debtor)

        has been given a fresh and clean slate upon approval of the

        resolution plan. The same cannot be allowed to be defeated

        or frustrated by raising claims relatable to the period covered

        by the corporate insolvency resolution process. In this

        connection, learned senior counsel has placed reliance on the

        following decisions:
(
i)     Essar Steel India Ltd. Committee of Creditors
                        Vs. Satish Kumar Gupta2
(
ii)    Ghanshyam Mishra & Sons (P) Ltd. Vs.
                        Edelweiss Asset Reconstruction Co. Ltd.3
(
iii)   Ruchi Soya Industries Ltd. Vs. Union of India4
(
iv)    RPS Infrastructure Ltd. Vs. Mukul Kumar5
2
(2020) 8 SCC 531
3
(2021) 9 SCC 657
4
(2022) 6 SCC 343
5
(2023) 10 SCC 718
11
22.6.           On the basis of the above decisions, learned senior

           counsel submits that it would lead to an absurd situation if

           the respondent and other operational creditors are permitted

           to pursue their individual claims even after the corporate

           debtor goes through a successful corporate insolvency

           resolution process (CIRP) where the claims of the operational

           creditors were settled at nil in the resolution plan which was

           approved by the committee of creditors and finally by the

           adjudicating authority (NCLT). In such a case, the corporate

           debtor would once again have to struggle to sustain itself as

           a going concern to satisfy such claims. Thus, the object or

           the purport of IBC would be defeated.
22.7.           Adverting to a decision of this Court in
Adani

           Power Ltd. Vs. Shapoorji Pallonji & Co. Pvt. Ltd.6
, learned

           senior counsel submits that this Court has held that the

           resolution plan, as approved, is binding on all and cannot be

           made subject matter of arbitration or any other proceedings.

           Once the resolution plan is approved, the resolution

           applicant cannot be settled with any liability except what is

           mentioned in the resolution plan.
6
Civil Appeal No. 1741 of 2023
12
22.8.      Learned senior counsel further submits that the

resolution plan or the terms thereof could have been

challenged by the respondent in the manner provided under
Section 32
read with Section 61(3) of the IBC. Further,

Section 63 of the IBC makes it abundantly clear that no civil

court or authority shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit

or proceedings in respect of any matter over which NCLT or

NCLAT has jurisdiction under the IBC and that a civil court

would not have any jurisdiction.
22.9.      He submits that respondent had accepted the

resolution plan as approved and did not prefer any challenge

thereto or the order of the NCLT approving the resolution

plan. On the other hand, some operational creditors

challenged the order dated 17.04.2018 passed by the NCLT

approving the resolution plan. However, those challenges

were dismissed by the NCLAT. When the matter reached this

Court in Civil Appeal No. 1133 of 2019, this Court vide the

order dated 27.11.2019 had clarified that implementation of

the resolution plan was not stayed while dismissing the

appeal.
13
22.10.       Thus, the Facilitation Council lacked jurisdiction

          in respect of the claim of the respondent which was part of

          the subject matter of the resolution plan. Facilitation Council

          could not have continued with the arbitration proceedings

          and could not have passed the award in view of Section 63

          read with Section 238 of the IBC. Therefore, learned senior

          counsel would submit that the award passed by the

          Facilitation Council is a nullity and non est in the eye of law.

          This award has been passed in respect of a claim which stood

          extinguished and did not exist in law.
22.11.       Learned senior counsel submits that an award can

          be challenged in an execution proceeding on the ground of it

          being a nullity. In the instant case, Facilitation Council

          lacked jurisdiction to pass the award. Even if the appellant

          had not challenged the award under Section 34 of the 1996

          Act, the issue of nullity could still be raised at the stage of

          execution.
In this connection, learned senior counsel has

          referred to a decision of this Court in
Sarwan Kumar Vs.

          Madam Lal Aggarwal7
. In the circumstances, learned senior

          counsel submits that appellant was well within its right to
7
(2003) 4 SCC 147
14
object to execution of the award by contending that the award

itself is a nullity since the Facilitation Council inherently

lacked jurisdiction to arbitrate on the claim of the respondent

post approval of the resolution plan.
22.12.     In view of the above, learned senior counsel for the

appellant submits that the execution petition filed by the

respondent for execution of the award ought to have been

dismissed by the Executing Court. High Court committed a

manifest error in declining to entertain the objections filed by

the appellant to execution of the award. That being the

position, impugned order of the High Court is liable to be set

aside, so also the execution proceedings.
23.        Learned senior counsel for the respondent on the

other hand supports the impugned order passed by the High

Court.
23.1.      He submits that the corporate debtor (appellant)

which was being managed by the resolution professional, had

knowledge of the arbitral award. As a matter of fact, appellant

had taken shelter of the arbitral award to get the revision

petition filed by the respondent before the Calcutta High

Court disposed of. The revision petition was filed against an
15
order passed under
Section 14
of the 1996 Act. It was

submitted before the High Court that an arbitral award was

passed by the Facilitation Council and on the basis of such

submission, Calcutta High Court had disposed of the

aforesaid proceedings observing that
Section 14
proceedings

had been rendered infructuous leaving the partes to avail

their remedies in accordance with law.
23.2.      Learned counsel submits that upon approval of the

resolution plan, the proceedings which were stayed by the

Facilitation Council in view of the moratorium, did not

automatically get terminated. On the contrary those stood

revived. He submits that operational creditors whose claims

were pending adjudication at the time of initiation of the

corporate insolvency resolution process, formed a different

class. Proceedings initiated by them would continue post

lifting of moratorium for the purpose of quantification of their

claims.
23.3.      It is evident from the order passed by the Calcutta

High Court that the appellant was aware of the arbitral

award. Appellant did not challenge the award despite liberty

granted by the High Court. Without challenging the award
16
under Section 34 of the 1996 Act, it was not open to the

appellant to challenge the same in a proceeding under
Section 47
of the CPC.
23.4.     Learned    senior     counsel    for   the   respondent

distinguished the case of
Ghanshyam Mishra
(supra) by

contending that
the said judgment
was rendered in a

distinguishable factual situation where the creditor had failed

to lodge its claim upon public announcement by the

resolution professional. Therefore, this Court held that such

a creditor cannot file its claim thereafter and such claim gets

extinguished. This judgment does not deal with claims filed

before the interim resolution professional or resolution

professional and not included in the resolution plan. High

Court had noticed this fact and has rightly observed that

since the respondent does not fall in the category of

operational creditors whose claims were rendered nil, there

was no occasion for the respondent to challenge the

resolution plan.
23.5.     Learned    counsel     submits    that   there   is   no

inconsistency between
IBC and the MSME Act
. Therefore,

High Court rightly did not examine the plea of inconsistency.
17
23.6.        He has referred to various provisions of the IBC as

well as to the decision of this Court in
Ghanshyam Mishra
(supra) and submits that imposition of moratorium and

consequential approval of resolution plan does not terminate

or put an end to pending proceedings but those were merely

stayed. Legislature has not provided that upon approval of a

resolution    plan,   all   pending   proceedings   would   get

extinguished. Therefore, post expiry of the moratorium

period, pending proceedings such as arbitral proceedings

would stand revived and taken to their logical conclusion.

23.7.        Learned senior counsel submits that in the present

case, respondent had lodged its claim before the interim

resolution professional and had also informed about the

pendency of proceedings before the Facilitation Council.

Interim resolution professional had published an information

memorandum on 20.10.2017 mentioning therein a list of

claimants which did not include operational creditors whose

claims were sub-judiced before different judicial fora. Validity

of such claims would be decided after the judicial proceedings

were complete. He submits that after lifting of moratorium,

notices were duly issued to the appellant by the Facilitation
18
Council but the appellant decided not to appear and contest

the proceedings. After the award was passed, appellant did

not challenge the same under Section 34 of the 1996 Act.

Having not challenged the award in the forum designated by

law, he could not have challenged the same by filing

objections to the arbitral award in a proceeding under
Section

47
of the CPC. Learned counsel asserts that Section 34 of the

1996 Act is the only acknowledged remedy available to

challenge an award. Appellant had the opportunity to assail

the award under Section 34 of the 1996 Act but he did not do

so. Therefore, filing of application to declare the award a

nullity in execution proceedings instituted by the respondent

for execution of the award is a clear abuse of the process of

law and was rightly rejected by the Executing Court which

decision has been upheld by the High Court. Learned counsel

further submits that since the claim of the respondent was

pending before the Facilitation Council and in view of the

information memorandum issued by the interim resolution

professional, there was no need for the respondent to have

challenged the resolution plan. Therefore, the High Court was

fully justified in rejecting the petition filed by the appellant
19
under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India. The appeal is

devoid of any merit and should, therefore, be dismissed.
24.          Submissions made by learned counsel for the

parties have received the due consideration of the Court.
25.          At the outset, let us examine a few relevant

provisions of the IBC.
Section 30
provides for submission of

resolution plan. As per sub-section (1), a resolution applicant

may submit a resolution plan alongwith an affidavit stating

that he is eligible under Section 29A to the resolution

professional prepared on the basis of the information

memorandum in terms of
Section 29
. Sub-section (2) says

that   the    resolution   professional   shall   examine     each

resolution plan received by him to confirm that such

resolution plan complies with the requirement of clauses (a)

to (f) of the said sub-section. Thereafter the resolution

professional is required under sub-section (3) to present the

resolution    plans   which    are   in   conformity   with    the

requirements of sub-section (2) to the committee of creditors

for its approval. Sub-section (4) mandates that the committee

of creditors may approve a resolution plan by vote of not less

than 66 percent of the voting share of the financial creditors
20
after considering its feasibility and viability. The resolution

applicant may also attend such meeting of the committee of

creditors though it shall not have the right to vote unless it is

also a financial creditor (sub-section (5)). Once the resolution

plan is approved by the committee of creditors, the resolution

professional shall submit the same to the adjudicating

authority in terms of sub-section (6).
26.
Section 31
deals with approval of resolution plan.

As per sub-section (1), if the adjudicating authority is

satisfied that the resolution plan as approved by the

committee of creditors meets the requirement of sub-section

(2) of
Section 30
, it shall by order approve the resolution plan.

Once the resolution plan is approved by the adjudicating

authority, it shall be binding on the corporate debtor and its

employees,    members,     creditors     including    the   central

government, any state government or any local authority to

whom a debt including statutory dues are owed, guarantors

and other stakeholders involved in the resolution plan.

However,     before   passing    an    order   of   approval,   the

adjudicating authority has to satisfy itself that the resolution

plan has provisions for its effective implementation. Under
21
sub-section (2), if the adjudicating authority is satisfied that

the resolution plan does not conform to the requirements

referred to in sub-section (1), it may by an order reject the

resolution plan. Sub-section (3) provides that once the

resolution plan is approved under sub-section (1), the

moratorium order passed by the adjudicating authority

under
Section 14
shall cease to have effect.
27.        Under
Section 32
, any appeal from an order

approving the resolution plan shall be in the manner and on

the grounds
laid down in
sub-section (3) of Section 61.

Section 61 provides for appeals and appellate authority. Sub-

section (1) says that any person aggrieved by an order of the

adjudicating authority may prefer an appeal to the National

Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) within thirty days as provided

in sub-section (2). Be it stated that National Company Law

Tribunal (NCLT) constituted under
Section 408
of the

Companies Act, 2013 is the adjudicating authority as defined

in
Section 5(1)
of IBC. Sub-section (3) deals with an appeal

against an order approving a resolution plan under Section
31. It says that such an appeal can be filed on the following

grounds:
22
(i)     the approved resolution plan is in contravention
               of the provisions of any law for the time being in
               force;
(ii)    there has been material irregularity in exercise of
               the powers by the resolution professional during
               the corporate insolvency resolution period;
(iii)   the debts owed to operational creditors of the
               corporate debtor have not been provided for in the
               resolution plan in the manner specified by the
               Insolvency   and    Bankruptcy    Board   of   India
               established under Section 188(1);
(iv)    the insolvency resolution process costs have not
               been provided for repayment in priority to all other
               debts; or
(v)     the resolution plan does not comply with any
               other criteria specified by the Insolvency and
               Bankruptcy Board of India.
28.            Section 238 of IBC clarifies that provisions of IBC

shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent

therewith contained in any other law for the time being in

force or any instrument having effect by virtue of any such

law.
29.
In
Essar Steel India Ltd.
(supra), a three-Judge

Bench of this Court examined amongst others the role of

resolution applicants, resolution professionals and the

committee of creditors constituted under the IBC as well as
23
the jurisdiction of NCLT and NCLAT qua resolution plans

approved by the committee of creditors. After an elaborate

and exhaustive analysis of various provisions of the IBC, the

Bench concluded that a successful resolution applicant

cannot suddenly be faced with ‘undecided’ claims after the

resolution plan submitted by him has been accepted. This

would amount to a hydra head popping up which would

throw into uncertainty amounts payable by a prospective

resolution applicant. All claims must be submitted to and

decided by the resolution professional so that a prospective

resolution applicant knows exactly what has to be paid in

order that it may then take over and run the business of

corporate debtor. Paragraph 107 of
the said decision
reads

as under:
107. For the same reason, the impugned NCLAT
     judgment [
Standard Chartered Bank v. Satish Kumar
     Gupta
, 2019 SCC OnLine NCLAT 388] in holding that
     claims that may exist apart from those decided on
     merits by the resolution professional and by the
     Adjudicating Authority/Appellate Tribunal can now be
     decided by an appropriate forum in terms of Section
     60(6) of the Code, also militates against the rationale of
Section 31
of the Code. A successful resolution
     applicant cannot suddenly be faced with “undecided”
     claims after the resolution plan submitted by him has
24
been accepted as this would amount to a hydra head
      popping up which would throw into uncertainty
      amounts payable by a prospective resolution applicant
      who would successfully take over the business of the
      corporate debtor. All claims must be submitted to and
      decided by the resolution professional so that a
      prospective resolution applicant knows exactly what has
      to be paid in order that it may then take over and run
      the business of the corporate debtor. This the successful
      resolution applicant does on a fresh slate, as has been
      pointed out by us hereinabove. For these reasons, NCLAT
      judgment must also be set aside on this count.
30.        An important question arose for consideration in
Ghanshyam Mishra
(supra). Again a three-Judge Bench of

this Court examined a question as to whether any creditor

including the central government, state government or any

local authority is bound by the resolution plan once it is

approved by the adjudicating authority under sub-section (1)

of
Section 31
of IBC? Corollary to the above question was the

issue as to whether after approval of the resolution plan by

the adjudicating authority, a creditor including the central

government, state government or any local authority is

entitled to initiate any proceeding for recovery of any of the

dues from the corporate debtor which are not a part of the

resolution plan approved by the adjudicating authority. In
25
that case, the Bench concluded by holding that once a

resolution plan is duly approved by the adjudicating

authority under sub-section (1) of
Section 31
, the claims as

provided in the resolution plan shall stand frozen and will be

binding on the corporate debtor and its employees, members,

creditors, including the central government, any state

government or any local authority, guarantors and other

stakeholders. On the date of approval of the resolution plan

by the adjudicating authority, all such claims which are not

a part of the resolution plan shall stand extinguished and no

person will be entitled to initiate or continue any proceeding

in respect to a claim which is not part of the resolution plan.

The Bench declared that all dues including statutory dues

owed to the central government, any state government or any

local authority if not part of the resolution plan shall stand

extinguished and no proceeding in respect of such dues for

the period prior to the date on which the adjudicating

authority grants its approval under
Section 31
could be

continued. Paragraph 102 of the aforesaid decision reads

thus:
102    In the result, we answer the questions framed
        by us as under:
26
102.1. That once a resolution plan is duly approved by
      the adjudicating authority under sub-section (1) of
Section 31
, the claims as provided in the resolution
      plan shall stand frozen and will be binding on the
      corporate   debtor   and     its       employees,   members,
      creditors, including the central government, any state
      government or any local authority, guarantors and
      other stakeholders. On the date of approval of
      resolution plan by the adjudicating authority, all such
      claims, which are not a part of the resolution plan,
      shall stand extinguished and no person will be entitled
      to initiate or continue any proceedings in respect to a
      claim, which is not part of the resolution plan.
*       *        *           *            *         *       *
      102.3. Consequently    all       the    dues   including   the
statutory dues owed to the central government, any
      state government or any local authority, if not part of
      the resolution plan, shall stand extinguished and no
      proceedings in respect of such dues for the period prior
      to the date on which the adjudicating authority grants
      its approval under
Section 31
could be continued.
31.
In
Ruchi Soya Industries Ltd.
(supra), a two-Judge

Bench of this Court referred to the decision in
Ghanshyam

Mishra
(supra) and thereafter declared that on the date on

which the resolution plan was approved by the NCLT, all

claims stood frozen and no claim, which is not a part of the

resolution plan, would survive.
27
32.            A three-Judge Bench of this Court in
Ajay Kumar

          Radheshyam Goenka
(supra) held that a creditor has no

          option but to join the process under the IBC. Once the plan

          is approved, it would bind everyone under the sun. The

          making of a claim under the IBC and accepting the same and

          not making any claim will not make any difference in the light

          of
Section 31
of IBC. Both the situations will lead to
Section

          31
and the finality and binding value of the resolution plan.

          Paragraph 62 of
the said decision
is extracted hereunder:
62. Thus, from the aforesaid, it is evident that the
                    creditor has no option but to join the process under the
                    IBC. Once the plan is approved, it would bind everyone
                    under the sun. The making of a claim and accepting
                    whatever share is allotted could be termed as an
                    “Involuntary Act” on behalf of the creditor. The making
                    of a claim under the IBC and accepting the same and
                    not making any claim, will not make any difference in
                    light of
Section 31
IBC. Both the situations will lead to
Section 31
and the finality and binding value of the
                    resolution plan.
33.            In a recent decision, a two-Judge Bench of this

          Court decided a contempt application in M/s. JSW Steel Ltd.
Vs. Pratishtha Thakur Haritwal8. Contention of the petitioner

          was that respondents had wilfully disobeyed the judgment of
8
2025 INSC 401
28
this Court in
Ghanshyam Mishra
(supra) by issuing demand

notices pertaining to the period covered by the corporate

insolvency resolution process.
In the above context, the

Bench reiterated what was held in
Ghanshyam Mishra
(supra) which has been followed in subsequent decisions and

thereafter declared that all claims which are not part of the

resolution plan shall stand extinguished. No person will be

entitled to initiate or continue any proceeding in respect to a

claim which is not part of the resolution plan.
Though the

Bench did not take any action for contempt in view of the

unconditional apology made by the respondents nonetheless

the   Bench   reiterated   the   proposition
laid   down   in
Ghanshyam Mishra
(supra) clarifying that even if any

stakeholder is not a party to the proceedings before the NCLT

and if such stakeholder does not raise its claim before the

interim resolution professional/resolution professional, the

resolution plan as approved by the NCLT would still be

binding on him.
34.       Having noticed the relevant provisions of IBC and

the judgments of this Court, let us now deal with the

challenge made in this appeal.
29
35.       Respondent had supplied telescopic and type

mounted cranes, 75 ton crawler cranes, hydra and trailors

on hiring basis to the appellant pursuant to two purchase

orders dated 02.06.2011 and 06.06.2011. Case No. 330 of

2014 pertains to 138 numbers of bills under eight work

orders   in   which    the    disputed   amount    was    Rs.
1,36,69,981.33; on the other hand Case No. 331 of 2014

pertains to 158 numbers of bills under nine work orders

where the disputed amount was Rs. 22,39,233.00. Thus, the

total disputed amount was Rs. 1,59,09,214.33. Buyer

(appellant) did not make any payment so the entire amount

was claimed as outstanding and due. Initially conciliation

proceedings were initiated by the Facilitation Council but the

buyer unit was not present though it had filed written

submissions stating that on the request of the supplier it had

appointed an arbitrator whereafter arbitration proceedings

had commenced. As an independent arbitration agreement

existed between the parties, Facilitation Council should not

proceed under
Section 18(3)
of the MSME Act. Already

arbitration process was going on as per the arbitration

agreement. Facilitation Council in its proceedings dated

31.07.2017 noted that it appeared from newspaper reports
30
and order copy of the NCLT that moratorium was declared

under
Section 14
of IBC in the matter of
State Bank of India

Vs. Electrosteel Steels Ltd. It
was decided that the matter

should be kept in abeyance till the moratorium period was

over.
36.        We shall now deal with the resolution plan and

revert back to the proceedings of the Facilitation Council

thereafter. The resolution plan was submitted by Vedanta

Ltd. as resolution applicant and is dated 29.03.2018.

Clause 3 contained the mandatory contents of the resolution

plan. Clause 3.2(v) declared that while the liquidation value

of the corporate debtor was Rs. 2,899.98 crores, the admitted

debts of the financial creditors aggregated to approximately

Rs.13,395.25 crores. The liquidation value was not sufficient

to cover the debts of the financial creditors in full. Therefore,

the liquidation value of the operational creditors or the other

creditors or stakeholders of the corporate debtor including

dues of the employees (other than workmen), government

dues, taxes etc. and other creditors and stakeholders was nil.

As such, they would not be entitled to any payment. The

dissenting financial creditors would be entitled to receive
31
21.65 percent of the value of their admitted debt which would

be paid in priority to any payment to the assenting financial

creditors.
37.          Clause   3.2(xii)(A)   is   relevant.   It   says   that

notwithstanding what is contained in the mandatory

contents of the resolution plan, upon approval of the

resolution plan by the NCLT under
Section 31
of the IBC, on

and from the effective date all pending proceedings relating

to the winding up of the company i.e. the corporate debtor

shall stand irrevocably and unconditionally abated in

perpetuity and claims in connection with all violation or

breach of any agreement by the corporate debtor shall be

settled at nil value at par with operational creditors.
38.          Clause 3.4 provides for a proposal for operational

creditors (excluding employees and workmen). Sub-clause (ii)

says that since the liquidation value is not sufficient to cover

the debts of the financial creditors in full, therefore, the

liquidation value of the operational creditors or the other

creditors etc. was taken as nil. Thus nil payment was

proposed under the resolution plan towards claims of

operational creditors whether filed or not, whether admitted
32
or not and whether or not set out in the provisional balance

sheet or the list of creditors etc. Thus, no source was

identified for such payment under the resolution plan.
39.         Heading of Clause 3.8 is treatment of amounts

claimed under ongoing litigations. Clause 3.8(i) states that all

claims arising out of enquiries, investigations, notices,

causes of action, suits, litigations, arbitrations, claims of the

top 30 operational creditors against the corporate debtor in

relation to any period prior to the effective date etc. shall be

settled at nil.
40.         The resolution plan as submitted by Vedanta Ltd.

was examined by NCLT and by order dated 17.04.2018

approved the same. It was mentioned in the said order that

the resolution plan had the approval of the committee of

creditors with a voting share of 100 percent. It was clarified

that the moratorium order passed under
Section 14
IBC

would cease to have effect as the approved resolution plan

had come into force with immediate effect. Adjudicating

authority i.e. NCLT declared that the approved resolution

plan would be binding on the corporate debtor, its employees,
33
members, creditors, coordinators and stakeholders involved

in the resolution plan.
41.        Reverting back to the proceedings before the

Facilitation   Council,   it   is   seen   that   on   16.05.2018,

Facilitation Council noted that the moratorium period of the

corporate insolvency resolution process had expired. The

buyer did not appear in the conciliation process as well as in

the arbitration proceeding. Thereafter, the Facilitation

Council passed the award dated 06.07.2018 holding that

claim of the respondent was genuine. The buyer unit was

liable to pay the outstanding amount of Rs. 1,59,09,214.33

with interest at the rate of 3 times of the prevailing bank rate.
42.        At this stage, we may mention that respondent did

not challenge the resolution plan before the NCLAT or before

any other forum. On the other hand, a number of other

operational creditors had challenged the order of the NCLT

dated 17.04.2018 before the NCLAT in Company Appeal (AT)

(Insolvency) No. 175 of 2018. However, the said appeal was

dismissed on 10.08.2018. Similar appeal being Company

Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 265 of 2018 was also dismissed

by the NCLAT vide the order dated 20.08.2018. These orders
34
were challenged before this Court in Civil Appeal No. 1133 of

2019 which was dismissed on 27.11.2019.
43.       The decree holder i.e. the respondent filed an

execution petition before the Executing Court for execution

of the award dated 06.07.2018. In the said execution

proceedings being Commercial Execution Case No. 21/2022

(Execution Case No. 77/2018), appellant had filed an

application for declaring the award as a nullity and hence

non-executable in view of the resolution plan approved by the

NCLT. By the order dated 03.03.2023, the Executing Court

noted that the judgment debtor (appellant) had not preferred

any appeal against the award dated 06.07.2018. Instead of

filing such an appeal, appellant had filed application dated

14.05.2019 for dismissing the execution proceedings on the

ground that the award passed by the Facilitation Council was

illegal and non est in the eye of law. Since the appellant did

not file any application under Section 34 of the 1996 Act, the

Executing Court dismissed the application of the appellant

dated 14.05.2019 observing that the appellant was trying to

deprive the decree holder of the fruits of the award by

unnecessarily delaying the execution.
35
44.        This order came to be challenged by the appellant

before the High Court in a proceeding under
Article 227
of

the Constitution of India. We have already noted the three

issues framed by the High Court for consideration. In so far

the first issue is concerned, High Court is of the view that an

award can be challenged in a proceeding under
Section 47
CPC on the very limited ground of the award being a nullity

or void ab intio or suffering from inherent lack of jurisdiction.

However, the High Court opined that if an aggrieved party

does not challenge an award under Section 34 of the 1996

Act, it cannot be permitted to object to its execution by

alleging it to be a nullity though such a plea of nullity can be

entertained if it is of such a grave nature that it is not even

capable of being waived by one or the other party. Therefore,

High Court concluded that the plea of nullity qua an arbitral

award can be raised in a proceeding under
Section 47
CPC

but such a challenge would lie within a very narrow compass.
45.        In so far the second issue is concerned, High Court

rejected the contention of the appellant that since the award

suffered from patent or inherent lack of jurisdiction,

objection to the award can be taken at the stage of execution
36
without challenging the award under Section 34 of the 1996

Act. While rejecting the said contention, High Court held that

the arbitral proceedings culminating in the award cannot be

said to be suffering from inherent lack of jurisdiction.
46.        As regards issue No. 3, High Court examined as to

how the claim of the respondent was dealt with in the

resolution plan. After observing that the respondent was not

included in the top 30 operational creditors whose claims

were settled at nil, High Court held that the Facilitation

Council had the jurisdiction to proceed and pronounce the

award even after approval of the resolution plan. The arbitral

proceedings were initiated prior to the resolution insolvency

date, suspended during the moratorium period and resumed

upon expiry of the moratorium period. High Court further

observed that the approved resolution plan did not determine

the claim of the respondent as nil and that the proceedings

before the Facilitation Council was taken note of in the

resolution plan.
47.        High Court is correct in answering the first issue

that a plea of nullity qua an arbitral award can be raised in
37
a proceeding under
Section 47
CPC but such a challenge

would lie within a very narrow compass.
48.        Section 36 of the 1996 Act deals with enforcement

of arbitral awards. Sub-section (1) says that where the time

for making any application to set aside an arbitral award

under Section 34 has expired, then subject to the provisions

of sub-section (2), such award shall be enforced in

accordance with the provisions
of CPC
in the same manner

as if it were a decree of the court. As per sub-section (2),

where an application to set aside an arbitral award has been

filed under Section 34, the filing of such an application shall

not by itself render an award unenforceable unless an order

of stay is granted by the court. Therefore, in terms of Section

36 of the 1996 Act, an award can be enforced in accordance

with the provisions
of CPC
in the same manner as if it were

a decree of a civil court.
48.1.
Section 47
CPC deals with questions to be

determined by the court executing decree. As per sub-

section (1), all questions arising between the parties to the

suit in which the decree was passed and relating to the

execution, discharge or satisfaction of the decree shall be
38
determined by the court executing the decree and not by a

          separate suit. Execution of decrees and orders is provided for

          in
Order XXI CPC
. The law is well settled that at the stage of

          execution, an objection as to executability of the decree can

          be raised but such objection is limited to the ground of

          jurisdictional infirmity or voidness. The law laid down by this

          Court in
Vasudev Dhanjibhai Modi Vs. Rajabhai Abdul

          Rehman9
is that only a decree which is a nullity can be the

          subject matter of objection under
Section 47
CPC and not

          one which is erroneous either in law or on facts. The aforesaid

          proposition of law continues to hold the field.
49.          Objection to execution of an award under
Section

          47
CPC is not dependent or contingent upon filing a petition

          under Section 34 of the 1996 Act. High Court was not

          justified in taking the view that since the appellant did not

          file a petition under Section 34 of the 1996 Act, therefore, it

          was precluded from filing an application before the Executing

          Court to declare the award as void and hence non-

          executable.
9
(1970) 1 SCC 670
39
50.       In so far the second and third issues are

concerned, it is by now well settled that once a resolution

plan is duly approved by the adjudicating authority under

sub-section (1) of
Section 31
, all claims which are not part of

the resolution plan shall stand extinguished and no person

will be entitled to initiate or continue any proceeding in

respect to a claim which is not part of the resolution plan.
In

fact, this Court in
Essar Steel India Ltd.
(supra) had

categorically declared that a successful resolution applicant

cannot be faced with undecided claims after the resolution

plan is accepted. Otherwise, this would amount to a hydra

head popping up which would throw into uncertainty the

amount payable by the resolution applicant. In so far the

resolution plan is concerned, the resolution professional, the

committee of creditors and the adjudicating authority noted

about the claim lodged by the respondent in the arbitration

proceeding. However, the respondent was not included in the

top 30 operational creditors whose claims were settled at nil.

This can only mean that the three authorities conducting the

corporate insolvency resolution process did not deem it

appropriate to include the respondent in the top 30

operational creditors. If the claims of the top 30 operational
40
creditors were settled at nil, it goes without saying that the

claim of the respondent could not be placed higher than the

said top 30 operational creditors. Moreover, the resolution

plan itself provides that all claims covered by any suit, cause

of action, arbitration etc. shall be settled at nil. Therefore, it

is crystal clear that in so far claim of the respondent is

concerned, the same would be treated as nil at par with the

claims of the top 30 operational creditors.
50.1.       Lifting of the moratorium does not mean that the

claim of the respondent would stand revived notwithstanding

approval of the resolution plan by the adjudicating authority.

Moratorium is intended to ensure that no further demands

are raised or adjudicated upon during the corporate

insolvency resolution process so that the process can be

proceeded     with     and        concluded   without     further

complications. View taken by the High Court cannot be

accepted in the light of the clear cut provisions of the IBC as

well as the law
laid down by
this Court. In view of the

resolution plan, as approved, the claim of the respondent

stood extinguished. Therefore, the Facilitation Council did

not have the jurisdiction to arbitrate on the said claim. Since
41
the award was passed without jurisdiction, the same could

be assailed in a proceeding under
Section 47
CPC. View taken

by the High Court that because the appellant did not

challenge the award under Section 34 of the 1996 Act,

therefore, it was precluded from objecting to execution of the

award at the stage of
Section 47
of CPC is wholly

unsustainable.
51.         Consequently, the view taken by the High Court

that notwithstanding approval of the resolution plan by the

NCLT, the Facilitation Council did not lose jurisdiction to

proceed and pronounce the arbitral award, is erroneous and

contrary to the law
laid down by
this Court.
52.         In that view of the matter, we have no hesitation

to hold that upon approval of the resolution plan by the

NCLT, the claim of the respondent being outside the purview

of the resolution plan stood extinguished. Therefore, the

award dated 06.07.2018 is incapable of being executed.

Consequently, the order dated 03.03.2023 passed by the

Presiding   Officer,   Commercial   Court/District   Judge-1,

Bokaro in Commercial Execution Case No. 21 of 2022

(Execution Case No. 77 of 2018) is hereby set aside.
42
Execution proceedings in Commercial Execution Case No. 21

of 2022 (Execution Case No. 77 of 2018) pending in the Court

of Presiding Officer, Commercial Court/District Judge-1,

Bokaro, are hereby quashed. Resultantly, impugned order of

the High Court dated 17.07.2023 is also set aside.
53.       Appeal is accordingly allowed. However, there

shall be no order as to cost.
………………………………J.
                                        [ABHAY S. OKA]


                                    .……………………………J.
                                        [UJJAL BHUYAN]
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 21, 2025.
43