[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Renuka vs State Of Karnataka on 29 April, 2025
Author:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Reportable
 2025 INSC 596
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.            OF 2025
                              (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No. ________OF 2025)
                                         (@ D.No.55944 OF 2024)


                  Renuka                                               .…Appellant(s)

                                                   Versus


                State of Karnataka and Anr.                         …. Respondent(s)


                                                 JUDGMENT
Joymalya Bagchi, J.
1. Delay condoned. Leave granted.
2. Appellant-wife has challenged the impugned order whereby the

                           High Court quashed proceeding in CC No. 163 of 2021 dated

                           03.02.2021 under Sections 498-A, 324, 355, 504, 506 read with
Section 149
of the Indian Penal Code, 18601 against the

                           respondent-husband.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
KAPIL TANDON
Date: 2025.04.29
18:44:14 IST
Reason:
1
Hereinafter referred to as ‘
IPC
’.
1
3. The aforesaid case was registered on the written complaint lodged

  by the appellant-wife alleging as follows:-
(i)     Marriage between the appellant and respondent was

          solemnized in 2012.
(ii)    Two children were born to the couple.
(iii)   Respondent-husband developed illicit relation with one

          Bharati Halamani Tamadaddi and the latter abused the

          appellant in filthy language four months prior to the incident.
She reported the matter to Teradal Police Station but no

          complaint was lodged.
(iv)    Respondent-husband        and   other   in-laws   harassed   her

          physically and mentally and demanded two lakhs dowry.
(v)     Due to ill treatment and demand of dowry, the appellant

          started residing at her parental home at Telasang.
(vi)    On 27.10.2020, Respondent-husband and other in-laws

          came in a car to her parental home and threw chilli powder

          in her eyes, abused her and her relations in filthy language

          and assaulted them with slippers and stones. Neighbours,

          including one Suvarna Andri, intervened and rescued them.
2
4. During investigation, Police recovered slippers and stones from the

               place of occurrence.         Statements of witnesses including the

               neighbour Suvarna Andri were recorded and charge sheet was filed

               against respondent-husband and in-laws.
5. The in-laws assailed the proceeding2 before the High Court. A

               Single Judge partly allowed the petition and quashed the

               proceeding       against    the       septuagenarian   parents-in-law   but

               permitted the proceeding to continue against other in-laws.
6. Subsequently, respondent-husband prayed for quashing3 before

               another co-ordinate single bench which came to be allowed.
7. We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the

               records.
8. The case at hand portrays a disturbing picture. While one judge

               refused to quash proceeding against the in-laws, inter alia,

               observing wound certificate demonstrates the appellant was

               assaulted and suffered simple injuries, another judge by the

               impugned order quashed the proceeding against respondent-

               husband holding the medical certificate was not consistent with
2
Criminal Petition No. 101599 of 2021
3
Criminal Petition No. 101591 of 2021
3
the allegations in the complaint i.e. the wound certificate does not

              show the injuries were caused by a blunt weapon.
9. Having perused the impugned judgment, we are of the view the

              judge erred in law by embarking upon an enquiry with regard to

              the    credibility   or     otherwise   of   the   allegations     in   the

              FIR/Chargesheet.       The Judge compared the nature of assault

              described in the FIR vis-à-vis wound certificate and came to a

              finding that the allegations are untrue. In doing so, the Judge had

              undertaken a mini trial to quash the proceeding which is

              impermissible in law.
10.
In
R.P. Kapur v. State of Punjab4
this Court enumerated the

              category of cases where inherent powers may be invoked to quash

              criminal proceeding. One such category is where there is no legal

              evidence adduced in support of the allegations made against the

              accused or the allegations or such evidence manifestly fails to

              prove the charge.         Elaborating further with regard to scope of

              enquiry to determine this category of cases, the Court held as

              follows:-
“6. ………………. In dealing with this class of cases it is important
                  to bear in mind the distinction between a case where there is no
4
1960 SCC OnLine SC 21.
4
legal evidence or where there is evidence which is manifestly and
                clearly inconsistent with the accusation made and cases where
                there is legal evidence which on its appreciation may or may not
                support the accusation in question. In exercising its jurisdiction
                under Section 561-A the High Court would not embark upon an
                enquiry as to whether the evidence in question is reliable or not.
                That is the function of the trial Magistrate, and ordinarily it would
                not be open to any party to invoke the High Court's inherent ju-
                risdiction and contend that on a reasonable appreciation of the
                evidence the accusation made against the accused would not be
                sustained………..”
                                                                   (emphasis supplied)
11. This view has been consistently followed and in a catena of cases5

            this Court has repeatedly forbidden the High Court from

            embarking on a ‘mini trial’ in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction

            to quash proceeding.
12. Applying the ratio to the facts of the case, we have no hesitation

            to hold the allegation of throwing chilli powder and assault on the

            appellant by respondent-husband and other in-laws is not only

            supported by the wound certificate which discloses simple injury

            but also the statement of the neighbour, Suvarna Andri. Given

            this situation, it cannot be said the case falls in the category of

            those cases where there is no legal evidence or evidence is
5
Neeharika Infrastructure Private Limited v. State of Maharashtra and Others
2021 SCC OnLine SC
315, (Para 10.7);
State of Odisha v. Pratima Mohanty and Others
2021 SCC OnLine SC 1222, (Para
8.2);
State of Uttar Pradesh and Another v. Akhil Sharda and Others
2022 SCC OnLine SC 820, (Para
18);
State v. M. Maridoss and Another
2023 SCC OnLine SC 47, (Para 7);
Central Bureau of
Investigation v. Aryan Singh and Others
2023 SCC OnLine SC 379, (Para 6);
Dharambeer Kumar Singh
v. State of Jharkhand and Another
2024 SCC OnLine SC 1894, (Para 17);
Ranjeet Mittal v. State of
Madhya Pradesh
2024 SCC OnLine SC 2926, (Para 19).
5
“manifestly and clearly inconsistent” with the accusation levelled

  in the chargesheet.
13. It is nobody’s case no injury was noted in the wound certificate,

  rendering the allegation of assault patently absurd or inherently

  improbable. In this backdrop, it was unwarranted for the judge to

  embark on a mini trial to weigh the ocular version vis-à-vis medical

  evidence and quash the proceeding. Whether the ocular evidence

  is fully incompatible with medical evidence is a matter of trial and

  cannot be a ground to terminate prosecution at the initial stage.
14. In support of quashing the Judge had also observed that it is

  unclear from the allegations who had perpetrated the assault and

  the prosecution during the pendency of a matrimonial suit was

  nothing but an abuse of process of Court.       These grounds are

  equally untenable.
15. Respondent-husband and other in-laws (except parents-in-law)

  have been alleged to have acted in concert and conjointly assaulted

  the appellant and her relations. When multiple accused share

  common intention/common object to commit a crime, it is

  irrelevant to determine the exact role played by each of them in the
6
assault. Learned Judge failed to appreciate the uncontroverted

  allegations in the chargesheet attracted constructive liability and

  the proceeding could not be quashed on the score it is unclear who

  had perpetrated the assault.
16. The Judge also misdirected himself in coming to a finding that

  the proceeding was malicious and an abuse of the process of court

  as proceedings were pending before the matrimonial court.

  Offences involving cruelty on wife would invariably arise out of

  matrimonial disputes. Accordingly, pendency of matrimonial

  proceeding between the parties cannot per se lead to an inference

  that institution of criminal proceeding alleging assault supported

  by medical evidence and independent witness is a product of

  malice and abuse of court.
17. Finally, it is argued there are case and counter case and

  proceeding against parents-in-law have been quashed by the co-

  ordinate bench. Noting the parents-in-law are septuagenarian and

  there is no whisper in the FIR that they participated in the assault,

  proceeding against them was quashed. Uncontroverted allegations

  in the FIR/Chargesheet unequivocally implicate respondent-

  husband in the assault. He stands on the same footing with the
7
other in-laws i.e. brother-in-law/sisters-in-law against whom the

  proceeding was not quashed in Criminal Petition No. 101599 of

  2021. Though the order refusing to quash the proceeding against

  some of the in-laws was passed earlier, it is inexplicable why there

  is no reference to the said order in the impugned order quashing

  proceeding against the respondent-husband. It was incumbent on

  the Judge while quashing the proceeding against the respondent-

  husband to refer to the earlier decision of the co-ordinate bench

  and distinguish the reasons therein to arrive at a different

  conclusion.    Failure to do so infracts judicial propriety and

  discipline. Consistency in judicial outcomes is the hallmark of a

  responsible judiciary.    Inconsistent decisions coming out from

  different benches shake public trust and reduce litigation to a

  punter’s game. It gives rise to various insidious sharp practices

  like forum shopping spoiling the clear stream of justice. Impugned

  order suffers from the vice of judicial caprice and arbitrariness and

  is liable to be set aside also on this score.
18. For the aforesaid reasons, we set aside the order dated

  16.02.2024 and the proceeding against the respondent-husband
8
(R2) are revived and shall continue in accordance with law.

    Consequently, the appeal is allowed.
….……..…..……...……………………….J.
                             (PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA)



                              ….……..…..……...……………………….J.
                                         (JOYMALYA BAGCHI)
New Delhi,
April 29, 2025
9