[Cites
5
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Ayyub Ali vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 17 April, 2025
Author:
Sanjay Kumar
Bench:
Sanjay Kumar
SLP(Crl.) No. 13433/2024

                                                                                                NON-REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 568
                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                           CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.      OF 2025
                                  (arising out of SLP(Crl.) No. 13433 of 2024)


        AYYUB ALI                                                          .....                APPELLANT(S)

                                                VERSUS

        STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ORS.                                      .....            RESPONDENT(S)



                                                     O R D E R
Leave granted.
Learned counsel for the appellant, Ayyub Ali ,                the    father       of

        the deceased, Ziyahur/Ziyahul/Ziaul Rahman, submits that this is a

        case of honour killing, wherein the deceased, Ziyahur/Ziyahul/Ziaul

        Rahman, was attacked with sticks and rods. The intention to commit

        murder is also clear from the number and nature of the injuries

        mentioned in the postmortem report.
We have examined the postmortem report, which records that

        the                 deceased,   Ziyahur/Ziyahul/Ziaul         Rahman,      aged   26     years,      had

        suffered 14 antemortem injuries on different parts of the body,

        including                several    blows   to   the       head.   The   report    thus     mentions

        severe dural hematoma under the left parietal and frontal bone. The
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Deepak Guglani
Date: 2025.04.25
10:58:40 IST
cause of death is stated to be shock and haemorrhage.
Reason:
1
SLP(Crl.) No. 13433/2024
In the chargesheet filed by the investigating officer, charges

were framed only under
Section 304
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 1

against the accused persons. The appellant, Ayyub Ali, had filed an

application before the Additional Sessions Judge, praying that the

charges should be framed under
Section 302
read with
Section 34
of

the IPC instead. In his application, the appellant, Ayyub Ali,

submitted that the deceased, Ziyahur/Ziyahul/Ziaul Rahman, was hit

with sticks/rods and baseball bats, and at least 6 injuries were

suffered   on   soft     parts     of   the       body,   including   the    head.      The

appellant,      Ayyub     Ali,     also       submitted       that    the      deceased,

Ziyahur/Ziyahul/Ziaul Rahman, had suffered dural hematoma on left

side of the head and the parietal and frontal bone was fractured,

and that these antemortem injuries had resulted in death.
While   the      postmortem    report        records   the   presence     of    dural

hematoma, it does not mention that the parietal and frontal bone

was fractured.
On the question of the place of occurrence, there is no doubt

or debate.
We find it surprising that the chargesheet was filed invoking

only
Section 304
of the IPC, and that at the stage of framing of

the charge, the trial court also framed the charge only under
Section 304
of the IPC. The trial court made a cursory observation

that though the deceased had suffered 14 injuries, they were not


1 “
IPC
”, for short.
2
SLP(Crl.) No. 13433/2024
inflicted by a sharp-edged weapon or firearm but by sticks, etc.,

and therefore, there is no prima facie basis for framing a charge

under
Section 302
read with
Section 34
of the IPC.
While examining the aspects that the Court must take into

consideration while framing charge(s), in
Ghulam Hassan Beigh v.

Mohd. Maqbool Magrey & Ors.,2
this Court observed that the Court

undoubtedly has the power to sift through and weigh the evidence

for the limited purpose of finding out whether or not a prima facie

case   is   made   out.    When   the     materials   placed   before    the    Court

disclose a grave suspicion, which is not properly explained, the

Court would be justified in framing a charge and proceeding with

the trial. Specifically dealing with the question as to whether a

charge should be framed under
Section 304
or
Section 302
of the

IPC, it was observed as under: -
“33. Whether the case falls under
Section 302
or 304
        Part II,
IPC
could have been decided by the trial court
        only after the evaluation of the entire oral evidence
        that may be led by the prosecution as well as by the
        defence,   if     any,    comes    on   record.   Ultimately,    upon
        appreciation of the entire evidence on record at the
        end of the trial, the trial court may take one view or
        the other i.e. whether it is a case of murder or case
        of culpable homicide. But at the stage of framing of
        the charge, the trial court could not have reached to
        such a conclusion merely relying upon the post-mortem
        report on record. The High Court also overlooked such
2 (2022) 12 SCC 657.
3
SLP(Crl.) No. 13433/2024
fundamental infirmity in the order passed by the trial
       court and proceeded to affirm the same.”


      In this case, on the basis of the facts noted above, we find

that the charge should have been framed under
Section 302
and not

under
Section 304
of the IPC, as was erroneously done by the trial

court and subsequently affirmed by the High Court.
The impugned judgments of the High Court and the trial court

are   accordingly   set      aside,    and    the   appeal     is    allowed     in    the

aforesaid terms.
Fresh   charge   will    be     framed    under
Section      302
read       with
Section 34
of the IPC, and the trial will proceed accordingly.
We, however, clarify that the observations made in the present

order will not be read as observations and findings on the merits

of the case. The trial will proceed in accordance with law and the

decision of the trial court would be on the evidence led and the

materials placed before it.
Keeping in view the nature of the allegations and the manner

in which the trial has proceeded, we direct the State of Uttar

Pradesh to appoint a Special Prosecutor to conduct the trial, after

consultation   with    the    appellant,       Ayyub    Ali,   the    father      of    the

deceased. The said exercise will be completed within a period of

six weeks from the date a copy of this order is served on the Chief
4
SLP(Crl.) No. 13433/2024
Secretary,   State     of   Uttar   Pradesh.     A   compliance   report       to    the

aforesaid effect will be filed in this Court.


    It   will     be    open   to   the       private   respondents,       that      is,

respondent Nos. 2 to 5, to move an application for grant of bail

before the trial Court in view of the amended charge. The said

application for bail will be considered on its own merits within a

period of three weeks from the date of filing. Till the application

is decided, respondent Nos. 2 to 5 need not be taken into custody.


    Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
.................CJI
                                                                (SANJIV KHANNA)


                                                           ..................J.
                                                                 (SANJAY KUMAR)
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 17, 2025.
5