[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Muppidi Lakshmi Narayana Reddy vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh on 23 April, 2025
Author:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
Bench:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
1


2025 INSC 562
                                                                     REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(s). __________ OF 2025
                               (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No(s). 2570 of 2018)


             MUPPIDI LAKSHMI NARAYANA
             REDDY & ORS.                                         ... APPELLANTS

                                                VERSUS


             THE STATE OF ANDHRA
             PRADESH & ANR.                                      ...RESPONDENTS



                                             JUDGMENT
PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA, J.
Leave granted.
2.             In the present appeal the appellants have challenged the

             order passed by the High Court whereby their petition under
Signature Not Verified
Section 482
Cr.P.C for quashing proceedings in C.C. No. 359 of
Digitally signed by
SAPNA BISHT
Date: 2025.04.23
18:05:10 IST
Reason:
2
2016 on the file of the Special Judicial Magistrate, Ist Class for

Prohibition & Excise Cases, Guntur was dismissed.
3.   The appellant No.1 (A4) is the sister-in-law of the de-facto

complainant, appellant No. 2 (A5) is the husband of A4 and

appellant No. 3 (A6) is the father-in-law of appellant No. 1

(A4).
4.   The marriage between de-facto complainant (respondent

no. 2) with Challa Poornananda Reddy (A1) was solemnised on

24.05.2014 at Guntur. After five months of the marriage, the

de-facto complainant left the company of her husband and

joined her parents to live at her parental house at Vidyanagar,

Guntur. On persuasion, she joined her husband but again went

back to her parental house and this act continued for some

more time compelling the husband to send a legal notice

followed by a petition for restitution of conjugal rights on

18.02.2015. During the pendency of this proceeding, she

lodged a complaint before the concerned police on 13.02.2016.

However, on intervention of elders a compromise was arrived at

on 02.04.2015 and the husband (A1) withdrew the case of

restitution of conjugal rights and the de-facto complainant also

withdrew her complaint before the concerned police.
3
5.    She later left for USA without intimating the husband or

his family members and the dispute continued. The husband

moved a petition for dissolution of marriage on 21.06.2016 and

as a counterblast she again lodged a police complaint bearing

FIR No. 79 of 2016 against six accused persons including the

present appellants.
6.    It is the case of the appellants that they are nowhere

connected with the dispute between the husband and the wife

or the husband’s family members. The appellants are residing

at Hyderabad. On the complaint of the father of the respondent

no. 2 (de–facto complainant) an offence under
Section 66C
of

the Information Technology Act       was registered against the

husband (A1) which is pending as CC No. 775 of 2016 before

the   learned   Special   Judicial   First-Class   Magistrate   for

Prohibition and Excise, Gunturu, Andhra Pradesh. It is further

case of the appellants that accused no. 4 is a housewife,

accused no. 5 is a Software Engineer in a Private Software

Company and accused no. 6 is a Central Government employee

and all are stationed at Hyderabad having no connection or

intervention with the dispute between the de-facto complainant

and her husband.
4
7.   The High Court refused to allow the quashing petition on

the ground that there are allegations against the appellants for

which a trial is required and the same cannot be disbelieved at

this stage.
8.   Having heard learned counsel for the parties and on

perusal of record it appears that there are omnibus and general

allegations against the appellants. As per complaint, although,

they reside at Hyderabad, they used to visit Guntur and during

such visit they used to instigate accused no. 1/husband and his

parents and would also join in demanding dowry.       The initial

allegation is of demand of Rs. 5,00,000/- made against

accused No. 4/appellant no. 1 with further statement that they

used to taunt that if accused no. 1 would have married

somewhere else, he would have got Rs. 10 crores dowry. There

is no allegation of any physical torture being perpetrated by the

present appellants. The allegation is only of taunt and

statement that they are highly placed having political influence

and connection with Ministers as such they instigated accused

no. 1 to accused no. 3 to pressurise the de-facto complainant

to get additional dowry.
5
9.        There is no denial of the fact that the appellants reside at

Hyderabad whereas the de-facto complainant stayed at Guntur

in her marital house. There is no specific date as to when the

present appellants visited Guntur and joined accused nos. 1 to

3 in demanding dowry from de-facto complainant. Considering

the growing trend of the dowry victim arraigning the relatives

of the husband, this Court in the matter of
Geeta Mehrotra &

Anr. vs. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.1
has deprecated the

practice involving the relatives of the husband for the offence

under
Section 498A
IPC and
Section 4
of Dowry Prohibition Act,

1961. The following has been held in para 18:
“18. Their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Ramesh
               case [(2005) 3 SCC 507 : 2005 SCC (Cri) 735] had
               been pleased to hold that the bald allegations made
               against the sister-in-law by the complainant appeared
               to suggest the anxiety of the informant to rope in as
               many of the husband's relatives as possible. It was held
               that neither the FIR nor the charge-sheet furnished the
               legal basis for the Magistrate to take cognizance of the
               offences alleged against the appellants. The learned
               Judges were pleased to hold that looking to the
               allegations in the FIR and the contents of the charge-
               sheet, none of the alleged offences under Sections 498-
               A, 406
IPC
and
Section 4
of the Dowry Prohibition Act
               were made against the married sister of the
               complainant's husband who was undisputedly not living
               with the family of the complainant's husband. Their
               Lordships of the Supreme Court were pleased to hold
               that the High Court ought not to have relegated the
               sister-in-law to the ordeal of trial. Accordingly, the
1
(2012) 10 SCC 741
6
proceedings against the appellants were quashed and
               the appeal was allowed.”
10.
In a recent judgment in the matter of
Dara Lakshmi

Narayana & Ors. vs. State of Telangana & Anr.2
, this Court

has again reiterated and deprecated the practice of involving

the relatives of the husband in dowry related matters. The

following has been held in paras 24, 25, 28, 30, 31 & 32:
“24. Insofar as appellant Nos.2 to 6 are concerned, we
               find that they have no connection to the matter at hand
               and have been dragged into the web of crime without
               any rhyme or reason. A perusal of the FIR would
               indicate that no substantial and specific allegations
               have been made against appellant Nos.2 to 6 other
               than stating that they used to instigate appellant No.1
               for demanding more dowry. It is also an admitted fact
               that they never resided with the couple namely
               appellant No.1 and respondent No.2 and their children.
               Appellant Nos.2 and 3 resided together at Guntakal,
               Andhra Pradesh. Appellant Nos.4 to 6 live in Nellore,
               Bengaluru and Guntur respectively.
25. A mere reference to the names of family members
               in a criminal case arising out of a matrimonial dispute,
               without specific allegations indicating their active
               involvement should be nipped in the bud. It is a well-
recognised fact, borne out of judicial experience, that
               there is often a tendency to implicate all the members
               of the husband’s family when domestic disputes arise
               out of a matrimonial discord. Such generalised and
               sweeping accusations unsupported by concrete
               evidence or particularised allegations cannot form the
               basis for criminal prosecution. Courts must exercise
               caution in such cases to prevent misuse of legal
               provisions and the legal process and avoid unnecessary
               harassment of innocent family members. In the present
               case, appellant Nos.2 to 6, who are the members of the
               family of appellant No.1 have been living in different
               cities and have not resided in the matrimonial house of
2
(2024) INSC 953: (2024) 12 SCR 559
7
appellant No.1 and respondent No.2 herein. Hence,
they cannot be dragged into criminal prosecution and
the same would be an abuse of the process of the law
in the absence of specific allegations made against each
of them.
28. The inclusion of
Section 498A
of the IPC by way of
an amendment was intended to curb cruelty inflicted on
a woman by her husband and his family, ensuring swift
intervention by the State. However, in recent years, as
there have been a notable rise in matrimonial disputes
across the country, accompanied by growing discord
and tension within the institution of marriage,
consequently, there has been a growing tendency to
misuse provisions like
Section 498A
of the IPC as a tool
for unleashing personal vendetta against the husband
and his family by a wife. Making vague and generalised
allegations during matrimonial conflicts, if not
scrutinized, will lead to the misuse of legal processes
and an encouragement for use of arm-twisting tactics
by a wife and/or her family. Sometimes, recourse is
taken to invoke
Section 498A
of the IPC against the
husband and his family in order to seek compliance
with    the   unreasonable    demands     of   a   wife.
Consequently, this Court has, time and again, cautioned
against prosecuting the husband and his family in the
absence of a clear prima facie case against them.
30.
In the above context, this Court in
G.V. Rao vs.
L.H.V. Prasad
(2000) 3 SCC 693 observed as follows:
“12. There has been an outburst of
     matrimonial disputes in recent times. Marriage
     is a sacred ceremony, the main purpose of
     which is to enable the young couple to settle
     down in life and live peacefully. But little
     matrimonial skirmishes suddenly erupt which
     often assume serious proportions resulting in
     commission of heinous crimes in which elders
     of the family are also involved with the result
     that those who could have counselled and
     brought about rapprochement are rendered
     helpless on their being arrayed as accused in
     the criminal case. There are many other
     reasons which need not be mentioned here for
     not encouraging matrimonial litigation so that
     the parties may ponder over their defaults and
     terminate their disputes amicably by mutual
8
agreement instead of fighting it out in a court
           of law where it takes years and years to
           conclude and in that process the parties lose
           their “young” days in chasing their “cases” in
           different courts.”
31. Further, this Court in
Preeti Gupta vs. State of
       Jharkhand
(2010) 7 SCC 667 held that the courts have
       to be extremely careful and cautious in dealing with
       these complaints and must take pragmatic realties into
       consideration while dealing with matrimonial cases. The
       allegations of harassment by the husband’s close
       relatives who had been living in different cities and
       never visited or rarely visited the place where the
       complainant resided would have an entirely different
       complexion. The allegations of the complainant are
       required to be scrutinized with great care and
       circumspection.
32. We, therefore, are of the opinion that the impugned
       FIR No.82 of 2022 filed by respondent No.2 was
       initiated with ulterior motives to settle personal scores
       and grudges against appellant No.1 and his family
       members i.e., appellant Nos.2 to 6 herein. Hence, the
       present case at hand falls within category (7) of
       illustrative parameters highlighted in Bhajan Lal.
       Therefore, the High Court, in the present case, erred in
       not exercising the powers available to it under
Section
       482
CrPC and thereby failed to prevent abuse of the
       Court’s process by continuing the criminal prosecution
       against the appellants.”
11. In the present case also, it is an admitted position that

the appellants are residing at Hyderabad whereas the de-facto

complainant stayed in her marital house at Guntur at the

relevant point of time. She is presently staying in USA. There

is omnibus allegation against the appellants that they too used
9
to demand dowry or instigate accused nos. 1 to 3 who are not

before us, in demanding dowry.
12. Considering the entire facts of the case, we are of the

view, having relied on this Court’s previous decisions in
Geeta

Mehrotra
(supra) &
Dara Lakshmi Narayana
(supra), the

present criminal case against the appellants deserves to be

quashed. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed and Criminal Case

No. 359 of 2016 against the appellants is quashed.
………………………………………J.
                              (AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH)



                               .......……………………………….J.
                             (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA)
NEW DELHI;
APRIL23, 2025.