[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
K. Valarmathi vs Kumaresan on 29 April, 2025
Author:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
2025 INSC 606                                                                   Reportable

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO.           OF 2025
                                  (Arising out of SLP (C) No.21466 of 2024)

                            K. Valarmathi & Ors.                        …..Appellant(s)

                                                     VERSUS

                            Kumaresan                                   …..Respondent(s)


                                                JUDGMENT
Joymalya Bagchi, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. Can the High Court in exercise of its supervisory jurisdiction

                            under
Article 227
reject a plaint?
3. Short factual compass giving rise to the issue is as follows:
Appellants are the legal heirs i.e. wife and daughters of one

                             Kathiresan (since deceased). Kathiresan purchased the nanja

                             suit land from his own funds in the name of the respondent i.e.

                             his nephew. He had done so on astrological advice. During his

                             lifetime, Kathiresan was in possession of the suit land and

                             thereafter appellants claim to be in possession of the said land.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
KAPIL TANDON
Date: 2025.04.30
18:02:56 IST
After the death of Kathiresan, disputes broke out between the
   Reason:
Page 1 of 6
appellants on one hand and sisters of Kathiresan on the other,

        in respect of ownership of the suit land and other businesses.

        The respondent, who is the son of one of the sisters of late

        Kathiresan, initiated negotiations for sale of the suit land. This

        prompted the appellants to file O.S. No. 1087 of 20181 seeking

        a declaration regarding title and consequential injunction

        against the respondent from encumbering the suit land. Other

        lands purchased by Kathiresan from his own funds in the

        name/joint name with other family members, were the subject

        matter of another O.S. No. 201 of 20182 instituted by the

        appellants.
4. Respondent took out petitions3 under
Article 227
of the

       Constitution before the High Court praying for rejection of plaint

       in both the suits.
5. High Court by the impugned order, inter alia, rejected the plaint

       in the present suit, holding the suit is barred by law i.e.

       Prohibition of Benami Property Transactions Act, 19884. With

       regard to the other suit the High Court was of the view the suit

       was not barred under the
Benami Act
and declined the relief.

1 Hereinafter, ‘the present suit’.
2 Hereinafter, ‘the other suit’.
3 CRP (MD) 125 of 2019 in O.S. No. 201 of 2018 and CRP (MD) 210 of 2019 in O.S. No.

 1087 of 2018.
4 In short,
Benami Act
.
Page 2 of 6
6. Appellants have challenged the jurisdiction of the High Court to

  reject the plaint in exercise of its supervisory powers under
Article 227
of the Constitution.
7. Heard Mr. M. Gireesh Kumar, learned Counsel for the appellant

  and Mr. R. Baskaran, learned Senior Counsel for the

  respondent.   Mr. V. Prabhakar, learned Senior Counsel also

  assisted the Court as Amicus Curiae. Mr. Prabhakar contends

  the High Court erred in law invoking the supervisory jurisdiction

  under
Article 227
of the Constitution to reject the plaint.
8. Power of the High Court under
Article 227
is supervisory and is

  exercised to ensure courts and tribunals under its supervision

  act within the limits of their jurisdiction conferred by law. This

  power is to be sparingly exercised in cases where errors are

  apparent on the face of record, occasioning grave injustice by

  the court or tribunal assuming jurisdiction which it does not

  have, failing to exercise jurisdiction which it does have, or

  exercising its jurisdiction in a perverse manner.
9. Essence of the power under
Article 227
being supervisory, it

  cannot be invoked to usurp the original jurisdiction of the court

  which it seeks to supervise. Nor can it be invoked to supplant a
Page 3 of 6
statutory legal remedy under the Civil Procedure Code, 19085.
For example, existence of appellate remedy under Section 96 of

       the Code operates as a near total bar to exercise of supervisory

       jurisdiction under Article 2276.
10. Civil Procedure Code is a self-contained Code and Order VII Rule

       11 therein enumerates the circumstances in which the trial

       court may reject a plaint. Such rejection amounts to a deemed

       decree which is appealable before the High Court under Section

       96 of the Code. This statutory scheme cannot be upended by

       invoking supervisory jurisdiction of the High Court under
Article

       227
to entertain a prayer for rejection of plaint.
11. In the present case, High Court has supervened the provisions

       of the Code when it rejected the plaint on the ground it was

       barred by law. In doing so, the High Court not only substituted

       itself as the court of first instance but also rendered nugatory a

       valuable right to appeal available to the appellant had the issue

       been adjudicated by the trial court in the first place.
12. We are conscious appellate remedy against rejection of plaint is

       not available if the High Court had in its revisional jurisdiction


5 In short, ‘the
Code’
6 Virudhunagar Hindu Nadargal Dharma Paribalana Sabai v. Tuticorin Educational Society
,

(2019) 9 SCC 538
Page 4 of 6
reversed the order of trial court and rejected the plaint.
In
Frost

       (International) Ltd. v. Milan Developers7
, this Court observed as

       follows:-
“31. No doubt rejection of a plaint is a decree within the meaning of
Section 2(2)
CPC and an appeal lies from every decree passed by any
              court exercising original jurisdiction to the court authorised to hear
              appeals from a decision of such court. However, it must be borne in
              mind that when a Revisional Court rejects a plaint, in substance,
              an application filed under Order 7 Rule 11 is being allowed. Under
              such circumstances, the remedy by way of a writ petition under
Article 227
of the Constitution could be availed and Respondent
              1/the plaintiff has resorted to the said remedy in the instant case;
              although if the plaint had been rejected by the trial court i.e. court
              of original jurisdiction, it would have resulted in a right of appeal
              under
Section 96
CPC.”
13.    These observations in
Frost
(supra) are not relevant for the

       matter in issue as the High Court in the present case had not

       exercised its supervisory power to correct a jurisdictional error

       of the trial court but usurped its original jurisdiction to reject

       the plaint.
14.    Procedural law provides the necessary legal infrastructure on

       which edifice of rule of law is built. Short-circuiting of procedure

       to reach hasty outcomes is an undesirable propensity of an

       overburdened judiciary. Such impulses rendering procedural

       safeguards and substantive rights otiose, subvert certainty and

       consistency in law and need to be discouraged.
7 (2022) 8 SCC 633.
Page 5 of 6
15.   Similar issue fell for decision in
Jacky v. Tiny @ Antony & Ors.8
when a tenant (non-party to the suit) prayed for rejection of an

      alleged collusive suit between the legal heirs of his erstwhile

      landlord and the new purchaser under Article 226/227.

      Deprecating invocation of constitutional powers in a landlord-

      tenant dispute, the Court observed: -
“15. …If a suit is not maintainable it was well within the
             jurisdiction of the High Court to decide the same in appropriate
             proceedings but in no case power under
Articles 226
and
227
of
             the Constitution of India can be exercised to question a plaint.”
16.   In light of the aforesaid discussion, we set aside the impugned

      judgment dated 11.07.2024 passed by the High Court and allow

      the appeal. We make it clear that we have not expressed any

      opinion regarding merits of the plea of the respondent for

      rejection of plaint and give liberty to seek necessary relief before

      the trial court in accordance with law, if so advised.
….……..…..……...……………………….J.
                                    (PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA)


                                    ….……..…..……...……………………….J.
                                                (JOYMALYA BAGCHI)
New Delhi,
April 29, 2025




8 (2014) 6 SCC 508
Page 6 of 6