[Cites
39
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Uttar Pradesh vs Ram Prakash Singh on 23 April, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
,
Dipankar Datta
2025 INSC 555                                                                      REPORTABLE



                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 14724/2024



            STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH THROUGH
            PRINCIPAL SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF
            PANCHAYATI RAJ, LUCKNOW                                           …APPELLANT

                                                        VERSUS



            RAM PRAKASH SINGH                                                 …RESPONDENT



                                                    JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
THE CHALLENGE
1.              The challenge in this appeal, by special leave, is to a judgment and

                            order dated 19th October, 20191 of the High Court of Judicature at

                            Allahabad2. It is laid by the State of Uttar Pradesh, the unsuccessful

                            writ petitioner3. The impugned order dismissed the writ petition4 of

                            the appellant, wherein the final order of the Uttar Pradesh State
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
rashmi dhyani pant
Date: 2025.04.23
17:40:08 IST
Reason: 1  impugned order
2
High Court
3
appellant
4
Writ Petition (S/B) No. 28859/2019
1
Public Services Tribunal5 dated 19th November, 2018 was under
challenge. The Tribunal set aside the order of punishment dated 24th

     March, 2015 imposing a penalty of Rs. 10.25 lakh along with a 5%

     reduction in pension for five years on Ram Prakash Singh6.
FACTUAL MATRIX
2.   The facts of the case are of great significance given the key

     arguments advanced by the parties. Hence, we find it appropriate to

     briefly narrate the events having a bearing on our decision before

     proceeding to examine the merits of the rival claims. The vital facts,

     as culled out from the records, to decide the appeal are as follows:
I.   The respondent was serving as an Assistant Engineer in

              District Panchayat, Kushinagar in 2004-2005.
II.   According to the appellant, the respondent had engaged in

              embezzlement of panchayat funds to the tune of Rs. 2.5 crore

              in relation to certain drainage and road construction projects.
In cahoots with the incumbent Junior Engineer, Ram Kripal

              Singh, the respondent had created sham work records and

              siphoned off panchayat funds.
III.   Consequently,   in   December,    2005,   the   Commissioner,

              Gorakhpur Division7 was appointed to make a preliminary

              enquiry. He directed the Technical Audit Cell and Divisional
5
Tribunal
6
Respondent
7
Enquiry Officer
2
Technical Examiner to determine the existence and extent of

        financial irregularities committed by the respondent.
IV.    The Technical Audit Cell submitted the financial audit report

        dated 16th January, 2006, which found the respondent to have

        verified fake records of work created by the said Ram Kripal,

        Junior Engineer. Vide another report dated 23rd February

        2006, it was opined that there was a loss of Rs. 30.083 lakh

        to the exchequer on account of the misconduct committed by

        the respondent and others and that the respondent being

        responsible for 35% of the said loss, Rs. 10.25 lakh was the

        amount recoverable from him.
V.    On 12th April, 2006, the respondent was placed under

        suspension in contemplation of disciplinary proceedings.
VI.    Respondent was served with a chargesheet dated 24th August,

        2006. Five charges were framed against him. The audit

        reports dated 16th January, 2006 and 23rd February 2006

        constituted the basis for the charges.
VII.    A challenge laid by the respondent to the order of suspension

        dated 12th April, 2006 before the High Court in its writ

        jurisdiction resulted in his reinstatement in service on 24th

        November, 2006.
VIII.   The documents sought to be relied on by the appellant

        against the respondent to drive home the charges were not

        supplied to the respondent. Respondent, thus, furnished his
3
reply on 2nd January, 2008 denying the charges against him in

        addition to praying for a personal hearing.
IX.    The enquiry officer submitted his report of enquiry to the

        appellant on 18th February, 2008 holding the respondent

        guilty of all the charges.
X.    Per the respondent, there was no enquiry at all. No witness

        was examined in support of the charges and he was not put

        on notice. None proved the documents forming part of the

        charge-sheet, which were also not supplied to him. Relying on

        the charge-sheet, his reply thereto and the enquiry reports

        obtained from Technical Audit Cell, the enquiry officer held

        him guilty. Even copy of the enquiry report was not furnished.
XI.    Respondent reached the age of superannuation on 2 nd August,

        2010.
XII.    Almost after two and half years of submission of the enquiry

        report by the Enquiry Officer, the respondent received on 2nd

        August, 2010 an order dismissing him from service dated 26th

        July,    2010    passed    by      the    Principal    Secretary   to   the

        Government of Uttar Pradesh, Panchayati Raj Section.
XIII.   Apart from being dismissed, a penalty of Rs. 10.52 lakh was

        imposed on the respondent.
XIV.    Crestfallen with the order of dismissal received by him a

        couple    of    days   after    the      date   of   superannuation,    the
4
respondent challenged such order by lodging a claim8 before

                the Tribunal. The Tribunal, vide judgment and order dated

                23rd January, 2014, inter alia, returned findings on perusal of

                the enquiry report that no enquiry was conducted by the

                Enquiry Officer in accordance with Rule 7(vii) of the U.P.

                Government Servants (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 19999

                ordaining that when a charge is denied by the charged officer,

                the Enquiry Officer shall proceed to call the witnesses

                proposed in the charge-sheet and record their oral evidence in

                presence of the charged officer who shall then be given

                opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses. Holding that the

                order of dismissal could not be sustained based on an

                “irregular” enquiry, the Tribunal ordered the appellant to

                initiate enquiry proceedings against the respondent from the

                stage of submission of reply within three weeks from date of

                receipt of the judgment and conclude the same within a

                period of an additional three months.
XV.     The   three-month        period stipulated   by the    Tribunal   for

                concluding the enquiry expired in April, 2014.
XVI.     In the wake of the decision of the Tribunal, the Enquiry Officer

                addressed a letter dated 16th May, 2014 to the respondent

                extending    to    him    another   opportunity   to   present    any
8
Claim Petition No. 1563/2010
9
1999 Rules
5
statement or additional evidence within 15 days of receiving

         such letter.
XVII.    However, according to the appellant, instead of participating,

         the respondent refused to join the enquiry and raised

         frivolous grounds to derail the same.
XVIII.   Through a letter dated 23rd May 2014, the respondent replied

         to the letter dated 16th May, 2014 stating that the time period

         stipulated by the Tribunal had expired and no extension of

         time having been prayed, the proceedings initiated against

         him had lapsed. Respondent also contended that since he had

         retired in 2010, no proceedings could be continued against

         him.
XIX.    Vide his letter dated 05th June, 2014, the Enquiry Officer once

         again called upon the respondent to file his additional

         reply/explanation.
XX.    Respondent vide his letter dated 13th June, 2014 reiterated

         that the Enquiry Officer had become functus officio and,

         therefore, without any extension of time granted by the

         Tribunal, he had no authority to proceed.
XXI.    Once again, the Enquiry Officer without recording the oral

         evidence of any witness and merely on the basis of the

         charge-sheet, reply and the documents gathered during

         preliminary enquiry submitted a report of enquiry dated 15th
6
September, 2014, holding the respondent guilty of all the

              charges.
XXII.   After receiving the sanction of the Governor under Article

              351-A, Civil Service Regulations10 on 05th January, 2015

              (which was required because the respondent had retired), the

              Joint   Secretary   to   the   Government   of   Uttar   Pradesh,

              Panchayati Raj Section issued a fresh order of punishment on

              24th March, 2015 reducing the pension of the respondent by

              5% for a period of five years and requiring recovery of Rs.
10.52 lakh from his retiral benefits.
XXIII.   Interestingly, the aforesaid order dated 24th March, 2015

              though briefly refers to and summarises the enquiry report, it

              is clear on perusal thereof that the Enquiry Officer proceeded

              to hold the charges against the respondent established only

              on the basis of the allegations in the charge-sheet and the

              reply of the respondent. There is absolutely no reference to

              statement of any witness being recorded or as to who proved

              the documents which, in the opinion of the Enquiry Officer,

              did support the case of the department that the respondent

              had by his acts of omission/commission indulged in draining

              the public exchequer in excess of Rs. 2 crore.      Further, the

              said order is completely silent as to whether the documents

              relied on by the Enquiry Officer were at all made over to the
10
CSR
7
respondent. Also, the Principal Secretary quashed the earlier

                order of punishment dated 26th July, 2010 and closed the

                proceedings ordering fresh punishment, but little did he

                realise that such order had been quashed earlier by the

                Tribunal vide judgment and order dated 23rd January, 2014;

                hence such order did not survive for being quashed.

      XXIV.     Dissatisfied with the order of punishment dated 24th March,

                2015, the respondent once again invoked the jurisdiction of

                the Tribunal to assail the order of the appellant by lodging a

                fresh claim11. The Tribunal, vide judgment and order dated

                12th November, 2018, allowed the claim of the respondent by

                setting aside the impugned order dated 24th March, 2015.
The

                Tribunal noted that, admittedly, copy of the enquiry report

                was not supplied to the respondent; hence, the procedure

                adopted by the appellant was in the teeth of Rule 9(4) of the

                1999 Rules. Further, it found that the enquiry had not been

                conducted in terms of the 1999 Rules. Additionally, it was

                recorded that the Tribunal on the earlier occasion having

                granted    three   months’   time   to   conclude   the   enquiry,

                submission of the enquiry report dated 15th September, 2014

                and the final order of punishment dated 24th March, 2015

                should have been preceded by a permission being sought

                from the Tribunal which, unfortunately, the appellant did not
11
Claim Petition No. 471/2016
8
seek. Reliance was placed by the Tribunal on the Full Bench

               decision of the High Court in
Abhishek Prabhakar Awasthy

               v. New India Assurance Co. Ltd.12
. It was laid down

               therein that if the court stipulates a time for concluding the

               proceedings, it will not be open to the employer to disregard

               that stipulation and an extension of time must be sought.

               Based on such reasons, the order of punishment dated 24th

               March,    2015    under    challenge     was    set    aside   and   the

               respondent was held entitled to all service benefits that were

               stopped in terms thereof. Compliance was directed to be

               ensured within a period of three months.
XXV.    Aggrieved by the order of the Tribunal, the appellant moved

               the High Court in its writ jurisdiction albeit unsuccessfully. The

               High     Court,   vide   the       impugned   order,    dismissed    the

               appellant’s writ petition and upheld the order of the Tribunal.


CONTENTIONS OF THE PARTIES
3.     Learned counsel for the appellant, seeking quashing of the impugned

       order and the order passed by the Tribunal, vigorously contended

       that:
I.    Immense gravity of the offence committed by the respondent

               was not appreciated either by the High Court or the Tribunal.
Further, the respondent overtly refused to participate in the
12
2013 SCC OnLine All 14267
9
second    round   of   disciplinary   proceedings;   hence,   the

                respondent cannot be permitted to take advantage of his own

                wrong.
II.    This Court in Board of Directors Himachal Pradesh

                Transport Corporation v. HC Rahi13, has held that the

                principles of natural justice cannot be viewed in a rigid

                manner. The application of these principles depends on the

                facts and circumstances of each individual case. To sustain

                the plea of violation of principles of natural justice, one must

                establish how he has been prejudiced by the violation. In the

                present case, Respondent was aware of the disciplinary

                proceedings, yet, refused to participate in the same. It can be

                inferred from the respondent’s actions that he had waived any

                right to natural justice.
III.   The Tribunal, vide order dt. 23rd January, 2014, in the first

                round of litigation, had overruled the respondent’s contention

                that the entirety of the disciplinary proceedings should be set

                aside. However, the respondent chose to raise the same

                issues in his letters dated 23rd May, 2014 and 13th June,

                2014.
IV.    The second round of enquiry was not a fresh proceeding;
rather, it was a continuation of the disciplinary proceeding

                which was initiated in 2006. Additionally, a fresh enquiry can
13
(2008) 11 SCC 502
10
be initiated against a retired employee within four years of his

               retirement under Regulation 351-A of the CSR. Respondent

               retired on 31st July, 2010 and the office order directing

               resumption of disciplinary proceedings was passed on 10th

               April, 2014, which is well within four years of the respondent’s

               retirement. In any event, the Government, vide office order

               dated 16th October 2014, granted sanction under Regulation

               351A of the CSR to continue the proceedings.
In arguendo,

               even if the non-supply of enquiry report is a violation of

               principles of natural justice, it could not have resulted in

               quashing of the proceedings per the Constitution Bench

               decision   of   this   Court   in
Managing   Director,   ECIL,

               Hyderabad v. B. Karunakar14
. It was held therein that in

               the event that there is a non-supply of the enquiry report, the

               courts and tribunals shall cause the enquiry report to be

               furnished to the employee and he be given an opportunity to

               make his case. If after hearing the parties, the court comes to

               a conclusion that the non-supply has made no difference to

               the findings and punishment meted out to the charged

               employee, the court should not interfere with the punishment

               order. It was also held that the court should not mechanically

               set aside a punishment order on the ground of non-supply of

               enquiry report to the charged employee.
14
(1993) 4 SCC 727
11
V.     The correct procedure per
B. Karunakar
(supra) has not

             been followed by the High Court and, accordingly, the

             impugned order ought to be set aside.
4.   Per contra, in support of the impugned order and pressing for

     dismissal   of   the   appeal,   learned   counsel   for   the   respondent

     assiduously contended that:
I.     The appellant has tried to mislead this Court by painting the

             present case as an instance of non-cooperation of the

             respondent whereas, in actuality, the present case is a

             demonstration of flagrant violation of the rules. Further, the

             appellant has supressed from this Court the fact that the

             second round of disciplinary proceedings were conducted in

             breach of the timeline provided by the Tribunal.
II.    Rule 7(v) of the 1999 Rules require the disciplinary authority

             to provide to the employee, the chargesheet along with the

             copy of all documentary evidence mentioned therein. The

             appellant has not been able to prove before the Tribunal and

             the High Court as well as before this Court that the

             documents sought to be relied on in the enquiry were

             furnished to him.
III.   Moreover, Rule 9(4) of the 1999 Rules mandates that if the

             disciplinary authority is of the opinion that punishment is

             required to be imposed on the employee, the employee has to

             be supplied with the enquiry report and given an opportunity
12
to make a representation. Admittedly, no copy of the enquiry

            report was furnished to the respondent and, therefore, he had

            no opportunity to represent thereagainst.
IV.   Surprisingly, not only copy of the enquiry report dated 15 th

            September, 2014 was not furnished to the respondent, even

            the copy of such report was neither placed on record before

            the Tribunal as well as before this Court.
V.    The dictum in
B. Karunakar
(supra), relied upon, does not

            apply to the present facts and circumstances.
The appellant

            has violated the principles of natural justice as well as the

            1999 Rules,

      VI.   Finally, the Tribunal and the High Court were bound by the

            ruling of the Full bench of the High Court in
Abhishek

            Prabhakar Awasthy
(supra) and, therefore, the proceedings

            could not have been carried forward beyond April, 2014

            without applying for and obtaining permission to proceed.
Having not concluded the enquiry as per the timeline provided

            by the Tribunal, the order of punishment dated is non-est in

            law and cannot be given effect. The same was, thus, rightly

            interdicted by the Tribunal.
IMPUGNED ORDER
5.   The High Court took notice of the fact that copy of the enquiry report

     had not been furnished to the respondent in the second round of
13
disciplinary proceedings and this action of the appellant is repugnant

     to the provisions contained in Rule 9(4) of the Rules. The High Court

     held that the Tribunal’s order does not suffer from any infirmity while

     holding that the appellant’s order dated 24th March 2015 is illegal on

     the ground of non-supply of the enquiry report. The High Court also

     noticed the fact that the Tribunal’s order dated 12th November, 2018

     directed the appellant to conclude the disciplinary proceedings within

     a time-frame and the appellant failed to do so. Prior to the time-

     frame expiring, the appellant should have approached the Tribunal

     seeking suitable     extension. The   conclusion of the        disciplinary

     proceedings     beyond   the   time-frame   fixed   by   the   Tribunal   is

     impermissible in law. That apart, the order of punishment is also

     unsustainable as the same was discriminatory. While the co-charged

     employee Baliram was let off and not punished, the respondent was

     punished for the same act.
6.   For the reasons thus assigned, the High Court upheld the order of the

     Tribunal.
ISSUES
7.   The present case tasks us to decide the following issues: -
(i)         Whether, in pursuance of a purported enquiry where there

                 was none to present the case of the department, no witness

                 was examined in support of the charges and no document
14
was formally proved, any order of punishment could validly

             be made?
(ii)    Whether the disciplinary authority was justified in placing

             reliance on a report of enquiry prepared by the Enquiry

             Officer who had looked into documents which were not

             provided to the respondent and had arrived at findings of

             guilt only on the basis of the charge-sheet, the reply thereto

             of the respondent and such documents?
(iii)   Whether failure or omission or neglect of the disciplinary

             authority to furnish the enquiry report had the effect of

             vitiating the enquiry?
(iv)    Whether the enquiry not having been completed within the

             time stipulated by the Tribunal in its order dated 23rd

             January, 2014, the disciplinary proceedings could have been

             continued beyond May, 2014? And
(v)     Whether, and if at all, the appellant should be granted one

             more opportunity to conclude the enquiry against the

             respondent within the time to be stipulated by us?
ANALYSIS
8.   The first two issues being related are taken up for consideration

     together.
9.   There could be no iota of doubt that the enquiry in the present case

     was conducted by the Enquiry Officer in clear disregard of the 1999
15
Rules relating to conduct of disciplinary proceedings against the

       employees of the appellant.
10. We are at loss to comprehend as to how, after the first round of

       litigation before the Tribunal leading to quashing of the order of

       dismissal dated 27th July, 2010, the same mistake could be repeated

       by the Enquiry officer by not calling for witnesses to record their oral

       statements as well as to prove the documents generated in course of

       the   preliminary    enquiry.    The   procedure     followed    is   plainly

       indefensible and, therefore, we hold that the respondent has been

       punished by the disciplinary authority without due process being

       followed in taking disciplinary action against him.
11. Useful reference can be made to certain decisions of this Court to

       show the infirmity in the process of decision making which led to the

       order of punishment being passed against the respondent.
12. M/s.
Bareilly Electricity Supply Company Limited v. The

       Workmen and Others15
is a decision arising from an award under

       the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
. Law has been laid down therein as

       follows:
“9. … Innumerable statements, letters, balance-sheet, profit and
               loss account and other documents called for or otherwise were filed
               on behalf of the appellants. It cannot be denied that the mere filing
               of any of the aforementioned documents does not amount to proof
               of them and unless these are either admitted by the respondents or
               proved they do not become evidence in the case.
***
14. … But the application of principle of natural justice does not
               imply that what is not evidence can be acted upon. On the other
               hand what it means is that no materials can be relied upon to
15
(1971) 2 SCC 617
16
establish a contested fact which are not spoken to by persons who
               are competent to speak about them and are subjected to cross-
examination by the party against whom they are sought to be used.
               When a document is produced in a Court or a Tribunal the questions
               that naturally arise is, is it a genuine document, what are its
               contents and are the statements contained therein true. When the
               appellant produced the balance-sheet and profit and loss account of
               the company, it does not by its mere production amount to a proof
               of it or of the truth of the entries therein. If these entries are
               challenged the appellant must prove each of such entries by
               producing the books and speaking from the entries made therein. If
               a letter or other document is produced to establish some fact which
               is relevant to the enquiry the writer must be produced or his
               affidavit in respect thereof be filed and opportunity afforded to the
               opposite party who challenges this fact. … ”
                                                                    (emphasis ours)
13.
In
Roop Singh Negi v. Punjab National Bank and Others16
, it

       was held that an officer conducting an enquiry has a duty to arrive at

       findings in respect of the charges upon taking into consideration the

       materials brought on record by the parties. It has also been held

       therein that any evidence collected during investigation by an

       investigating officer against the accused by itself could not be treated

       to be evidence in the disciplinary proceedings.
14. What follows from a conjoint reading of the above two decisions is

       and what applies here is that, ‘materials brought on record by the

       parties’ (to which consideration in the enquiry ought to be confined)

       mean only such materials can be considered which are brought on

       record in a manner known to law. Such materials can then be

       considered legal evidence, which can be acted upon. Though the

       Indian Evidence Act, 1872 is not strictly applicable to departmental

       enquiries, which are not judicial proceedings, nevertheless, the
16
(2009) 2 SCC 570
17
principles flowing therefrom can be applied in specific cases.
Evidence tendered by witnesses must be recorded in the presence of

       the delinquent employee, he should be given opportunity to cross-

       examine the witnesses and no document should be relied on by the

       prosecution without giving copy thereof to the delinquent - all these

       basic principles of fair play have their root in such Act. In such light,

       the documents referred to in the list of documents forming part of

       the annexures to the chargesheet, on which the department seeks to

       rely in the enquiry, cannot be treated as legal evidence worthy of

       forming the basis for a finding of guilt if the contents of such

       documents are not spoken to by persons competent to speak about

       them. A document does not prove itself. In the enquiry, therefore,

       the contents of the relied-on documents have to be proved by

       examining a witness having knowledge of the contents of such

       document and who can depose as regards its authenticity. In the

       present case, no such exercise was undertaken by producing any

       witness.
15. We may further refer to the decision of this Court in
State of Uttar

       Pradesh and Others v. Saroj Kumar Sinha17
where disciplinary

       proceedings were drawn up against the respondent, Saroj Kumar

       Sinha, under the 1999 Rules itself with which we are concerned.

       Paragraphs 26 to 30 and 33 of
the said decision
being relevant are

       quoted below:
17
(2010) 2 SCC 772
18
“26. The first inquiry report is vitiated also on the ground that the
inquiry officers failed to fix any date for the appearance of the
respondent to answer the charges. Rule 7(x) clearly provides as
under:
‘7. (x) Where the charged government servant does not appear on
  the date fixed in the inquiry or at any stage of the proceeding in
  spite of the service of the notice on him or having knowledge of the
  date, the inquiry officer shall proceed with the inquiry ex parte. In
  such a case the inquiry officer shall record the statement of
  witnesses mentioned in the charge-sheet in absence of the charged
  government servant.’
27. A bare perusal of the aforesaid sub-rule shows that when the
respondent had failed to submit the explanation to the charge-sheet
it was incumbent upon the inquiry officer to fix a date for his
appearance in the inquiry. It is only in a case when the government
servant despite notice of the date fixed failed to appear that the
inquiry officer can proceed with the inquiry ex parte. Even in such
circumstances it is incumbent on the inquiry officer to record the
statement of witnesses mentioned in the charge-sheet. Since the
government servant is absent, he would clearly lose the benefit of
cross-examination of the witnesses. But nonetheless in order to
establish the charges the Department is required to produce the
necessary evidence before the inquiry officer. This is so as to avoid
the charge that the inquiry officer has acted as a prosecutor as well
as a judge.
28. An inquiry officer acting in a quasi-judicial authority is in the
position of an independent adjudicator. He is not supposed to be a
representative of the department/disciplinary authority/Government.
His function is to examine the evidence presented by the Department,
even in the absence of the delinquent official to see as to whether the
unrebutted evidence is sufficient to hold that the charges are proved.
In the present case the aforesaid procedure has not been observed.
Since no oral evidence has been examined the documents have not
been proved, and could not have been taken into consideration to
conclude that the charges have been proved against the respondents.
29. Apart from the above, by virtue of
Article 311(2)
of the
Constitution of India the departmental enquiry had to be conducted in
accordance with the rules of natural justice. It is a basic requirement
of the rules of natural justice that an employee be given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard in any proceedings which may culminate
in punishment being imposed on the employee.
30. When a departmental enquiry is conducted against the
government servant it cannot be treated as a casual exercise. The
enquiry proceedings also cannot be conducted with a closed mind.
The inquiry officer has to be wholly unbiased. The rules of natural
justice are required to be observed to ensure not only that justice is
done but is manifestly seen to be done. The object of rules of natural
justice is to ensure that a government servant is treated fairly in
proceedings which may culminate in imposition of punishment
including dismissal/removal from service.
19
***
33. As noticed earlier in the present case not only the respondent has
             been denied access to documents sought to be relied upon against
             him, but he has been condemned unheard as the inquiry officer failed
             to fix any date for conduct of the enquiry. In other words, not a single
             witness has been examined in support of the charges levelled against
             the respondent. The High Court, therefore, has rightly observed that
             the entire proceedings are vitiated having been conducted in
             complete violation of the principles of natural justice and total
             disregard of fair play. The respondent never had any opportunity at
             any stage of the proceedings to offer an explanation against the
             allegations made in the charge-sheet.”
                                                                    (emphasis ours)
16. It appears that the appellant is yet to take lessons despite the

       admonition in
Saroj Kumar Sinha
(supra). The same kind of

       omissions and commissions that led to setting aside of the order of

       punishment imposed being upheld by this Court were repeated in the

       present case.
17. Next, the decision in
Nirmala J. Jhala v. State of Gujarat and

       Another18
deserves consideration where the concept of preliminary

       enquiry being distinct from a regular enquiry was noticed and

       discussed. Paragraphs 45 and 51 from such decision read as follows:
“42. A Constitution Bench of this Court in
Amalendu Ghosh v. North
               Eastern Railway
, AIR 1960 SC 992, held that the purpose of holding
               a preliminary inquiry in respect of a particular alleged misconduct is
               only for the purpose of finding a particular fact and prima facie, to
               know as to whether the alleged misconduct has been committed
               and on the basis of the findings recorded in preliminary inquiry, no
               order of punishment can be passed. It may be used only to take a
               view as to whether a regular disciplinary proceeding against the
               delinquent is required to be held.
43. Similarly in
Champaklal Chimanlal Shah v. Union of India
, AIR
               1964 SC 1854, a Constitution Bench of this Court while taking a
               similar view held that preliminary inquiry should not be confused
               with regular inquiry. The preliminary inquiry is not governed by the
               provisions of
Article 311(2)
of the Constitution of India. Preliminary
18
(2013) 4 SCC 301
20
inquiry may be held ex parte, for it is merely for the satisfaction of
           the Government though usually for the sake of fairness, an
           explanation may be sought from the government servant even at
           such an inquiry. But at that stage, he has no right to be heard as
           the inquiry is merely for the satisfaction of the Government as to
           whether a regular inquiry must be held. …
                                       ***
45. In view of the above, it is evident that the evidence recorded in
           preliminary inquiry cannot be used in regular inquiry as the
           delinquent is not associated with it, and opportunity to cross-
examine the persons examined in such inquiry is not given. Using
           such evidence would be violative of the principles of natural
           justice.”
18. Guided by the law declared in the aforesaid decisions, we can safely

    conclude that the enquiry conducted by the Enquiry Officer in a

    manner not authorised by law could not have formed the basis of the

    order of punishment dated 24th March, 2015 imposed on the

    respondent. The first two issues are, therefore, answered in the

    negative.
19. In view of our answers to the first two issues and the glaring fact of

    the report of enquiry not having seen the light of the day, the third

    issue may not detain us for long. However, before specifically

    answering this issue, we need to deal with the argument of learned

    counsel for the appellant that the test of ‘prejudice’ ought to be

    applied in this case since the respondent did not participate in the

    enquiry and, therefore, there was no obligation for the disciplinary

    authority to furnish such report. This argument has necessitated a

    study of the law declared in
B. Karunakar
(supra), in some depth,

    to assess how the jurisprudence has developed on the issue of non-

    furnishing of the report of enquiry in the light of such decision.
21
20. Multiple decisions have been rendered by different Benches of this

    Court where, considering
B. Karunakar
(supra), views have been

    expressed placing the burden of proof on the delinquent employee to

    demonstrate the ‘prejudice’ that he has suffered owing to non-

    furnishing of the report of enquiry as a pre-requisite to succeed in his

    challenge to the order of punishment on the ground of violation of

    natural   justice,   with   which    we   find   ourselves   in   respectful

    disagreement.
We may be mistaken; but our reading suggests that

    the articulation of law in
B. Karunakar
(supra) has been subject to

    varying interpretations, and in some cases the key ruling has been

    overlooked so much so that in the process its core principle stands

    overshadowed. Though judicial discipline, propriety and decorum

    demand that we follow the precedents bearing in mind the rule of

    stare decisis, or formulate the issue(s) on which we disagree and

    refer the same for consideration by a larger Bench, we propose not

    to walk that way since, on other fronts, the violations/breaches in

    this case are so obtrusive, as already found, that the respondent is

    entitled to grant of relief irrespective of the legal position on the

    point, and what we express hereafter on the effect and impact of

    non-furnishing of the report of enquiry.
21. A random search for precedents over the past 20 (twenty) years’

    reveals that in umpteen decisions in relation to service law (as well

    as non-service law disputes), this Court has consistently accepted the

    principle of law enunciated in
B. Karunakar
(supra) that non-
22
furnishing of the report of enquiry to the delinquent employee

     constitutes violation of his right to raise an effective defence.

     However, in the same breath, it has been observed in such

     precedents that even if the report is not furnished in any particular

     case, the court seized of the matter must make an independent

     examination whether non-furnishing of the report has caused any

     prejudice to him. The common thread running through all these

     decisions is that quashing of the proceedings does not follow as a

     ritual if the claim for obtaining relief is that the report of enquiry has

     not been furnished; on the contrary, grant of relief in such a case

     must be preceded by a satisfaction to be recorded by the court that

     non-furnishing of the report did ‘prejudice’ the delinquent employee

     amounting to the due process of law not being followed and thereby

     causing a failure of justice; and, for such a finding to be recorded,

     ‘prejudice’ has to be pleaded and proved. Indeed, an onerous burden

     placed on a delinquent employee!
22.
In relation to service law disputes, inter alia, the decisions in
Haryana Financial Corporation v. Kailash Chandra Ahuja19
;
Union of India v. Bishamber Das Dogra20
;
Sarva U.P. Gramin

     Bank v. Manoj Kumar Sinha21
;
Union of India v. Alok Kumar22
;
Punjab National Bank v. K.K. Verma23
,
Union of India v. R.P
19
(2008) 9 SCC 31
20
(2009) 13 SCC 102
21
(2010) 3 SCC 556
22
(2010) 5 SCC 349
23
(2010) 13 SCC 494
23
Singh24;
SBI v. B.R. Saini25
; and Union of India and Others v.
Dilip Paul26 hold the field.
23. This Court has also noticed the decision in
B. Karunakar
(supra) in a

     wide variety of cases raising disputes other than service, largely

     focusing on the elucidation of principles of natural justice.
Reference

     may be made, inter alia, to the decisions in
Dharampal Satyapal

     Ltd. v. CCE27
,
Swamy Devi Dayal Hospital & Dental College v.

     Union of India28
,
Vijayakumaran C.P.V. v. Central University of

     Kerala29
,
Mineral Area Development Authority of India & Anr.

     v. Steel Authority of India & Anr.30
,
Securities Exchange Board

     of India v. Mega Corporation Limited31
,
T. Takano v. Securities

     and Exchange Board of India and Anr.32
,
State of U.P. v.

     Sudhir Kumar Singh33
and
Gorkha Security Services v. Govt.

     (NCT of Delhi
)34.
24. Lest we be misunderstood, we clarify that our intention is to offer

     insights and not to dispute or critique established views. We aim here

     to present an alternative perspective on the law declared by the

     Constitution Bench in
B. Karunakar
(supra) analysing the basic

     question and the incidental questions that emerged for answers
24
(2014) 7 SCC 340
25
(2018) 11 SCC 83
26
2023 SCC OnLine SC 1423
27
(2015) 8 SCC 519
28
(2014) 13 SCC 506
29
(2020) 12 SCC 426
30
(2024) 10 SCC 257
31
(2023) 12 SCC 802
32
(2022) 8 SCC 162
33
(2021) 19 SCC 706
34
(2014) 9 SCC 105
24
before it, moving away from the prevailing perspective available in

        decisions   so   far   rendered   by   diverse   Benches.    As   different

        understandings have emerged, this endeavour may facilitate further

        clarification or reconsideration by a relevant Bench, allowing for

        potential re-evaluation in future cases which could ultimately lead to

        further development and refinement of the law on the topic.
25. We propose to begin the discussion by referring to the decision in
State Bank of Patiala v. S.K. Sharma35
, which was rendered by a

        coordinate Bench of this Court close on the heels of the decision in
B. Karunakar
(supra).
Upon consideration thereof, this Court in
S.K. Sharma
(supra) held that while applying the rule of audi

        alteram partem (the primary principle of natural justice) the

        courts/tribunals must always bear in mind the ultimate and

        overriding objective underlying the said rule, viz. to ensure a fair

        hearing and to ensure that there is no failure of justice. It was also

        authoritatively held that:
“33. We may summarise the principles emerging from the above
               discussion. (These are by no means intended to be exhaustive and
               are evolved keeping in view the context of disciplinary enquiries
               and orders of punishment imposed by an employer upon the
               employee):
(1) An order passed imposing a punishment on an employee
               consequent upon a disciplinary/departmental enquiry in violation of
               the rules/regulations/statutory provisions governing such enquiries
               should not be set aside automatically. The Court or the Tribunal
               should enquire whether (a) the provision violated is of a substantive
               nature or (b) whether it is procedural in character.
               (2) A substantive provision has normally to be complied with as
               explained hereinbefore and the theory of substantial compliance or
               the test of prejudice would not be applicable in such a case.
35
(1996) 3 SCC 364
25
(3) In the case of violation of a procedural provision, the position is
this: procedural provisions are generally meant for affording a
reasonable and adequate opportunity to the delinquent
officer/employee. They are, generally speaking, conceived in his
interest. Violation of any and every procedural provision cannot be
said to automatically vitiate the enquiry held or order passed.
Except cases falling under — ‘no notice’, ‘no opportunity’ and ‘no
hearing’ categories, the complaint of violation of procedural
provision should be examined from the point of view of prejudice,
viz., whether such violation has prejudiced the delinquent
officer/employee in defending himself properly and effectively. If it
is found that he has been so prejudiced, appropriate orders have to
be made to repair and remedy the prejudice including setting aside
the enquiry and/or the order of punishment. If no prejudice is
established to have resulted therefrom, it is obvious, no
interference is called for. In this connection, it may be remembered
that there may be certain procedural provisions which are of a
fundamental character, whose violation is by itself proof of
prejudice. The Court may not insist on proof of prejudice in such
cases. As explained in the body of the judgment, take a case where
there is a provision expressly providing that after the evidence of
the employer/government is over, the employee shall be given an
opportunity to lead defence in his evidence, and in a given case, the
enquiry officer does not give that opportunity in spite of the
delinquent officer/employee asking for it. The prejudice is self-
evident. No proof of prejudice as such need be called for in such a
case. To repeat, the test is one of prejudice, i.e., whether the
person has received a fair hearing considering all things. Now, this
very aspect can also be looked at from the point of view of directory
and mandatory provisions, if one is so inclined. The principle stated
under (4) hereinbelow is only another way of looking at the same
aspect as is dealt with herein and not a different or distinct
principle.
(4)(a) In the case of a procedural provision which is not of a
mandatory character, the complaint of violation has to be examined
from the standpoint of substantial compliance. Be that as it may,
the order passed in violation of such a provision can be set aside
only where such violation has occasioned prejudice to the
delinquent employee.
(b) In the case of violation of a procedural provision, which is of a
mandatory character, it has to be ascertained whether the provision
is conceived in the interest of the person proceeded against or in
public interest. If it is found to be the former, then it must be seen
whether the delinquent officer has waived the said requirement,
either expressly or by his conduct. If he is found to have waived it,
then the order of punishment cannot be set aside on the ground of
the said violation. If, on the other hand, it is found that the
delinquent officer/employee has not waived it or that the provision
could not be waived by him, then the Court or Tribunal should
make appropriate directions (include the setting aside of the order
of punishment), keeping in mind the approach adopted by the
26
Constitution Bench in B. Karunakar. The ultimate test is always the
               same, viz., test of prejudice or the test of fair hearing, as it may be
               called. … ”
26. Having regard to the statement of law in
S.K. Sharma
(supra),

       certain questions fall for answers, viz. what would be the effect and

       impact of non-furnishing the report of enquiry by the disciplinary

       authority to a delinquent employee before he is punished? Does he

       have to plead and prove ‘prejudice’? Is it in all or specific

       circumstances that the courts would insist on the delinquent

       employee to demonstrate ‘prejudice’? Is furnishing of the report of

       enquiry merely a procedural step in the disciplinary proceedings or

       something more?
We may proceed to find the answers to these

       questions referring to
B. Karunakar
(supra).
27. Due to an apparent conflict between the decisions in
Kailash

       Chander Asthana v. State of U.P.36
and
Union of India v. Mohd.

       Ramzan
Khan37—both delivered by Benches comprising three

       Judges—a     reference    was    made    to   a   Constitution   Bench    for

       authoritative resolution.
Kailash Chander Asthana
(supra) was a

       case where the enquiry had been conducted by an Administrative

       Tribunal under applicable disciplinary rules. It was held that the

       failure to serve a copy of the enquiry report was not material.
In

       contrast,
Mohd. Ramzan Khan
(supra) marked a momentous

       progress in the jurisprudence on disciplinary proceedings by holding

       that a delinquent employee is entitled to receive a copy of the
36
(1988) 3 SCC 600
37
(1991) 1 SCC 588
27
enquiry report before the disciplinary authority decides on the

    charges against them.
Observing the divergence in these rulings, a

    Bench of co-equal strength referred several cases to a Constitution

    Bench through an order dated 5th August, 1991, which was decided

    in
B. Karunakar
(supra).
Notably, Mohd. Ramzan Khan
(supra)

    judgment heralded      a watershed moment in disciplinary law,

    declaring that withholding the enquiry report before the disciplinary

    authority's decision strikes at the very heart of natural justice. It

    firmly entrenched the employee’s right to be heard before a final

    decision to punish him is taken.
28. The majority opinion in the Constitution Bench decision of
B.

    Karunakar
(supra) was authored by Hon'ble P.B. Sawant, J. The

    questions which this Court considered are as under:
“2. The basic question of law which arises in these matters is
           whether the report of the enquiry officer/authority who/which is
           appointed by the disciplinary authority to hold an enquiry into the
           charges against the delinquent employee, is required to          be
           furnished to the employee to enable him to make proper
           representation to the disciplinary authority before such authority
           arrives at its own finding with regard to the guilt or otherwise of
           the employee and the punishment, if any, to be awarded to him.
           This question in turn gives rise to the following incidental
           questions:
i. Whether the report should be furnished to the employee even
                when the statutory rules laying down the procedure for
                holding the disciplinary enquiry are silent on the subject or
                are against it?
ii. Whether the report of the enquiry officer is required to be
                furnished to the delinquent employee even when the
                punishment imposed is other than the major punishment of
                dismissal, removal or reduction in rank?
iii. Whether the obligation to furnish the report is only when the
                employee asks for the same or whether it exists even
                otherwise?
iv. Whether the law
laid down in
Mohd. Ramzan Khan
case will
                apply to all establishments — Government and non-
28
Government, public and private sector undertakings?
v.   What is the effect of the non-furnishing of the report on the
                     order of punishment and what relief should be granted to the
                     employee in such cases?
vi.   From what date the law requiring furnishing of the report,
                     should come into operation?
vii.   Since the decision in
Mohd. Ramzan Khan
case has made the
                     law laid down there prospective in operation, i.e., applicable
                     to the orders of punishment passed after November 20, 1990
                     on which day
the said decision
was delivered, this question in
                     turn also raises another question, viz., what was the law
                     prevailing prior to November 20, 1990?”
                                                                   (emphasis ours)
29. At paragraph 18 of the judgment, this Court after examining the

       decision in
Kailash Chander Asthana
(supra),
Union of India v. E.

       Bashyan38 and Mohd. Ramzan Khan
(supra) found no conflict

       between
Kailash Chander Asthana
(supra) and the two others.
30. In view of the above, ordinarily, the Constitution Bench might not

       have proceeded further; however, it found it necessary to do so in

       light of the observations recorded in paragraph 19:
“19.
In
Mohd. Ramzan Khan
case the question squarely fell for
               consideration before a Bench of three learned Judges of this Court,
               viz., that although on account of the Forty-second Amendment of
               the Constitution, it was no longer necessary to issue a notice to
               the delinquent employee to show cause against the punishment
               proposed and, therefore, to furnish a copy of the enquiry officer's
               report along with the notice to make representation against the
               penalty, whether it was still necessary to furnish a copy of the
               report to him to enable him to make representation against the
               findings recorded against him in the report before the disciplinary
               authority took its own decision with regard to the guilt or otherwise
               of the employee by taking into consideration the said report. The
               Court held that whenever the enquiry officer is other than the
               disciplinary authority and the report of the enquiry officer holds the
               employee guilty of all or any of the charges with proposal for any
               punishment or not, the delinquent employee is entitled to a copy of
               the report to enable him to make a representation to the
               disciplinary authority against it and the non-furnishing of the
               report amounts to a violation of the rules of natural justice.
               However, after taking this view, the Court directed that the law
38
(1988) 2 SCC 196
29
laid down there shall have prospective application and the
          punishment which is already imposed shall not be open to
          challenge on that ground. Unfortunately, the Court by mistake
          allowed all the appeals which were before it and thus set aside the
          disciplinary action in every case, by failing to notice that the
          actions in those cases were prior to
the said decision
. This anomaly
          was noticed at a later stage but before the final order could be
          reviewed and rectified, the present reference was already made, as
          stated above, by a Bench of three learned Judges. The anomaly
          has thus lent another dimension to the question to be resolved in
          the present case.”
                                                                (emphasis ours)
31. Hon’ble K. Ramaswamy, J. agreed with the view expressed by

   Hon’ble P.B. Sawant, J. on all but one of the points. His Lordship

   opined that no mistake was made by the Bench in
Mohd. Ramzan

   Khan
(supra) in granting relief to the employees, even though the

   judgment said that the rule requiring the enquiry report to be given

   to the employee would apply only in future cases.
Importantly, both

   Hon’ble Sawant and Hon’ble Ramaswamy, JJ. were on the three-

   Judge Bench that decided
Mohd. Ramzan Khan
(supra).
This Court

   was aware that several appeals were pending, where high courts

   had struck down disciplinary actions just because the enquiry report

   was not furnished—relying on
Mohd. Ramzan Khan
(supra), even

   though that ruling was meant to apply only to future cases.
Because

   of this confusion, the Constitution Bench had to clarify the law to

   properly address those pending cases where disciplinary action was

   taken before the decision in
Mohd. Ramzan Khan
(supra) was

   rendered. The inconsistency mentioned in paragraph 19 of that

   ruling also led to several related legal issues [questions (v), (vi),

   and (vii)] that needed settlement.
30
32. Upon a survey of the legal position from the time the Government of

        India Act, 193539 was enacted till the 42nd Amendment of the

        Constitution of India came into effect, the Constitution Bench had

        the occasion to observe as follows:
“24. Since the Government of India Act, 1935 till the Forty-second
                Amendment of the Constitution, the Government servant had
                always the right to receive the report of the enquiry
                officer/authority and to represent against the findings recorded in
                it when the enquiry officer/authority was not the disciplinary
                authority. This right was however, exercisable by him at the
                second stage of the disciplinary proceedings viz., when he was
                served with a notice to show cause against the proposed penalty.
                The issuance of the notice to show cause against the penalty
                necessarily required the furnishing of a copy of the enquiry
                officer's report since, as held by the Courts, the right to show
                cause against the penalty also implied the right to represent
                against the findings on the charges. This was considered to be an
                essential part of the ‘reasonable opportunity’ incorporated earlier
                in Section 240(3) of the GOI Act and later in
Article 311(2)
of the
                Constitution as originally enacted. The right to receive the enquiry
                officer's report and to show cause against the findings in the
                report was independent of the right to show cause against the
                penalty proposed. The two rights came to be confused with each
                other because as the law stood prior to the Forty-second
                Amendment of the Constitution, the two rights arose
                simultaneously only at the stage when a notice to show cause
                against the proposed penalty was issued. If the disciplinary
                authority after considering the enquiry officer's report had dropped
                the proceedings or had decided to impose a penalty other than
                that of dismissal, removal or reduction in rank, there was no
                occasion for issuance of the notice to show cause against the
                proposed penalty. In that case, the employee had neither the right
                to receive the report and represent against the finding of guilt nor
                the right to show cause against the proposed penalty. The right to
                receive the report and to represent against the findings recorded
                in it was thus inextricably connected with the acceptance of the
                report by the disciplinary authority and the nature of the penalty
                proposed. Since the Forty-second Amendment of the Constitution
                dispensed with the issuance of the notice to show cause against
                the penalty proposed even if it was dismissal, removal or reduction
                in rank, some courts took the view that the Government servant
                was deprived of his right to represent against the findings of guilt
                as well. The error occurred on account of the failure to distinguish
                the two rights which were independent of each other.
25. While the right to represent against the findings in the report
39
GoI Act
31
is part of the reasonable opportunity available during the first
 stage of the inquiry viz., before the disciplinary authority takes
 into consideration the findings in the report, the right to show
 cause against the penalty proposed belongs to the second stage
 when the disciplinary authority has considered the findings in the
 report and has come to the conclusion with regard to the guilt of
 the employee and proposes to award penalty on the basis of its
 conclusions. The first right is the right to prove innocence. The
 second right is to plead for either no penalty or a lesser penalty
 although the conclusion regarding the guilt is accepted. It is the
 second right exercisable at the second stage which was taken
 away by the Forty-second Amendment.
26. The reason why the right to receive the report of the enquiry
officer is considered an essential part of the reasonable
opportunity at the first stage and also a principle of natural justice
is that the findings recorded by the enquiry officer form an
important material before the disciplinary authority which along
with the evidence is taken into consideration by it to come to its
conclusions. It is difficult to say in advance, to what extent the
said findings including the punishment, if any, recommended in
the report would influence the disciplinary authority while drawing
its conclusions. The findings further might have been recorded
without considering the relevant evidence on record, or by
misconstruing it or unsupported by it. If such a finding is to be
one of the documents to be considered by the disciplinary
authority, the principles of natural justice require that the
employee should have afair opportunity to meet, explain and
controvert it before he is condemned. It is negation of the tenets
of justice and a denial of fair opportunity to the employee to
consider the findings recorded by a third party like the enquiry
officer without giving the employee an opportunity to reply to it.
Although it is true that the disciplinary authority is supposed to
arrive at its own findings on the basis of the evidence recorded in
the enquiry, it is also equally true that the disciplinary authority
takes into consideration the findings recorded by the enquiry
officer alongwith the evidence on record. In the circumstances,
the findings of the enquiry officer do constitute an important
material before the disciplinary authority which is likely to
influence its conclusions. If the enquiry officer were only to record
the evidence and forward the same to the disciplinary authority,
that would not constitute any additional material before the
disciplinary authority of which the delinquent employee has no
knowledge. However, when the enquiry officer goes further and
records his findings, as stated above, which may or may not be
based on the evidence on record or are contrary to the same or in
ignorance of it, such findings are an additional material unknown
to the employee but are taken into consideration by the
disciplinary authority while arriving at its conclusions. Both the
dictates of the reasonable opportunity as well as the principles of
natural justice, therefore, require that before the disciplinary
authority comes to its own conclusions, the delinquent employee
should have an opportunity to reply to the enquiry officer's
32
findings. The disciplinary authority is then required to consider the
evidence, the report of the enquiry officer and the representation
of the employee against it.
27. It will thus be seen that where the enquiry officer is other than
the disciplinary authority, the disciplinary proceedings break into
two stages. The first stage ends when the disciplinary authority
arrives at its conclusions on the basis of the evidence, enquiry
officer's report and the delinquent employee's reply to it. The
second stage begins when the disciplinary authority decides to
impose penalty on the basis of its conclusions. If the disciplinary
authority decides to drop the disciplinary proceedings, the second
stage is not even reached. The employee's right to receive the
report is thus, a part of the reasonable opportunity of defending
himself in the first stage of the inquiry. If this right is denied to
him, he is in effect denied the right to defend himself and to prove
his innocence in the disciplinary proceedings.
28. The position in law can also be looked at from a slightly
different angle.
Article 311(2)
says that the employee shall be
given a ‘reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of the
charges against him’. The findings on the charges given by a third
person like the enquiry officer, particularly when they are not
borne out by the evidence or are arrived at by overlooking the
evidence or misconstruing it, could themselves constitute new
unwarranted imputations. What is further, when the proviso to the
said Article states that ‘where it is proposed after such inquiry, to
impose upon him any such penalty, such penalty may be imposed
on the basis of the evidence adduced during such inquiry and it
shall not be necessary to give such person any opportunity of
making representation on the penalty proposed’, it in effect
accepts two successive stages of differing scope. Since the penalty
is to be proposed after the inquiry, which inquiry in effect is to be
carried out by the disciplinary authority (the enquiry officer being
only his delegate appointed to hold the inquiry and to assist him),
the employee's reply to the enquiry officer's report and
consideration of such reply by the disciplinary authority also
constitute an integral part of such inquiry. The second stage
follows the inquiry so carried out and it consists of the issuance of
the notice to show cause against the proposed penalty and of
considering the reply to the notice and deciding upon the penalty.
What is dispensed with is the opportunity of making representation
on the penalty proposed and not of opportunity of making
representation on the report of the enquiry officer. The latter right
was always there. But before the Forty-second Amendment of the
Constitution, the point of time at which it was to be exercised had
stood deferred till the second stage viz., the stage of considering
the penalty. Till that time, the conclusions that the disciplinary
authority might have arrived at both with regard to the guilt of the
employee and the penalty to be imposed were only tentative. All
that has happened after the Forty-second Amendment of the
Constitution is to advance the point of time at which the
representation of the employee against the enquiry officer's report
would be considered. Now, the disciplinary authority has to
33
consider the representation of the employee against the report
            before it arrives at its conclusion with regard to his guilt or
            innocence of the charges.
(emphasis ours)
33. Resting on the aforesaid reasoning, the answer to the basic question

    (majority view) in
B. Karunakar
(supra) is found in paragraph 29

    reading as follows:
“29. Hence it has to be held that when the enquiry officer is not
           the disciplinary authority, the delinquent employee has a right to
           receive a copy of the enquiry officer's report before the disciplinary
           authority arrives at its conclusions with regard to the guilt or
           innocence of the employee with regard to the charges levelled
           against him. That right is a part of the employee's right to defend
           himself against the charges levelled against him. A denial of the
           enquiry officer's report before the disciplinary authority takes its
           decision on the charges, is a denial of reasonable opportunity to
           the employee to prove his innocence and is a breach of the
           principles of natural justice.”
                                                                (emphasis ours)
34. Hon’ble Ramaswamy, J. answered the basic question as follows:
“61. It is now settled law that the proceedings must be just, fair
           and reasonable and negation thereof offends
Articles 14
and
21.
It
           is well-settled law that the principles of natural justice are integral
           part of
Article 14.
No decision prejudicial to a party should be
           taken without affording an opportunity or supplying the material
           which is the basis for the decision. The enquiry report constitutes
           fresh material which has great persuasive force or effect on the
           mind of the disciplinary authority. The supply of the report along
           with the final order is like a post-mortem certificate with putrefying
           odour. The failure to supply copy thereof to the delinquent would
           be unfair procedure offending not only
Articles 14
, 21
and
311(2)
of the Constitution, but also, the principles of natural justice. The
           contention on behalf of the Government/management that the
           report is not evidence adduced during such enquiry envisaged
           under proviso to
Article 311(2)
is also devoid of substance. It is
           settled law that the
Evidence Act
has no application to the enquiry
           conducted during the disciplinary proceedings. The evidence
           adduced is not in strict conformity with the
Indian Evidence Act
,
           though the essential principles of fair play envisaged in the
Evidence Act
are applicable. What was meant by ‘evidence’ in the
34
proviso to
Article 311(2)
is the totality of the material collected
            during the enquiry including the report of the enquiry officer
            forming part of that material. Therefore, when reliance is sought to
            be placed by the disciplinary authority, on the report of the enquiry
            officer for proof of the charge or for imposition of the penalty, then
            it is incumbent that the copy thereof should be supplied before
            reaching any conclusion either on proof of the charge or the nature
            of the penalty to be imposed on the proved charge or on both.”

                                                                 (emphasis ours)
35. The answers to the incidental questions are found in paragraph 30.

    A brief summary of the same is as follows:
i.     Question (i): it was held that even if the disciplinary rules are
           silent on providing the enquiry report to the delinquent
           employee or prohibit it—the employee still has a right to get
           the enquiry report. Denying the report means denying a fair
           chance to defend oneself, which violates natural justice. So,
           any rule that prevents giving the report is invalid.
    ii.    Question (ii): If someone other than the disciplinary authority
           conducts the enquiry, the report must be shared with the
           employee.
iii.   Question (iii): The enquiry report must be given whether or not
           the employee asks for it. It is his right, and not asking for it
           does not mean he has given up that right.
iv.    Question (iv): The law
laid down in
Mohd. Ramzan Khan
(supra) applies to all employees—Government, private, or
           public sector.
v.     Question (v): discussed in the next paragraph.
    vi.    Question (vi): the requirement to provide the enquiry report
           would take effect from November 20, 1990—the date of the
           decision in
Mohd. Ramzan Khan
(supra).
vii.   Question (vii): The rule requiring the enquiry report to be given
           to the employee was established for the first time in
Mohd.
           Ramzan Khan
(supra), i.e., 20th November, 1990 and applies
           only to disciplinary orders made after that date; orders passed
           before it would be governed by the earlier law, which did not
           mandate furnishing the report—even if related cases were still
           pending in court.
36. The Constitution Bench’s answer to question (v), referring to the

    ‘prejudice’ principle, reads:
“[v] The next question to be answered is what is the effect on the
35
order of punishment when the report of the enquiry officer is not
      furnished to the employee and what relief should be granted to
      him in such cases. The answer to this question has to be relative to
      the punishment awarded. When the employee is dismissed or
      removed from service and the enquiry is set aside because the
      report is not furnished to him, in some cases the non-furnishing of
      the report may have prejudiced him gravely while in other cases it
      may have made no difference to the ultimate punishment awarded
      to him. Hence to direct reinstatement of the employee with back-
      wages in all cases is to reduce the rules of justice to a mechanical
      ritual. The theory of reasonable opportunity and the principles of
      natural justice have been evolved to uphold the rule of law and to
      assist the individual to vindicate his just rights. They are not
      incantations to be invoked nor rites to be performed on all and
      sundry occasions. Whether in fact, prejudice has been caused to
      the employee or not on account of the denial to him of the report,
      has to be considered on the facts and circumstances of each case.
      Where, therefore, even after the furnishing of the report, no
      different consequence would have followed, it would be a
      perversion of justice to permit the employee to resume duty and to
      get all the consequential benefits. It amounts to rewarding the
      dishonest and the guilty and thus to stretching the concept of
      justice to illogical and exasperating limits. It amounts to an
      ‘unnatural expansion of natural justice’ which in itself is antithetical
      to justice.”
                                                            (emphasis ours)


The Constitution Bench further proceeded to hold that:
“31. Hence, in all cases where the enquiry officer's report is not
      furnished to the delinquent employee in the disciplinary
      proceedings, the Courts and Tribunals should cause the copy of the
      report to be furnished to the aggrieved employee if he has not
      already secured it before coming to the Court/Tribunal and give
      the employee an opportunity to show how his or her case was
      prejudiced because of the non-supply of the report. If after hearing
      the parties, the Court/Tribunal comes to the conclusion that the
      non-supply of the report would have made no difference to the
      ultimate findings and the punishment given, the Court/Tribunal
      should not interfere with the order of punishment. The
      Court/Tribunal should not mechanically set aside the order of
      punishment on the ground that the report was not furnished as is
      regrettably being done at present. The courts should avoid
      resorting to short cuts. Since it is the Courts/Tribunals which will
      apply their judicial mind to the question and give their reasons for
      setting aside or not setting aside the order of punishment, (and
      not any internal appellate or revisional authority), there would be
      neither a breach of the principles of natural justice nor a denial of
      the reasonable opportunity. It is only if the Court/Tribunal finds
      that the furnishing of the report would have made a difference to
36
the result in the case that it should set aside the order of
      punishment. Where after following the above procedure, the
      Court/Tribunal sets aside the order of punishment, the proper
      relief that should be granted is to direct reinstatement of the
      employee with liberty to the authority/management to proceed
      with the enquiry, by placing the employee under suspension and
      continuing the enquiry from the stage of furnishing him with the
      report. The question whether the employee would be entitled to
      the back-wages and other benefits from the date of his dismissal
      to the date of his reinstatement if ultimately ordered, should
      invariably be left to be decided by the authority concerned
      according to law, after the culmination of the proceedings and
      depending on the final outcome. If the employee succeeds in the
      fresh enquiry and is directed to be reinstated, the authority should
      be at liberty to decide according to law how it will treat the period
      from the date of dismissal till the reinstatement and to what
      benefits, if any and the extent of the benefits, he will be entitled.
      The reinstatement made as a result of the setting aside of the
      enquiry for failure to furnish the report, should be treated as a
      reinstatement for the purpose of holding the fresh enquiry from
      the stage of furnishing the report and no more, where such fresh
      enquiry is held. That will also be the correct position in law.”
                                                          (emphasis ours)


Ultimately, the Constitution Bench at paragraph 44 observed:
“44. The need to make the law
laid down in
Mohd. Ramzan Khan
case prospective in operation requires no emphasis. As pointed out
      above, in view of the unsettled position of the law on the subject,
      the authorities/managements all over the country had proceeded on
      the basis that there was no need to furnish a copy of the report of
      the enquiry officer to the delinquent employee and innumerable
      employees have been punished without giving them the copies of
      the reports. In some of the cases, the orders of punishment have
      long since become final while other cases are pending in courts at
      different stages. In many of the cases, the misconduct has been
      grave and in others the denial on the part of the management to
      furnish the report would ultimately prove to be no more than a
      technical mistake. To reopen all the disciplinary proceedings now
      would result in grave prejudice to administration which will far
      outweigh the benefit to the employees concerned.
Both
      administrative reality and public interests do not, therefore, require
      that the orders of punishment passed prior to the decision in
Mohd.
      Ramzan Khan
case without furnishing the report of the enquiry
      officer should be disturbed and the disciplinary proceedings which
37
gave rise to the said orders should be reopened on that account.
Hence we hold as above.”

                                                               (emphasis ours)
37. Plain reading of the questions posed and the answers thereto

    together with the underlying reasons highlight the Constitution

    Bench’s anxiety to safeguard the delinquent employee’s right to

    raise a fair defence, especially in cases where the enquiry is

    conducted by someone other than the disciplinary authority. This

    Court carefully reviewed the legal framework, including
Article 311
of the Constitution—both in its original form and as amended by the

    42nd Amendment, effective from 1st January, 1977. Notwithstanding

    that the law was in a nebulous state at one point of time, the

    decision in
B. Karunakar
(supra) brought clarity and settled the law

    without ambiguity.
38. Thus, the right to receive the enquiry report as a fundamental

    safeguard in disciplinary proceedings, where such report holds the

    charges against the delinquent employee to be established, was

    firmly entrenched by the Constitution Bench in the jurisprudence

    relating   to   proceedings   initiated   for   disciplinary   action   for

    misconduct. This valuable right applies uniformly, regardless of who

    the employer is (Government, public or private) and regardless of

    what the rules governing the service ordain. Even if the rules are

    silent or do not require furnishing of the enquiry report, the same

    has to be furnished. Additionally, the report must be furnished to

    the employee even without a request, as it forms an integral part of
38
ensuring a fair and reasonable opportunity to defend against the

    charges. By not furnishing the report, an employer cannot scuttle

    the rights of the delinquent employee.
39. Reading the passage from
S.K. Sharma
(supra) highlighted above

    bearing in mind the guidance received from the dicta in
B.

    Karunakar
(supra), one can safely conclude that furnishing of a

    report of enquiry though is a procedural step, it is of a mandatory

    character. However, such a requirement can be waived by the

    delinquent employee, expressly or by conduct, but if on facts he is

    found not to have waived his right to receive the report, the theory

    of substantial compliance or the test of ‘prejudice’ would not be

    applicable.
40.
In the decisions of this Court, referred to at the beginning of the

    discussion, it is revealed that some of the Benches of this Court

    have not invalidated the employers' acts of withholding the reports

    of enquiry on the ground that the delinquent employees have not

    been able to demonstrate how they suffered ‘prejudice’ by reason of

    the reports not being furnished, notwithstanding that such decisions

    of the employers clearly violated the precedential significance of the

    Constitution   Bench   decision   in
B.   Karunakar
(supra)   while

    answering question (i).
41. Application of the test of ‘prejudice’, when the requirement is

    mandatory in character and where admittedly the report of enquiry

    has not been furnished, goes against the very grain of the answer
39
rendered by the Constitution Bench in
B. Karunakar
(supra) to the

    basic issue that was under consideration before it. It is proposed to

    discuss, a little later in this judgment, why the test of ‘prejudice’

    may not be made applicable in respect of disciplinary action,

    proceedings wherefor have commenced after the decision in
B.

    Karunakar
(supra) was rendered, appreciating the deleterious

    effects likely to befall employees who have been punished without

    furnishing of the enquiry reports.
We consider it reasonable to think

    that in every case of failure/omission/neglect to furnish the report of

    enquiry, which is an act of the employer certainly in utter disregard

    of the ratio decidendi of the decision in
B. Karunakar
(supra),

    calling upon the employer to justify why the judicial mandate of the

    Constitution Bench had not been followed could have eased the

    situation.
42. Be that as it may, the question that troubles us is this: does the law

    laid down while answering incidental questions have the effect of

    overriding or prevailing over or modifying the law declared on the

    main issue by the Constitution Bench? Questions (v), (vi) and (vii)

    framed by the Constitution Bench in
B. Karunakar
(supra), to our

    mind, were necessitated because of the error/anomaly that was

    noticed in the ultimate direction in
Mohd. Ramzan Khan
(supra).
As we read and understand the law
laid down in
B. Karunakar
(supra), the answers to questions (v), (vi) and (vii) were intended

    to have limited application, that is, to matters which were already
40
pending before this Court or before the high courts as on date the

    Constitution Bench rendered its decision, where the challenge was

    laid to punishment orders passed, both prior to and post November

    20, 1990, i.e., the day when
Mohd. Rizwan Khan
(supra) was

    decided. And the answer to question (i), which was to apply

    prospectively, was intended to guide decisions in future cases

    making it imperative that the employer has to furnish such report to

    the delinquent employee, no matter who the employer is, what the

    rules say or whether the delinquent employee asks for it. Whatever

    be the legal (non)requirement or the factual position, the report has

    to be furnished. That is the law. The report has to be furnished

    because it is an integral part of natural justice and consideration of

    the report behind the back of the delinquent employee would

    effectively deprive him of the protective shield of ‘reasonable

    opportunity to defend’ the charges. We are anchored in our

    conviction that any other interpretation of the Constitution Bench

    decision would result in diluting the law declared therein.
43.
Interpretation of B. Karunakar
(supra), particularly bearing in mind

    the shifting trend towards the ‘prejudice’ principle and the insistence

    on the pleading and proof of ‘prejudice’, may have unintended

    consequences for delinquent employees which have not been

    visualized hitherto, therefore, having the potential of rendering the

    law
laid down by
the Constitution Bench a dead letter.
44. To recapitulate,
B. Karunakar
(supra) has unequivocally held that
41
non-furnishing of the enquiry report would deprive the employee of

    the opportunity and disable him to demonstrate before the

    disciplinary authority the perversity in such report by filing a

    representation. The object that is sought to be achieved by

    furnishing of the enquiry report is this. If the report were furnished,

    the delinquent employee could persuade the disciplinary authority to

    hold that either he is innocent and/or that he does not deserve any

    punishment, or may be let off with a minor punishment. Providing a

    delinquent employee with an opportunity to respond to the enquiry

    report is, thus, a crucial procedural step that must precede

    disciplinary action. Failure to do so, such as imposing punishment

    without   furnishing   the   report,   could   severely   handicap   the

    employee’s ability to effectively question or challenge the decision in

    an appeal/appropriate proceedings, as he would be unaware of the

    materials against him. In such a case, at best, nothing more than a

    plain and simple plea can be urged that non-furnishing of the

    enquiry report has deprived him of reasonable opportunity to

    counter the findings of guilt without, however, he being able to

    demonstrate prejudice. It is axiomatic that without reading the

    enquiry report, there cannot be an effective and meaningful

    challenge to the findings contained therein.
45. That apart, the right to receive the report of enquiry being available

    prior to a final decision being taken in the disciplinary proceedings

    cannot be postponed by any arbitrary act of the employer in not
42
following the law, which can be or should be validated by the court,

    and what was intended to be a pre-decisional opportunity cannot be

    made to partake the character of a post-decisional opportunity.
46. Imagine a scenario where the employer seeking to get rid of an

    inconvenient employee succeeds in its endeavour and dismisses him

    following an enquiry, flawed in itself, by relying on the report of

    enquiry without furnishing copy of the same to him. In such an

    eventuality,   the   dismissed    employee   while   approaching   a

    tribunal/court for redress has to do so without having access to the

    materials considered in the report. This is best exemplified by the

    present case where the report of enquiry has neither been furnished

    to the respondent nor placed on record before all the adjudicatory

    fora. In the absence of such access, can the delinquent employee be

    expected to demonstrate prejudice suffered by him? We are not

    sure how the burden can be discharged by the employee in such a

    case. This lack of access to the report would severely hamper the

    ability of the employee to demonstrate ‘prejudice’ and to build a

    strong case for succeeding in his challenge to the order of

    punishment. Besides, the lengthy legal process could be agonizing,

    and especially without any earning, may not only lead to financial

    strain and diminished resolve but could eventually end up with the

    employee abandoning the challenge. Drawing from experience, we

    understand how employers take advantage and employ methods to

    drag on proceedings for years and thereby ensure that through the
43
process of ‘wear and tear’, the employee (if he has been either

    dismissed or removed from service) loses steam and, inevitably,

    lacking interest in the challenge effectively gets thrown out of the

    legal arena by forces beyond his control.
47. These are vital considerations which, in our considered opinion,

    need to engage the mind of every court while deciding to apply the

    test of ‘prejudice’. In a battle between the mighty lion and the weak

    lamb when the former is in an overpowering position, should the

    courts lean in its favour and put the weak to the sword for not

    having demonstrated ‘prejudice’ when a brazen violation of the law

    declared by the Constitution Bench is brought to its notice? Why

    should the mighty not be made answerable as to why the report of

    enquiry has not been furnished and to bear whatever consequences

    that are bound to follow its failure, omission or neglect in this

    behalf?
In a society governed by the rule of law and when the

    preambular promise is to secure equality and justice for all, the

    weak lamb is certainly entitled in law to demand that the ratio

    decidendi of
B. Karunakar
(supra) be followed to the ‘T’. We

    regret, reliance placed in some of the decisions primarily on certain

    English decisions on whether ‘opportunity would have served any

    purpose’, may not be appropriate for acceptance in our service

    jurisprudence.
48. Looked at from a different angle, it is unheard of and simply

    unacceptable to us that employers could brazenly disregard the law
44
declared by the Constitution Bench and/or act in derogation of

statutory rules, yet, argue that no prejudice was caused to the

dismissed employee by reason of not giving him access to the

enquiry report. If the answer to question (v) given in
B. Karunakar
(supra) is to be regarded as the final word, we are left to wonder

whether it would have at all been necessary for the Constitution

Bench to elaborately discuss the law on the subject, stress on the

importance and need for the enquiry report to be furnished to the

delinquent   employee    and    to    introduce   a   new    regime    with

prospective effect.
If the test of ‘prejudice’ were to be given

primordial importance, the Constitution Bench could have, on the

contrary, simply observed that post 20th November, 1990 [the date

on which
Mohd. Ramzan Khan
(supra) was decided], if in case

report of enquiry in a particular case were not furnished to the

delinquent   employee     and    upon     the     matter    reaching   the

tribunal/court for adjudication at a subsequent stage, the employer

is under no obligation to explain why the report has not been

furnished and its action of taking disciplinary action has to be

judged and could be interdicted only in the event the employee, on

the touchstone of ‘prejudice’, were to succeed in proving that he had

been denied reasonable opportunity to defend. The Constitution

Bench’s careful consideration of question (i), viz. the need to furnish

the enquiry report to a delinquent employee before disciplinary

action is taken being an integral part of natural justice, the answer
45
thereto would be rendered redundant if such an approach by the

     employers is permitted. Allowing employers to circumvent the law

     declared by the Constitution Bench and dilution of such declared law

     regarding the necessity, nay imperative, to furnish the enquiry

     report by interpretative exercises subsequently undertaken by

     Benches    of    lesser   strength    without   bearing   in   mind   other

     Constitution Bench decisions (we propose to refer to them briefly,

     immediately after this discussion) on the effect of breach of natural

     justice principles and the consequences that could visit an employee

     whose service is terminated if the report were not furnished in the

     first place is an unfortunate development which undermines the rule

     of law.
49. Just as
Articles 14
, 19
and
21
of the Constitution constitute a

     triumvirate of rights of citizens conceived as charters on equality,

     freedom and liberty, the trio of decisions of Constitution Benches of

     this Court in
Union of India v. Tulsiram Patel40
,
Olga Tellis v.

     Bombay Municipal Corporation41
and
A.R. Antulay v. R.S.

     Nayak42
form the bedrock of natural justice principles being

     regarded as part of
Article 14
of the Constitution and obviating the

     need to demonstrate ‘prejudice’ if a challenge were laid on the

     ground of breach of
Article 14.
In
Tulsiram Patel
(supra), it was

     held that violation of a principle of natural justice is violation of
40
(1985) 3 SCC 398
41
(1985) 3 SCC 545
42
(1988) 2 SCC 602
46
Article 14.
The dictum of the three-Judge Bench in S.L. Kapoor v.
Jagmohan43       that   non-observance   of   natural   justice   is   itself

       prejudice to any man and proof of prejudice, independently of proof

       of denial of natural justice is unnecessary, was approved by the

       Constitution Bench in
Olga Tellis
(supra).
No prejudice need be

       proved for enforcing the Fundamental Rights is the emphatic

       assertion in
A.R. Antulay
(supra).
50. These Constitution Bench decisions have stood the test of time.
Without being overruled in any subsequent decision, the law

       continues to bind all Benches of lesser strength. Equally, it cannot

       be gainsaid that with the march of time and the progress made in

       the years since then, nuanced or refined approaches to applying

       natural justice principles may be necessary and appropriate in

       specific cases. There can be no quarrel with this approach. However,

       we find it difficult for us to be guided by the decisions insisting on

       application of the ‘prejudice’ principle in the wake of the aforesaid

       Constitution Bench decisions. Accepting such decisions of lesser

       strength would signal re-imposition of the legal regime pre-Mohd.
Ramzan Khan
(supra) when the employer was under no obligation

       to furnish the enquiry report. We are afraid, this could encourage

       mischievous employers to drain out its terminated employee by

       ensuring that copy of the enquiry report is not furnished.
51. Thus said, what is the way for reconciling the law
laid down in
the
43
(1980) 4 SCC 379
47
precedents discussed so far?
Attempting to clear the confusion

arising out of different understandings of the ratio decidendi of the

decision in
B. Karunakar
(supra), we proceed to focus on the

proper course for the tribunal/court to adopt when the issue reaches

it for adjudication. In our opinion, whenever a challenge is mounted

to an order of punishment on, inter alia, the ground that the report

of enquiry has not been furnished, the tribunal/court should require

the employer (Government, public or private) to justify non-

furnishing of such report. This is a course, which again experience

has shown, is seldom followed. If no valid explanation is proffered

and the tribunal/court suspects unfair motives (report has not been

furnished as part of a strategic ploy or to advance an unholy cause

or prompted by extraneous reasons) or carelessness, without much

ado and without insisting for ‘prejudice’ to be demonstrated, the

order of punishment should be set aside and the proceedings

directed to resume from the stage of offering opportunity to the

delinquent employee to respond to the enquiry report. Irrespective

of ‘prejudice’ being demonstrated, no employer or for that matter

anyone should be permitted to steal a march and gain any benefit

by violating the law. In case the tribunal/court is satisfied that real

effort was made by the employer but such effort remained abortive

because the report could not be furnished to the employee for

reason(s) beyond its control, or some other justification is placed on

record, which is acceptable to the tribunal/court, the test of
48
‘prejudice’ is open to be applied but only after ensuring service of a

   copy of the enquiry report on the employee. In a case where the

   employee either expressly or by his conduct appears to have waived

   the requirement of having access to the report, it would be open to

   the tribunal/court to deal with the situation as per its discretion.
However, the simplicitor application of the ‘prejudice’ test absent a

   query to the employer, as indicated above, in our opinion, would be

   in the teeth of the law
laid down in
B. Karunakar
(supra).
52. We now sum up our understanding of the law declared in
B.

   Karunakar
(supra) and answer the four questions delineated in

   paragraph 26 (supra) compositely.
Reading the declaration of law by

   the Constitution Bench regarding the imperative need to furnish the

   report of enquiry to the delinquent employee even when: (i) the

   relevant statutory rules are silent or against it, (ii) the punishment

   to be imposed is other than the punishment referred to in clause (2)

   of
Article 311
of the Constitution, (iii) the employee does not ask for

   it, and (iv) the burden is cast on a private employer too, and the law

   requiring   furnishing   of   the    report   being   made   to   operate

   prospectively from the date the decision in
Mohd. Ramzan Khan
(supra) was rendered, thereby reinforcing the legal position that

   prevailed after the GoI Act was enacted but became unsettled later,

   there can be no two opinions that on and from 20th November, 1990

   [i.e., when
Mohd. Ramzan Khan
(supra) was decided] it is the

   mandatory requirement of law that the report of enquiry has to be
49
furnished to the delinquent employee.
Taking a cue from
S. K.

    Sharma
(supra), we are inclined to the view that the requirement

    of furnishing the report of enquiry, though procedural, is of a

    mandatory character and the bogey argument of the employer to

    apply the test of ‘prejudice’ when the report of enquiry is not

    furnished cannot be of any avail to thwart the challenge of the

    delinquent employee. Such test could call for application, if from the

    facts and circumstances, it can be established that the delinquent

    employee waived his right to have the report furnished. Should

    satisfactory explanation be not proffered by the employer for its

    failure/omission/neglect to furnish the enquiry report, that ought to

    be   sufficient   for   invalidating    the   proceedings   and   directing

    resumption from the stage of furnishing the report. No proof of

    prejudice for breach of a statutory rule or the principles of natural

    justice and fair play need be proved, unless there is a waiver, either

    express or by conduct, to of the right to receive the report. And, it is

    only in specific and not in all circumstances that proof of ‘prejudice’

    ought to be insisted upon.
53. While concluding our discussion, we repeat what has been observed

    earlier. This discourse is intended, not to doubt existing points of

    view, but to contribute to the understanding of the law. To prevent

    misunderstandings and to provide clarity, we wish to make it clear

    that it would be open for all courts, bound by
Article 141
of the

    Constitution, to decide matters coming up before them on the
50
relevant topic in accordance with what they perceive is the law

    declared in
B. Karunakar
(supra).
54. Turning to the facts of the present appeal, we have noted how the

    appellant has conducted itself in proceeding against the respondent.

    Res ipsa loquitur. We have noted earlier that the report of enquiry

    dated 15th September, 2014 has never seen the light of the day.
55. Relying on the law declared in
S.K. Sharma
(supra) which, in turn,

    relied on
B. Karunakar
(supra), we hold that prejudice is self-

    evident and no proof of prejudice as such is called for in this case.
56. Assuming that ‘prejudice’ has to be additionally shown, such

    question at least does not arise here because we are also disabled

    from looking into the said report. Much of what has been argued by

    learned counsel for the appellant pales into insignificance by reason

    of the neglect of the appellant to even place on record before us the

    report of enquiry. We draw adverse presumption and hold that there

    is a purpose behind withholding the report. The report, if produced,

    would have supported the contention of the respondent and hence,

    conveniently, it has not been produced before any fora.
57. It would also be beneficial at this juncture to read the rules and

    regulations which govern the respondent’s employment with the

    appellant. Rule 9 of the 1999 Rules ordains that:
9. Action on Enquiry Report –
           (1) ***
           (2) ***
           (3) ***
51
(4) If the disciplinary authority having regard to its findings on all or
           any of charges is of the opinion that any penalty specified in Rule 3
           should be imposed on the charged Government servant, he shall
           give a copy of the enquiry report and his findings recorded under
           sub-rule (2) to the charged Government servant and require him to
           submit his representation if he so desires, within a reasonable
           specified time. The disciplinary authority shall, having regard to all
           the relevant records relating to the enquiry and representation of
           the charged Government servant, if any, and subject to the
           provisions of Rule 16 of these rules, pass a reasoned order imposing
           one or more penalties mentioned in Rule 3 of these rules and
           communicate the same to the charged Government servant.
(emphasis ours)
58. It is clear, on a bare reading of Rule 9, that the procedure

    contemplated    therein    corresponds     to   the   procedure     that   was

    ordinarily followed in conducting disciplinary proceedings prior to

    amendment of
Article 311
by the Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act,

    1976. As held in paragraph 27 of
B. Karunakar
(supra), where the

    enquiry officer is other than the disciplinary authority, the disciplinary

    proceedings break into two stages. The first stage ends when the

    disciplinary authority arrives at its conclusions on the basis of the

    evidence, enquiry officer’s report and the delinquent employee’s

    reply to it with regard to his alleged guilt. The second stage begins

    when the disciplinary authority decides to impose penalty on the

    basis of its conclusions reached at the first stage. If the disciplinary

    authority decides to drop the disciplinary proceedings, the second

    stage is not even reached. The employee’s right to receive the report

    is, thus, a part of the reasonable opportunity of defending himself in

    the first stage of the enquiry. If this right is denied to him, he is in
52
effect denied the right to defend himself and to prove his innocence

    in the disciplinary proceedings.
59. In the present case, except that the respondent had not participated

    in the second round of enquiry and, hence, the disciplinary authority

    was not under obligation to furnish him the enquiry report, no other

    worthy explanation is forthcoming as to why such report was not

    furnished to the respondent. Assuming arguendo that the respondent

    had   without   justification   stayed   away   from   the   enquiry,   the

    disciplinary authority could not have considered the report of the

    Enquiry Officer in view of what has been held in paragraph 26 of
B.

    Karunakar
(supra) as well as Rule 9(4) of the 1999 Rules. Also,

    since the report of enquiry has been withheld by the appellant at all

    three tiers, it is preposterous that he would be in a position to plead

    and prove prejudice. No such question does arise here.
60. We, thus, hold while answering the third issue that there has been

    blatant disregard by the appellant of not only principles of natural

    justice and the judicial command in
B. Karunakar
(supra) by not

    furnishing the enquiry report but also by not following the applicable

    statutory rule. The enquiry, therefore, stands wholly vitiated.
61. The fourth issue requires us to consider
Abhishek Prabhakar

    Awasthi
(supra), a decision of the Full Bench of the High Court.

    Being a Full Bench decision, obviously the Tribunal as well as the

    Division Bench of the High Court was bound thereby.
The Full Bench

    rendered such decision upon considering, inter alia, the decision of
53
this Court in Union of India and Others v. Satyendra Kumar

       Sahai and Another44. We may only notice the answers to the

       questions referred to the Full Bench, reading as follows:
“(A) Question No. (a): We hold that if an enquiry is not concluded
               within the time which has been fixed by the Court, it is open to the
               employer to seek an extension of time by making an appropriate
               application to the Court setting out the reasons for the delay in the
               conclusion of the enquiry. In such an event, it is for the Court to
               consider whether time should be extended, based on the facts and
               circumstances of the case. However, where there is a stipulation of
               time by the Court, it will not be open to the employer to disregard
               that stipulation and an extension of time must be sought;
               (B) Question No. (b): The judgment of the Supreme Court in the
               case of
Suresh Chandra
(supra) as well as the judgment of the
               Division Bench of this Court in the case of Satyendra Kumar Sahai
               (supra) clearly indicate that a mere delay on the part of the
               employer in concluding a disciplinary enquiry will not ipso facto
               nullify the entire proceedings in every case. The Court which has
               fixed a stipulation of time has jurisdiction to extend the time and it
               is open to the Court, while exercising that jurisdiction, to consider
               whether the delay has been satisfactorily explained. The Court can
               suitably extend time for conclusion of the enquiry either in a
               proceeding instituted by the employee challenging the enquiry on
               the ground that it was not completed within the stipulated period or
               even upon an independent application moved by the employer. The
               Court has the inherent jurisdiction to grant an extension of time,
               the original stipulation of time having been fixed by the Court itself.
Such an extension of time has to be considered in the interests of
               justice balancing both the need for expeditious conclusion of the
               enquiry in the interests of fairness and an honest administration. In
               an appropriate case, it would be open to the Court to extend time
               suo motu in order to ensure that a serious charge of misconduct
               does not go unpunished leading to a serious detriment to the public
               interest. The Court has sufficient powers to grant an extension of
               time both before and after the period stipulated by the Court has
               come to an end”.
62. While affirming the aforesaid view of the Full Bench, we would like to

       provide clarification on certain points not touched by such bench.

       First, in view of unseen institutional hurdles that can slow down swift
44
(2005) 12 SCC 355
54
action, it may not always be possible for the disciplinary authority in

each such case where a fixed time has been stipulated by a

tribunal/court to conclude the proceedings to apply and seek

extension of time before expiry of such time although there can be

no gainsaying that applying and obtaining an extension before expiry

is eminently desirable. In exceptional cases, even after expiry of the

stipulated time, such an application can be moved; and, depending

on the cause shown for inability or failure to conclude the

proceedings within the time stipulated and also for not applying for

extension before expiry, the tribunal/court may, in its discretion,

allow or reject the prayer for extension. If the application is rejected,

the proceedings cannot be carried forward unless a superior court,

reversing the order of rejection, permits the disciplinary authority to

so proceed. Secondly, if the delinquent employee objects to

continuation     of   proceedings   beyond     the   time   stipulated,   the

disciplinary authority without proceeding further ought to apply for

extension of time and may not go ahead till such time its prayer for

extension   is   granted    on   such    application.   Proceeding   despite

objection and without there being an extension could give rise to

apprehensions of bias. Therefore, applying for extension upon halting

the proceedings awaiting order on the application would be an

advisable course of action to balance the interests of both the

employer and the employee. Thirdly, even if the delinquent employee

has not objected to continuation of proceedings beyond the time
55
stipulated by the tribunal/court but before the final order is passed in

    the proceedings, the disciplinary authority would be bound to seek

    and obtain extension of time. This is for the simple reason that the

    sanctity of the orders of tribunals/courts cannot be disrespected by

    errant parties. The dignity of the judicial process would be seriously

    eroded and there would be nothing left of the rule of law if orders of

    tribunals/courts, validly made, are disobeyed and the disobedience is

    encouraged by being indulgent. Finally, we hasten to add that if a

    tribunal/court stipulates a fixed time by which an enquiry or

    proceedings for disciplinary action ought to be concluded coupled

    with a rider that, in default, the enquiry/proceedings will stand

    lapsed, the disciplinary authority in such a case would cease to have

    the jurisdiction to proceed further unless, of course, citing genuine

    grounds, a recall of such default clause is sought and obtained to

    proceed further in accordance with law.
63. We also hold that continuation of disciplinary proceedings beyond the

    time stipulated by a tribunal/court could invite interdiction if no bona

    fide attempt is shown to have been made to seek an extension of

    time. However, much would depend on the facts of each case and it

    may not be possible to lay down a common formula applicable to

    each case. In an exceptional case, the tribunal/court would have the

    discretion to overlook the laxity and make such direction as it deems

    fit in the circumstances.
56
64. The answer to the fourth issue, in view of our discussion, has to be in

       favour of the respondent and against the appellant. Without an

       extension of time, no order of punishment could have been validly

       made and the grievance of the respondent in this behalf is absolutely

       legitimate.
65. What survives for decision is now the fifth and final issue.
66. It is clear as day-light that the appellant despite being given an

       opportunity to proceed in accordance with law failed to utilise such

       opportunity. The respondent has experienced 75 (seventy-five)

       summers, and is now in the winter years of his life.
67. There are two decisions of this Court, from which guidance could be

       had.
68. In A. Masilamani v. LIC45, this Court held:
“16. It is a settled legal proposition, that once the court sets aside
               an order of punishment, on the ground that the enquiry was not
               properly conducted, the court cannot reinstate the employee. It
               must remit the case concerned to the disciplinary authority for it to
               conduct the enquiry from the point that it stood vitiated, and
               conclude the same.”
69. The decision of this Court in
Allahabad Bank v. Krishna Narayan

       Tiwari46
also throws light on the approach to be adopted but in a

       more nuanced manner than what was held in A. Masilamani

       (supra). Paragraph 8 of the decision reads as follows:
“8. There is no quarrel with the proposition that in cases where the
               High Court finds the enquiry to be deficient, either procedurally or
               otherwise, the proper course always is to remand the matter back
45
(2013) 6 SCC 530
46
(2017) 2 SCC 308
57
to the authority concerned to redo the same afresh. That course
           could have been followed even in the present case. The matter
           could be remanded back to the disciplinary authority or to the
           enquiry officer for a proper enquiry and a fresh report and order.
But that course may not have been the only course open in a given
           situation. There may be situations where because of a long time-lag
           or such other supervening circumstances the writ court considers it
           unfair, harsh or otherwise unnecessary to direct a fresh enquiry or
           fresh order by the competent authority. That is precisely what the
           High Court has done in the case at hand.”
                                                              (emphasis ours)
70. Respondent, undoubtedly, was denied a reasonable opportunity to

    defend himself in the enquiry by the appellant, as ordained by the

    1999 Rules. The manner in which the disciplinary proceedings were

    conducted and continued against the respondent did not satisfy the

    requirements    of   ‘due   process’.   The   flaws   creeping   in   such

    proceedings have rendered the same wholly illegal. The routine

    course of action in a case, such as the present, where an order of

    punishment is set aside on grounds of breach of statutory rules and

    the charged officer is not acquitted on merits, is to remit the case to

    the disciplinary authority and direct resumption from the stage the

    proceedings is found to stand vitiated.
71. This, in this case, would mean reverting to the stage of production of

    witnesses on behalf of the department. When not a single witness

    could be produced for examination in 2010 and 2014, we do not

    think that witnesses would now be available to support the charges.

    Even otherwise, these proceedings have certain incidents of 2004-05

    as the origin. Having regard to the lapse of time since then coupled

    with the retirement of the respondent from service in 2010 and,
58
more particularly, when the appellant despite an earlier opportunity

granted by the Tribunal has failed to avail the same by continuing the

enquiry in accordance with law, it would be highly unfair and unjust

to subject the respondent to face the enquiry once again. Gravity of

the offence alleged to have been committed is certainly a vital

consideration; however, repeated opportunities cannot be claimed

without there being overwhelming public interest warranting such

opportunity. No doubt, the respondent was charged with involvement

in a financial scam but a line has to be drawn. Or else, it could be an

unending affair till such time based on a legal and valid report of

enquiry, the disciplinary authority passes an appropriate order. On

facts, we are satisfied that second opportunity was not required to be

given. Also, we have noticed from the materials on record that two of

the respondent’s colleagues (one of them a senior officer) who were

also proceeded against have been practically let off with no

punishment or punishment of stoppage of increments. Thus, we are

satisfied that no useful purpose will be served by reviving the

disciplinary proceedings and in remitting the case to the appellant.

On the contrary, the issue must be given a quietus because the

Tribunal or the High Court did not commit any illegality. We hold that

the Tribunal and the High Court were correct and justified in not

granting   one   more   opportunity   to   the   appellant   to   resume

proceedings from the stage invalidity in the proceedings was

detected. The impugned order of the High Court, not suffering from
59
any legal infirmity, does not warrant any interference and deserves

    to be upheld.
CONCLUSION
72. For the foregoing reasons, we find no merit in this appeal. The same

    is, accordingly, dismissed. Interim order stands vacated.
73. The respondent shall be entitled to full retiral benefits from the date

    of his superannuation without any sum being deducted. However,

    provisional pension received by him may be adjusted with the

    arrears. Let the pensionary benefits be computed and the balance

    sum of pension together with other retiral benefits be released in

    favour of the respondent as early as possible, but positively within

    three months from date of receipt of a copy of this judgment and

    order. In default, the sum payable to the respondent shall carry

    interest @ 6% per annum and the High Court too shall be free to

    carry the contempt proceedings forward.
74. Parties shall, however, bear their own costs.
……………………..……J.
                                                     (DIPANKAR DATTA)



                                         ………………………………………J.
                                         (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA)

     New Delhi.
April 23, 2025.
60