[Cites
21
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Larsen And Toubro Ltd vs Puri Construction Pvt. Ltd on 21 April, 2025
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
,
Abhay S Oka
2025 INSC 523

                                                                              Reportable

                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 2575-2578 OF 2016

                            Larsen and Toubro Limited                    … Appellant

                                                          versus


                            Puri Construction Pvt. Ltd.                  … Respondents
                            and Others
                                                      with
                                      CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 2580-2581 OF 2016
                                                           and
                                            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2579 OF 2016


                                                        JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1.   These appeals arise out of the judgment and order dated

                            30th April, 2015, passed by the Division Bench of Delhi High

                            Court on the appeals preferred under
Section 37
of the

                            Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short, ‘the
Arbitration Act
’). The appeals before the Division Bench were

                            preferred against the judgment dated 26th November, 2008 of
Signature Not Verified
the learned Single Judge in a petition under
Section 34
of the
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2025.04.21
18:34:47 IST
Reason:
Arbitration Act
by which the award of the Arbitral Tribunal
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                        Page 1 of 72
was set aside.                    The Division Bench, by the impugned

          judgment, has disagreed with some of the findings recorded

          by the learned Single Judge. To that extent, the appeals

          preferred by Puri Construction Private Limited and Mohinder

          Puri have been allowed.                The appeal by Larsen and Toubro

          Limited was dismissed.                    However, the Division Bench

          observed that the parties are left to pursue the appropriate

          course of actions under law.
2.       In these appeals, we are concerned with a company,

          Puri Construction Limited and its sister concerns (collectively

          referred to as ‘PCL’). We are also concerned with another

          company, Larsen and Toubro Limited (hereafter referred to as

          ‘L&T’). PCL was in possession of lands in the Gurgaon

          District, Haryana, as the owner thereof. PCL had obtained

          licenses from the Director Town and Country Planning,

          Haryana (for short, ‘the DTCP’) to develop the lands for

          residential group housing schemes. Earlier, PCL had entered

          into a joint venture with ITC Classic Real Estate Finance

          Limited (for short, ‘ITCREF') under the name Florentine

          Estates of India Limited for the development of the lands.
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                          Page 2 of 72
Ultimately, ITCREF exited from the business. An Exit

          Agreement dated 30th July, 1997 was made, which, inter alia,

          stipulated that PCL would transfer to ITCREF the built-up

          space of 1,95,000 sq. ft. in the project. Thereafter, L&T was

          introduced to complete the project.
3.       L&T and PCL entered into an agreement for land

          development (for short ‘the Development Agreement’) on 19 th

          January, 1998, but the date mentioned therein was 10 th

          March, 1998. Subsequently, since L&T was of the opinion that

          there was a recessionary trend in the real estate market due

          to which the project was required to be down-sized, a

          supplementary agreement was entered into between L&T and

          PCL on 30th December, 1999 (for short ‘the Supplementary

          Agreement’). Based on the Supplementary Agreement, a

          Tripartite Agreement dated 10th January, 2000 (for short, ‘the

          Tripartite Agreement’) was entered into between PCL, L&T

          and Lord Krishna Bank (for short ‘the Bank’).
4.       Broadly, in the Development Agreement, it was provided
          as under:
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                   Page 3 of 72
(a) L&T will develop the entire property mentioned in

                            Schedule ‘A’ of the Agreement, including the part

                            allocated to PCL, at its own cost;
(b) In phase-I of development, L&T will develop a

                            portion of Schedule ‘A’ property as described in

                            Schedule ‘B’. An area of 18.025 acres will be

                            developed by L&T within 60 months in phase-I. In

                            phase-II of the development, L&T was to develop

                            the remaining portion as mutually acceptable to

                            the parties in view of the prevailing market

                            conditions;
(c)    The ratio of division in the developed property

                            between PCL and L&T was agreed to be 25% and

                            75% respectively;
(d) ITCREF was to get an area of 2,20,416 sq. ft. from

                            the property allocated to PCL;
(e)    PCL agreed to pay all External Development

                            Charges (for short, ‘EDC’) up to the date of the

                            development agreement. The liability to pay EDC
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                       Page 4 of 72
was to be of L&T after receiving No Objection

                            Certificate (for short ‘NOC’);
(f)    L&T was to complete the construction of Phase-I in

                            60 months, which was subject to extension in view

                            of prevailing market conditions; and
(g) L&T will not be deemed to be in default if

                            performance      of   its   obligations   under   the

                            development agreement is delayed, inter alia, due

                            to the prevailing market conditions.
5.       The        Supplementary       Agreement    incorporated   the
          following clauses:
(a) The terms of the Development Agreement will

                            continue to bind the parties unless otherwise

                            agreed in the in the Supplementary Agreement,

                            which shall come into effect after happening of the

                            following events:
i.   L&T taking over or replacing bank guarantees

                                   furnished by PCL to DTCP;
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                           Page 5 of 72
ii.   The bank paying EDC amounting to Rs. 6

                                   crores to DTCP;
iii.   Reimbursement of expenses incurred by PCL

                                   by L&T; and


                            iv.    Compliance with the terms and conditions of

                                   the Tripartite Agreement made by L&T by

                                   paying Rs.5.14 crores to the Lord Krishna

                                   Bank (“the Bank”).
(b) L&T will furnish bank guarantees to DTCP after

                            approval of the term loan by the bank to PCL;
(c)    L&T will pay the EDC of Rs. 6 crores paid by PCL

                            through the bank and the remaining EDC Charges

                            within 18 months;
(d) L&T agreed to commence construction work for

                            3.84 lac sq.ft. of the development, subject to

                            achieving a confirmed booking/selling target of

                            75% in phase-I area; and
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                        Page 6 of 72
(e)    The Agreement would not be construed as a waiver

                            of any right that has accrued for the extension or

                            termination under the Development Agreement.
6.       In the Tripartite Agreement, it was provided as under:
(a) The Bank will pay a sum of Rs. 6 crores towards

                            EDC to DTCP on behalf of PCL, which will

                            constitute a term loan to PCL. The loan will be

                            secured by 15 acres of land already mortgaged by

                            PCL to the Bank;
(b) The Bank will issue a bank guarantee of Rs. 4.66

                            crores to DTCP on behalf of L&T; and
(c)    L&T will pay the Bank a sum of Rs. 5.19 crores on

                            behalf of PCL to discharge the loan availed for

                            payment of EDC on or before 19th January, 2000.
7.       We may note here that there was an arbitration to which

          ITCREF and PCL were parties. A consent award was passed

          on 13th May, 2000, in favour of ITCREF requiring PCL to allot

          1,06,200 sq. ft. to ITCREF.
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                        Page 7 of 72
8.       PCL by letter dated 18th December, 2000, terminated the

          Development Agreement with L&T inter alia, on the grounds

          of:
(a) Failure to allocate area to ITCREF;
(b) Non-sanctioning        of    funds     towards     the

                            development; and


                     (c)    Non-payment of EDC; and
(d) Other breaches in relation of non-commencement

                            of work.
9.       Delhi High Court referred the dispute between PCL and

          L&T to a Sole Arbitrator. Broadly, the following were the

          prayers made by PCL before the Arbitral Tribunal:
(a) Direct L&T to satisfy the loan availed from the

                            Bank and to obtain the release of the title-deeds in

                            respect of 15 acres of land placed by PCL with the

                            Bank as security;
(b) Direct L&T to return the title-deeds of the rest of

                            the lands to PCL;
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                          Page 8 of 72
(c)    Direct L&T to return the sanctioned development

                            plans and other documents, including licences,

                            permits, permissions etc;
(d) Issue              a   permanent    injunction    against    L&T

                            restraining it from interfering with any of PCL’s

                            rights to develop the property; and
(e)    For grant of compensation and damages to the

                            tune of Rs. 300 crores and Rs. 100 crores

                            respectively.
10.      L&T filed a counter-claim before the Arbitral Tribunal,

          making the following prayers:
(a) Declare that PCL has no authority to rescind the

                            contract;
(b) Grant compensation and damages to L&T to the

                            tune of Rs. 280 crores due to the wrongful

                            rescission of the agreement by PCL. Rs. 280 crores

                            were claimed as the reimbursement amount of

                            profit          which   L&T     would   have   received    by

                            developing 75% of the area; and
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                                   Page 9 of 72
(c)    Grant reimbursement to L&T of Rs. 8,31,53,968/-
as the amount spent by it towards fulfilling the

                            obligations under the Development Agreement.
11.      The Arbitral Award was made on 28th December, 2002.

          The Arbitral Tribunal held that:
(a) L&T            jeopardised   PCL’s   obligations   towards

                            ITCREF;
(b) L&T resiled from and went back upon its original

                            contractual obligations and tried to effect sales

                            without sanction under the revised development

                            plan and without making any provision for the

                            responsibility towards ITCREF;
(c)    L&T had consciously decided to abandon the

                            Development Agreement and omitted to pay EDC

                            and also defaulted in the fulfilment of its obligation

                            to the statutory authorities, ITCREF, as well as the

                            Bank;
(d) The object of the Supplementary Agreement was

                            unlawful as it sought to defeat the beneficial
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                             Page 10 of 72
interest of ITCREF, which was a signing party to

                            the Development Agreement; and
(e)    The Supplementary Agreement was tainted by

                            economic coercion, and the signatures of PCL were

                            obtained by fraud.
12.      The operative award is as follows:
“ I. An Award in favour of the Claimants directing the
                              Respondent to pay Rs. 35 Crores to the Claimants on
                              account of damages suffered by the Claimants within
                              four weeks from the date of the award;
II.     An Award in favour of the Claimants, directing
                              the Respondent to settle the claim of Lord Krishna
                              Bank within 4 weeks of the Award by repayment of
                              loan of Rs. 6 Crores with such interest that may be
                              due and payable to Lord Krishna Bank and further
                              directing the Respondent to secure the release of title
                              deeds from the said bank and to reimburse the
                              claimant’s interest charges paid by Puri Construction
                              Ltd. to Lord Krishna Bank in interregnum; within a
                              period of four weeks from the date of this award. In
                              default thereof, the Respondent will pay to the
                              Claimants a sum of Rs. 75 Crores for loss of saleable
                              area in respect of 15 acres of land placed in mortgage
                              with the said bank within a period of four weeks from
                              the date of this Award.;
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                               Page 11 of 72
III.    An Award in favour of the claimants directing the
                              Respondent       to   return   licences   permits    and
                              permissions obtained by the Claimants from the
                              statutory authorities in respect of the lands covered
                              by the Development Agreement dated 10.3.1998
                              within 4 weeks of this Award to the Managing
                              Director of Puri Construction Ltd. and obtain a
                              certificate of discharge to that effect granted by the
                              said Puri Construction Ltd. or in lieu thereof the
                              Respondent will pay to the Claimants a sum of Rs. 5
                              Crores by way of damages within a period of four
                              weeks from the date of this Award;
IV.     An Award in favour of the Claimants directing
                              that the Respondent or anybody claiming under the
                              Respondent is permanently injuncted by restraining
                              them from interfering in any way or manner with the
                              rights of the claimants to develop the property
                              covered under the said Agreement dated 10.3.1998;

                              V.      An Award in favour of the Claimants, directing
                              the Respondent to indemnify the Claimants in terms
                              of Clauses 4(b) and 25 of the Development Agreement
                              dated 10.3.1998 for any action or decree or settlement
                              to be enforced by ITCREF against the Claimants or in
                              lieu thereof shall pay to the Claimants a sum of Rs.
                              50 Crores on such date as such action or decree or
                              settlement to be enforced by ITCREF against the
                              Claimants becomes crystallized;
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                                 Page 12 of 72
VI.     An Award in favour of the Claimants, directing
                              the Respondent to pay cost of the Arbitration
                              proceedings quantified at Rs. 30 lakhs within a period
                              of four weeks from the date of the Award;
VII. An Award in favour of the Claimants, directing
                              the Respondent to pay interest to the Claimants @
                              12%       p.a.   on     the   sums    awarded    hereinabove
                              commencing on four weeks from the date of this
                              Award till actual payment made by the Respondent.”
13.      The learned Single Judge in a petition under
Section 34
of the Arbitration Act had set aside the Arbitral Award. The

          Division Bench by the impugned judgment upheld the

          dismissal of L&T’s counter-claim. The Division Bench upheld

          the findings of the Arbitral Tribunal that the Supplementary

          Agreement was a non-starter as it was vitiated by economic

          duress.         The       Division    Bench       also    upheld    the   Arbitral

          Tribunal's finding that the Development Agreement was not

          novated by the Supplementary Agreement. Division Bench

          also upheld the Tribunal’s finding that conditions to be

          fulfilled       by L&T,           subject   to    which    the   Supplementary

          Agreement was to come into force, were not fulfilled. However,

          the Tribunal’s quantification of damages for breach of

          contract, amounting to a sum of Rs. 35 crores, and
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                                      Page 13 of 72
compensation in lieu of securing title deeds with respect to 15

          acres of land, amounting to Rs. 75 crores, as well as

          compensation for default in returning licences and permits,

          amounting to Rs. 5 crores, was set aside. The permanent

          injunction granted in favour of PCL, restraining L&T from

          interfering with PCL’s development of the Schedule ‘A’

          property under the Development Agreement, was upheld.

          Even the relief granted of indemnification in favour of PCL for

          ITCREF’s claim was set aside without prejudice to the

          indemnification for ITCREF’s claim relating to the transfer of

          2,20,416 sq. ft of land to the extent envisaged under the

          Development Agreement. The Division Bench upheld the

          Arbitral Tribunal’s order to the extent that it awarded the cost

          of arbitration to PCL. The title deeds deposited with the

          Registrar of the High Court were ordered to be released to

          PCL. In the light of the above directions and conclusions, the

          parties were allowed to pursue their appropriate course of

          action. The Division Bench allowed three appeals preferred by

          PCL in part and dismissed the appeal preferred by L&T. Both

          PCL and L&T, aggrieved by the Division Bench's decision,

          preferred the present Civil Appeals.
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                    Page 14 of 72
SUBMISSIONS
14.      Very detailed submissions have been made on behalf of

          both parties. We are reproducing the gist of the submissions

          made by the counsel appearing for the parties.
15.      Learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of L&T has

          made detailed submissions after inviting our attention to the

          findings recorded by the Arbitral Tribunal and by the courts

          under
Sections 34
and
37
of the Arbitration Act. The learned

          senior counsel submitted that though Division Bench of the

          High Court has referred to the decision of this court in the

          case of
Project Director, National Highways No. 45 E and

          220, National Highways Authority of India v. M. Hakeem

          and Another1
, which holds that the court dealing with a

          petition under
Section 34
cannot modify the award, the

          Division Bench purported to modify the award. He submitted

          that it is not permissible for the court to uphold a part of the

          award and remand the remaining part back to the Tribunal.

          He submitted that the decision of the Division Bench is akin

          to setting aside the decree for upholding judgment. He

          submitted that the reasoning in the award and its operative

          1 (2021) 9 SCC 1
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                    Page 15 of 72
part are intrinsically linked and the same cannot be severed.
Moreover, this is not a case where there are distinct and

          severable claims. He submitted that the effect of the

          impugned judgment of the Division Bench is that PCL would

          get a chance to improve upon the pleadings by initiating fresh

          arbitration before the Tribunal. But, L&T’s doors would be

          closed for a fresh adjudication in view of the findings rendered

          in the award.
16.      According to the learned senior counsel, the Division

          Bench has set aside the award directing payment of Rs. 35

          crores as damages to PCL. He pointed out that the award

          contains a direction to L&T to settle the claim of the Bank by

          repayment of the loan of Rs. 6 crores and to secure release of

          the title deeds from the Bank; in default, L&T was directed to

          pay PCL a sum of Rs. 75 crores. The first part of the relief for

          payment of Rs. 6 crores has been upheld by the Division

          Bench, but the portion of the award in respect of Rs. 75

          crores has been set aside. The award contains a direction

          against L&T to return licences, permits and permissions

          obtained by PCL from statutory authorities in respect of the
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                    Page 16 of 72
lands. On failure to return the documents, L&T was directed

          to pay Rs. 5 crores to PCL. However, the Division Bench has

          upheld the award directing return of the documents, but has

          rejected the award to the extent of payment of Rs. 5 crores.

          Moreover, an award-granting injunction against L&T from

          interfering in any manner with the rights of PCL to develop

          the property has been upheld. The award directed L&T to

          indemnify PCL for any action, decree, or settlement to be

          enforced by ITCREF or, in lieu thereof, to pay to PCL Rs. 50

          crores. The Division Bench has set aside this part of the

          award in its entirety. There was an order of costs of

          arbitration to the tune of Rs. 30 lakhs in favour of PCL, which

          has been confirmed. He submitted that, in fact, no licences,

          permits, or permissions obtained from statutory authorities

          were in possession of L&T. Moreover, the award in favour of

          the Bank is perverse as L&T has sought specific performance

          of the contract; there was no need to grant an injunction.
17.      Now, coming to the interplay between the Development

          Agreement, Supplementary Agreement and the Tripartite

          Agreement, he submitted that the rights and obligations of
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                   Page 17 of 72
the parties under the said agreements have been decided by

          the      Arbitral         Tribunal       without      recording    reasons.    He

          submitted that even PCL admitted that the conditions

          contained in Sub-clauses (a) to (d) of Clause I of the

          Supplementary                Agreement         were    conditions     precedent.

          However, the Tribunal misread the plain terms of the

          Supplementary Agreement contrary to the pleadings and

          without assigning any reason, has held that conditions

          precedent in Clauses (I), (II) and (III) of the Supplementary

          Agreement            have         not   been   fulfilled   and    therefore,   the

          Supplementary Agreement was a non-starter. He relied upon

          the decision of this Court in the case of
Dyna Technologies

          Private Limited v. Crompton Greaves Limited2
.
18.      The learned senior counsel further submitted that in
Section 34
proceedings, reasons cannot be supplanted to the

          reasons recorded in the award. He invited our attention to

          sub-clauses (a) to (d) of Clause I of the Supplementary

          Agreement.            His     submission       is   that   the    terms   of   the

          Supplementary Agreement were totally disregarded by the

          Tribunal and relied on the original terms of the Development

          2 (2019) 20 SCC 1
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                                      Page 18 of 72
Agreement. He submitted that the award is vitiated due to

          lack of reasons. He submitted that the award made was

          contrary to the pleadings. The learned senior counsel invited

          our attention to the findings of the learned Single Judge in a

          petition under
Section 34
. He submitted that the Division

          Bench supplanted its own reasons to uphold the award.

          Further, the Division Bench tried to rewrite the contract by

          including          other          clauses   as   conditions   precedent.   His

          submission is that the Tribunal mixed up various unrelated

          issues with issue no. 2 which pertains to economic coercion.

          He submitted that the entire focus was on the alleged breach

          committed by L&T of the Development Agreement and

          abandonment of the site. Unreasoned finding has been given

          that      the      Supplementary            Agreement   and    the   Tripartite

          Agreement were entered under compulsion. The Tribunal

          failed to note that in the Statement of Claim as well as in the

          rejoinder filed by PCL, there was assertion regarding the

          binding nature of the Supplementary Agreement.
One Mr.

          Mohinder Puri on behalf of PCL filed an affidavit which was

          not only beyond the pleadings, but also contrary to the same

          as he, for the first time, alleges exercise of coercion to enter
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                                   Page 19 of 72
into Supplementary Agreement. Learned counsel relied upon

          several documents to show that there was no coercion and

          submitted that the Tribunal ignored the documents. He

          would, therefore, submit that the award was vitiated in view of
Section 28(1)(a)
of the Arbitration Act. He relied upon a

          decision of this Court in the case of
Associate Builders v.

          Delhi Development Authority3
. Learned counsel submitted

          that the view taken by the Tribunal is not even a plausible

          view.
19.      Learned senior counsel submitted that a finding was

          recorded by the learned Single Judge in the
Section 34
petition that the Arbitral Tribunal could not have ignored all

          the       correspondence          and   evidence   showing   why   the

          Supplementary Agreement was signed. The learned Single

          Judge held that the award was self-contradictory and the

          findings were mutually destructive inasmuch as while holding

          that the Supplementary Agreement was entered into by

          compulsion, the Tribunal, thereafter, purported to enforce the

          Tripartite Agreement. Learned senior counsel pointed out that

          the Division Bench rejected the objection of L&T that the plea

          3 (2015) 3 SCC 49
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                          Page 20 of 72
of coercion was not taken by holding that the Statement of

          Claim is not specific on the point of coercion, but the plea

          taken in paragraph 136(5)(a) of the Statement of Claim can be

          deemed sufficient. In fact, what is quoted was part of PCL’s

          letter dated 18th December, 2000, in response to L&T’s letter

          dated 10th July, 2000. It was urged that the above allegation

          has nothing to do with economic coercion to compel PCL to

          enter into Supplementary Agreement. It is submitted that

          Division Bench has supplied reasons to justify the award

          which reasons were not there in the award itself. In fact, the

          Division Bench went to the extent of converting the plea of

          coercion into undue influence even when there was no

          pleading to that effect.
20.      The Arbitral Tribunal has rendered a contradictory

          finding that the Supplementary Agreement was not operative,

          but, L&T cannot be relieved of its obligations under the

          Tripartite Agreement and thus, is bound to pay the Bank.

          Learned counsel reiterated that the Tripartite Agreement

          flows from the Supplementary Agreement. He pointed out that

          the Arbitral Tribunal held that L&T was bound by the
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                  Page 21 of 72
Tripartite Agreement and at the same time observed that the

          Supplementary Agreement and the Tripartite Agreement were

          signed by PCL under compulsion and in dire need of funding

          of EDC payment. He submitted that the learned Single Judge

          has rightly held that when the Supplementary Agreement was

          a non-starter, as per the Tribunal, no relief could have been

          granted under the Tripartite Agreement. Unfortunately, this

          argument has not been dealt with by the Division Bench.
21.      He      invited          our   attention   to   Clause   26   of   the

          Development Agreement which provided that L&T was entitled

          to extension of time for completing the construction in case of

          adverse market conditions. As per Clause 34, L&T could not

          be treated in default of performance of its obligation if it is

          delayed or prevented due to adverse market conditions. He

          submitted that there were enough documents on record to

          show that land prices were falling and prevailing market

          conditions did not encourage development of land. He

          submitted that though there was a specific pleading to that

          effect, the Arbitral Tribunal did not record any finding in the

          award with regard to the market conditions and in fact,
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                                   Page 22 of 72
Clauses 26 and 34 of the Development Agreement have been

          completely ignored. However, the learned Single Judge noticed

          that there was material on record with respect to the fall in

          real estate market and held that Arbitrator could not have

          ignored all those correspondences and evidence showing why

          the Supplementary Agreement was signed. The Division

          Bench recorded the submission that the Tribunal has ignored

          Clauses 26 and 34 of the Development Agreement, but, has

          not dealt with the submission and tried to supply its own

          reasons which were not found in the award. Thus, the

          Division Bench acted beyond the scope of
Section 37
of the

          Arbitration Act.
22.      The Arbitral Tribunal committed an error by directing

          L&T to make payment to the Bank on the ground that L&T

          cannot be relieved of its obligation to the Bank under the

          Tripartite Agreement. It is submitted that the Bank was not a

          party to the proceedings and therefore, the claim by the Bank

          was not before the Arbitral Tribunal. In fact, in the affidavit in

          lieu of evidence filed by PCL, it was contended that the Bank

          is a third party and any action by the Bank can be tried only
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                      Page 23 of 72
by the Debt Recovery Tribunal. Therefore, the submission is

          that the award in favour of the Bank is vitiated under
Section

          28(1)(a)(iv)
. He submitted that the said argument of L&T was

          accepted by the learned Single Judge on the ground that the

          Bank was not a party before the Tribunal and the Tripartite

          Agreement did not have an arbitration clause. On this aspect,

          he pointed out the finding of the Division Bench that the

          principal amount of Rs. 6 crores with interest was an amount

          payable by L&T to the bank under the Development

          Agreement. He submitted that, in fact, the said obligation can

          be read only in the Tripartite Agreement.
23.      Learned senior counsel submitted that L&T has suffered

          a loss of Rs. 5.44 crores towards EDC. Though, the Tribunal

          had noted that the EDC payment would normally be

          reimbursed, but it failed to offset the same. Learned counsel

          pointed out that the sum of Rs. 8.10 crores was deposited

          under an interim order dated 24 th January, 2003 passed by

          the learned Single Judge in
Section 34
petition subject to the

          outcome of the proceedings. An application for restitution was

          filed by L&T in
Section 34
proceedings. By order dated 8 th
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                   Page 24 of 72
January, 2011, it was directed to be listed along with the

          appeal before the Division Bench. However, the Division

          Bench has not dealt with the same. A prayer was made that

          L&T may be permitted to file an appropriate application for

          restitution before the High Court.
24.      The submission of the learned senior counsel is that the

          order of the learned Single Judge in the
Section 34
petition

          deserves to be upheld.
25.      The learned senior counsel appearing for PCL pointed

          out that basically two issues arise for consideration. The first

          is whether there was a breach committed by L&T as held by

          the Arbitral Tribunal, and the second question is whether, if

          the finding of breach committed by L&T is upheld, the finding

          of the Arbitral Tribunal regarding damages can be revived.
26.      The learned senior counsel submitted that the scope of

          interference in a petition under
Section 34
of the Arbitration

          Act is now well settled. He relied upon a decision of this Court

          in the case of
S.V. Samudram v. State of Karnataka and

          Another4
. If the Arbitral Tribunal’s view is a plausible view, it

          4 (2024) 3 SCC 623
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                     Page 25 of 72
ought not be interfered with. To arrive at a decision as to

          whether a plausible view has been taken, the court would

          consider whether the Arbitrator has considered the material

          forming part of the record and arrived at a plausible view in

          an overall sense and not expect the Arbitrator to deal with the

          matter and render a judgment with the detailed reasoning as

          is normally found in decisions of the civil courts.
27.      Learned senior counsel submitted that to examine the

          award in supervisory jurisdiction under
Section 34
of the

          Arbitration Act, the court must be cautious and should defer

          to the view taken by the Arbitral Tribunal even if the

          reasoning provided in the award is implied. If the reasons

          recorded by the Arbitral Tribunal are intelligible, the award

          cannot be set aside just because there were gaps in the

          reasoning of conclusions reached by the Arbitral Tribunal.

          The submission is that the award of the Arbitral Tribunal in

          the present case is intelligible and contains adequate reasons.

          He pointed out several findings recorded by the Arbitral

          Tribunal with reasons.
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                   Page 26 of 72
28.      He submitted that L&T’s submission that Clause 26

          read with Clause 34 of the Development Agreement permitted

          it to seek extension of time is wholly misplaced considering

          the fact that L&T abandoned the project because a decision

          was taken by L&T to do so. Only in case L&T had paid EDC

          and there was no risk of losing the licences, L&T could have

          invoked Clauses 26 and 34 of the Development Agreement for

          delayed completion of construction. Admittedly, no request

          was made by L&T for the grant of extension of time for

          completing the construction with the undertaking of making

          payment of EDC in terms of Clauses 19 and 25 of the

          Development Agreement, which were never modified. Learned

          senior counsel submitted that L&T was holding title deeds in

          relation to 25 acres of land and did not return the title deeds.

          The title deeds in respect of the remaining 15 acres of land

          were with the Bank for securing the loan availed for payment

          of EDC. The payment of EDC was the liability of L&T as per

          the Development Agreement. He also pointed out that L&T did

          not lead any of the evidence. The stand of L&T in

          considerations of the overall findings of the learned Tribunal

          on breach of contract, abandonment etc. is completely out of
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                    Page 27 of 72
place and without any basis. In fact, no issues were framed

          on the basis of Clauses 26 and 34 of the Development

          Agreement.
29.      The       conditions     precedent     in   the   Supplementary

          Agreement may be read with their true intent and purport.

          Condition precedent no.1 also contains the binding nature of

          the Development Agreement, except as agreed otherwise.

          Under the Supplementary Agreement, payment of EDC, as

          per Clause 19 read with Clause 27 of the Development

          Agreement, was continued. The developer was liable to pay

          EDC over a period of 18 months in terms of the licence.

          Condition           precedent     no.   1(a)   expressly   requisited   the

          ‘replacing or taking over’ of the bank guarantee furnished by

          PCL. He pointed out the letter dated 15 th March, 2000,

          addressed by PCL to the Bank, where the request was made

          to continue with the bank guarantee of PCL. However, at the

          same time, the request was made to the bank to forthwith

          release the margin money of PCL. Learned counsel submitted

          that L&T has made a false statement on oath that the bank

          guarantee of PCL, with margin money and interest, was
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                               Page 28 of 72
released. Altogether, a new case was made out by L&T before

          this court, as it was not pleaded before the Tribunal that the

          margin money had been refunded and bank guarantees had

          been released. In fact, PCL by letter dated 12 th April, 2000

          reminded L&T that fresh bank guarantees were to be served

          as PCL's guarantee was not released. According to the specific

          pleading of PCL in the Statement of Claims, a condition

          precedent for the coming into effect of the said agreement was

          replacing and taking over the bank guarantee. In the

          Statement of defence-cum-counterclaim of L&T, it was claimed

          that L&T had executed a counter bank guarantee. It was

          submitted that attributing insufficient reasons in relation to

          non-satisfaction                  of   the   condition   precedent   of   the

          Supplementary Agreement is incorrect. On 07 th October,

          1999, L&T had taken a clear stand that the report submitted

          by the consultant was not favourable to pursue the project

          and hence, they shall not pay EDC. Reliance was placed by

          learned counsel on the Statement of Claims of L&T. He invited

          our attention to the fact that on 26 th October, 1999, PCL was

          again constrained to put L&T on notice that there were

          serious defaults of the terms of licences and the Development
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                                 Page 29 of 72
Agreement. It was submitted that L&T was in possession of

          title deeds of area of 25 acres from 15 th and 16th October,

          1998. A submission was made that there were sufficient facts

          pleaded in the pleadings to show coercion. He submitted that

          non-payment of EDC as per Clause 19(b) of the Development

          Agreement led to issuance of notice for cancellation of licences

          of PCL. In the letter dated 07th October, 1999, L&T had taken

          a clear stand that they will not pay EDC. Initially, on 8 th

          December,           1998,         L&T's   stand   was   that   it   was   their

          responsibility to pay EDC from 01 st July, 1998. Thereafter, a

          stand was taken on 02nd April, 1999 that they will pay EDC

          only after launch of the project. L&T did not pay Rs. 5 crores

          refundable advance to PCL. L&T instructed PCL not to collect

          any cheque and on 08th April, 1999, L&T internally instructed

          to demobilize resources from the site. The title deeds were in

          possession of L&T and the same was pleaded in the

          Statement of Claims. Learned counsel submitted that these

          all facts constituted coercion. He also pointed out that with

          the consent of the parties, the issue was framed on the plea of

          coercion being an issue no. 2, and in fact, L&T accepted that

          there could be no grievance with the procedure followed by
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                                   Page 30 of 72
the Arbitral Tribunal in framing issues. In fact, in the final

          submission before the Arbitral Tribunal, L&T admitted that

          the plea of economic duress was pleaded by PCL by pointing

          out that the Supplementary Agreement was signed out of

          economic duress and coercion.
30.      He      submitted that on the question    whether the

          condition precedent for the Supplementary Agreement was

          satisfied, L&T did not lead evidence and evidence of PCL

          remained uncontroverted.
31.      As regards the contention that the relief granted in the

          award was beyond the jurisdiction, learned counsel submitted

          that the arbitration clause in the Development Agreement

          even covered disputes in connection with the agreement. In

          fact, the Supplementary Agreement refers to the fact that

          parties to the Development Agreement have agreed to enter

          into a tripartite agreement with the Bank. In turn, the

          tripartite agreement records that L&T and PCL had entered

          into Development Agreement on 10th March 1998. The notice

          invoking the arbitration clause refers to the three agreements,

          and even in the petition filed under
Section 11
of the
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                     Page 31 of 72
Arbitration Act
, the disputes were set out in relation to the

          three agreements. By consent of the parties, vide order dated

          14th February, 2001, the disputes in relation to all three

          agreements, including the determination of the liability of

          ITCREF and the Bank, were referred to the Arbitral Tribunal.

          Before the Arbitral Tribunal, L&T took the stand that it was

          its liability to ensure payment to the Bank. Also, L&T took a

          stand through its counsel that the obligation was cast upon

          L&T with respect to the liability of ITCREF. Moreover, L&T did

          not take recourse to
Section 16
of the Arbitration Act for

          challenging the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal.
32.      Learned senior counsel pointed out the issues framed by

          the Tribunal concerning damages and compensation. He

          submitted that perusal of L&T’s Statement of Defence shows

          that the parties were ad idem on the question of valuation at

          which sales could be made as L&T had itself based the claim

          for damages on such valuation. As regards valuation, the

          Tribunal considered the evidence of Shri Mohinder Puri

          adduced on behalf of PCL. Therefore, the Tribunal relied upon

          agreed valuation based on L&T’s demands in its counter-claim
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                    Page 32 of 72
as a reasonable estimate of the loss suffered by PCL. L&T had

          pleaded that they were entitled to 75% of the total constructed

          area while PCL was entitled to 25%. In fact, the Arbitral

          Tribunal used L&T’s computation of loss of profit made by

          L&T at Rs. 280 crores as the basis to arrive at PCL’s loss of

          profit as Rs. 93 crores. In fact, the estimate of loss caused to

          PCL was taken at Rs. 93 crores, which is on the lower side.

          After considering the fact that ITCREF had initiated action to

          forfeit licenses, the Tribunal reduced the amount awarded as

          damages to Rs. 35 crores. Therefore, the findings recorded by

          the Tribunal on this behalf are reasonable. Learned counsel

          submitted that the Division Bench ought not to have set aside

          the Tribunal’s findings on damages awarded to PCL. This was

          not a case of no evidence before the Tribunal.
The basis of

          damages was L&T's own valuation of the built-up space.

          Evidence of Shri Mahendra Puri had gone unchallenged. As

          the damages granted to PCL were based on evidence on

          record, the said finding should not have been interfered with

          in a petition under
Section 34
or in an appeal under
Section

          37
of the Arbitration Act. He submitted that in view of the

          decision of this Court in the case of
Associate Builders v.
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                    Page 33 of 72
Delhi Development Authority3
, incorrect quantification of

          damages by the Arbitral Tribunal will not be covered by either

          “patent illegality” or “violation of public policy”. Even as

          regards the indemnity in favour of ITCREF, the concerned

          issue was issue no. 10 before the Tribunal on which detailed

          statements were made and findings were recorded by the

          Arbitral Tribunal based on the appreciation of the evidence on

          record. The finding of the Division Bench that L&T's

          obligation to indemnify was only in terms of the built-up

          space is wholly incorrect. Learned senior counsel pointed out

          that on one hand, there was non-payment of EDC by L&T, on

          the other hand, there were repeated notices sent by DTCP for

          cancellation of licences. Moreover, ITCREF had filed a civil

          suit in the District Court seeking recovery of rupees 73 crores

          plus interest against PCL and also against L&T. In addition to

          all this, L&T was holding title deeds of 25 acres of licensed

          land of PCL and 15 acres of PCL’s licensed land with the Bank

          for which the Bank had invoked securitization laws and also

          filed proceedings before the Debt Recovery Tribunal. During

          the Arbitral proceedings, L&T always resisted returning the

          title deeds in respect of 25 acres of land. Therefore, the
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                   Page 34 of 72
argument that the land remained with PCL has no relevance

          at all.
33.       Lastly, it was submitted that the dispute between the

          parties was of the year 2000. The award was made on 28th

          December, 2002, after a very detailed hearing before the

          Tribunal.          Thereafter,    the   dispute   remained   sub-judice

          continuously before the courts. Therefore, considering the

          findings of the Tribunal, as upheld by the Division Bench,

          this court will consider exercising extraordinary powers to do

          complete justice. Therefore, appeals preferred by L&T may be

          dismissed, and PCL may be compensated for the huge legal

          expenditure incurred during the last 21 years. It was

          submitted that the appeal preferred by PCL be allowed while

          upholding the damages and compensation awarded by the

          Arbitral Tribunal in terms of the award.
ISSUES FRAMED BY THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL
34.       The Arbitral Tribunal framed 14 issues which read thus:
Issue No. 1:                Whether the Development Agreement dated

          10.03.1998 entered into between the Respondent and the
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                           Page 35 of 72
Claimants is binding on the parties or the same stand

          novated by the Supplementary Agreement dated 30.12.1999?
Issue No. 2:                Whether     the    Supplementary     Agreement

          dated       30.12.1999            and   the   Tripartite   Agreement   dated

          10.01.2000 were tainted by coercion and economic duress on

          the claimants? If not, whether the claimants and the

          Respondent performed respective obligations according to

          tenor and terms of the Supplementary Agreement dated

          30.12.1999 and the Tripartite Agreement dated 10.01.2000?


          Issue No. 3:                Whether the Claimants committed breaches

          of the fundamental terms of the Development Agreement

          dated 10.03.1998 to enable the Respondent to resile from the

          agreement of development?
Issue No. 4:                Whether the respondent's Board of directors

          in pursuance of reports of Boston Consulting Group (for short

          ‘BCG’). Richard Ellis and Jones Lang La Salle decide to down-

          size/exit the business of real estate development and not to

          pay EDC or commence development work?
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                                Page 36 of 72
Issue No. 5:                Whether there had been non provisions of

          security of the development site and unprovoked unilateral

          abandonment of the site by L&T. If so whether such actions

          had resulted in encroachments causing monetary loss to the

          Claimants and in the event of such monetary loss caused to

          the Claimants what is the extent of such loss?


          Issue No. 6:                Whether the Claimants entitled to terminate

          the development agreement for the reasons stated in the letter

          of termination dated 16.12.2000 or even otherwise?


          Issue No. 7:                Was the Respondent under any obligation to

          commence construction in phase I for development of 3.84

          Lac        sq.      ft.     before   the   Claimants   had   confirmed

          booking/selling targets as per the Supplementary Agreement

          dated 30.12.1999?
Issue No. 8:                Whether termination of the contract by the

          Claimants amounts to wrongful repudiation and entitles

          Respondent to rescind the contract and claim damages under

          Section 73 and 75 of the Indian Contracts Act?
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                           Page 37 of 72
Issue No. 9:                Whether the Respondent is entitled to be

          relieved of its obligations under the Tripartite Agreement

          dated 10.01.2000 and be put in the same position as if such

          agreement had not been entered into?
Issue No. 10:               Is the Respondent liable to compensate the

          Claimants under the agreement of indemnity and if so what

          effect?
Issue No. 11:               Is the Respondent liable to be compensated

          by Claimants by a sum of Rs.8,31,53,968/- including a sum

          of Rs.5.19 Crores paid by the LKB as claimed by the

          respondent?
Issue No. 12:               Is    the   Respondent   entitled   to   be

          compensated by the Claimants a sum of Rs.280 Crores as net

          profit being difference in the cost of construction estimated at

          Rs.800/- per sq. ft. with the total cost being Rs. 320 Crores as

          claimed by the respondent?
Issue No. 13:               Are the Claimants entitled to compensation

          from the Respondent and damages of a total values of Rs. 300
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                           Page 38 of 72
crores and are the Claimants entitled to a further sum of Rs.
100 crores as punitive damages?
Issue No. 14:               Whether    Mr.   Mohinder    Puri   has   the

          authority to institute the instant claim petition and to carry

          out acts necessary to prosecute the instant claim petition on

          behalf of Claimants other than Puri Construction Limited? If

          not whether the claim petition for other Claimants is

          maintainable?
ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL’S AWARD
35.      The Arbitral Tribunal recorded detailed findings. The

          findings recorded by the Arbitral Tribunal can be summarised

          as under:
Issue No. 1:                The conditions precedent in Clauses (I), (II),

          and (III) of the Supplementary Agreement were not fulfilled.

          Therefore, the Supplementary Agreement was a non-starter,

          hence, only the Development Agreement was binding on the

          parties which was not novated by the Supplementary

          Agreement.
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                              Page 39 of 72
Issue No. 2:                The    Supplementary      Agreement    and    the

          Tripartite         Agreement         were   tainted   by    coercion.   These

          agreements were executed as PCL was in dire need of money

          for making EDC payments. It was the obligation of L&T to

          provide funds for payment of EDC and the Tripartite

          Agreement was signed since L&T failed to provide the

          requisite funds.
Issue No. 3:                PCL substantially discharged its obligation

          under the Development Agreement. However, by unilaterally

          abandoning the project, L&T committed fundamental breach

          in its obligation under the Development Agreement.


          Issue No. 4:                The site inspection conducted by the Arbitral

          Tribunal          revealed        that   L&T   had    not   commenced     the

          development work. L&T did not lead any oral evidence and

          failed to produce the relevant documents that were called

          upon to be produced by the Tribunal. Thus, L&T took a

          conscious decision to abandon the development, not to pay

          EDC or fulfil its obligations towards statutory authorities,

          ITCREF and the Bank. Therefore, monetary loss was caused

          to PCL.
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                                 Page 40 of 72
Issue No. 5:                L&T did not fulfil its obligations under the

          development agreement. L&T failed to fund the project. It also

          failed to provide sufficient security arrangements at the site,

          resulting in encroachment of some sites.


          Issue No. 6:                PCL   was    entitled   to   terminate   the

          Development Agreement in view of the breaches committed by

          L&T as recorded in issue No. 5.
Issue No. 7:                Before PCL had confirmed bookings/selling

          targets as per the Supplementary Agreement, L&T was not

          under an obligation to commence construction in phase 1.

          The reason was that the Supplementary Agreement was not

          operative and binding, and no responsibility contrary to the

          Development Agreement could be fastened on L&T.


          Issue No. 8:                The termination of the contract by PCL does

          not amount to wrongful repudiation, and it does not entitle

          L&T to rescind the contract and claim damages under
Sections 73
and
75
of the Contract Act.


          Issue No. 9:                As the Tripartite Agreement was negated due

          to L&T's default, and since it imposes liability on L&T, it
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                            Page 41 of 72
cannot be relieved of its obligation under the Tripartite

          Agreement.
Issue No. 10:               L&T   had   complete   knowledge   of   PCL’s

          obligation to ITCREF. Under Clause 25 of the Development

          Agreement, L&T was responsible for indemnifying PCL against

          any loss, liability, cost, or claim that may arise against PCL

          due to L&T’s failure to discharge its obligations. The

          obligations under Clause 25 shall subsist even after the

          termination of the Development Agreement.


          Issue No. 11:               As L&T had abandoned the project, it cannot

          take advantage of its own wrong. Therefore, L&T is not

          entitled to compensation from PCL.
Issue No. 12:               The claim of Rs. 240 crores made by L&T

          was negatived on the ground that L&T itself had abandoned

          the project and therefore, it cannot take advantage of its own

          wrong.
Issue No. 13:               PCL was entitled to compensation from L&T

          amounting to Rs. 93 crores in relation to its 25 percent share.

          It was based on L&T’s calculation of profit for its 75 percent
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                             Page 42 of 72
share. The Tribunal observed that PCL was entitled to

          damages of Rs. 35 crores in lieu of L&T's failure to pay EDC in

          a timely manner. However, it was held that PCL was not

          entitled to any punitive damages.
Issue No. 14:               The authority of Mr. Mohinder Puri to

          institute a claim on behalf of PCL was acquiesced by L&T, as

          it did not object to the affidavit filed by Mr. Puri. Moreover, Mr.

          Puri supplied copies of the board resolutions of the respective

          companies granting him power of attorney.
36.      We have already reproduced the operative part of the

          Award in paragraph 12 above.
FINDINGS RECORDED BY LEARNED SINGLE JUDGE IN
          SECTION 34 PETITION
37.      Now, coming to the findings recorded in a petition under
Section 34
, the findings can be summarised as under:
Issue No. 1:                The   conditions    precedent      for    the

          Supplementary                Agreement   were   satisfied   substantially.

          Clause (I) was the only condition required to be fulfilled, and

          Clauses (II) and (III) were not required to be fulfilled by L&T. It
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                              Page 43 of 72
was held that the Arbitral Tribunal gave inconsistent findings

          by holding that the Supplementary Agreement was a non-

          starter and void. However, the Tripartite Agreement was not

          found to be void, though it was entered into as a result of the

          Supplementary Agreement.
Issue No. 2:                Both the Supplementary Agreement and the

          Tripartite Agreement were not tainted by coercion as parties

          to it recognized that the market prices had gone down and it

          was not advisable to launch the project. In fact, Clause 26 of

          the Development Agreement stipulated that construction was

          contingent upon prevailing market conditions, and parties

          were permitted to rescind the contract in the event of adverse

          market conditions.
Issue No. 3:                It    seems   that   no   submissions   were

          canvassed in the petition under
Section 34
.


          Issue No. 4:                The Tribunal’s conclusion could not be

          based solely on the reports of BCG; instead, the inference was

          to be drawn by the Tribunal based on the actions.
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                            Page 44 of 72
Issue No. 5:                The learned Single Judge did not record a

          finding on this issue.
Issue No. 6:                PCL was not entitled to terminate the

          Development Agreement. Although PCL made a commitment

          to ITCREF to provide an area of 153,500 sq. ft., it allocated

          only 88,320 sq. ft. itself.
Issue Nos. 7 and 8:               It appears that no submissions were

          made before the learned Single Judge on these issues.


          Issue No. 9: The Tribunal exceeded its jurisdiction by

          directing L&T to fulfil its obligations towards the Bank. It was

          held that the Bank was not a party to the proceedings and the

          Tripartite Agreement did not contain any arbitration clause.


          Issue Nos. 10, 11 and 12:               There were no specific findings

          recorded by the learned Single Judge.


          Issue No. 13: PCL was not entitled to any compensation from

          L&T as it had already paid the price of the land to ITCREF.

          Moreover, PCL committed an area to ITCREF, which was more

          than its share. PCL’s losses would arise only when ITCREF
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                           Page 45 of 72
files a suit for recovering damages for non-fulfilment of the

          commitment and failing to hand over the land in due time.


          FINDINGS RECORDED BY DIVISION BENCH IN SECTION
          37 APPEALS
38.      Now, we must consider the findings recorded by the

          Division Bench in appeals under
Section 37
of the Arbitration

          Act.
Issue No. 1: The Division Bench relied upon the conditions

          included in Clause II of the Supplementary Agreement. The

          Division Bench observed that PCL had spent 17.28 crores

          towards EDC out of which payment of Rs. 6 crores was made

          by PCL by mortgaging 15 acres of its land. Under Clause II,

          L&T was required to make good a plurality of bank guarantees

          and assume responsibility for payment of EDC. However,

          there was complete failure on the part of L&T to do so.


          Issue No. 2: The Division Bench found that the finding of the

          Tribunal          that      the   Supplementary   Agreement   and   the

          Tripartite Agreement were tainted by coercion was correct. It

          was observed that the Arbitral Tribunal rightly found that

          economic duress has vitiated the Development Agreement.
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                           Page 46 of 72
Issue No. 3: The Division Bench observed that L&T has not

          urged any ground with respect to rejection of its counter-claim

          before the learned Single Judge.
Issue No. 4: The Division Bench agreed with the finding of

          the Tribunal that L&T decided to abandon the project on the

          basis of the BCG Report. The Division Bench held that the

          award was well supported by evidence. Inspection conducted

          by the Arbitral Tribunal showed that L&T had not even

          commenced the development work. Though, PCL handed over

          the title deeds to L&T on 16 th October, 1998, no progress was

          made in construction by L&T. Moreover, L&T delayed the

          project and was planning it till 18 th December, 1999. L&T was

          fully aware about PCL’s obligation to ITCREF which was

          expressly set out in the Development Agreement.


          Issue No. 6: There may not be separate findings recorded by

          the Division Bench, but the Division Bench, as stated earlier,

          agreed that the Tribunal accepted the breaches committed by

          L&T.


          Issue No. 7: There is no specific finding recorded by the

          Division Bench.
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                   Page 47 of 72
Issue No. 8 and 9: The Division Bench held that L&T did not

          urge any ground with respect to the rejection of its counter-

          claim before the learned Single Judge.
Issue No. 10: The Division Bench held that the Tribunal’s

          direction to L&T to pay Rs. 50 crores to PCL on crystallization

          of ITCREF’s claim deserves to be set aside. The loss suffered

          by ITCREF would not be reasonably foreseeable for PCL to be

          indemnified against. It was held that L&T’s failure to transfer

          the built-up area would have to be accounted for under the

          heading         damages           for   the   breach   of   the   Development

          Agreement by L&T.


          Issue Nos. 11 and 12: The Division Bench held that L&T did

          not raise any ground with respect to the rejection of its

          counter-claim before the learned Single Judge.


          Issue No. 13: The Division Bench held that actual loss was

          not established by PCL. It was observed that after the

          rejection of L&T’s counterclaim, it would be an illegality to rely

          on L&T’s calculation of profit. However, the Tribunal’s finding

          regarding L&T’s failure to pay EDC timely was affirmed.
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                                 Page 48 of 72
Issue No. 14: It is evident that the Tribunal's findings were

          not seriously challenged.
39.      We now turn to the conclusions recorded in paragraph

          119 of the impugned judgment. In substance, the Division

          Bench agreed with the findings recorded by the Arbitral

          Tribunal that the Supplementary Agreement was a non-

          starter, it was vitiated by economic duress, and that the

          Development               Agreement         was    not     novated    by     the

          Supplementary Agreement. The Division Bench also approved

          the finding of the Arbitral Tribunal that L&T committed a

          fundamental breach of the Development Agreement. The

          Division         Bench            also   upheld   the    dismissal   of    L&T's

          counterclaim. Furthermore, the Division Bench concluded

          that the permanent injunction granted in favour of PCL was

          also justified. However, the quantification of damages and

          compensation, as well as indemnification for ITCREF’s claim,

          was found to be contrary to the record. The net effect was that

          the operative part of the award fixing the monetary liability of

          L&T was set aside while leaving open the remedy of PCL for

          the quantification of the monetary claim. In view of the
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                                    Page 49 of 72
confirmation of findings on merits, the award regarding costs

          was confirmed. But, in view of the legal position that the

          award cannot be varied or modified, the Division Bench did

          not restore any part of the arbitral award and held in

          paragraph no. 120 that the parties are left to pursue the

          appropriate course of action.
CONSIDERATION
40.      Firstly, we will deal with the issue of the power of the

          Court under
Section 34
of partly setting aside the award. This

          issue was dealt with by this Court in the case of
Project

          Director, National Highways No. 45 E and 220, National

          Highways Authority of India v. M. Hakeem and Another
1.
This Court, in
the said decision
, considered its earlier

          decision in the case of
McDermott International Inc. v Burn

          Standard Co. Ltd. & Ors.
5 Ultimately, in paragraph 42, this

          Court held thus:
“42. It can therefore be said that this question
                         has now been settled finally by at least 3
                         decisions [
McDermott International Inc. v. Burn
                         Standard Co. Ltd.
, (
2006) 11 SCC 181] , [Kinnari
                         Mullick v. Ghanshyam Das Damani
, (2018) 11


          5 (2006) 11 SCC 181
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                     Page 50 of 72
SCC 328 : (
2018) 5 SCC (Civ) 106] , [Dakshin
                         Haryana            Bijli    Vitran   Nigam   Ltd. v. Navigant
                         Technologies (P) Ltd.
, (2021) 7 SCC 657] of this
                         Court. Even otherwise, to state that the judicial
                         trend appears to favour an interpretation that
                         would read into
Section 34
a power to modify,
                         revise or vary the award would be to ignore the
                         previous law contained in the 1940 Act; as also
                         to ignore the fact that the 1996 Act was enacted
                         based         on           the Uncitral Model     Law     on
                         International              Commercial   Arbitration,    1985
                         which, as has been pointed out in Redfern and
                         Hunter on International Arbitration, makes it clear
                         that, given the limited judicial interference on
                         extremely limited grounds not dealing with the
                         merits of an award, the “limited remedy” under
Section 34
is coterminous with the “limited
                         right”, namely, either to set aside an award or
                         remand the matter under the circumstances
                         mentioned in
Section 34
of the Arbitration Act,
                         1996.”
41.      We are conscious of the fact that a larger bench is seized

          with the issue of the power of the Court to modify the award

          under
Section 34
. However, we are respectfully bound by the

          decision in the case of
Project Director, National Highways

          No. 45 E and 220, National Highway Authority of India v.

          M. Hakeem and Another1
. As we have noted, after recording
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                                Page 51 of 72
its conclusions in paragraph 119, the Division bench, in the

          last paragraph of the impugned Judgment, has not modified

          the award.
42.      We have perused the three agreements subject matter of

          controversy. The Development Agreement is a contract

          between PCL and L&T. Clause 4 of the Development

          Agreement refers to the obligations of PCL under the

          agreement entered into by it on 30 th July, 1997 with ITCREF.

          It refers to the fact that PCL had agreed to hand over 1,95,000

          sq. ft. of built-up area in the Schedule ‘A’ property, after its

          development, comprising high-rise and low-rise buildings,

          inclusive of a car park, to ITCREF. It also refers to the fact

          that the extent of the built-up area to be allocated to ITCREF

          was 2,20,416 sq. ft., which formed part of the allocation made

          under the Development Agreement to PCL. The Development

          Agreement also provides that PCL had agreed that 15 acres of

          land mortgaged to the Bank would be in the remaining

          portion of Schedule ‘A’ property and that PCL would get the

          mortgage discharged on this 15 acres of land comprised in

          Schedule ‘A’ property before commencement of development
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                    Page 52 of 72
work in the remaining portion of Schedule ‘A’ property. The

          Agreement also provides for the deposit of original documents

          in relation to Schedule ‘A’ property (except to the extent of 15

          acres of land mortgaged with the Bank). Paragraph 19 records

          L&T's obligation to pay the EDC after receiving the NOC from

          the appropriate authority. The Agreement provides that L&T

          shall complete the construction of the building on the

          Schedule ‘B’ property within 60 months or such mutually

          extended period from the date of obtaining sanction for the

          building plan, or tax clearance under
Section 37-I
of the

          Income Tax Act, and making the said property available for

          development, whichever is later. It has also stipulated that

          construction shall be carried out in phases. After completion

          of phase of 3,00,000 sq. ft. on Schedule ‘B’ property, L&T, in

          consultation with PCL, by mutual consent, shall have the

          option          and         liberty   to   renew   and   revise   the

          specifications/amenities and built-up area of the balance

          development and extend the period of completion by a further

          period of 12 months, depending upon the prevalent market

          conditions.
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                         Page 53 of 72
43.      Now, we refer to the Supplementary Agreement. In the

          recital of the Supplementary Agreement, it is mentioned that

          L&T has made only partial compliance with the requirement

          under the Development Agreement to pay EDC to DTCP.

          Moreover, L&T has failed to furnish a bank guarantee for the

          balance payment of EDC. In fact, it records that L&T had

          taken a stand that in view of the adverse market conditions,

          the project had become unviable and sought further time

          from PCL to allow the prevailing real estate market conditions

          to improve. Clauses I, II and III of the Supplementary

          Agreement read thus:
I. “That        the    terms    of   the    Development
                          Agreement          will   continue     to    bind   the
parties hereto, unless otherwise agreed to
                          in these presents, which shall come into
                          effect       on    happening     of    the   following
                          events :
(a) DEVELOPER replacing or taking over the
                                Bank        Guarantees     furnished    by    the
                                OWNERS through their Banker to DTCP,
                                Haryana;
(b) Payment of EDC amounting to Rs. 6
                                Crore by Lord Krishna Bank to DTCP
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                           Page 54 of 72
Haryana,      in    terms     of    the    Tripartite
                                Agreement between the parties hereto
                                with Lord Krishna Bank;
(c) Reimbursement of expenses incurred by
                                the OWNER as detailed in Annexure I, on
                                production of proof of payment thereof;
(d) Compliance of the terms and conditions
                                of the tripartite agreement between the
                                parties hereto with Lord Krishna Bank,
                                inter-alia the DEVELOPER paying Rs.
5.19 Crore to Lord Krishna Bank, on
                                behalf of OWNERS towards discharge of
                                the loan availed by the OWNERS for
                                payment of EDC. The said sum of Rs.
5.19 Crore shall be a secured interest free
                                loan by the DEVELOPER to the OWNERS.
II. The Bank Guarantees would be furnished by
                          the DEVELOPER to the DTCP after final
                          approval of term loan by Lord Krishna Bank
                          to     the        OWNER       and    escrow           account
                          arrangement finalisation, either through the
                          Bankers of the OWNERS or any other Bank
                          acceptable         to    DTCP.      The        said     bank
                          guarantees shall remain valid and in force
                          upto      the     date   of   receipt     of    completion
                          Certificate of the I phase of the project.
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                                 Page 55 of 72
III. The parties hereto agree that the Clause 19
                          of the Development Agreement shall stand
                          modified as under:
(a) The EDC Charges of Rs. 1013.14 Lacs
                                paid so far by the OWNERS shall be
                                reimbursable only after receipt of the
                                same from the prospective purchasers of
                                the apartments in the Project.
(b) The Developer agrees to pay the balance
                                EDC as under:
i. Rs. 6 Crore through M/s. Lord Krishna
                                   Bank as provided in Clause I(b) supra;

                               ii. Pay the remaining EDC charges over a
                                   period of 18 months in terms of
                                   licenses.
(c) The EDC paid by the parties shall be
                                reimbursable to each of the parties from
                                out of the sale proceeds, as agreed in the
                                Agreement for Development.”
                                                         (emphasis added)
44.      We may note here that, as stated in Clause (I) of the

          Supplementary Agreement, the terms of the Supplementary

          Agreement were to come into effect upon the occurrence of the

          events mentioned therein, which included the condition that
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                    Page 56 of 72
L&T would replace or take over the bank guarantees

          furnished by PCL through their banker to DTCP. Other

          condition was of compliance of the terms and conditions of

          the Tripartite Agreement which provided for L&T paying sum

          of Rs. 5.19 crores to the Bank on behalf of PCL. The Arbitral

          Tribunal found that Clauses (I) and (II) were not fully complied

          with by L&T. The Tribunal also found that Clause (III) was not

          complied with by L&T due to non-payment of EDC charges as

          provided therein. On a plain reading of these three clauses,

          the learned Single Judge's finding that Clauses (II) and (III)

          were not required to be fulfilled is based on a complete

          misreading of Clauses (II) and (III). The Division Bench rightly

          agreed with the Tribunal that conditions included in the said

          clauses were required to be complied with, but were not

          complied with. The Division Bench noted that even the

          Supplementary Agreement revealed that the DTCP had issued

          a show-cause notice for non-payment of EDC, threatening

          cancellation of licenses. Clause (I) of the Supplementary

          Agreement makes it very clear that the Supplementary

          Agreement shall come into effect only upon the occurrence of
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                    Page 57 of 72
the      four      events         specified   therein.   That   is   how   the

          Supplementary Agreement remained a non-starter.
45.      We now turn to the Tripartite Agreement, which in turn

          refers to the Supplementary Agreement. It is recorded that

          PCL and L&T had approached the Bank to avail a term loan of

          Rs. 6 crores for payment of EDC charges. Under the said

          agreement, the Bank agreed to pay Rs. 6 crores EDC to DTCP

          on behalf of PCL. It was agreed that the 15 acres of land

          already mortgaged by PCL with the Bank will continue to

          serve as a guarantee for the said term loan of Rs. 6 crores.
The Tripartite Agreement provides that the Bank shall

          forthwith release, in favour of the PCL, the counter-

          guarantees outstanding for the bank guarantees given by the

          Bank for a sum of Rs. 466.175 lakhs in favour of DTCP,

          Haryana. It was provided in the Tripartite Agreement that

          L&T will open an Escrow account with the Bank in New Delhi,

          wherein all sale proceeds of the proposed flats will be

          deposited. Out of the funds in the escrow account, the Bank

          will first appropriate the interest part for the respective period

          and out of the balance portion, appropriate 50 per cent
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                                  Page 58 of 72
towards repayment of the term loan and release the remaining

          50 per cent balance to L&T, subject to review on a later date.

          It was provided that PCL and L&T have undertaken to launch

          the sale of apartments in the Schedule ‘A’ property, covering

          an area of 3.84 lakhs sq. ft., by 15th February, 2000. L&T

          had also undertaken to complete the said development within

          30 months of the commencement of construction. Even all

          sale proceeds were to be collected by L&T and deposited with

          the Bank in an escrow account. The Tripartite Agreement

          provided that L&T shall pay to the Bank a sum of Rs. 5.19

          crores on behalf of PCL towards discharge of the loan availed

          by PCL for payment of EDC on or before 19 th January, 2000.

          Lastly, it was provided that upon full set-off and/or repayment

          of the term loan of Rs. 6 crores, including interest thereon,

          PCL shall be relieved of its obligation under this Agreement.
46.      Looking          to      the   clauses   in   the   Supplementary

          Agreement, the finding recorded by the Tribunal that, as the

          conditions precedent in the relevant clauses were not

          complied with by L&T, the Supplementary Agreement was a

          non-starter is undoubtedly a possible finding which could not
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                              Page 59 of 72
have been interfered with under
Section 34
of the Arbitration

          Act. Moreover, it is a finding of fact.
47.      Coming to the issue no. 2, it is apparent from the

          recitals in the Supplementary Agreement as well as Tripartite

          Agreement that as L&T did not discharge its obligation under

          the Development Agreement to pay EDC, the Bank was

          required to be brought into the picture so that it could

          advance a sum of Rs. 6 crores by way of loan for making

          payment of the said amount to DTCP. We must mention here

          that Clause 19 of the Development Agreement provided that

          L&T shall reimburse PCL the EDC amount already paid up to

          the date of the Development Agreement by mutually agreed

          instalments. The amounts paid by PCL towards EDC up to

          the date of execution of the Development Agreement were also

          mentioned, as L&T did not pay the amount already paid by

          PCL towards EDC. By Clause (III) of the Supplementary

          Agreement, Clause 19 was modified. The main reason for the

          execution of the Supplementary Agreement and the Tripartite

          Agreement was the default on the part of L&T. The Tribunal

          looked into various terms and conditions of the Development
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                 Page 60 of 72
Agreement and the obligation of L&T to carry out its activities

          in a time-bound manner. The Tribunal considered the

          pleadings of PCL and the failure of L&T to deny material

          paragraphs. The tribunal also referred to a letter dated 7 th

          October, 1999, addressed by L&T that its consultant had

          reported that it would not be favourable to pursue the project

          and therefore requirement of payment of EDC by L&T does not

          arise. In fact, L&T relied upon the report of BCG. However, in

          respect of order dated 08th November, 2001, L&T did not

          produce the relevant documents. The Tribunal has noted that

          L&T was aware about PCL’s financial conditions and its

          obligations towards ITCREF. The Tribunal also referred to the

          fact that on 02nd November, 1999, DTCP issued a show cause

          notice proposing cancellation of licenses due to non-payment

          of EDC. These facts and the default by L&T left no choice to

          PCL but to execute the Supplementary Agreement as well as

          the Tripartite Agreement.
48.      The Division Bench referred to
Section 16(3)
of the

          Contract Act which provides that where a person who is in a

          position to dominate the will of another, enters into a contract
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                    Page 61 of 72
with him, and the transaction appears, on the face of it or on

          the evidence adduced, to be unconscionable, the burden of

          proving that there was no undue influence is on the person in

          a position to dominate the will of the other. Illustrations (c)

          and (d) of
Section 16(3)
of the Contract Act were also relied

          upon, which deal with cases of economic duress and undue

          influence. After examining the evidence, the Division Bench

          held that there was no patent illegality in the findings

          recorded by the Arbitral Tribunal that the Supplementary

          Agreement and the Tripartite Agreement were tainted by

          coercion. On consideration of the facts discussed before, such

          a view by the Arbitral Tribunal cannot be said to be contrary

          to justice and morality. We agree with the view taken by the

          Division Bench.
49.      Dealing with issue no. 3, the Division Bench referred to

          Clause 26 of the Development Agreement and Clause 5 of the

          Supplementary Agreement. The Tribunal found that L&T

          committed a breach of Clause 19 of the Development

          Agreement by not making payment of a single instalment of

          EDC. Moreover, interest free deposit of Rs. 5 crores in terms of
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                     Page 62 of 72
Clause 12 of the Development Agreement was not paid by L&T

          to PCL. The Tribunal found that there was no Development

          work carried out and not a single floor of any residential

          building was constructed for which development plans were

          sanctioned. Therefore, the finding recorded by the Tribunal

          that L&T committed fundamental breaches of the agreement

          cannot be interfered within the limited jurisdiction under
Section 34
of the Arbitration Act.
50.      As regards issue no. 4 and 5, the Division Bench has

          considered material on record. The Division Bench recorded

          that approval of the competent authority under the
Income

          Tax Act, 1961
was given on 30th June, 1998 and the building

          plans were sanctioned on 30th September, 1998. The title

          deeds were handed over by PCL to L&T on 16 th October, 1998.

          There are letters on record addressed by PCL complaining to

          L&T about failure to make any progress on the site. No EDC

          payments were made by L&T. Even planning of the project

          was not completed by L&T till December, 1999. That is how

          the inspection of the Arbitral Tribunal revealed that L&T did

          not commence the development work. From the recital of
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                 Page 63 of 72
clauses in the Development Agreement, it is apparent that

          L&T was aware of the obligations of PCL towards ITCREF.

          Considering the material on record, the Arbitral Tribunal

          recorded that there was a conscious decision on the part of

          L&T to abandon the development and not to fulfil its

          obligations under the contract. Therefore, the Division Bench

          accepted the correctness of the finding recorded by the

          Tribunal that there was an abandonment of the project on the

          part of L&T. The Division Bench rightly declined to find fault

          with the findings recorded by the Tribunal on this aspect

          based on evidence. Obviously, such conduct on the part of

          L&T caused loss to PCL, which ultimately resulted in the

          termination of the Development Agreement. The issues based

          on the rejection of the counter-claim of L&T have been rightly

          addressed by the Division Bench on the ground that there

          were no submissions made on the rejection of the counter-

          claim before the learned Single Judge in a petition under
Section 34
of the Arbitration Act.
51.      The Division Bench dealt with the Tribunal’s direction

          to L&T to pay Rs. 50 crores to PCL on crystallization of
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                   Page 64 of 72
ITCREF’s claims. The Division Bench held that the type and

          kind of losses incurred by ITCREF would not be reasonably

          foreseeable for PCL to be indemnified against. Therefore, the

          Division Bench rightly observed that while granting a sum of

          Rs. 50 crores to PCL, the Tribunal had gone overbroad. The

          said finding of the Division Bench cannot be faulted with.
52.      As regards the damages of the sum of Rs. 35 crores to

          be paid by L&T to PCL on account of breach of the

          Development Agreement, the basis taken by the Tribunal was

          the figures given by L&T in its counter-claim. Mr. Mohinder

          Puri estimated the loss of PCL at Rs. 117 crores. However,

          PCL did not prove the said loss, and the Tribunal did not rely

          upon any evidence to arrive at a fair assessment of the loss

          actually incurred by PCL. The Division Bench held that

          instead of basing the findings on the figures set out by L&T in

          its counter-claim, the correct approach would have been to

          determine the prevailing market rate for sale of built-up area

          at the time of the breach and thereupon determine the

          proceeds that PCL would have received from the sale of its 25

          per cent share under the Development Agreement. Therefore,
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                   Page 65 of 72
the award of Rs. 35 crores as damages was fundamentally

          contrary to
Section 73
of the Contract Act. Such an approach

          was completely contrary to substantive law in the form of

          Section 73. This finding cannot be disturbed.
53.      As regards the direction to pay the amount of Rs. 6

          crores with interest, we need not record any finding as the

          amount has been paid by L&T. The award in the alternative of

          Rs. 75 crores, without proof of the value of land, cannot be

          sustained at all. There was no evidence on record to indicate

          that the value of the 15-acre area would be Rs. 5 crores per

          acre. Similarly, there was no basis for granting Rs. 5 crores to

          PCL due to L&T's failure to return the licenses and other

          statutory permits. In these circumstances, we find the view

          taken by the Division Bench to be correct.
54.      As the termination of the Development Agreement is

          upheld, obviously, L&T cannot deal with the property in any

          manner and PCL can always deal with the same.
55.      In para 119, the Division Bench held thus:
“119.      In      the   circumstances,   the   Court
                         concludes as follows:
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                        Page 66 of 72
a. The finding of the Tribunal that the
Development Agreement was not novated by
                         the     Supplementary           Agreement     is     upheld;
similarly the Tribunal's findings that the
                         conditions which were to be fulfilled by L&T
                         subject to which the said Supplementary
                         Agreement was to come into force (but were
                         not fulfilled) are upheld;
b. The finding of the Tribunal that the
                         Supplementary Agreement was a non-starter
                         as it was vitiated by economic duress is
                         upheld. The impugned judgment's ruling to
                         the contrary is set aside.
c. The finding of the Tribunal that L&T
                         committed            fundamental       breach        of     the
                         Development            Agreement       is   upheld.        The
impugned judgment's ruling to the contrary is
                         set aside.
d.     The         Tribunal’s    dismissal      of        L&T’s
                         counterclaim is upheld.
e. The Tribunal's quantification of damages for
                         breach of contract (35 crores), compensation in
                         lieu of securing title deeds with respect to 15
                         acres of land (75 crores) and compensation for
                         default in returning licences and other permits
                         is    set    aside     (5   crores).    The     permanent
                         injunction granted in favour of PCL restraining
                         L&T from interfering with PCL's development
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                                  Page 67 of 72
of Schedule A property of the Development
                         Agreement          is   upheld.   The   relief   granting
                         indemnification in favour of PCL for ITCREF's
                         claims is set aside. It is clarified that this is
                         without prejudice to the indemnification for
                         ITCREF's claims relating to the transfer of
                         2,20,416 sq. ft. of land to the extent envisaged
                         under       the     Development     Agreement,       The
                         Tribunal's order to the extent that it awards
                         costs of arbitration to PCL is upheld.
f. Title deeds deposited with the Registrar of
                         this Court pursuant to the directions in FAO
                         319/2001 are directed to be released to PCL.”
56.      The powers of the Appellate Court under
Section 37
of

          the Arbitration Act are not broader than those of the Court

          under
Section 34
of the Arbitration Act. Therefore, what

          cannot be done in the exercise of the powers under
Section 34
cannot be done in an Appeal under
Section 37
. An Arbitral

          Award cannot be modified. Thus, even after recording the

          conclusions in paragraph no. 119, the Division Bench has not

          modified the Award by partly setting aside the Judgment

          under
Section 34
. In paragraph 121 of the Judgment, the

          Division Bench held thus:
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                            Page 68 of 72
“121. In light of the above conclusions, parties
                         are left to pursue the appropriate course of
                         action under law. This Court notices that since
                         the dispute has been in subsistence for a
                         considerable period of time, an attempt may be
                         made at settling the claims through mediation.
                         FAO (OS) 21/2009, 22/2009 and 23/2009 are
                         partly allowed to the above extent; FAO (OS)
                         194/2009 is dismissed, for the same reason.”

          On a conjoint reading of Paragraph 119 and 121, we find that

          the remedy of PCL has been kept open to pursue appropriate

          course of action under law as there cannot be a remand to the

          Arbitral Tribunal for quantification of monetary claim. As the

          finding of the Arbitral Tribunal regarding breaches committed

          by L&T was affirmed, the Division Bench has rightly

          segregated that part of the Award by which, cost of arbitration

          was ordered to be paid to PCL by L&T. This part has been

          severed from rest of the Award.           Therefore, this part of the

          Award must be complied with by L&T, if not already done. As

          documents of title were deposited with the Registrar, the

          direction to hand over the same to PCL cannot be faulted

          with.       We cannot find any fault with the operative part in

          paragraph 120.
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                         Page 69 of 72
57.      Before we part with Judgment, we must reproduce what

          is observed by Division Bench in paragraph no. 120 with

          approval:
“120. Before concluding, the court would like to
                         highlight - more as a post script, the prolix and
                         near      interminable      arguments      which      were
                         addressed by senior counsel on either side, who
                         were insistent that the arbitral records, such as
                         pleadings and documents, had to be examined,
                         and read out in court. The court unsuccessfully
                         entreatied them to limit oral arguments; equally
                         unsuccessful were attempts at ensuring that
                         written briefs were kept within limits. The
                         citation of numerous authorities on similar
                         propositions, and reference to factual material,
                         reduced        an   arbitration   appeal   (against    the
                         decision in
Section 34
) to the Division Bench into
                         an appeal on facts, which
Section 37
was clearly
                         not intended to be. One hopes that there is some
                         clarity within the legal system about the kind of
                         time limit to arguments in such cases, to ensure
                         timely disposal of appeals.”
58.      We agree with the views expressed by the Division

          Bench which we have quoted above. In several appeals arising

          out of
Sections 34
and
37
proceedings, we have noticed that

          there is a tendency on the part of the senior members of the
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                             Page 70 of 72
Bar to argue as if these proceedings were regular appeals

          under
Section 96
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for

          short ‘
CPC
’). In this case, while making submissions, the

          learned counsel appearing for both the parties have gone into

          the minutest factual details. As the Members of the Bar are

          aware of the limited jurisdiction of the Courts in proceedings

          under
Sections 34
and
37
of the Arbitration Act, they must

          show restraint. Similarly, we observe a tendency on the part of

          the Members of the Bar to rely upon a large number of

          decisions, whether relevant or irrelevant, while arguing
Section 34
petitions and
Section 37
appeals as well as

          appeals arising therefrom. Multiple decisions are cited on the

          same proposition of law. This makes hearing time-consuming.

          As there are long oral arguments, the Courts permit written

          submissions to be filed. That is how very long written

          submissions come on record. The Courts have to devote page

          after page for dealing with many submissions which ought not

          be made considering the limited jurisdiction under
Section 34
of the Arbitration Act. This results in very lengthy judgments.

          The high monetary stakes involved in the proceedings should

          not result in unnecessarily long oral submissions or bulky
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                   Page 71 of 72
written submissions. All this results in the criticism about

          the arbitrations in India. Therefore, there is a need to impose

          time limit on oral submissions in such cases.          We cannot

          forget that this Court and the High Courts have the appellate

          jurisdiction in civil and criminal cases. These Courts should

          be in a position to also devote sufficient time to the cases of

          the common man. What we have expressed is a matter of

          serious concern and introspection for everyone.
59.      In view of what we have held earlier, there is no merit in

          the appeals and the same are dismissed.
…………………………….J.
                                                   (Abhay S Oka)



                                                   …………………………….J.
                                                   (Pankaj Mithal)

          New Delhi;
April 21, 2025.
Civil Appeal Nos. 2575-2578 of 2016, etc.                                       Page 72 of 72