[Cites
16
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Md. Firoz Ahmad Khalid vs The State Of Manipur on 22 April, 2025
Author:
Rajesh Bindal
Bench:
Rajesh Bindal
2025 INSC 535




                                                                                      REPORTABLE


                                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                              CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3797 OF 2025
                                          (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 2138 of 2024)



                             MD. FIROZ AHMAD KHALID                               …APPELLANT(S)


                                                              VERSUS


                             THE STATE OF MANIPUR & ORS.                        …RESPONDENT(S)


                                                               WITH



                                              CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3798 OF 2025
                                          (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 8642 of 2024)


                                                         JUDGMENT
M. M. Sundresh, J.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SWETA BALODI
Date: 2025.04.22
17:07:52 IST
1. Whether a Muslim Member of the Bar Council of the State or the Union
Reason:
territory (hereinafter referred to as “the Bar Council”), duly elected as

                            Civil Appeal No(s). 3797 & 3798 of 2025                              1 of 25
   a Member of the Waqf Board (hereinafter referred to as “the Board”)

   constituted under
Section 14
of the Wakf Act, 1995 (hereinafter referred

   to as “the 1995 Act”), can continue to hold the said position, even after

   the expiry of his tenure in the Bar Council, is the short issue that arises

   for consideration in these appeals.
2. The facts of the case in a nutshell are as follows :–

   A Gazette notification had been issued by the Bar Council of Manipur

   on 26.12.2022, vide which the appellant in Civil Appeal No. 3797 of

   2025 (hereinafter referred to as the “appellant”), had been elected as a

   Member of the Bar Council. Subsequently, an order was issued by the

   Commissioner-cum-Secretary (Minority Affairs), Government of

   Manipur, on 08.02.2023, appointing the appellant as one of the

   Members of the 7th Waqf Board Committee, in exercise of powers

   conferred under
Section 14(1)(b)(iii)
and
Section 14(3)
of the 1995 Act,

   since respondent No. 3 in Civil Appeal No. 3797 of 2025 (hereinafter

   referred to as “respondent No. 3”), being an earlier Member of the

   Board, had ceased to be a Member of the Bar Council of Manipur.
3. Respondent No. 3 had filed Writ Petition (Civil) No. 304 of 2023 before

   the High Court of Manipur at Imphal, praying for the order dated


Civil Appeal No(s). 3797 & 3798 of 2025                                2 of 25
   08.02.2023, vide which the appellant had been appointed to the Board,

   to be quashed. The challenge to the said order was on the ground that

   there is no provision under the 1995 Act, which stipulates that a

   Member of the Board shall cease to continue in his position, if he is no

   longer a Member of the Bar Council. Vide judgment and order dated

   23.08.2023, the Single Judge dismissed Writ Petition (Civil) No. 304 of

   2023 as respondent No. 3 had lost the Bar Council election held on

   17.12.2022, and therefore, as per the mandate of Explanation II to
Section 14(1)(b)
of the 1995 Act, he cannot be a Member of the Board,

   any longer.
4. Vide impugned judgment dated 23.11.2023, the Division Bench of the

   High Court, placing reliance on Explanation II to
Section 14(1)(b)
of

   the 1995 Act, has arrived at the conclusion that the said Explanation

   only speaks about instances wherein a Member of the Board, who

   ceases to be a Member of Parliament or Member of the State Legislative

   Assembly, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have vacated their

   position in the Board. The Division Bench has further concluded that

   the said Explanation does not apply to a Member of the Board, who

   ceases to hold their position as a Muslim Member of the concerned Bar


Civil Appeal No(s). 3797 & 3798 of 2025                             3 of 25
   Council, and that they would continue to hold their position as a

   Member of the Board, regardless of them having ceased to be a Muslim

   Member of the Bar Council. Consequently, the order dated 08.02.2023

   issued by the Commissioner-cum-Secretary (Minority Affairs),

   Government of Manipur appointing the appellant as a Member of the

   Board in place of respondent No. 3, was set aside, and the State of

   Manipur was directed to continue the services of respondent No. 3 as a

   Member of the 7th Waqf Board Committee, till the completion of the

   term of his office as stipulated under
Section 15
of the 1995 Act.
5. Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant and learned counsel

   appearing for the State of Manipur submit that
Section 14
of the 1995

   Act, is clear and unambiguous. Sub-section (1) which deals with the

   composition of the Board, stipulates that the Board shall mandatorily

   consist of a Chairperson, and amongst other members, it would

   comprise Muslim Members of Parliament from the State or the National

   Capital Territory of Delhi, Muslim Members of the State Legislative

   Assembly, and Muslim Members of the Bar Council. Explanation II to
Section 14(1)(b)
of the 1995 Act merely clarifies that an individual who

   ceases to be either a Member of Parliament or a Member of the State


Civil Appeal No(s). 3797 & 3798 of 2025                                 4 of 25
   Legislative Assembly, from the said community, would be deemed to

   have vacated their office as a Member of the Board. The interpretation

   as rendered by the Division Bench of the High Court, vide the impugned

   judgment, would militate against the very legislative intent of the

   substantial part of the provision, and, therefore, the same ought to be

   interfered with.
6. Per-contra, learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 3 by placing

   reliance upon the decision of this Court in
The State of Maharashtra vs.

   Shaikh Mahemud & Anr. (Civil Appeal No.2784
of 2022 arising out of

   Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.11652 of 2021) decided on

   06.04.2022, and the decision of the High Court of Judicature at

   Bombay, Nagpur Bench, Nagpur in Shri Asif S/o. Shaukat Qureshi vs.

   The State of Maharashtra and Anr. (Writ Petition No. 4343 of 2016)

   decided on 22.12.2016, submits that one shall read the provision as a

   whole, and not in piecemeal. The Legislature, in its wisdom, has

   thought it fit to apply Explanation II to
Section 14(1)(b)
of the 1995

   Act, only to a Member of Parliament, or a Member of the State

   Legislative Assembly, who ceases to hold the said posts. Placing

   reliance on the maxim, “expressio unius est exclusio alterius”, he


Civil Appeal No(s). 3797 & 3798 of 2025                             5 of 25
   submits that there is a conscious omission on the part of the Legislature

   to the effect that a Member of the Bar Council is excluded from the

   purview of Explanation II. In such view of the matter, there is no need

   for interference in the impugned judgment.
7. On a conspectus of the arguments advanced by both the sides, we deem

   it fit to firstly extract
Section 14
of the 1995 Act:
Section 14
of the 1995 Act
     “14. Composition of Board.- (1) The Board for a State and the National
     Capital Territory of Delhi shall consist of-
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) one and not more than two members, as the State Government may think
     fit, to be elected from each of the electoral colleges consisting of-
(i) Muslim Members of Parliament from the State or, as the case may be,
     the National Capital Territory of Delhi;
(ii) Muslim Members of the State Legislature;
(iii) Muslim members of the Bar Council of the concerned State or
     Union territory:
Provided that in case there is no Muslim member of the Bar Council of a
     State or a Union territory, the State Government or the Union territory
     administration, as the case may be, may nominate any senior Muslim
     advocate from that State or the Union territory, and
(iv) mutawallis of the auqaf having an annual income of rupees one lakh
     and above.
Explanation I - For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the
     members from categories mentioned in sub-clauses (i) to (iv), shall be
     elected from the electoral college constituted for each category.
Civil Appeal No(s). 3797 & 3798 of 2025                                     6 of 25
     Explanation II. - For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that in
     case a Muslim member ceases to be a Member of Parliament from the
     State or National Capital Territory of Delhi as referred to in sub-clause
(i) of clause (b) or ceases to be a Member of the State Legislative
     Assembly as required under sub-clause (ii) of clause (b), such member
     shall be deemed to have vacated the office of the member of the Board
     for the State or National Capital Territory of Delhi, as the case may be,
     from the date from which such member ceased to be a Member of
     Parliament from the State National Capital Territory of Delhi, or a
     Member of the State Legislative Assembly, as the case may be;
(c) one person from amongst Muslims, who has professional experience in
     town planning or business management, social work, finance or revenue,
     agriculture and development activities, to be nominated by the State
     Government;
(d) one person each from amongst Muslims, to be nominated by the State
     Government from recognised scholars in Shia and Sunni Islamic Theology;
(e) one person from amongst Muslims, to be nominated by the State
     Government from amongst the officers of the State Government not below
     the rank of Joint Secretary to the State Government;

     (1-A) No Minister of the Central Government or, as the case may be, a State
     Government, shall be elected or nominated as a member of the Board:
Provided that in case of a Union territory, the Board shall consist of not less
     than five and not more than seven members to be appointed by the Central
     Government from categories specified under sub-clauses (i) to (iv) of clause
(b) or clauses (c) to (e) in sub-section (1):
Provided further that at least two Members appointed on the Board shall be
     women:
Provided also that in every case where the system of mutawalli exists, there
     shall be one mutawalli as the member of the Board.
(2) Election of the members specified in clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall
     be held in accordance with the system of proportional representation by
     means of a single transferable vote, in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that where the number of Muslim Members of Parliament,
     the State Legislature or the State Bar Council, as the case may be, is
     only one, such Muslim Member shall be declared to have been elected
     on the Board:
Civil Appeal No(s). 3797 & 3798 of 2025                                           7 of 25
     Provided further that where there are no Muslim Members in any or
     the categories mentioned in sub-clauses (i) to (iii) of clause (b) of sub-
     section (1), the ex-Muslim Members of Parliament, the State
     Legislature or ex-member of the State Bar Council, as the case may be,
     shall constitute the electoral college.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where the State
     Government is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded in writing, that it is not
     reasonably practicable to constitute an electoral college for any of the
     categories mentioned in sub-clauses (i) to (iii) of clause (b) of sub-section
     (1), the State Government may nominate such persons as the members of
     the Board as it deems fit.
(4) The number of elected members of the Board shall, at all times, be more
     than the nominated members of the Board except as provided under sub-
section (3).
(6) In determining the number of Shia members or Sunni members of the
     Board, the State Government shall have regard to the number and value of
     Shia auqaf and Sunni auqaf to be administered by the Board and
     appointment of the members shall be made, so far as may be, in accordance
     with such determination.
(8) Whenever the Board is constituted or re-constituted, the members of the
     Board present at a meeting convened for the purpose shall elect one from
     amongst themselves as the Chairperson of the Board.

     (9) The members of the Board shall be appointed by the State Government
     by notification in the Official Gazette.”

                                                            (emphasis supplied)
8.
Section 14
of the 1995 Act, as extracted above, has two parts to it. While
Section 14(1)
of the 1995 Act concerns itself with the composition of

   the Board, and lists out the eligibility criteria for membership to the

   Board,
Section 14(2)
of the 1995 Act provides for the mode of election,

   and the eventualities in case of a lack of, or unavailability of eligible

   Muslim Members as provided for under
Section 14(1)(b)
of the 1995


Civil Appeal No(s). 3797 & 3798 of 2025                                           8 of 25
   Act.
Section 14(1)(b)
of the 1995 Act facilitates for one and at the most

   two Members each to be elected from the electoral colleges comprising
(i) Muslim Members of Parliament, (ii) Muslim Members of the State

   Legislative Assembly and (iii) Muslim Members of the Bar Council.

   Only in the event that there is no Muslim Member of the Bar Council

   available, the State Government or the Union territory administration,

   as the case may be is given the discretion to nominate any Senior

   Muslim advocate to the electoral college. As is evident from the

   language of
Section 14
of the 1995 Act, this is a mandatory provision.
9. Explanation II to
Section 14(1)(b)
of the 1995 Act merely clarifies that

   in case a Member of the Board ceases to be a Member of Parliament or

   a Member of the State Legislative Assembly, such Member shall be

   deemed to have vacated the office of the Member of the Board from the

   date on which they ceased to be a Member of Parliament or Member of

   the State Legislative Assembly, as the case may be. The difficulty

   herein has arisen on account of the fact that a Muslim Member of the

   Bar Council serving as a Member of the Board, does not find a specific

   mention in Explanation II to
Section 14(1)(b)
of the 1995 Act with




Civil Appeal No(s). 3797 & 3798 of 2025                              9 of 25
   respect to their deemed vacation of office, pursuant to ceasing to be a

   Member of the concerned Bar Council.
10.To interpret a legislative provision, what must be primarily considered

   is its substantive part. An explanation simply performs a clarifying

   function. In other words, the substantive part of a provision cannot be

   understood solely from the point of view of an explanation.
11.The words “for the removal of doubts” in Explanation II to
Section

   14(1)(b)
of the 1995 Act, throw light on the clarificatory nature of the

   said Explanation. Although Explanation II to
Section 14(1)(b)
of the

   1995 Act does not explicitly mention that the term of a Muslim Member

   of the Bar Council in the Board, is also co-terminus with their term in

   the Bar Council, this must be understood to be implied, upon a reading

   of the provision as a whole. This is because the eligibility of persons

   under the categories listed in
Section 14(b)(i)
,
14(b)(ii)
, and
14(b)(iii)
of the 1995 Act, hinges on their membership in either the Parliament,

   or the State Legislative Assembly, or the Bar Council respectively.

   Without such membership in the Parliament, or the State Legislative

   Assembly or the Bar Council, the very basis for their membership in the

   Board ceases to exist. There is no satisfactory justification to exclude


Civil Appeal No(s). 3797 & 3798 of 2025                              10 of 25
   the applicability of Explanation II to
Section 14(1)(b)
of the 1995 Act,

   to a Member of the Bar Council. Such an exclusion would, in fact, run

   contrary to the legislative intent behind the statute.
12.Upon reading the provision as a whole, we find that the implied

   inclusion, as aforestated, is also supported by the two provisos

   appended to
Section 14(2)
of the 1995 Act.
Section 14(2)
of the 1995

   Act provides that the election of the Members specified in
Section

   14(1)(b)
of the 1995 Act, shall be held in accordance with the system

   of proportional representation by means of a single transferable vote, in

   such manner as may be prescribed. The first proviso makes it clear that

   where the number of Muslim Members of Parliament, State Legislative

   Assembly, or Bar Council, as the case may be, is only one, the said

   person shall be declared to have been elected as a Member of the Board.

   More pertinently, the second proviso clarifies that where there are no

   Muslim Members in any of the three categories mentioned in
Section

   14(1)(b)
of the 1995 Act, ex-Muslim Members of Parliament, State

   Legislative Assembly or ex-Member of Bar Council, as the case may

   be, shall constitute the electoral college. In simpler terms, the first




Civil Appeal No(s). 3797 & 3798 of 2025                             11 of 25
   proviso reiterates the fact that there are twin conditions, to be eligible

   to be a Member of the Board, namely:
1. The candidate must be from the Muslim community, and
2. The candidate must hold a position either as a Member of

      Parliament, or a Member of the State Legislative Assembly, or a

      Member of the Bar Council.
The aforementioned conditions are reiterated with further clarity in the

   second proviso. The second proviso states that by way of an exception

   based on a factual contingency, in the event that there are no Muslim

   Members available in any of the categories listed in
Section 14(1)(b)
of

   the 1995 Act, an ex-Member of Parliament, State Legislative Assembly

   or an ex-Member of the Bar Council, as the case may be, would

   constitute the electoral college.
13.This makes it clear that an ex-Member of the Bar Council would

   constitute the electoral college only when there is no eligible Member

   as provided for in
Section 14(1)(b)(iii)
of the 1995 Act, and the proviso

   contained therein. This means that if there is no serving Muslim

   Member in the Bar Council and also no Senior Muslim advocate who

   is available, only then would an ex-Member of the Bar Council be


Civil Appeal No(s). 3797 & 3798 of 2025                              12 of 25
   eligible to be a Member of the Board. It is thus, axiomatic to state that

   an existing Muslim Member of the Board from the Bar Council, would

   cease to be a Member of the Board, upon the completion of their tenure

   as a Member of the Bar Council, when there is another Muslim Member

   available to replace them from within the Bar Council. Thus, upon a

   reading of the entire provision, it is clear that there is no conscious

   intention on the part of the Legislature to omit the applicability of

   Explanation II to
Section 14(1)(b)
of the 1995 Act, to Muslim Members

   of the Board elected from the Bar Council.
14.The object of any provision must be seen in light of the provisions

   surrounding it, which includes the proviso(s) and the explanation(s)

   appended to it. When a right accrues to a person pursuant to a position

   that they hold, it ultimately becomes a qualification. Once such

   qualification ceases to exist, that person would not be eligible to hold

   any other post based on his earlier position, unless the statute

   categorically facilitates the same. An explanation, which is simply in

   the nature of a clarification as regards certain categories, cannot be read

   in a manner which is violative of the substantive part of the provision.

   Although normally, a proviso cannot be used to understand the


Civil Appeal No(s). 3797 & 3798 of 2025                               13 of 25
   substantive part of the provision, there is no absolute bar in doing so,

   particularly in cases where the statute is peculiar and the proviso does

   not create any exception. For the aforementioned purpose, an

   explanation can also be understood through the proviso. In other words,

   if a proviso or an explanation, as the case may be, is phrased in a manner

   which throws more light on the objective behind the substantive part of

   the provision, there would be no difficulty in appreciating the same.

   Ultimately, a proviso or an explanation may be used for several

   purposes. Therefore, what is required is that Courts appreciate the

   context of such usage before rendering an interpretation to a provision

   vis-a-vis the proviso or explanation contained therein.
15.On another footing, extending the applicability of Explanation II to
Section 14(1)(b)
of the 1995 Act, even to a Muslim Member of the Bar

   Council, is only but natural even in light of the doctrine of reasonable

   classification that has evolved from the jurisprudence on
Article 14
of

   the Constitution of India, 1950, which provides for equality before the

   law and equal protection of the law. A classification would be

   reasonable only when there is an intelligible differentia which has a

   rational nexus with the object sought to be achieved through the statute.
Civil Appeal No(s). 3797 & 3798 of 2025                              14 of 25
     In the instant case, giving an overreaching interpretation to Explanation

     II to
Section 14(1)(b)
of the 1995 Act, to imply that a Muslim Member

     of the Bar Council shall continue to hold membership in the Board,

     despite losing their position in the former post, would amount to treating

     Members of Parliament and Members of the State Legislative Assembly

     differently from Members of the Bar Council. No intelligible differentia

     is discernible for such a classification from the scheme of the provision.

     In fact, it is tantamount to rewriting the provision in its entirety. On this

     ground also, we find that Explanation II to
Section 14(1)(b)
of the 1995

     Act must be given a harmonious construction and purposive

     interpretation to mean that the term of a Member of the Bar Council

     serving on the Board, is co-terminus with their membership in the Bar

     Council itself.
Dattatraya Govind Mahajan v. State of Maharashtra
, (1977) 2 SCC 548


       “9. …It is true that the orthodox function of an explanation is to explain the
       meaning and effect of the main provision to which it is an explanation and
       to clear up any doubt or ambiguity in it. But ultimately it is the intention
       of the legislature which is paramount and mere use of a label cannot
       control or deflect such intention. It must be remembered that the
       legislature has different ways of expressing itself and in the last analysis
       the words used by the legislature alone are the true repository of the
       intent of the legislature and they must be construed having regard to
       the context and setting in which they occur. Therefore, even though the
       provision in question has been called an Explanation, we must construe


  Civil Appeal No(s).
3797 & 3798 of 2025                                         15 of 25
       it according to its plain language and not on any a priori
       considerations….”

                                                               (
emphasis supplied)




S. Sundaram Pillai v. Pattabiraman
, (1985) 1 SCC 591
       “46. …It is now well settled that an Explanation added to a statutory
       provision is not a substantive provision in any sense of the term but as
       the plain meaning of the word itself shows it is merely meant to explain
       or clarify certain ambiguities which may have crept in the statutory
       provision. Sarathi in Interpretation of Statutes while dwelling on the
       various aspects of an Explanation observes as follows:
(a) The object of an Explanation is to understand the Act in the light of
       the explanation.
(b) It does not ordinarily enlarge the scope of the original section which
       it explains, but only makes the meaning clear beyond dispute. (p. 329)
47. Swarup in Legislation and Interpretation very aptly sums up the scope
       and effect of an Explanation thus:
“Sometimes an Explanation is appended to stress upon a particular
       thing which ordinarily would not appear clearly from the provisions of
       the section. The proper function of an Explanation is to make plain or
       elucidate what is enacted in the substantive provision and not to add or
       subtract from it. Thus an Explanation does not either restrict or extend
       the enacting part; it does not enlarge or narrow down the scope of the
       original section that it is supposed to explain.... The Explanation must
       be interpreted according to its own tenor; that it is meant to explain
       and not vice versa.” (pp. 297-98)
48. Bindra in Interpretation of Statutes (5th Edn.) at p. 67 states thus:
“An Explanation does not enlarge the scope of the original section that
       it is supposed to explain. It is axiomatic that an Explanation only
       explains and does not expand or add to the scope of the original
       section... The purpose of an Explanation is, however, not to limit the
       scope of the main provision.... The construction of the Explanation
       must depend upon its terms, and no theory of its purpose can be
       entertained unless it is to be inferred from the language used. An
       ‘Explanation’ must be interpreted according to its own tenor.”



  Civil Appeal No(s). 3797 & 3798 of 2025                                          16 of 25
49. The principles
laid down by
the aforesaid authors are fully supported
     by various authorities of this Court.
To quote only a few, in Burmah Shell
     Oil Storage and Distributing Co. of India Ltd. v. CTO [(1961) 1 SCR 902 :
AIR 1961 SC 315 : (1960) 11 STC 764] a Constitution Bench decision,
     Hidayatullah, J. speaking for the Court, observed thus:
     “Now, the Explanation must be interpreted according to its own tenor, and
     it is meant to explain clause (1)(fl) of the Article and not vice versa. It is an
     error to explain the Explanation with the aid of the Article, because this
     reverses their roles.”
50.
In
Bihta Cooperative Development Cane Marketing Union Ltd. v. Bank
     of Bihar
[(1967) 1 SCR 848 : AIR 1967 SC 389 : 37 Com Cas 98] this Court
     observed thus:
“The Explanation must be read so as to harmonise with and clear up
     any ambiguity in the main section. It should not be so construed as to
     widen the ambit of the section.”
51. In Hiralal Rattanlal case [(1973) 1 SCC 216 : 1973 SCC (Tax) 307]
     this Court observed thus: [SCC para 25, p. 225: SCC (Tax) p. 316]
     “On the basis of the language of the Explanation this Court held that it did
     not widen the scope of clause (c). But from what has been said in the case,
     it is clear that if on a true reading of an Explanation it appears that it
     has widened the scope of the main section, effect be given to legislative
     intent notwithstanding the fact that the Legislature named that
     provision as an Explanation.”
                          ***               ***             ***
53. Thus, from a conspectus of the authorities referred to above, it is
     manifest that the object of an Explanation to a statutory provision is—
     “(a) to explain the meaning and intendment of the Act itself,
(b) where there is any obscurity or vagueness in the main enactment,
     to clarify the same so as to make it consistent with the dominant object
     which it seems to subserve,
(c) to provide an additional support to the dominant object of the Act
     in order to make it meaningful and purposeful,
(d) an Explanation cannot in any way interfere with or change the
     enactment or any part thereof but where some gap is left which is
     relevant for the purpose of the Explanation, in order to suppress the
     mischief and advance the object of the Act it can help or assist the
     Court in interpreting the true purport and intendment of the
     enactment, and


Civil Appeal No(s). 3797 & 3798 of 2025                                            17 of 25
(e) it cannot, however, take away a statutory right with which any
       person under a statute has been clothed or set at naught the working
       of an Act by becoming an hindrance in the interpretation of the
       same.””

                                                              (emphasis supplied)


Government of Andhra Pradesh v. Corporation Bank, (2007) 9 SCC 55
       “12. In construing a statutory provision, the first and foremost rule of
       construction is the literal construction. If the provision is unambiguous and
       if from that provision, the legislative intent is clear, we need not call into
       aid the other rules of construction. The other rules of construction are
       invoked when the legislative intent is not clear. In Bihta Co-op.
Development and Cane Marketing Union Ltd. v. Bank of Bihar
[AIR 1967
       SC 389] this Court was called upon to consider Explanation to
Section
       48(1)
of the Bihar and Orissa Cooperative Societies Act, 1935. This Court
       observed that the Court should not go only by the label. The Court
       observed that an explanation must be read ordinarily to clear up any
       ambiguity in the main section and it cannot be construed to widen the
       ambit of the section. However, if on a true reading of an Explanation it
       appears to the Court in a given case that the effect of the Explanation
       is to widen the scope of the main section then effect must be given to
       the legislative intent. It was held that in all such cases the Court has to
       find out the true intention of the legislature.
Therefore, there is no
       single yardstick to decide whether an Explanation is enacted to clarify
       the ambiguity or whether it is enacted to widen the scope of the main
       section….”

                                                              (emphasis supplied)

Kirloskar Ferrous Industries Ltd. v. Union of India, (2025) 1 SCC
695
“66. What can be discerned from the above is that an explanation must be
       read so as to harmonise with and clear up any ambiguity in the main section.
       It should not be so construed as to widen the ambit of the section. An
       explanation does not enlarge the scope of the original section that it is
       supposed to explain. It is axiomatic that an explanation only explains and
       does not expand or add to the scope of the original section. The purpose of
       an explanation is, however, not to limit the scope of the main provision.
       The construction of the explanation must depend upon its terms, and no
       theory of its purpose can be entertained unless it is to be inferred from the
       language used. An “explanation” must be interpreted according to its

  Civil Appeal No(s). 3797 & 3798 of 2025                                         18 of 25
       own tenor. Sometimes an explanation is appended to stress upon a
       particular thing which ordinarily would not appear clearly from the
       provisions of the section. The proper function of an explanation is to
       make plain or elucidate what is enacted in the substantive provision
       and not to add or subtract from it. Thus, an explanation does not either
       restrict or extend the enacting part; it does not enlarge or narrow down
       the scope of the original section that it is supposed to explain. The
       Explanation must be interpreted according to its own tenor; that it is
       meant to explain and not vice versa.
Explanation added to a statutory
       provision is not a substantive provision in any sense of the term but as
       the plain meaning of the word itself shows it is merely meant to explain
       or clarify certain ambiguities which may have crept in the statutory
       provision.”

                                                               (
emphasis supplied)

Shailesh Dhairyawan v. Mohan Balkrishna Lulla
, (2016) 3 SCC
619
“31. …The principle of “purposive interpretation” or “purposive
       construction” is based on the understanding that the court is supposed to
       attach that meaning to the provisions which serve the “purpose” behind
       such a provision. The basic approach is to ascertain what is it designed
       to accomplish? To put it otherwise, by interpretative process the court
       is supposed to realise the goal that the legal text is designed to realise.
       As Aharon Barak puts it:
“Purposive interpretation is based on three components: language,
       purpose, and discretion. Language shapes the range of semantic
       possibilities within which the interpreter acts as a linguist. Once the
       interpreter defines the range, he or she chooses the legal meaning of
       the text from among the (express or implied) semantic possibilities. The
       semantic component thus sets the limits of interpretation by restricting
       the interpreter to a legal meaning that the text can bear in its (public
       or private) language.” [ Aharon Barak, Purposive Interpretation in Law
       (Princeton University Press, 2005).]
32. Of the aforesaid three components, namely, language, purpose and
       discretion “of the court”, insofar as purposive component is concerned, this
       is the ratio juris, the purpose at the core of the text. This purpose is the
       values, goals, interests, policies and aims that the text is designed to
       actualise. It is the function that the text is designed to fulfil.
33. We may also emphasise that the statutory interpretation of a provision
       is never static but is always dynamic. Though the literal rule of
       interpretation, till some time ago, was treated as the “golden rule”, it is now


  Civil Appeal No(s). 3797 & 3798 of 2025                                          19 of 25
       the doctrine of purposive interpretation which is predominant, particularly
       in those cases where literal interpretation may not serve the purpose or may
       lead to absurdity. If it brings about an end which is at variance with the
       purpose of statute, that cannot be countenanced. Not only legal process
       thinkers such as Hart and Sacks rejected intentionalism as a grand
       strategy for statutory interpretation, and in its place they offered
       purposivism, this principle is now widely applied by the courts not only
       in this country but in many other legal systems as well.”

                                                             (
emphasis supplied)

Grid Corpn. of Orissa Ltd. v. Eastern Metals & Ferro Alloys
,
(2011) 11 SCC 334
       “25. …The golden rule of interpretation is that the words of a statute
       have to be read and understood in their natural, ordinary and popular
       sense. Where however the words used are capable of bearing two or
       more constructions, it is necessary to adopt purposive construction, to
       identify the construction to be preferred, by posing the following
       questions: (i) What is the purpose for which the provision is made? (ii)
       What was the position before making the provision? (iii) Whether any
       of the constructions proposed would lead to an absurd result or would
       render any part of the provision redundant? (iv) Which of the
       interpretations will advance the object of the provision? The answers
       to these questions will enable the court to identify the purposive
       interpretation to be preferred while excluding others. Such an exercise
       involving ascertainment of the object of the provision and choosing the
       interpretation that will advance the object of the provision can be
       undertaken, only where the language of the provision is capable of more
       than one construction….”

                                                             (emphasis supplied)
16.We further add that the legal maxim “expressio unius est exclusio

     alterius” finds absolutely no application to the instant case, as applying

     the same would render an interpretation contrary to the intent of the

     provision, resulting in an unreasonable and unjust classification. The

     aforesaid maxim is not one of universal and absolute application.
Civil Appeal No(s). 3797 & 3798 of 2025                                       20 of 25
     Before the said principle can be applied, the Court must discern whether

     a natural interpretation flows from a reading of the provision as a whole,

     which in the instant case is possible by reading
Section 14(2)
along with
Section 14(1)
of the 1995 Act.
Asstt. Collector, Central Excise v. National Tobacco Co.
, (1972) 2 SCC
560
“30. …This rule flows from the maxim: “Expressio unius ast exclusio
       alterius”.
But, as was pointed out by Wills, J., in Colguoboun v. Brooks,
       [(1888) 21 QBD 52, 62] this maxim “is often a valuable servant, but a
       dangerous master….”. The rule is subservient to the basic principle
       that Courts must endeavour to ascertain the legislative intent and
       purpose, and then adopt a rule of construction which effectuates rather
       than one that may defeat these. Moreover, the rule of prohibition by
       necessary implication could be applied only where a specified
       procedure is laid down for the performance of a duty….”

                                                              (emphasis supplied)

Union of India v. B.C. Nawn and others, 1971 SCC OnLine Cal 180
: (1972) 84 ITR 526 : 1971 Tax LR 1198
       “8. The maxim is not of universal application. Crawford in his book The
       Construction of Statutes, 1940 edition, at pages 335-336, has pointed out
       that this maxim does not apply to matters “where it clearly appears that
       something was expressly mentioned for another reason or merely because
       of caution” and “this maxim, or general principle of construction, as must
       be apparent, is based upon the probable intention of the legislature. Hence,
       where that intention clearly reveals that the law-makers did not mean
       that the express mention of one thing should operate to exclude all
       others, of course, the principle is not applicable. Consequently, when the
       statutory language is plain and the meaning is clear, there can be no implied
       exclusion. In other words, the principle is to be used as a means of
       ascertaining the legislature's intent where it is doubtful and not as a
       means of defeating the apparent intent of the legislature.
9. Maxwell on the Interpretation of Statutes, eleventh edition, at page 306
       observes:
Civil Appeal No(s). 3797 & 3798 of 2025                                        21 of 25
       “Provisions sometimes found in statutes, enacting imperfectly or for
       particular cases only that which was already and more widely the law,
       has occasionally furnished ground for the contention that an intention
       to alter the general law was to be inferred from the partial or limited
       enactment, resting on the maxim expressio unius exclusio alterius. But,
       that maxim is inapplicable in such cases. The only inference which a
       court can draw from such superfluous provisions (which generally find
       a place in Acts to meet unfounded objections and idle doubts), is that
       the legislature was either ignorant or unmindful of the real state of the
       law, or that it acted under the influence of excessive caution. If the law
       be different from what the legislature supposed it to be, the implication
       arising from the statute, it has been said, cannot operate as a negation
       of its existence, and any legislation founded on such a mistake has not
       the effect of making that law which the legislature erroneously assumed
       to be so.”

                                                           (emphasis supplied)

State of Karnataka v. Union of India, (1977) 4 SCC 608
       “80. It is evident from the foregoing discussion that the principle relied
       upon by the plaintiffs learned Counsel repeatedly, in support of which a
       passage from Crawford's “Statutory Construction” (1940 Edn.) (Paragraph
       195 at pp. 334-335) was also cited, as the basis of the submissions of the
       learned Counsel, was that what is expressly provided for by the
       Constitution must necessarily exclude what is not so provided for. This
       reasoning is an attempted misapplication of the principle of
       construction “Expressio Unius Est Exclusio Alterius”. Before the
       principle can be applied at all the Court must find an express mode of
       doing something that is provided in a statute, which, by its necessary
       implication, could exclude the doing of that very thing and not
       something else in some other way. ……..That maxim has been aptly
       described as a “useful servant but a dangerous master” (per Lopes L.J. in
       Colquhoun v. Brooks [(1888) 21 QBD 52, 65]). The limitations or
       conditions under which this principle of construction operates are
       frequently overlooked by those who attempt to apply it.”

                                                           (emphasis supplied)
17.At this juncture, we take note of Lord Denning’s words of wisdom in

     Seaford Court Estates Ld. v. Asher [(1949) 2 K.B. 481]

       “…when a defect appears a judge cannot simply fold his hands and
       blame the draftsman. He must set to work on the constructive task of

  Civil Appeal No(s). 3797 & 3798 of 2025                                     22 of 25
     finding the intention of Parliament, and he must do this not only from
     the language of the statute, but also from a consideration of the social
     conditions which gave rise to it, and of the mischief which it was passed
     to remedy, and then he must supplement the written word sc as to give
     “force and life” to the intention of the legislature. That was clearly laid
     down by the resolution of the judges in Heydon's case, and it is the
     safest guide to-day. Good practical advice on the subject was given
     about the same time by Plowden in his second volume Eyston v. Studd.
     Put into homely metaphor it is this: A judge should ask himself the
     question: If the makers of the Act had themselves come across this ruck
     in the texture of it, how would they have straightened it out? He must
     then do as they would have done. A judge must not alter the material
     of which it is woven, but he can and should iron out the creases.”

                                                          (emphasis supplied)
18.In the case at hand, the State of Manipur has deemed it fit to accept the

   membership of the appellant, who is admittedly serving as a Muslim

   Member of the Bar Council, to the Board. A Gazette notification had

   been issued by the Bar Council of Manipur, stating that the appellant

   had been elected as a Member of the Bar Council. Therefore, as such, a

   Member of the Bar Council was available, who was subsequently

   elected as a Member of the Board, in accordance with
Section

   14(1)(b)(iii)
of the 1995 Act. Respondent No. 3, who is no longer

   holding the said post of a Muslim Member of the Bar Council, cannot

   be allowed to contend that even after he had ceased to be a Member of

   the Bar Council, he would be entitled to continue as a Member of the

   Board.
Civil Appeal No(s). 3797 & 3798 of 2025                                      23 of 25
19.We also note that presently, the appellant is the only Muslim Member

   in the concerned Bar Council - a fact that has been rightly taken note of

   by the State of Manipur, while appointing him as a Member of the

   Board. In any case, there is no dispute with respect to the appellant’s

   eligibility to be a Member of the Board by virtue of his membership in

   the Bar Council.
20.Based on the aforesaid discussion and reasoning, we are not inclined to

   concur with the reasoning adopted by the Division Bench of the High

   Court in the impugned judgment. Thus, we hold that the decision

   rendered by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, Nagpur Bench,

   Nagpur in Shri Asif S/o Shaukat Qureshi Versus The State of

   Maharashtra and Anr. (Writ Petition No. 4343 of 2016) decided on

   22.12.2016, is not a good law.
21.Accordingly, the impugned judgment stands set aside, and the judgment

   and order of the Single Judge of the High Court dated 23.08.2023,

   dismissing Writ Petition (Civil) No. 304 of 2023, stands restored.
22.The appeals are allowed in the aforesaid terms.
Civil Appeal No(s). 3797 & 3798 of 2025                             24 of 25
23.Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
...………………………. J.
(M. M. SUNDRESH)



                                               …………………………. J.
(RAJESH BINDAL)

   NEW DELHI;
APRIL 22, 2025




Civil Appeal No(s). 3797 & 3798 of 2025                       25 of 25