[Cites
34
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Cryogas Equipment Private Limited vs Inox India Limited on 15 April, 2025
Author:
Surya Kant
Bench:
Surya Kant
2025 INSC 483                                                                     REPORTABLE


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                          Civil Appeal No. ____ / 2025
                         (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C.) No. 28062 / 2024)



             Cryogas Equipment Private Limited                             ….Appellant(s)



                                                    versus



             Inox India Limited and Others                                ….Respondents



                                                       WITH


                                          Civil Appeal No. ____ / 2025
                         (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C.) No. 28017 / 2024



             LNG Express India Private Limited                             ….Appellant(s)



                                                      versus



             Inox India Limited and Others                                ….Respondents
   Signature Not Verified

   Digitally signed by
   ARJUN BISHT
   Date: 2025.04.15
   15:24:12 IST
   Reason:




                                                                               Page 1 of 56
                              JUDGEMENT



SURYA KANT, J.
Leave granted.
2.   The captioned appeals arise from a common judgement dated

     22.10.2024 delivered by the High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad

     (High Court) in a dispute between the parties primarily concerning

     an alleged copyright infringement, whereby the 4th Additional

     District Judge at Vadodara’s (Commercial Court) order dated

     03.05.2024 allowing an application under
Order VII Rule 11 of the

     Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 (
CPC
) was set aside, and the Suit

     filed by Respondent No. 2 was restored to its original number

     (Impugned Judgement).
3.   The parties to the appeal are, inter alia embroiled in a dispute

     concerning the purported infringement of intellectual property (IP)

     rights in relation to the designing and manufacturing of the internal

     parts of Cryogenic Storage Tanks and Distribution Systems which

     are mounted on Trailers and Semi-Trailers, to effectively transport

     industrial gases, liquified natural gas (LNG) and such like

     substances.
Page 2 of 56
A.   FACTS
4.   That being so, given the shared sequence of events underlying these

      two appeals, this presents an appropriate juncture for a detailed

      examination of the factual matrix.
4.1. The dispute between the parties arose when Respondent No. 1 in

      these appeals, Inox India Limited (Inox), filed Trademark Suit No.

      3/2019 (Suit) before the Commercial Court against the Appellants,

      i.e. Cryogas Equipment Private Limited (Cryogas) and LNG Express

      India Private Limited (LNG Express), on 24.09.2018. Inox primarily

      alleged that Cryogas, LNG Express, and others had infringed two

      distinct types of copyright: (i) the drawings of LNG Semi-trailers

      developed by Inox (Proprietary Engineering Drawings); and (ii)

      the details, processes, descriptions and narrations written by Inox

      employees in creating the Proprietary Engineering Drawings

      (Literary Works). These IPs were supposedly developed by Inox to

      meet the specific requirements for storing and transporting

      sophisticated LNG Semi-trailers suitable for Indian roads.


4.2. In this Suit, Inox sought relief in terms of: (i) a declaration that

      Cryogas, LNG Express and others have infringed Inox’s Proprietary

      Engineering Drawings, IP and Literary Works; (ii) a permanent

      injunction restraining Cryogas, LNG Express and the other

      associated parties from using or reproducing any drawings or
Page 3 of 56
works similar to that of Inox’s Proprietary Engineering Drawings or

     Literary Works; (iii) a permanent injunction against the use of any

     IP or know-how associated with manufacturing the impugned

     products; (iv) an order directing Cryogas, LNG Express and others

     to surrender all infringing materials for destruction, including

     drawings, trailers, labels and other items using the Proprietary

     Engineering Drawings; and (v) an award of damages amounting to

     Rs. 2 Crores for copyright infringement.
4.3. In addition, Inox filed an application under Order XXXIX Rules 1

     and 2
of the CPC
, seeking an ad interim injunction to restrain

     Cryogas, LNG Express, and others from infringing its IP rights and

     confidential information during the pendency of the Suit.


4.4. In response thereto, LNG Express moved its application under
Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC
, seeking rejection of the Suit on the

     ground that it was not maintainable under
Section 15(2)
of the

     Copyright Act, 1957
(Copyright Act
). It primarily contended that

     the Proprietary Engineering Drawings, for which Inox claimed

     copyright protection, fell within the definition of a ‘design’ under
Section 2(d)
of the Designs Act, 2000
(Designs Act
). It argued that

     Inox had lost copyrights for the said drawings by failing to register

     them under the
Designs Act
. Furthermore, LNG Express asserted

     that copyright does not subsist in any design that is registered or
Page 4 of 56
capable of being registered under the
Designs Act
once it has been

     reproduced more than fifty times by an industrial process, either

     by the copyright owner or any authorised licensee. Specifically, it

     contested Inox’s claim of generating revenue amounting to Rupees

     122 crores, arguing that such proceeds could only have been

     realised through the sale of Cryogenic Semi-trailers manufactured

     by an industrial process and using the Proprietary Engineering

     Drawings    in   excess   of   the   stipulated   threshold   of   fifty

     reproductions. In this context, LNG Express assailed that

     protection could not be sought under the
Copyright Act
by virtue of
Section 15(2)
, and the Suit thus falls at the threshold.


4.5. The Commercial Court, on 01.04.2022, allowed the application filed

     by LNG Express under
Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC
, consequently

     rejecting Inox’s plaint and its application for interim injunction.

     Inox filed two appeals before the High Court challenging the orders

     of the Commercial Court. On 13.03.2024, the High Court, through

     a common order set aside the Commercial Court’s order, holding

     that it erred in allowing the application under
Order VII Rule 11 of

     the CPC
, which had led to the rejection of both the plaint and the

     prayer for interim injunction. The High Court remanded the matter

     to the Commercial Court for fresh consideration, restoring the Suit
Page 5 of 56
to its original number and directing it to adjudicate the pending

     applications concurrently while issuing separate orders for each.


4.6. Subsequently, on 03.05.2024, in compliance with the High Court’s

     directions, the Commercial Court reconsidered the aforementioned

     applications. By way of separate orders, it allowed LNG Express’

     application under
Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC
, resulting in the

     rejection of the plaint, and consequently dismissed Inox’s

     application for ad interim injunction.
4.7. Inox once again approached the High Court, challenging the

     Commercial Court’s orders dated 03.05.2024 through separate

     appeals. The High Court, in turn, vide the Impugned Judgment, set

     aside the Commercial Court’s orders based on the following

     rationale and has issued: (i) The Commercial Court erred in law by

     presuming that the Proprietary Engineering Drawings qualified as

     a ‘design’ under
Section 2(d)
of the Designs Act and stood utilised

     to manufacture a product more than fifty times through an

     industrial process, thereby excluding it from protection under the
Copyright Act
; (ii) LNG Express’ application under
Order VII, Rule

     11 of the CPC
was rejected, and the Suit was restored to its original

     number; (iii) Inox’s interim injunction application under Order

     XXXIX Rules 1 and 2
of the CPC
was reinstated; and (iv) The

     restored interim injunction application was directed to be decided
Page 6 of 56
by the Commercial Court on its merits independently and as

      expeditiously as possible, preferably within eight weeks.


4.8. Hence, the instant appeals. We may clarify at this stage that after

      reserving our judgment on 29.01.2025 and pending the present

      proceedings, the Commercial Court was permitted to proceed with

      hearing the parties on the interim application in accordance with

      the High Court’s directions. However, the passing of the final order

      was directed to remain in abeyance.
B.   CONTENTIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS
5.   Mr. Shyam Divan, learned Senior Counsel appearing for Cryogas

      and LNG Express, vehemently argued that the High Court erred in

      setting aside the Commercial Court’s order dated 03.05.2024,

      which had allowed their application under
Order VII Rule 11 of the

      CPC
. In support of his contentions, he advanced the following

      submissions:
(a) Inox filed the Suit seeking protection of the Proprietary

          Engineering Drawings under the
Copyright Act
, alleging that

          Cryogas and LNG Express had infringed its IP rights in both

          the artistic elements of the drawings and the literary

          components detailing the processes and descriptions therein.
Inox further sought to restrain Cryogas and LNG Express from
Page 7 of 56
converting   the   two-dimensional   industrial   drawings   of

    cryogenic      Semi-trailers      into      three-dimensional

    representations. However, these pleas ought to be outrightly

    rejected as they have been raised as an afterthought to

    circumvent the applicability of
Section 15(2)
of the Copyright

    Act. Admittedly, Semi-trailers can only be manufactured

    through an industrial and mechanical process.
(b) LNG and Cryogenic Semi-trailers worldwide are designed in

    accordance with international standard-setting bodies such as

    the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) and the

    Pressure Equipment Directive (PED). Given that these trailers

    are used for transporting cryogenic liquids, their design must

    comply with country-specific regulations, while international

    standards prescribe detailed guidelines on design parameters,

    material selection, and internal components. Accordingly, all

    relevant stakeholders, including the parties herein, adhere to

    PED stipulations and the guidelines issued by the Ministry of

    Road Transport and Highways of India.
(c) The Suit is barred under
Section 15(2)
of the Copyright Act, as

    the Proprietary Engineering Drawings, for which Inox claims

    copyright infringement, are capable of being registered under

    the
Designs Act
. The copyright protection for such drawings
Page 8 of 56
would cease to subsist in view of
Section 15(2)
of the Copyright

    Act once Semi-trailers are reproduced or manufactured more

    than fifty times through an industrial process.
(d) The right to protect IP in terms of the Proprietary Engineering

    Drawings would, however, be available to Inox under the
Designs Act
, provided the said drawings were registered under

    it. Furthermore, ‘Semi-trailers’ or ‘Road Vehicle Trailers’

    manufactured by Inox fall within the classification under
Schedule III of the Designs Act
, specifically Class 12-10.

    Consequently, to claim an IP infringement, Inox should have

    registered the Proprietary Engineering Drawings under the
Designs Act
.
(e) The objective of the
Copyright Act
is to protect artistic works

    such as paintings, sculptures, and other forms of creative

    expression for extended periods. In contrast, the
Designs Act
is intended to safeguard industrial designs for a limited

    duration    to   facilitate   commercial    exploitation.   The

    Legislature’s intent was thus to provide protection for

    industrial designs, such as the Proprietary Engineering

    Drawings, under the
Designs Act
rather than the
Copyright

    Act
, so as to ensure that such works are regulated within the

    appropriate legal framework.
Page 9 of 56
(f)   Inox has failed to disclose in its plaint before the Commercial

           Court the number of Semi-trailers it has produced through an

           industrial process. Instead, it has engaged in strategic drafting

           by selectively revealing that it has generated revenue of Rupees

           122 crores, seemingly to circumvent the legal effect of
Section

           15(2)
of the Copyright Act. However, such revenue can be

           reasonably inferred to result from the production of more than

           fifty Semi-trailers, thereby triggering the bar under
Section

           15(2)
of the Copyright Act. Inox cannot rely on evasive drafting

           to create a misleading impression of a valid cause of action.

           These contentions were buttressed by relying on the ratio laid

           down in decisions such as
Shri Mukund Bhavan Trust and

           others v. Shrimant Chhatrapati Udayan Raje Pratapsinh

           Bhonsle.1
(g) Inox has erroneously asserted that the Proprietary Engineering

           Drawings are not capable of registration as ‘designs’ under
Section 2(d)
of the Designs Act on the ground that the products

           manufactured using these drawings lack visual appeal, as they

           pertain to the inner vessel of the Semi-trailer, which remains

           concealed. This claim ought to be rejected, as the drawings fall

           within the category of designs capable of registration under the



1 (2024) SCC OnLine SC 3844.
Page 10 of 56
Designs Act
but have not been registered. Moreover, it is

      incorrect to suggest that the Semi-trailers lack visual appeal,

      given that the drawings also encompass the external shape

      and components of a Semi-trailer. In any case, the question of

      visual appeal is inherently subjective and cannot be a

      determinative factor for considering an application under
Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC
.
(h) The scope of inquiry before the Commercial Court in the Suit

      is limited to determining whether the Proprietary Engineering

      Drawings are capable of registration under the
Designs Act
and, if they have not been so registered, whether they lose the

      protection of the
Copyright Act
once applied to articles through

      an industrial process. The question of such drawings being

      subject to the limitations imposed by
Section 15(2)
of the

      Copyright Act is a pure question of law, which should be

      decided based on a prima facie appraisal of the averments in

      the plaint, without the necessity of adducing further evidence.
(i)   Lastly, Inox’s assertion that the plaint also pertains to the

      alleged theft of confidential information and trade secrets by

      Respondent Nos. 3 and 4, ought to be rejected at the threshold.

      The plaint contains no specific prayers regarding such claims,

      and any alleged breach of this nature arising from a common
Page 11 of 56
law right would be actionable before a civil court rather than a

         Commercial Court, which inter alia may only adjudicate

         matters related to IP rights. Moreover, a perusal of the plaint

         reveals that the Suit has been filed for copyright infringement

         under
Section 62(2)
of the Copyright Act, which falls within the

         jurisdiction of the Commercial Court.
C.   CONTENTIONS ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT NO. 1
6.   Mr. Chander M. Lall and Mr. J. Sai Deepak, Learned Senior

     Counsels representing Inox, refuted the claims put forth by

     Cryogas and LNG Express and instead adduced the following

     submissions:
(a) The Suit pertains to two distinct categories of copyright: the

         Proprietary Engineering Drawings and the Literary Work.
Consequently, the reliefs sought in the Suit are also distinct in

         nature. As a result, each IP claim should be assessed

         independently, with due consideration given to its unique

         characteristics and legal implications.
(b) Industrial drawings, such as the Proprietary Engineering

         Drawings, fall within the definition of ‘artistic works’ under
Section 2(c)
of the Copyright Act. An artistic work can be

         denied copyright protection by invoking
Section 15(2)
of the
Page 12 of 56
Copyright Act
only if such work is either registered or capable

    of being registered under the
Designs Act
. Moreover, the

    Proprietary Engineering Drawings pertain to the internal

    components of a cryogenic container and are excluded by the

    exception under
Section 2
of the Designs Act, which states that

    a registrable design ‘does not include any mode or principle

    of construction or anything which is in substance a mere

    mechanical device’. Furthermore, these drawings lack visual

    appeal, a necessary criterion for a ‘design’ under the
Designs

    Act
. Accordingly,
Section 15(2)
of the Copyright Act is

    inapplicable, and the Proprietary Engineering Drawings

    cannot be deemed capable of registration under the
Designs

    Act
.
(c) The Literary Work in question is not subject to the bar under
Section 15(2)
of the Copyright Act. The Commercial Court erred

    in concluding that the Literary Work, including details,

    processes, and descriptions, is merely a reference to the

    Proprietary   Engineering    Drawings     and   the   information

    contained therein. Such an interpretation incorrectly assumes

    that all the rights asserted in the plaint are intrinsically linked

    to the Proprietary Engineering Drawings. This approach is

    inconsistent with fundamental principles of copyright law,
Page 13 of 56
which recognise that each category of copyright protection is

    distinct and must be assessed independently.
(d) The infringement arising from the theft of confidential

    information constitutes a distinct legal issue and is not subject

    to the limitations imposed by
Section 15(2)
of the Copyright

    Act. Courts have consistently recognised that confidential

    information is a separate legal concept possessing independent

    value, warranting protection under common law principles.

    Accordingly, the misappropriation of confidential information

    should be assessed on its own merits.
(e) The issues concerning the three IPs in question are distinct

    and separate, a fact that the Commercial Court failed to

    appreciate while allowing LNG Express’ application under
Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC
. The Commercial Court proceeded

    under the erroneous assumption that an ‘original artistic work’

    automatically loses protection under the
Copyright Act
once it

    is applied to an article through an industrial process. The

    Commercial Court further failed to consider the true meaning

    and scope of ‘design’ under the
Designs Act
. That apart, the

    claims concerning the infringement of the Literary Work and

    the theft of confidential information fall outside the purview of
Page 14 of 56
Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC
and could not have been

      summarily rejected.
(f)   The determination of whether the original artistic work

      qualifies as a ‘design capable of being registered’ under the
Designs Act
cannot be made while deciding an application

      under
Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC
. At this stage, the

      jurisdiction of the court is limited to conducting a prima facie

      inquiry to ascertain whether or not the plaint discloses a cause

      of action. The issue at hand involves a mixed question of law

      and fact and thus requires a full trial wherein both parties can

      present evidence before a conclusive finding can be drawn.
(g) Inox, in its Suit, has also sought an injunction restraining

      Cryogas, LNG Express, and others from converting the two-

      dimensional Proprietary Engineering Drawings into three-

      dimensional objects. The Local Commissioner’s Report dated

      26.09.2018 provides substantive evidence in this regard,

      revealing that several files containing Inox’s proprietary

      materials—including inspection reports, general test plans,

      shop weld plans, quality control programs, and drawing design

      calculations—were found at the premises of LNG Express and

      Cryogas. These documents pertain to the quality control
Page 15 of 56
processes of Inox’s proprietary materials and products, further

           substantiating the claim of unauthorised use.
D.   ISSUES
7.   Having perused the factual matrix and on consideration of the rival

     contentions advanced by the parties, it is patently clear that the

     singular issue which invites our analysis, revolves around the

     maintainability of the application under
Order VII Rule 11 of the

     CPC
. However, given the abstruse nature of the underlying dispute,

     stemming      from   a   fundamental    dissonance     in   the   parties’

     interpretations of the applicability of the
Designs Act
, we deem it

     appropriate to adjudicate and analyse the following issues:
i.    What are the parameters for determining whether a work or an

           article falls within the limitation set out in
Section 15(2)
of the

           Copyright Act, thereby classifying it as a ‘design’ under
Section

           2(d)
of the Designs Act?
ii.   Whether the High Court erred in setting aside the order of the

           Commercial Court and thus rejecting the application under
Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC
?
Page 16 of 56
E.   ANALYSIS

E.1 Issue No. 1: The parameters for determining whether a work or

an article falls within the limitation set out in
Section 15(2)
of the

Copyright Act
8.   We may clarify at the very outset that the discussion herein would

     be limited to determining the distinction between a ‘design’ under

     the
Designs Act
and an ‘artistic work’ that might warrant copyright

     protection. To be precise, we are not, either expressly or implicitly,

     addressing the merits of the case. This examination has been

     prompted by the intrinsic disagreement posited by the parties in

     terms of the applicability of the
Designs Act
. Such a divergence in

     interpretation brings to light an interesting juxtaposition and

     perhaps a grey area which has not been seemingly addressed by

     this Court in the past. In this context, we find it appropriate to

     bridge this gap by conducting a conclusive analysis through a two-

     pronged    approach:   (i)   examining   the   current   IP   statutory

     framework in India; and (ii) evaluating the criteria considered and

     tests adopted across various jurisdictions. Finally, based on these

     two aspects, we seek to set out (iii) the definitive factors to be

     considered to ascertain whether an article ought to be conferred

     protection under the
Copyright Act
or the
Designs Act
within the

     confines of
Section 15(2)
of the Copyright Act.
Page 17 of 56
E.1.1. The current IP statutory framework
9.   IP rights are fundamentally aimed at excluding or preventing others

     from possessing, using, or alienating the protected IP, thereby

     enabling the owner to benefit from the product of their intellect. In

     India, IP rights encompass a broad spectrum of intangible

     properties, including Patents, Trademarks, Copyrights, Designs,

     and Geographical Indications, each governed and protected by

     distinct Statutes. These legislations enable creators or inventors to

     earn   recognition   and   receive   financial   benefits   from   their

     innovations in a manner which balances them with public interest.

     However, for the purposes of the present analysis, our examination

     will be confined to the intersection between the Copyright Act and

     the Designs Act.
10. In India, copyright is governed by the
Copyright Act, 1957
, which

     was enacted to safeguard the rights of copyright owners, including

     for commercial exploitation and to encourage the creation of

     innovative works. Copyright is a statutory and negative right,

     preventing unauthorised copying of copyrighted material. Under
Section 14
of the Act, copyright owners are granted a bundle of

     exclusive rights, including the right to reproduce, issue copies,

     perform in public, and create translations and adaptations.
Page 18 of 56
11. The term ‘copyright’ has been defined under
Section 14
of the

    Copyright Act to mean “the exclusive right subject to the

    provisions of the Act, to do or authorise the doing of any of

    the following acts in respect of a work or any substantial part

    thereof, namely…” It espouses the protection of works in terms of:
(i) literary, dramatic or musical work, not being a computer

    programme; (ii) a computer programme; (iii) an artistic work; (iv) a

    cinematograph film; and (v) a sound recording. To put it in more

    clear terms, the language employed in the provision reads as

    follows:
“14. Meaning of Copyright—For the purposes of this Act,
        “copyright” means the exclusive right subject to the provisions
        of this Act, to do or authorise the doing of any of the following
        acts in respect of a work or any substantial part thereof,
        namely:—
(a) in the case of a literary, dramatic or musical work, not being
        a computer programme,—
(i) to reproduce the work in any material form including the
        storing of it in any medium by electronic means;
(ii) to issue copies of the work to the public not being copies
        already in circulation;
(iii) to perform the work in public, or communicate it to the
        public;
(iv) to make any cinematograph film or sound recording in
        respect of the work;
(v) to make any translation of the work;
(vi) to make any adaptation of the work;
(vii) to do, in relation to a translation or an adaptation of the
        work, any of the acts specified in relation to the work in sub-
clauses (i) to (vi);
(b) in the case of a computer programme,—
(i) to do any of the acts specified in Clause (a);
(ii) to sell or give on commercial rental or offer for sale or for
        commercial rental any copy of the computer programme:
Page 19 of 56
Provided that such commercial rental does not apply in respect
        of computer programmes where the programme itself is not the
        essential object of the rental.
(c) in the case of an artistic work,—
(i) to reproduce the work in any material form including—
        (A) the storing of it in any medium by electronic or other means;
        or
        (B) depiction in three-dimensions of a two-dimensional work;
        or
        (C) depiction in two-dimensions of a three-dimensional work;
(ii) to communicate the work to the public;
(iii) to issue copies of the work to the public not being copies
        already in circulation;
(iv) to include the work in any cinematograph film;
(v) to make any adaptation of the work;
(vi) to do in relation to adaptation of the work any of the acts
        specified in relation to the work in sub-clauses (i) to (iv);
(d) in the case of a cinematograph film,—
(i) to make a copy of the film, including— (A) a photograph of
        any image forming part thereof; or (B) storing of it in any
        medium by electronic or other means;
(ii) to sell or give on commercial rental or offer for sale or for
        such rental, any copy of the film;
(iii) to communicate the film to the public;
(e) in the case of a sound recording,—
(i) to make any other sound recording embodying it including
        storing of it in any medium by electronic or other means;
(ii) to sell or give on commercial rental or offer for sale or for
        such rental, any copy of the sound recording;
(iii) to communicate the sound recording to the public.”
12. The enactment of the
Designs Act
in 2000, established a distinct

    protection regime for designs in India.
The Designs Act
seeks to

    minimise overlap with the
Copyright Act
by defining the term

    ‘design’ under
Section 2(d)
as “only the features of shape,

    configuration, pattern, ornament or composition of lines or

    colours applied to any article whether in two dimensional or

    three dimensional or in both forms, by any industrial process
Page 20 of 56
or means, whether manual, mechanical or chemical, separate

    or combined, which in the finished article appeal to and are

    judged solely by the eye but does not include any mode or

    principle of construction or anything which is in substance a

    mere mechanical device, and does not include any trade mark

    as defined in clause (v) of sub-section (1) of
section 2
of the

    Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958) or

    property mark as defined in
section 479
of the Indian Penal

    Code (45 of 1860) or any artistic work as defined in clause (c)

    of
section 2
of the Copyright Act, 1957 (14 of 1957).” This

    aspect of IP thus focuses on the utility of work, as well as its visual

    appeal and aesthetic, making it an important factor in determining

    consumer preference or commercial viability.
13. It must be borne in mind that
Section 2(d)
of the Design Act,

    reproduced above, expressly bars the inclusion of ‘artistic works’

    encapsulated under
Section 2(c)
of the Copyright Act. To further

    illuminate, the expression ‘artistic work’ has been defined in the
Copyright Act
which reads as follows:
“2. Interpretation.— In this Act, unless the context otherwise
        requires—
        ….
(c) “artistic work” means,—
(i) a painting, a sculpture, a drawing (including a diagram,
        map, chart or plan), an engraving or a photograph, whether or
        not any such work possesses artistic quality;
(ii) a work of architecture; and
(iii) any other work of artistic craftsmanship;”
Page 21 of 56
14. Despite the clear language employed in these provisions, a small

    vantage point of intersection exists wherein a ‘design’ shares

    commonalities with ‘artistic works’ such as paintings or drawings,

    that may be accorded copyright protection. This similitude is aptly

    illustrated in the Venn Diagram below. We may, however, hasten

    to caveat that this is only an illustrative image and is not exhaustive

    in nature.
15. This penumbra seems to have been synopsized and, to some extent,

    amplified in
Section 15(2)
of the Copyright Act. We say so, for the

    reason that the provision itself enumerates that “copyright in any

    design, which is capable of being registered under the
Designs

    Act, 2000
but which has not been so registered, shall cease

    as soon as any article to which the design has been applied
Page 22 of 56
has been reproduced more than fifty times by an industrial

    process by the owner of the copyright or, with his licence, by

    any other person.”
16. We must also bear in mind that
Section 15(1)
of the Copyright Act

    explicitly states that a ‘copyright’ shall not subsist in a ‘design’

    protected under the
Designs Act
. This provision thus establishes

    that once a ‘design’ is registered, any copyright protection ceases to

    exist. Whereas, as already recapitulated,
Section 15(2)
of the

    Copyright Act clarifies that any design which is capable of being

    registered under the
Designs Act
, if not registered, then the

    copyright protection in such design would terminate once that

    design is applied to any article and reproduced in excess of 50 times

    by an industrial process, either by the owner or a licensee.
17. The lines perhaps seem blurred owing to the inherent overlap

    between copyrightable artistic works and designs. To put it more

    simply, there may be some designs that could be entitled to

    copyright protection, and conversely, there can be certain artistic

    works which lose their copyright protection when industrially

    applied. This perplexity is further augmented on account of there

    being an express interdiction on designs from seeking any long-

    term copyright protection.
Page 23 of 56
E.1.2. Parameters adopted across various jurisdictions
18. To resolve this legal conundrum, it is essential to establish clear

    parameters distinguishing works eligible for protection under the
Designs Act
versus the
Copyright Act
. In this vein, we turn to

    established jurisprudence and comparative legal frameworks, and

    have thus examined: (i) the approach adopted by Courts in India;
(ii) the factors employed by courts in the United States of America

    (US); and (iii) broader international principles that provide

    guidance on the interplay between copyright and design protection.
19. By synthesising these perspectives, we aim to formulate a definitive

    test that will provide clarity on the scope of protection afforded

    under the respective Statutes.
E.1.2.1 Approach adopted by Courts in India
20. The test applied by various High Courts in India to resolve the

    intersection between the Copyright Act and the Designs Act can be

    categorised into two distinct approaches:
i.   Interpretation of
Section 15(2)
of the Copyright Act: This involves

         pulling back the curtains on the overlaps or intersections

         between the two Statutes and ascertaining whether an article

         would qualify protection under the
Copyright Act
for being an
Page 24 of 56
‘original artistic work’ or whether it would earn protection

          under the
Designs Act
.
ii.   Examination of the ‘Functional Utility’ of the Article: This

          requires an assessment as to whether the article serves a

          functional purpose beyond mere artistic expression. If the

          primary characteristic of the work is its functional utility

          rather than aesthetic appeal, it would not qualify to seek

          protection under the
Designs Act
.
E.1.2.1.1 Interpreting
Section 15(2)
of the Copyright Act
21. It has already been explained in paragraphs 16 and 17 of this

    judgement, that a ‘design’ defined under
Section 2(d)
of the Designs

    Act cannot be afforded protection by the
Copyright Act
under the

    guise of it being an ‘artistic work’. While there obviously seems to

    be a narrow intersection between ‘artistic works’ and ‘designs’,

    particularly in the case of paintings, sculptures or drawings,
Section 15(2)
attempts to obfuscate these overlaps and create a

    marked     distinction   so    as   to    prevent   any   unintended

    disconcertment. The crux of the issue thus lies in correctly

    classifying an article as either a ‘design’ under the
Designs Act
or

    an ‘artistic work’ under the
Copyright Act
.
Page 25 of 56
22. This interface between the two legislations was addressed

     extensively by the Delhi High Court in
Microfibres Inc v. Girdhar,2
where the dispute concerned the copyright infringement in the

     manufacture and sale of certain patterns of upholstery fabric by

     the defendant therein. The plaintiff, an American company, claimed

     exclusive rights to the drawings applied on the fabric, stating that

     they had sought copyright registration for the same and sought

     damages from the defendant.
23. The Delhi High Court denied the plaintiff any protection under the
Copyright Act
. It based its decision on the following definitive

     factors: (i) the plaintiff’s work is not a piece of art in itself in the

     form of a painting, despite there being labour and innovativeness

     applied    to   put    a   particular   ‘configuration’   in   place.   This

     configuration     comprises     of   motifs   and   designs,    which    by

     themselves are not original; (ii) The object of such an arrangement

     was to put them to industrial use and does not have any utility or

     independent existence of itself; (iii) Fabric designs on textile goods

     have been classified as proper subject matter of design protection

     by inclusion under Class 5 of the Design Rules, 2001; (iv)

     Legislative intent is also to be kept in mind, which is to protect the

     creator of the work for a certain period for commercial exploitation.



2 2006 SCC OnLine Del 60.
Page 26 of 56
Protection under the
Copyright Act
is for the lifetime of the author

     and an additional period of sixty years, which is not so in the case

     of the
Designs Act
, where the period is much lesser; (v) ‘Artistic

     work’ defined under
Section 2(c)
of the Copyright Act has been

     excluded from the definition of ‘design’ under
Section 2(d)
of the

     Designs Act to exclude for instance, works such as the painting of

     M.F. Hussain; (vi) It is apparent that it is the
Designs Act
which

     would give protection to the plaintiff in this case and not the
Copyright Act
, as the work in question cannot be labelled as an

     ‘artistic work’.
24. The Delhi High Court followed and affirmed the ratio in
Microfibres

     I
(supra) in subsequent judgements, such as in
Dart Industries

     Inc and another v. Techno Plast
and others,3 where the

     controversy concerned the plaintiffs, who were manufactures of

     ‘Tupperware’ products, alleging that the defendants had infringed

     their copyright and design rights by producing strikingly similar

     products. The High Court held that no copyright protection would

     subsist once a design had been registered under the
Design Act
.

     That was a case concerning product drawings meant to create the

     ultimate product design, for which the copyright claim in the said

     drawings was rejected.
3 2007 SCC OnLine Del 892.
Page 27 of 56
25. The High Court in this context further enunciated as follows:
“44. No doubt, the plaintiff has tried to argue that for creating
        the same designs, the defendant would have applied the
        technique of ‘reverse engineering’ inasmuch as striking
        resemblance to the Tupperware Products could have been
        achieved by the defendants by circumventing the tedious and
        lengthy process used for manufacture of the Tupperware
        Products by using computer techniques possibly by 2D or 3D
        scanning. This is a matter which would require evidence. May
        be on the basis of evidence led ultimately plaintiff is successful
        in showing that there is a copyright in the product drawings
        and the defendants have copied the said drawings thereby
        violating the copyright rights in creating their own products
        striking similar to the Tupperware Products. However, prima
        facie, it seems that once the drawings are made for
        creating the ultimate product design, the copyright in
        the said drawings cannot be claimed under the
Copyright Act
. May be this is the reason that
Section 15
of the Copyright Act provides that once a design is
        registered under the
Designs Act
, copyright therein
        shall not subsist. Such a copyright in any design ceases
        even when any article to which the design has been
        applied has been reproduced more than 50 times by an
        industrial process by the owner of the copyright. The
        underlying message is that copyright in an industrial
        design is governed by the
Designs Act, 2000
. If a design
        is registered under that Act it is not legible for
        protection under the
Copyright Act
. In such cases after the
        design is registered under the
Designs Act
, the protection given
        is not copyright protection but a true monopoly based on
        statute inasmuch as such designs were never protected by the
        common law. Exception may be in those cases where
        copyright had come into existence in respect of artistic
        drawings and subsequently those drawings were used
        as models or patterns to be multiplied by any industrial
        process. There, if the drawings became capable of registration
        as a design it would not result in copyright being fortified [See
        Warner Brothers v. Roadrunner, 1988 FSR 292]. However, if
        the intended industrial use of the work was contemporaneous
        with its coming into existence,
Section 15
of the Copyright Act
        would apply. I may hasten to clarify that it is not suggested
        that if any design is registered, copyright under no
        circumstance exist in the drawings.
Section 15
lays down that
        on registration of a design under the
Designs Act
, the copyright
        shall not subsist in that design and not in the drawings.
        Therefore, it is possible that when the moulded plastic article
        of novel shape is made from a working drawing, as in the
Page 28 of 56
instant case, the drawing may qualify as an original work
          entitled to copyright protection and, at the same time, a
          registered design for the shape of the article would be
          protected under the
Designs Act
. If an unauthorised copy is
          made of the article, it may constitute an indirect copy of the
          drawing and therefore may infringe the copyright.”
                                                 [Emphasis supplied]
26. Similarly, in
Mattel, Inc v. Jayant Agarwalla,4
the plaintiff Mattel

     alleged that the defendant had infringed their copyright by copying

     the design of their board game and creating an electronic game

     called ‘Scrabulous’. Mattel further argued that all versions of their

     game, since 1932, qualified as ‘artistic works’ under
Section 2(c)
of

     the Copyright Act and were protected in India under the

     International Copyright Order, 1991. On the contrary, the

     defendant contended that Mattel’s game board, being a three-

     dimensional article, could not be protected under the
Copyright Act
and ought to have been registered as a design under the
Designs

     Act
.
A Learned Single Judge of the High Court, having duly

     considered the competing claims and relying on
Microfibres I
(supra), declined ad interim injunction to the plaintiff on the basis

     that its board game had been reproduced more than fifty times,

     along with its alphabetical tile pieces, without any registration

     having taken place under the
Designs Act
.
4 2008 SCC Online Del 1059.
Page 29 of 56
27.
Meanwhile, Microfibres I
(supra), which was being relied on in

     several such decisions, was appealed before a Division Bench of the

     Delhi High Court vide
Microfibres Inc v. Girdhar and Co,5
contending that the subject works qualified as original ‘artistic

     works’ within
Section 2(c)
of the Copyright Act and that no artificial

     distinction between works which are pure artistic works and those

     which are not could be drawn. In particular, the appellant

     questioned the finding of the Single Judge that the artistic work in

     question did not have the ability to stand by itself as a piece of art

     and had no independent existence.
28. The Division Bench of the High Court, having considered these

     contentions, dismissed the appeal and summarised its conclusions

     as follows:
“46. We thus summarise our findings as follows:—

          a. The definition of ‘artistic work’ has a very wide connotation
          as it is not circumscribed by any limitation of the work
          possessing any artistic quality. Even an abstract work, such
          as a few lines or curves arbitrarily drawn would qualify as an
          artistic work. It may be two-dimensional or three-dimensional.
          The artistic work may or may not have visual appeal.
          b. The rights to which a holder of an original artistic work is
          entitled are enumerated in
Section 14(c)
of the Copyright Act.
          c. It is the exclusive right of the holder of a Copyright in
          an original artistic work to reproduce the work in any
          material form. For example, a drawing of an imaginary
          futuristic automobile, which is an original artistic
          work, may be reproduced in three-dimensional material
          form using an element, such as a metal sheet.
5 2009 SCC OnLine Del 1647.
Page 30 of 56
d. The design protection in case of registered works
under the
Designs Act
cannot be extended to include the
copyright protection to the works which were
industrially produced.
e. A perusal of the Copyright Act and the Designs Act and
indeed the Preamble and the Statement of Objects and
Reasons of the Designs Act makes it clear that the legislative
intent was to grant a higher protection to pure original
artistic works such as paintings, sculptures etc and
lesser protection to design activity which is commercial
in nature. The legislative intent is, thus, clear that the
protection accorded to a work which is commercial in
nature is lesser than and not to be equated with the
protection granted to a work of pure art.
f. The original paintings/artistic works which may be
used to industrially produce the designed article would
continue to fall within the meaning of the artistic work
defined under
Section 2(c)
of the Copyright Act, 1957
and would be entitled to the full period of copyright
protection as evident from the definition of the design
under
Section 2(d)
of the Designs Act. However, the
intention of producing the artistic work is not relevant.
g. This is precisely why the Legislature not only limited the
protection by mandating that the copyright shall cease under
the
Copyright Act
in a registered design but in addition, also
deprived copyright protection to designs capable of
being registered under the
Designs Act
, but not so
registered, as soon as the concerned design had been
applied more than 50 times by industrial process by the
owner of the copyright or his licensee.
h. In the original work of art, copyright would exist and the
author/holder would continue enjoying the longer protection
granted under the
Copyright Act
in respect of the original
artistic work per se.
i. If the design is registered under the
Designs Act
, the
Design would lose its copyright protection under the
Copyright Act
. If it is a design registrable under the
Designs Act
but has not so been registered, the Design
would continue to enjoy copyright protection under the
Act so long as the threshold limit of its application on
an article by an industrial process for more than 50
times is reached. But once that limit is crossed, it would lose
its copyright protection under the
Copyright Act
. This
interpretation would harmonise the Copyright and the Designs
Act in accordance with the legislative intent.
47. Thus, we find no merit in this appeal and the same is
dismissed but with no order as to costs.”
                                       [Emphasis supplied]
Page 31 of 56
29. The Delhi High Court’s view in
Microfibres II
(supra) has found

     favour with other High Courts, also, such as the Bombay High

     Court in
Pranda Jewelry Pvt. Ltd. v. Aarya
24 KT,6 and the

     Kerala High Court in
Fun World and Resorts (India) Pvt. Ltd. v.

     Nimil KK.7


     E.1.2.1.2 The
aspect of Functional Utility
30. In order to fully appreciate the scope of ‘functional utility’, it is

     imperative first to have a complete grasp on the objects and

     purpose of the
Designs Act
.
In this regard, we may usefully refer to

     a decision of this Court in
Bharat Glass Tube Ltd. v. Gopal Glass

     Works Ltd.
, which laid down as follows:8


          “26. In fact, the sole purpose of this Act is protection of
          the intellectual property right of the original design for
          a period of ten years or whatever further period
          extendable. The object behind this enactment is to
          benefit the person for his research and labour put in by
          him to evolve the new and original design. This is the sole
          aim of enacting this Act. It has also laid down that if design is
          not new or original or published previously then such design
          should not be registered. It further lays down that if it has
          been disclosed to the public anywhere in India or in any other
          country by publication in tangible form or by use or in any
          other way prior to the filing date, or where applicable, the
          priority date of the application for registration then such
          design will not be registered or if it is found that it is not
          significantly distinguishable from known designs or
          combination of known designs, then such designs shall not be
          registered. It also provides that registration can be cancelled
          under
Section 19
of the Act if proper application is filed before
          the competent authority i.e. the Controller that the design has
          been previously registered in India or published in India or in

6 2015 SCC OnLine Bom 958.
7 2020 SCC OnLine Ker 219.
8 (2008) 10 SCC 657.
Page 32 of 56
any other country prior to the date of registration, or that the
        design is not a new or original design or that the design is not
        registerable under this Act or that it is not a design as defined
        in Clause (d) of
Section 2
. The Controller after hearing both the
        parties if satisfied that the design is not new or original or that
        it has already been registered or if it is not registerable, cancel
        such registration and aggrieved against that order, appeal
        shall lie to the High Court. These prohibitions have been
        engrafted so as to protect the original person who has
        designed a new one by virtue of his own efforts by researching
        for a long time. The new and original design when
        registered is for a period of ten years. Such original
        design which is new and which has not been available
        in the country or has not been previously registered or
        has not been published in India or in any other country
        prior to the date of registration shall be protected for a
        period of ten years. therefore, it is in the nature of
        protection of the intellectual property right. This was
        the purpose as is evident from the statement of objects
        and reasons and from various provisions of the Act. In
        this background, we have to examine whether the design
        which was registered on the application filed by the
        respondent herein can be cancelled or not on the basis of the
        application filed by the appellant…”
                                                  [Emphasis supplied]
31. This Court further acknowledged that the term ‘design’ had been

    extensively interpreted by English Courts, considering that the

    expression was pari materia with the definition consecrated in the

    Indian context. This alignment is particularly relevant as English

    jurisprudence has long employed the ‘functional utility’ test to

    ascertain whether a work would be entitled to protection under

    English law, especially under the English Registered Designs Act,

    1949—a test subsequently adopted by some of the High Courts in

    India.
Page 33 of 56
32. The question of ‘functional utility’ in the context of design was first

     addressed by the House of Lords in Amp v. Utilux, wherein the

     dispute between the parties involved the infringement of designs

     relating to a single electrical terminal and to a number of terminals

     joined together in line.9 The controversy therein pertained to

     whether the features or the shape of the terminals were solely

     dictated by function or if they appealed to the eye. Lord Reid (for

     himself and Lord Donovan) opined that:
“There must be a blend of industrial efficiency with
            visual appeal. If the shape is not there to appeal to the
            eye but solely to make the article work then this
            provision excludes it from the statutory protection.
            I would add to avoid misunderstanding that no doubt in the
            great majority of cases which the Act will protect the designer
            had visual appeal in mind when composing his design. But it
            could well be that a designer who only thought of
            practical efficiency in fact has produced a design which
            does appeal to the eye. He would not be denied
            protection because that was not his object when he
            composed the design.”
                                                    [Emphasis supplied]
33. This decision was the first to draw a distinction in designs between

     ‘features’ and ‘shapes’ that were construed to be ‘aesthetically

     appealing’ to the eye of the consumer, in comparison to features

     that    existed    merely    for   ‘purely   functional   purposes’.     This

     demarcation based upon functional utility was further relied upon

     by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council while interpreting

     the English Registered Designs Act, 1949, in Interlego A.G v. Tyco


9 [1972] RPC 103.
Page 34 of 56
Industries Inc and others.10 This line of distinction on the basis

     of features being eye-appealing or merely due to functional utility,

     as developed by English courts, has been subsequently employed

     by some of the High courts in India.
34. The Delhi High Court first addressed the issue of functional utility

     in Smithkline Beecham Plc. v. Hindustan Lever Ltd,11 where the

     plaintiff sought a declaration of ownership over toothbrush designs

     to prevent the defendants from infringing upon them. The Single

     Judge examined whether the ‘S’-shaped design of the toothbrush

     was primarily functional or aesthetic. Applying the functional

     utility test, the court determined that while the design offered some

     aesthetic appeal to consumers, its primary purpose was functional.

     As a result, the High Court ruled in favour of the defendant and

     denied design protection to the plaintiff.
35. The Madras High Court thereafter applied the functional utility test

     in Tractors and Farm Equipment Ltd. v. Standard Combines

     Pvt. Ltd.,12 following the precedent set in Smithkline (supra). The

     case involved allegations of infringement and passing off relating to

     certain tractor models, parts, and fittings. In reviewing whether the

     Trial Court was correct in rejecting the plaint, the High Court held



10 [1988] UKPC 3.
11 1999 SCC OnLine Del 965.
12 2012 SCC OnLine Mad 5470.
Page 35 of 56
that serious questions remained regarding whether the specific

     parts or shapes were functional or aesthetic. Additionally, it needed

     to be determined whether the original drawings warranted

     protection     under      the
Designs    Act
or   the
Copyright      Act
.

     Consequently, the Madras High Court ruled that the plaint could

     not be rejected at the threshold. This decision by the Single Judge

     thereafter came to be reaffirmed by a Division Bench of the Madras

     High Court in 2014.13
36. The Smithkline (supra) decision itself was reaffirmed by a Full

     Bench of the Delhi High Court in
Mohan Lal v. Sona Paint and

     Hardwares.14 This
case involved a dispute over the infringement

     of novel and distinguishable mirror frames and addressed the

     broader legal question of whether a passing off action could be

     combined with a claim under the
Designs Act
, although not

     relevant to the present discussion.
37. The Bombay High Court also commented on the standard of the

     functional utility test in
Whirlpool of India Ltd. v. Videocon

     Industries Ltd.,15
wherein it has put forth that the ‘conundrum of

     functionality may be resolved by taking note of the fact that it would




13
Standard Corporation India Ltd. v. Tractors and Farm Equipment Ltd
, 2014 SCC OnLine

Mad 850.
14 2013 SCC OnLine Del 1980.
15 2014 SCC OnLine Bom 565.
Page 36 of 56
make no impact on the article’s functionality, if the function could be

     performed by the use of another shape as well’.
38. Interestingly, the Bombay High Court, in Photoquip India Ltd. v.
Delhi Photo Store,16 appears to have adopted a conjunctive

     approach by interpreting
Section 15(2)
of the Copyright Act

     alongside the test of functional utility. While adjudicating the

     plaintiff’s claim for an injunction to restrain the defendant from

     infringing its copyright in artistic works, a Learned Single Judge

     succinctly held that:
“29. What is that to which
Section 15(2)
refers? It speaks
          only of a ‘design’, and not an ‘artistic work’. It has no
          application to the latter, but only to the former.
Section
          2(d)
of the Designs Act makes this plain, for it excludes
          from the definition of design all ‘artistic works’. Therefore,
          the Defendants’ argument must necessarily be that the Plaintiff’s
          drawings are not artistic works at all, but are designs. Following
          the Interlego decision, Mrs. Justice Dalvi held in Indiana Gratings
          that to be registrable under the
Designs Act
(even if not actually
          registered), the shape or configuration of the whole article is to
          be considered, for it is this of which a commercial monopoly is
          sought. The design and the article must, of necessity, be
          taken as a whole. If there is a part of it that is functional,
          that stands excluded from the definition of a design. The
          exclusionary intent extends only to that which has no
          appeal but describes or portrays purely functional
          features. If it does, it is not a ‘design’. It may then enjoy
          copyright as an ‘artistic work’. This inclusion under the
Copyright Act
is not to be confused, as regrettably Mr. Grover
          does, with the question of ‘visual appeal’ for the purposes of the
Designs Act
. As in Indiana Gratings, the present Plaintiff’s
          drawings are skilled diagrams that do not reflect any finished
          products, let alone a finished product of any ‘visual’ or aesthetic
          appeal. They only serve a functional purpose. They are not,
          therefore, designs.”
                                                  [Emphasis supplied]


16 2014 SCC OnLine Bom 1088.
Page 37 of 56
39. No decision of any other High Court or this Court expressing a

     discordant view has been cited before us. We thus safely proceed

     on the premise that the test of functional utility is integral to

     determining whether an article or work qualifies for protection

     under the
Designs Act
and its continued relevance, as recently held

     by the Delhi High Court in
TTK Prestige Ltd. v. KCM Appliances

     Pvt. Ltd.17


     E.1.2.2 Factors
employed by courts in the US
40. The analysis of ‘functional utility’ for determining eligibility for

     design protection closely parallels the ‘conceptual separability’

     standard established by American Courts. Under this standard,

     courts assess whether the artistic aspect of an article can be

     distinguished from its utilitarian or functional component. This

     approach aligns with the tests applied by Indian High Courts,

     which exclude functional or utilitarian subject matter from

     protection under the
Designs Act
.
41. While American jurisprudence does not treat the distinction

     between artistic works and designs in the same manner as Indian

     law, there are notable similarities in the parameters used to

     separate the functional aspects of a work from its artistic or

     aesthetic features and thus conclusively determine whether a work


17 2023 SCC OnLine Del 2129.
Page 38 of 56
is entitled statutory protection. One of the first such cases

     employing an approach of separating artistic expression from a

     utilitarian article was Mazer v. Stein.18 The US Supreme Court in

     that dispute examined the validity of copyrights granted to the

     respondents for statuettes of male and female dancing figures made

     of semivitreous china. The Court ruled that while the copyright

     owners could not prevent others from using statuettes of human

     figures in table lamps, they could prohibit direct copying of their

     specific copyrighted statuettes.
42. Though the court in Mazer (supra) did not explicitly use the term

     ‘conceptual separability’, but that was seemingly the foundation to

     bifurcate an artistic expression from a utilitarian article. In fact,

     the position of law developed in Mazer (supra) was subsequently

     incorporated by the US Congress in the Copyright Act, 1976, which

     postulated that:
“Pictorial, graphic, and sculptural works” include two-
           dimensional and three-dimensional works of fine, graphic,
           and applied art, photographs, prints and art reproductions,
           maps, globes, charts, diagrams, models, and technical
           drawings, including architectural plans. Such works shall
           include works of artistic craftsmanship insofar as their
           form but not their mechanical or utilitarian aspects are
           concerned; the design of a useful article, as defined in this
           section, shall be considered a pictorial, graphic, or sculptural
           work only if, and only to the extent that, such design
           incorporates pictorial, graphic, or sculptural features that can
           be identified separately from, and are capable of existing
           independently of, the utilitarian aspects of the article.”


18 Mazer v. Stein, 347 U.S. 201,
74
S. Ct. 460, 98 L. Ed. 630 (1954).
Page 39 of 56
“A “useful article” is an article having an intrinsic
           utilitarian function that is not merely to portray the
           appearance of the article or to convey information. An
           article that is normally a part of a useful article is considered
           a “useful article”.”
                                                             [Emphasis supplied]
43. With the insertion of the notion of ‘conceptual separability’ into the

     statutory framework, a phase of continuous evolution was

     undergone to define the scope and extent of this concept. For

     instance, in Esquire Inc v. Ringer,19 the Court of Appeals for the

     District of Columbia Circuit assessed the House Report of the 1976

     Act and enumerated that ‘the overall design or configuration of a

     utilitarian object, even if it is determined by aesthetic as well as

     functional considerations, is not eligible for copyright’.
44. Thereafter, while adjudicating Kieselstein-Cord v. Accessories by

     Peral Inc,20 the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit qualified

     that the test of ‘conceptual separability’ is not a brightline rule but

     involves a degree of subjectivity. It introduced a primary-subsidiary

     approach, surmising that the test of ‘conceptual separability’ would

     be satisfied if the artistic features of a design are ‘primary’ to its

     subsidiary utilitarian function. However, in Carol Barnhart Inc.

     v. Economy Cover Corp, the Second Circuit further held that




19 Esquire, Inc. v. Ringer, 591 F.2d 796 (D.C. Cir. 1978).
20 Kieselstein-Cord v. Accessories by Pearl, Inc., 632 F.2d 989 (2d Cir. 1980).
Page 40 of 56
‘conceptual separability’ would be met if the artistic features of the

      design were not essential to the article’s utilitarian function.21
45. During this time, Circuit Courts relied on the works of scholars and

      academicians to conclusively put forth that considering the

      dominant characteristic of industrial design is the non-aesthetic

      and utilitarian concerns, copyrightability ultimately should depend

      on the extent to which the work reflects artistic expression

      uninhibited by functional considerations.22 It was also laid down

      that a direct assessment needs to be conducted in this regard to

      exclude the general realm of industrial design while preserving the

      exclusive rights in ‘applied art’.
46. Having said that, the Fifth Circuit sought to adopt a unique

      approach and followed the ‘Likelihood of Marketability Approach’

      wherein conceptual separability would exist if there is a substantial

      likelihood that even if the article had no utilitarian use, it would

      still be marketable to some significant segment of the community

      merely owing to its aesthetic qualities.23 It thus seems that there

      was a time when multiple tests were applied by American Courts to

      determine the copyrightability of useful articles.




21 Carol Barnhart Inc. v. Economy Cover Corp., 773 F.2d 411 (2d Cir.1985).
22 Brandir International, Inc. v. Cascade Pacific Lumber Co., 834 F.2d 1142 (2d Cir.1987);

Pivot Point Int’l,
Inc. v. Charlene Prods., Inc.
, 372 F.3d 913 (7th Cir. 2004).
23 Galiano v. Harrah’s Operating Co., 416 F.3d 411, 419 (5th Cir. 2005).
Page 41 of 56
47. The US Supreme Court, resolved these inconsistencies finally in

      2017, vide Star Athletica LLC v. Varsity Brands Inc,24 by

      establishing a clear test for the protection of features incorporated

      into the design of a useful article. It held that to be eligible for

      copyright protection, the feature would have to: (i) be perceived as

      a two or three-dimensional work of art separate from the useful

      article; and (ii) it would qualify as a protectable pictorial, graphic

      or sculptural work, either on its own or fixed in some other tangible

      medium or expression, if it were imagined separately from the

      useful article into which it is incorporated. In laying down these

      parameters, Star Athletica (supra) also abandoned the distinction

      created between ‘physical’ and ‘conceptual separability’, which had

      been adopted by some courts based on the copyright framework’s

      legislative history. The US Supreme Court thus axiomatically

      reconciled the various inconsistencies in interpretation and

      established       a   uniform       standard       for    analysing       ‘conceptual

      separability’.
E.1.2.3 Broader International Principles
48. In our effort to definitively address the overlap between ‘design’ and

      ‘artistic works’, we have already explored their treatment by the

      courts in India, as well as in the US. As an apotheosis to this



24 Star Athletica, L. L. C. v. Varsity Brands, Inc., 137 S. Ct. 1002, 197 L. Ed. 2d 354 (2017).
Page 42 of 56
sojourn, we also deem it essential to explore broader international

     principles and frameworks that regulate these aspects.
49. Public international law has played a crucial role in setting and

     enforcing minimum standards for IP rights among States. The

     earliest multilateral agreement in this regard was the Paris

     Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, 1883 (Paris

     Convention).25 However, while Article 5quinquies of the Paris

     Convention requires Members to establish a standard of protection

     for industrial designs, it does not explicitly provide any guidance in

     terms of harmonizing design protection with the copyright regime.
50. Subsequently, the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary

     and Artistic Works, 1886 (Berne Convention), was established to

     set legal principles for the protection of ‘literary and artistic works’;

     across multiple jurisdictions.26 While industrial designs are

     mentioned within this broad classification, the Berne Convention

     primarily allows States to develop sui generis protection for such

     designs through their domestic laws. Notably, it does not elaborate




25 Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property of March 20, 1883, as revised at

Brussels on December 14, 1900, at Washington on June 2, 1911, at The Hague on November
6, 1925, at London on June 2, 1934, at Lisbon on October 31, 1958, and at Stockholm on
July 14 1967.
26 Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works of September 9, 1886,

completed at Paris on May 4, 1896, revised at Berlin on November 13, 1908, completed at
Berne on March 20, 1914, revised at Rome on June 2, 1928, revised at Brussels on June 26,
1948, and revised at Stockholm on July 14, 1967 (with Protocol regarding developing
countries).
Page 43 of 56
on the overlap between design protection and copyright, leaving the

     matter largely to municipal legislation.
51. The most major development in the realm of multilateral treaties

     on IP rights, however, came with the adoption of the Agreement on

     Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, 1995

     (TRIPS).27 In comparison to the Paris Convention or the Berne

     Convention, TRIPS discusses ‘industrial designs’ in a far more

     comprehensive manner.
Articles 25
and
26
of the TRIPS recognise

     that Members may employ the test of ‘functional utility’ to exclude

     designs that are built on technical or fundamental consideration

     and require a minimum protection duration of 10 years, a provision

     which is also reflected in the
Designs Act
in India.
52. The relevant provisions of TRIPS have been highlighted as follows:
“Article 25 – Requirements for Protection:
1. Members shall provide for the protection of independently
           created industrial designs that are new or original. Members
           may provide that designs are not new or original if they do not
           significantly differ from known designs or combinations of
           known design features. Members may provide that such
           protection shall not extend to designs dictated
           essentially by technical or functional considerations.
2. Each Member shall ensure that requirements for securing
           protection for textile designs, in particular in regard to any
           cost, examination or publication, do not unreasonably impair
           the opportunity to seek and obtain such protection. Members
           shall be free to meet this obligation through industrial
           design law or through copyright law.
27 TRIPS, 1869 U.N.T.S. 299
33
I.L.M. 1197.
Page 44 of 56
Article 26
– Protection:
1. The owner of a protected industrial design shall have the
        right to prevent third parties not having the owner’s consent
        from making, selling or importing articles bearing or
        embodying a design which is a copy, or substantially a copy,
        of the protected design, when such acts are undertaken for
        commercial purposes.
2. Members may provide limited exceptions to the
        protection of industrial designs, provided that such
        exceptions do not unreasonably conflict with the normal
        exploitation of protected industrial designs and do not
        unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the
        owner of the protected design, taking account of the
        legitimate interests of third parties.
3. The duration of protection available shall amount to
        at least 10 years.”
                                                 [Emphasis supplied]
53. In summation, while international treaties such as the Paris

    Convention, the Berne Convention, and TRIPS have played a pivotal

    role in shaping IP protections, they do not pointedly address a

    unified framework for resolving the overlap between ‘design’ and

    ‘copyright’ protection. Instead, they allow individual jurisdictions to

    formulate    their    own      approaches.    TRIPS,   in    particular,

    acknowledges the role of ‘functional utility’ in distinguishing

    protectable designs, thereby reinforcing the necessity of a nuanced

    approach at the domestic level. Consequently, the harmonisation

    of design and copyright protection remains largely a matter of

    national legislative policy.
E.1.3. The final piece of the puzzle – the approach to be adopted
54. Having    traversed    the     stratagem     adopted   across   various

    jurisdictions and the key considerations that influence them, we
Page 45 of 56
see light at the end of the tunnel and deem it pertinent to outline

    our own definitive parameters that align with our existing IP right

    framework.
55. The expression ‘artistic work’ under
Section 2(c)
of the Copyright

    Act has a very wide connotation and may also include abstract

    work(s) comprising a few lines or curves arbitrarily drawn, which

    could be either two or three-dimensional. It may be clarified that

    such a work may or may not have any visual appeal. Further, the

    holder of such an artistic work is entitled to draw protection under
Section 14(c)
of the Copyright Act, including the exclusive right to

    reproduce such work in any material form. Such a reproduction

    may also involve depicting a three-dimension work of a two-

    dimensional work or vice versa.
56. However, if such reproduction is done by employing an industrial

    process, which may be manual, mechanical or chemical, and which

    results in a finished article that may appeal to the eye, then ‘the

    features of shape, configuration, pattern, ornament or composition

    of lines or colours applied to the article by such an industrial

    process’, constitutes ‘design’ within the meaning of
Section 2(d)
of

    the Designs Act.
57. It thus seems that the intent of producing an original artistic work

    is not determinative of its protection under the Copyright or
Page 46 of 56
Designs Regime. Rather, the legislative intent is to harmonise the

    two Statutes so that while an ‘artistic work’ qualifies for copyright

    protection, its commercial or industrial application—i.e., the

    ‘design’ derived from the original work for industrial production—

    is subject to the limitations set out in
Section 15(2)
of the Copyright

    Act. Such a design gets protected only if it is registered under the
Designs Act
.
58. To further simplify, the original artistic work, which initially enjoys

    copyright protection, does not lose the same merely because a

    ‘design’ derived from it has been industrially applied to create a

    product. While the expression ‘artistic work’ has a broad spectrum,

    ‘design’   is   restricted   to   specific   features   such   as   shape,

    configuration, pattern, ornamentation, or composition of lines or

    colours, applied to an article through an industrial process,

    resulting in a finished product that appeals to the eye. These

    visually appealing features, when applied industrially, define a

    ‘design’ under the
Designs Act
.
59. Our analysis further reveals that the inquiry cannot be concluded

    merely by assuming that what does not qualify as an ‘artistic work’,

    within the meaning of the
Copyright Act
, would automatically

    receive protection under the
Designs Act
. While protection under

    the
Designs Act
is not as enduring as that under the
Copyright Act
,
Page 47 of 56
it is not granted by default and requires specific criteria to be met.

    In this regard, courts in India and globally consistently apply the

    test of ‘functional utility’ to determine whether a work qualifies for

    protection under the
Designs Act
.
60. It would therefore be appropriate to espouse the approach already

    undertaken by the courts in India, as it not only emulates the best

    practices employed by US courts and the principles enshrined in

    International Conventions but it also gives due consideration to

    contemporaneous laws and legislations. We have thus formulated

    a two-pronged approach in order to crack open the conundrum

    caused by
Section 15(2)
of the Copyright Act so as to ascertain

    whether a work is qualified to be protected by the
Designs Act
. This

    test shall consider: (i) whether the work in question is purely an

    ‘artistic work’ entitled to protection under the
Copyright Act
or

    whether it is a ‘design’ derived from such original artistic work and

    subjected to an industrial process based upon the language in
Section 15(2)
of the Copyright Act; (ii) if such a work does not

    qualify for copyright protection, then the test of ‘functional utility’

    will have to be applied so as to determine its dominant purpose,

    and then ascertain whether it would qualify for design protection

    under the
Design Act
.
Page 48 of 56
61. The courts, while applying this test, ought to undertake a case-

    specific inquiry guided by statutory provisions, judicial precedents,

    and comparative jurisprudence. It must be kept in mind that the

    overarching objective is to ensure that rights granted under either

    regime serve their intended purpose without unduly encroaching

    upon the domain of the other. With this approach, we have

    attempted to clarify the treatment of works at the intersection of

    ‘copyright’ and ‘design’ law(s), thereby ensuring coherence and

    consistency in the application of IP rights in India.
62. We hasten to add that this Court has undertaken the task of

    clarifying the perceived complexities arising from
Section 15(2)
of

    the Copyright Act. In this context, we appreciate the efforts of High

    Courts across the country in adopting best practices that align with

    our socio-legal framework. Our analysis and examination have

    hopefully resolved this legal issue to prevent any further ambiguity

    in the future.
E.2 Issue No. 2: The High Court’s rejection of the application under
Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC
63. Adverting to the case at hand, the primary contention between the

    parties lies in whether or not the High Court erred in setting aside

    the Commercial Court’s order, whereby it allowed the application

    preferred by LNG Express under
Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC
.
Page 49 of 56
64. The Commercial Court allowed LNG Express’s application on the

    ground that the ‘Proprietary Engineering Drawings’ qualified as a

    ‘design’ under
Section 2(d)
of the Designs Act, and therefore, no

    suit for copyright infringement could be maintained in favour of

    Inox.
65. However, the High Court, having disagreed with the finding of the

    Commercial     Court,   initially   remanded    the   matter    for

    reconsideration. When the Commercial Court reiterated its earlier

    conclusion, the High Court again intervened and rejected LNG

    Express’s application, with a direction to the Commercial Court to

    consider Inox’s plea for an interim injunction under Order XXXIX

    Rules 1 and 2
of the CPC
.
66. This prolonged oscillation between the High Court and the

    Commercial Court has brought the parties before us. On a deeper

    analysis of the Impugned Judgement, we find that the High Court

    has substantiated its conclusions with the following broad reasons:
(a)
Section 15(1)
of the Copyright Act applies when a design is

        registered under the
Designs Act
, thereby implicitly barring

        any claim for copyright protection. However,
Section 15(2)
of

        the Copyright Act requires an inquiry to determine whether the

        drawing in question falls within the scope of the
Designs Act
.
This necessary inquiry implies that a suit cannot be dismissed
Page 50 of 56
outrightly under Clause (d) of
Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC
solely based on a reading of the averments in the plaint.
(b) The core dispute revolves around whether the ‘Proprietary

    Engineering Drawings’ qualify as drawings under
Section 2(c)
of the Copyright Act or whether they fall within the definition

    of a ‘design’ under
Section 2(d)
of the Designs Act,

    necessitating a detailed examination.
(c) The Division Bench of the Delhi High Court in
Microfibres II
(supra), has laid down that the term ‘artistic work’ has a broad

    scope and may exist independently or as a precursor to a

    design. Additionally, a design derived from an artistic work

    may enjoy copyright protection, which ceases once it is

    industrially applied beyond the threshold set in
Section 15(2)
of the Copyright Act. Given these intricate distinctions, a more

    detailed analysis is warranted, and such determinations

    cannot be made at the very threshold.
(d) Even if the drawing in question is not classified as an original

    artistic work, it does not automatically qualify for protection

    under the
Designs Act
. In such cases, it must be assessed

    whether the dominant aspect of the design is functional or

    whether the design is registrable under the
Designs Act
,

    meaning that when applied to an article through an industrial
Page 51 of 56
process, the finished product must possess aesthetic appeal

      rather than being purely functional.
(e)
Section 15(2)
of the Copyright Act serves as a limitation on the

      protection granted to artistic works under the Act. Allowing

      Inox’s claim may result in a cascading effect, potentially

      allowing every tracing or drawing to receive copyright

      protection     while   simultaneously   being   industrially   or

      commercially exploited through its application to an article.

      Such an outcome would likely contravene the intent of the

      Legislature.
(f)   Ultimately, the determination of whether the ‘Proprietary

      Engineering Drawings’ of the inner vessel, which is admittedly

      an ‘original artistic work’ under
Section 2(c)
of the Copyright

      Act, continues to enjoy copyright protection or whether such

      protection is curtailed by
Section 15(2)
of the Copyright Act

      due to their industrial application, is a significant mixed

      question of law and fact.
(g) Order VII Rule 11(a)
of the CPC
empowers a court to reject a

      plaint if the plaintiff fails to disclose a cause of action. In

      determining this, the court is not required to delve into

      complex legal questions but must simply assess whether the

      allegations, if taken as true, establish a cause of action without
Page 52 of 56
evaluating the likelihood of success. Since the plaintiff

      explicitly sought copyright protection over the ‘Proprietary

      Engineering Drawings’; the literary work associated with the

      internal parts of Cryogenic trailers; and the know-how for their

      manufacture or assembly, the rejection of the plaint was

      unwarranted.
(h) When determining whether a plaint discloses a cause of action,

      the court is not required to conduct an elaborate inquiry into

      complex legal or factual issues. The court’s role is limited to

      assessing whether any of the allegations indicate a cause of

      action. As long as the claim presents some cause of action or

      raises questions appropriate for judicial determination, the

      fact that the case may be weak or unlikely to succeed is not a

      valid reason for striking it out. For rejecting a plaint, it is

      unnecessary to evaluate whether the averments substantiate

      the ownership claim made by the defendant. Likewise, if the

      defendant raises a legal issue in the written statement, it

      cannot be adjudicated through an application under
Order VII

      Rule 11 of the CPC
, as doing so would amount to pre-judging

      the matter.
(i)   In any event, the Suit encompasses additional claims relating

      to ‘literary work,’ confidential information, and know-how,
Page 53 of 56
which cannot be rejected in part. Even if the claim for copyright

        infringement is deemed untenable, the Suit would still be

        maintainable with respect to the other rights asserted. As a

        result, the entire Suit must proceed to trial, since a plaint

        cannot be partially rejected.
67. We are in complete agreement with the reasoning of the High Court

    that the question as to whether the original artistic work would fall

    within the meaning of ‘design’ under the
Designs Act
cannot be

    answered while deciding an application under
Order VII Rule 11 of

    the CPC
. This stage would involve only a prima facie inquiry as to

    the disclosure of cause of action in the plaint. The question

    pertaining to ascertaining the true nature of the ‘Proprietary

    Engineering Drawings’ involves a mixed question of law and fact

    and could not have been decided by the Commercial Court at a

    preliminary stage based upon such a casual appraisal of the plaint

    averments.
68. We therefore concur with the High Court that this case warrants a

    trial given the triable issues involved. The plaintiff before the

    Commercial Court, i.e., Inox, was erroneously non-suited due to

    incorrect assumptions made by the Commercial Court which

    misread the plaint, misapplied legal principles and overlooked the

    distinction between ‘artistic work’ and ‘design.’
Page 54 of 56
69. In light of our discussion on relevant precedents and legal

     positions, and the clear test we have outlined, we direct the

     Commercial Court to consider the issue afresh and conduct trial by

     adopting an Occam’s Razor approach to ascertain the true nature

     of the ‘Proprietary Engineering Drawings’. Additionally, the

     Commercial Court would also need to independently assess the

     claims related to infringement of the Literary Works, confidential

     information,    know-how    etc.   so   as   to   resolve   the   matter

     comprehensively.
F.   CONCLUSION AND DIRECTIONS
70. Having thus examined the vagaries of IP law and the intrinsic

     synergy that exists between two independent legislations, namely

     the Designs Act and the Copyright Act, we dismiss the instant

     appeals with the following conclusions and directions:
i.    The decision of the High Court rejecting the application under
Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC
is upheld;
ii.   The Commercial Court is directed to deliver its decision on the

           pending application seeking interim injunction preferred by

           Inox, within a period of two months;
iii. The Commercial Court is further directed to conduct trial and

           discern the true nature of the Proprietary Engineering
Page 55 of 56
Drawings based upon the test
laid down in
paragraph 60 of

        this judgement, as also the other related IP right infringements

        claimed by Inox, within a period of one year, given that it has

        already wasted significant judicial time on this issue.
71. Ordered accordingly. Pending applications, if any, also stand

    disposed of in the above terms.
….........................J.
                                                              (SURYA KANT)



                           .............................................…….........J.
                                (NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH)


NEW DELHI;
DATED: 15.04.2025
Page 56 of 56