[Cites
5
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Sri Venkateswara Constructions vs The State Of Odisha on 25 April, 2025
Author:
Bela M. Trivedi
Bench:
Bela M. Trivedi
2025 INSC 580                                                   NON-REPORTABLE


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). ____________OF 2025
                            (@ Special Leave Petition (C) No(s). 12174 of 2023)




             M/S Sri Venkateswara Constructions                   Appellant(s)……


                                                     VERSUS


             State of Odisha & Ors.                             Respondent(s)…….


                                                  WITH


                                 CIVIL APPEAL No(s). ____________OF 2025
                            (@ Special Leave Petition (C) No(s). 18198 of 2023)


                                             JUDGMENT
PRASANNA B. VARALE, J:-
1.             Leave granted.
Signature Not Verified
2. The challenge in the present appeals is to the order dated
Digitally signed by
RAVI ARORA
Date: 2025.04.28
17:39:00 IST
Reason:
18.05.2023 in Writ Petition no. 32063/2022 whereby the High
1
Court of Orissa allowed the petition preferred by the respondent

no.4 herein and has thereby set aside the order/s impugned and

in addition has directed for fresh tender in respect of Karangadihi

Sand Quarry.
3.   The factual background is that on 18.07.2022 the Tahasildar,

Banspal (Respondent no. 2 herein) floated an auction notice for

long term lease of Karangadihi Stone Quarry for a period of five

years, i.e., from the financial year 2022-23 to 2026-27. The last

date of submission of bid was fixed to 04.08.2022 and the date of

opening of bid was fixed to 05.08.2022. The auction notice

specified the list of documents to be enclosed by the bidders along

with the bid application. The important documents which are in

question in the present case are:
“5. Income Tax Return of Previous Financial Year in which
            the annual income shall not be less than the royalty
            mentioned in schedule-1 as per annual Minimum
            Guaranteed Quantity (MGQ) of minor minerals and
            additional charge offered in the application of the applicant
            or Bank Guarantee with 18 months validity which shall not
            be less than the royalty mentioned in schedule-1 as per
            annual Minimum Guaranteed Quantity (MGQ) of minor
            minerals and additional charge offered in the application by
            the applicant and the applicant shall furnish details of other
            immovable property [Income Tax Return of Previous
            Financial Year showing annual income/ Requisite Extent of
            Bank Guarantee = Minimum Guaranteed Quantity X
            (Offered Additional Charge + Royalty)]
2
7. The bidder shall furnish a certificate/letter from the
            concerned GST jurisdictional officer that no GST dues are
            pending against such bidders”
4.   The tender drop box was opened, on 05.08.2022 at 11.30

A.M., by the selection committee, comprising of Tahasildar,

Banspal, Addl. Tahasildar, Banspal and Revenue Inspector in

presence of applicants or their representatives. Five sealed

envelopes were found to be submitted by Dileswar Behera, Anil

Khirwal, Soumyajit Mohanty, M/s Sri Venkateswar Construction

(petitioner herein) and M/s P.K. Minerals (P) Ltd. (respondent no.4

herein).
5.   On scrutiny of the documents, it was found by the Tahsildar

in its order dated 05.08.2022 that bids of Dileswar Behera, Anil

Khirwal, Soumyajit Mohanty were not accompanied with required

documents. It was further found that petitioner herein has quoted

the highest additional charge at rate of Rs. 589/- and the

respondent no.4 herein has quoted the second highest additional

charge at rate of Rs. 221/-. Consequently, the petitioner was

selected and declared as the successful bidder. The reasons given

by the Tahsildar for declaring the petitioner as the successful
3
bidder and for rejecting the bid of respondent no.4 herein are

reproduced below:
“The Serial No.04, M/S P.K Minerals Ltd. MD Soumya Ranjan
      Pahi. of Susila Saw Mill Campus, Keonjhar the 2nd highest bidder
      have not submitted any letter or certif[cate from the concerned
      GST Jurisdictional authority. In the advertisement No.1895
      dt18.07.2022 of tender call notice, the bidders were" asked to
      furnish a certificate/ letter from concerned GST jurisdictional
      officer that no GST dues are pending against such bidders". But
      it is found that he has submitted only a photocopy of GST portal
      site from internet , which can't be considered as certificate or
      letter from the concerned GST jurisdictional Officer. Hence the
      case of 2nd highest bidder is not considered.
On the other hand, SL No. 05, M/S Sri Venkateswara
      Constructions        Managing        Partner       Ganta      Naga
      Subrahamanyeswar Rao, Rutisila, District-Keonjhar who quoted
      the highest rate of additional charge @ Rs.589/- has submitted
      all requisite documents along with the IT return of assessment
      year 2021-22, which needs to be clarified in conformity with
      tender advertisement. On enquiry M/S Sri Venkateswara
      Constructions        Managing        Partner       Ganta      Naga
      Subrallamanyeswar Rao, Rutislla, District-KeonJhar has
      submitted an certificate from Chartered Accounts EVB Reddey
      and Associates with Registration No.011050S, where he
      has clarified that the due date of filing of audited balance
      sheet profit and loss account for financial year 2021-22 is 30th
      September, 2022 and the due date of filing of IT return is 31st
      October, 2022 and for this aforesaid balance sheet may be
      treated as previous year ITR. It is also clarified that U/S 44AB of
      IT Act 1961, in case of Partnership firm whose turnover is more
      than Rs 1 Crore , the due date of filing audited balance sheet and
      profit & loss account for the year 2021-22 is 30th September and
      due date of filing ITR is 31st October. Hence the requisite amount
      of IT return of Assessment year 2021-22 submitted by M/S Sri
      Venkateswara Constructions Managing Partner Ganta Naga
      Subrahamanyeswar Rao, Rutisila, District-Keonjhar is in
      consonance with the Income Tax circular of Govt of India and also
      in accordance with the tender requirement. Besides these M/S Sri
      Venkateswara Constructions, Managing Partner Ganta Naga
4
Subrahamanyeswar Rao, Rutisila, District-Keonjhar has also
       submitted the certificate/letter from the Office of the Supdt.
       Central GST & Central Excise, Jajpur Range, Jajpur Road, that
       there is no GST liability against M/S Sri Venkateswara
       Constructions      Managing        Partner      Ganta       Naga
       Subrahamanyeswar Rao, Rutisila, Distnct-Keonjhar bearing GST
       IN      No.21ABHFS6939AIZD            vide      C      No.CGST-
;21/06/Misc,.GST/JPR-II/2022/1173. In addition to these M/s
       Sri Venkateswara Constructions Managing Partner Ganta Naga
       Subrahamanyeswar Rao, Rutisila, District-Keonjhar has quoted
       highest rate @ Rs.589/-, which is far higher than the rate of 2nd
       highest bidder i.e.@ Rs.221/- which will increase the highest
       revenue to the Govt. exchequer”
6.   Accordingly, an intimation letter dated 10.08.2022 was

issued to the petitioner and subsequently, further process had

commenced such as deposit of the security money along with other

charges under various heads like Royalty, etc.
7.   The respondent no.4 herein has challenged the order of

Tahsildar dated 05.08.2022 and preferred an appeal before Sub-
Collector (Respondent no. 3 herein).
8.   The Sub-Collector vide its order dated 20.10.2022 dismissed

the appeal filed by the respondent no.4 herein, the reasoning given

for dismissing the appeal is enumerated below:
“After careful verification of documents available in the C/R, it is
       found that the return available as per the Act has been submitted
       with Tender Notice and the condition of the Annual Turnover and
       Net Worth of all partners also fulfilled and satisfied as the entire
       audited balance sheet and return for the Assessment year 2021-
5
22 relating to the previous year 2020-21as on the date of auction
that was on 04.08.2022.
The respondent No.1 has not committed any illegality in respect
of acceptance of the Income Tax Return of the respondent No.2
and consequential order is valid.
The second point of challenge before this court is that regarding
the condition as per clause No.5 of the Auction Notice, the
Bidders/participants have to submit their immovable property list
and particulars alongwith the application, whereas the
respondent No.2 has not furnished such particular, hence he is
not eligible for such tender.
In reply, the respondent No.2 submitted that he has disclosed its
income for the last Assessment Year is about Rs.1,81,06,830/-
and under these circumstances the submission of details of
immovable property is not required as per the terms and
conditions for submission of tender.
It is further submitted with reference to the CHECK LIST of
documents submitted by the Respondent NO.2 at Sl. No. 6, it has
been listed as Immovable property (sale deed) is attached. So,
this ground of challenge has not based on material.
The last ground of challenge of the appellant is that the
Respondent No.1 hurriedly completed the process of verification
without verifying the GST certificate submitted by the respondent
No.2. As per the records, the Respondent No.1 is satisfied and
verified the facts that, the no dues certificate has been issued by
the jurisdictional officer of the respondent No.2 and found correct
in respect of dues stands against the firm as on the date of
selection and no other condition is required to be satisfied,
whereas in other hand the appellant has not obtained the GST no
dues certificate from his jurisdictional officer, thus there was no
scope for any verification. The Appellant has not submitted any
more evidence against the documents submitted by the
Respondent No.2 which seems to be invalid as per the conditions
of the tender or otherwise fake or false. Hence, the objection on
this score raised by the Appellant is not sustainable in the eye of
law. ”
6
9.   On being aggrieved by the order of Sub-Collector the

respondent no.4 herein filed a Writ Petition before the High Court

of Orissa praying to set aside the order passed by the Sub-Collector

and Tahsildar. The High Court vide the impugned order allowed

the appeal of the respondent no.4 herein and thereby had

quashed the order dated 05.08.2022 passed by the Tahasildar and

order dated 20.10.2022 passed by Sub-Collector, and in addition

had directed for fresh tender. The High Court while allowing the

appeal has observed as under:
“7. On the basis of the factual matrix, as delineated above, before
      delving into the merits or the case itself, Clause-(iv) of Rule-27(4) of
      the Odisha Minor Minerals Concession (Amendment) Rules, 2022,
      which is relevant for the just and proper adjudication of the case,
      is taken note of:
"R-27/4/(iv). Income tax return of previous financial year showing
      annual income far on amount not less than the amount of
      additional charge offered and the royalty payable for the minimum
      guaranteed quantity for one whole year or bank guarantee valid
      for a period of eighteen months for the amount not less than the
      amount as above.”
8. As per the provision mentioned above, the bidder has to submit
      the income tax return of previous financial year for g an amount
      not less than the amount of additional charge offered and the
      royalty payable for the minimum guaranteed quantity for one
      whole year or bank guarantee for a period of 18 months for the
      amount of additional charges offered. As required under Clause-5
      of the auction notice, though opposite party no.4 had enclosed a
      check list along with bid application and vide sl.no.5 had enlisted
      "income tax return of FY 2021-22", but had enclosed the income
      tax return for the assessment year 202122 for the financial year
      2020-21. As the tender notification was issued on 18.07.2022, the
      bidder was required to submit the income tax return for the FY
7
ending 31.03.2022. If the same would be taken into consideration,
the bid application submitted by opposite party no.4 was without
any income tax return of the financial year 2021-22, therefore, the
same should have been rejected. Apart from the same, against
sl.no.8 of the check list, opposite party no.4 had mentioned "GST
no dues certificate", but the certificate enclosed was not a statutory
certificate and, as such, the same was issued before the
submission of income tax return of FY 202122. Furthermore, the
said certificate was issued on the request made by the assessee
and, as such, the same was a conditional one. The GST Authorities
had made it clear that the certificate is not valid in case of any
liability arises for the said period and at the time of scrutiny of
details. Meaning thereby, the authority had reserved the right to
cancel and declare the certificate to be invalid.
9. So far as the petitioner is concerned, it had no clues of Goods
and Service Tax (GST). On 28.07.2022, the petitioner had applied
to the Superintendent, Central Excise (CGST, Keonjhar1 Range for
issue of a "No Dues Certificate" to comply with Clause-7 of the
auction notice. But the CGST Authorities advised the petitioner to
download the information from their website. Accordingly, the
petitioner had downloaded the information from their website,
which contained the information that the petitioner had no
outstanding GST dues. Thereby, the same is in compliance of
Clause-7 of the auction notice. As a consequence thereof, the
petitioner objected to the bid submitted by opposite party no.4, but.
without considering the same, the authorities proceeded with the
decision making process of selection and allotment of the
quarry…….
10. On perusal of the endorsement of the committee, it is made
clear that opposite party no.4 had quoted additional charge at the
rate of Rs.589/-, but, so far as its income tax return for the
assessment year 2021-22 is concerned, a clarification was to be
given by the competent authority in consultation with the
concerned department/authority, and, as regards no dues
certificate obtained from the CGST department, confirmation was
to be made by the concerned authority. Similarly, it was observed
that the petitioner had quoted additional charge of Rs.221/·, but,
however, the no dues certificate obtained from GST portal was
needed to be confirmed from the concerned department/authority,
if necessary, and, thereafter, the tender would be finalized. If such
requirement has to be complied with, pursuant to the observation
8
made on 05.08.2022, without getting such clearance from the
      respective departments and getting confirmation from the
      respective authority, as was observed, the authority could not
      have proceeded with the matter and finalize the tender in favour
      of opposite party no.4 on the very same day, i.e., 05.08.2022.
      Thereby, the entire decision making process of the tendering
      authority is arbitrary, unreasonable and contrary to the provisions
      of law. Under these circumstances, this Court, in exercise of the
      powers conferred under the judicial review, has got jurisdiction to
      interfere with the decision making process of the tendering
      authority.
20. A contention was raised that opposite party no.4 had quoted
      highest price of Rs.589/as additional charge and the petitioner
      had quoted Rs.221/-, therefore, opportunity should have been
      given to the petitioner to match with the bid price of opposite party
      no.4. But that question does not arise, in view of the fact that the
      document, which had been submitted by the petitioner with regard
      to no dues certificate from GST authority, is also required to be
      verified by the concerned department/ authority, if necessary.
      Thereby, this Court is of the considered view that even if the
      petitioner is called upon to match the highest price, but its bid will
      suffer from deficiency like that of opposite party no.4. Therefore,
      the question of calling upon the petitioner to match the highest price
      offered by opposite party no.4 may not arise. ”
10. On being aggrieved with the impugned order passed by the

High Court the petitioner herein as well as the respondent no.4

through another SLP (C) no. 18198/2023 has preferred the present

appeals. Both the appeals are being decided by this common

judgement.
9
11. The Ld. counsel for the petitioner submitted as follows:
11.1 That the petitioner submitted the latest available Income Tax

Return as per the law. The auction notice, issued on 18.07.2022,

had a submission deadline of 04.08.2022. According to Section

139(1) and
Section 44AB
of the Income Tax Act, 1961, the due date

for filing the Income Tax Return for financial year 2021-2022 for a

tax audit subject bidder is 31.10.2022. Since the Petitioner, a

partnership firm with a turnover above Rs. 1,00,00,000/-(Rupees

one crore) was subjected to a tax audit and had not yet filed the

2021-2022 return by the bid submission date, the 2020-2021

return was considered the relevant return. In view of express

provisions of
Income Tax Act, 1961
the interpretation adopted by

Respondent Nos. 1-3 is reasonable, ensuring fairness and a level

playing field for all bidders. A strict interpretation of the bid

condition would have been disadvantageous to bidders subject to

a tax audit under the
Income Tax Act
. It is further submitted that

it is not impossible to determine the financial soundness of a

bidder and eligibility of a bidder under bid condition no. 5 from the

latest available income-tax return filed by the bidder.
10
11.2 That the certificate obtained by the Petitioner from the GST

jurisdictional officer dated July 28, 2022 confirms that, as per the

GST liability register, there was no outstanding GST liability

against the Petitioner as of that date, thereby fulfilling the

requirement under bid condition S. No. 7 of the auction notice. The

disclaimers in the certificate merely state that future liabilities may

arise due to events like scrutiny or audit—a standard and

universally applicable caveat. Such disclaimers do not undermine

the validity or sufficiency of the certificate, which accurately

reflects the Petitioner's compliance status at the time of issuance.

11.3   That    confirmations    and    clarifications   from   relevant

authorities are not essential preconditions to awarding a tender,

as long as proper verification is conducted. In this case, the

Tahasildar initiated clarifications and verifications on the same day

and recorded his findings. Upon examining the
Income Tax Act,

1961
, he concluded that for tax-audited entities like the Petitioner,

the due date for filing the 2021–2022 return was October 31, 2022,

making the 2020–2021 return the latest available at the time of

bidding and compliant with condition S. No. 5 of the auction notice.
He also found the 'GST no dues' certificate submitted by the
11
Petitioner to be in order, as it confirmed there were no outstanding

dues thus, meeting the requirement under S. No. 7.

11.4 That there was nothing in the order sheet noting that

Respondent No. 2 was restricted from conducting immediate

verification or the tendering authority prescribed any specific

standard or degree of verification. The fact that respondent no. 2

examined and verified the documents on the same day should not

prejudice the Petitioner, especially since the Petitioner’s bid was

found to be both compliant and the highest by a significant margin.

11.5 That Respondent No. 4 failed to comply with bid condition S.

No. 7 by submitting a self-downloaded printout from the GST

portal instead of an official 'no dues' certificate or letter from the

relevant authority. There was no proof supporting the claim that

CGST authorities advised submitting such a printout, and the

document lacked any official verification or certification. This non-

compliance was acknowledged by Respondent No. 2 in his order,

and the Hon'ble High Court also rejected Respondent No. 4’s

arguments regarding the same in the impugned order. Accordingly,

Respondent No. 2 rightly rejected Respondent No. 4’s bid on this

ground.
12
11.6 That While interpreting Rule 27(4)(iv), it is important to

consider that the provision was amended less than four months

before the auction notice, leaving limited precedent or established

procedural practice for authorities to follow. Therefore, the

approach taken by the tendering authorities (Respondents No. 1–
3) in not adhering strictly to a literal interpretation of the condition,

but instead ensuring a level playing field for all bidders, is

reasonable and cannot be faulted.
11.7 That Tax authorities do not typically issue “no dues

certificates” as part of statutory provisions but may do so upon

request, as in the Petitioner’s case for bid submission. Since no

specific format was prescribed in S. No. 7 of the auction notice, the

Petitioner could not be expected to dictate the format or wording of

the certificate issued by the statutory authority. Therefore, it was

not within the Hon'ble High Court’s purview to impose additional

requirements or mandate a specific certificate format when the

tendering authority itself had not done so.
11.8 That HC should not have quashed the entire tender process

but could have directed the Tahasildar to make appropriate

enquiries with the relevant authorities and pass a reasoned order

based on such enquiries finally settling the tender.
13
11.9 That the Petitioner, currently the highest bidder, has lost its

competitive advantage as its bid amount is now in public. This

order unfairly allows all bidders, including previously unsuccessful

ones like Respondent No. 4, a chance to match or outbid the

Petitioner in the re-tender process. Moreover, the order fails to

consider the Petitioner’s incurred expenses, obtained consents and

licenses, and offers no protection regarding the security deposit,

royalties already paid, or other investments made pursuant to the

original tender award.
11.10 Petitioner has placed reliance on several Supreme Court

decisions emphasizing judicial restraint in interfering with tender-

related decisions made by the employer. In Central Coalfields

Ltd. v. SLLSML (2016), the Court held that the employer's

determination of essential tender terms must be respected and is

not subject to judicial scrutiny.
In
G.J. Fernandez v. State of

Karnataka
(1990), it was affirmed that deviations from tender

terms are permissible if they apply equally to all applicants and are

non-objectionable.
Similarly, in
Tata Cellular v. Union of India
(1994), the Court clarified that judicial review focuses on the

lawfulness—not the soundness—of administrative decisions, and

such decisions will not be interfered with unless they are arbitrary,
14
irrational, mala fide, or biased.
This principle was reiterated in
Jagdish Mandal v. State of Orissa
(2007), where the Court held

that courts should not intervene at the behest of unsuccessful

bidders over mere technical or procedural issues. Accordingly, the

interpretation of condition S. No. 5 is reasonable, ensures equal

treatment of applicants, and does not warrant judicial interference.
12. Per contra, the Ld. Counsel appearing for the respondent no.4

submitted as follows:
12.1 That The income tax return for the previous financial year

was a crucial requirement of the tender and could not be

disregarded. Since the tender was advertised on 18.07.2022, the

required return was for the financial year 2021–2022. However, the

Petitioner submitted the return for the financial year 2020–2021,

corresponding to the previous assessment year. Despite this non-
compliance, the Tahasildar allegedly acted illegally and with mala

fide intent in selecting the Petitioner as the successful bidder.

Additionally, the Petitioner failed to submit a proper ‘no dues’

certificate from the GST jurisdictional officer. The certificate

submitted was conditional, issued upon the Petitioner’s request,

and explicitly stated that it would be invalid if any liability arose
15
during scrutiny, implying that the GST authority had reserved the

right to cancel it.
12.2 That the tender box was opened on 05.08.2022, and a

comparative     statement   of   the   bids   received   under   the

advertisement dated 18.07.2022 was prepared. The tender

committee's endorsements clearly indicated that the finalization of

the tender was contingent upon receiving necessary clarifications

regarding the bids of both the Petitioner and Respondent No. 4.

However, without awaiting these clarifications, the Tahasildar

proceeded to declare the Petitioner as the successful bidder on the

same day through an allegedly illegal and mala fide order. The

Hon'ble High Court, in paragraph 10 of the impugned order, noted

this irregularity and the premature action taken by the Tahasildar.

12.3 That Respondent No. 4 applied to the Superintendent, Central

Excise (CGST Authority) for a "No Dues Certificate" as required

under Clause 7 of the tender advertisement dated 18.07.2022.

However, the CGST authorities advised Respondent No. 4 to

download the relevant information from their website. Accordingly,

Respondent No. 4 submitted the downloaded document, which

indicated that there were no pending GST dues. This submission
16
was considered compliant with Clause 7, as the tender scrutiny

committee did not raise any objections regarding it.

12.4 That the advertisement for the long-term lease of the mine

was issued by the Tahasildar, Banspal, on 18.07.2022, and the

tender was open until 4th August 2022. The Petitioner could have

filed the Income Tax Return for the financial year 2021-2022

anytime between April and August 3, 2022, as the tender deadline

was 5 pm on 4th August. There was no need to wait until the

statutory deadline of 31.10.2022. The Petitioner, however,

submitted the Income Tax Return for the financial year 2020-2021

instead and misrepresented it as the return for 2021-2022. The

Hon'ble High Court acknowledged this in paragraph 8 of the

impugned order. Despite this, the Respondent Nos. 1–3, in their

Counter Affidavit, contradicted their own tender advertisement and

the OMMC Rules by supporting the Petitioner and suggesting that

the failure to submit the correct Income Tax Return or the Bank

Guarantee could be excused.
12.5 That in the counter affidavit, the Respondent State claims

that the necessary clarifications and confirmations were obtained

by the Tahasildar before issuing his order on 05.08.2022. However,

this statement contradicts both the facts and the Tahasildar’s own
17
order, which clearly shows that no clarifications were obtained

from the relevant department or authority, as indicated by the

Tender Committee’s endorsement. Instead, the Tahasildar relied

on   clarifications   provided     by   the   Petitioner’s   Chartered

Accountant, who could not offer an independent opinion. As a

government     officer,   the    Tahasildar   should    have   sought

clarifications from the appropriate government department rather

than relying on a bidder's representative, which suggests bias in

favor of the Petitioner and against Respondent No. 4.

12.6 The Respondent State filed a Counter Affidavit in W.P.(C) No.

32063 of 2022 on 22.12.2022 but did not mention that the

Tahasildar had made necessary clarifications and confirmations

before issuing the order dated 05.08.2022. Similarly, in another

affidavit filed on 02.05.2023 in reply to the Petitioner's Rejoinder,

no such claim was made. The current assertions by Respondents

No. 1 to 3 about the Tahasildar making necessary clarifications are

unsupported by documentary evidence and were never argued

before the High Court. These statements are misleading,

inconsistent with earlier records, and appear to be an afterthought.

The Hon'ble High Court, in paragraph 10 of the impugned
18
judgment, has thoroughly addressed these issues and given a clear

finding.
13. The Ld. Counsel appearing for the respondent no.1 to 3

submitted as follows:
13.1 That A review of the endorsements made by the committee

shows that clarifications and confirmations were not mandatory.
However, as part of a fair tender process, the Tahasildar confirmed

the details on the same day, 05.08.2022, after verifying the

documents submitted by both bidders. The entire bidding process

was conducted in accordance with the OMMC Rules, 2016, and no

objections were raised by any bidders during the process. As a

result, the Tahasildar was not required to seek further verification

or clarification from any party.
13.2   That   the   clarification provided   by   Mr. Ganta   Naga

Subrahamanyeswar Rao, Managing Partner of the Petitioner, is

valid, stating that under
Section 44AB
of the Income Tax Act, 1961,

for partnership firms with a turnover exceeding Rs. 1 crore, the

due date for filing the audited balance sheet and profit & loss

account for the financial year 2021-2022 was 30.09.2022, and the

due date for filing the Income Tax Return was 31.10.2022. As such,

the Income Tax Return for the financial year 2020-2021, submitted
19
by the Petitioner, can be treated as the relevant previous year's

return, satisfying the prerequisite conditions. Additionally, the

Petitioner submitted a valid certificate from the GST jurisdictional

officer, while Respondent No. 4 submitted an invalid photocopy

from the GST portal, which could not be accepted as a valid

certificate.
14. Heard Ld. Counsels appeared on both sides and perused the

relevant documents placed on record.
15. The controversy in these petitions revolves around the

conditions referred to in the tender notice dated 18.07.2022. As

referred to in para 3 the condition no. 5 is in respect of submission

of income tax return of previous financial year or bank guarantee

of 18 months validity.     The second condition is furnishing a

certificate/letter from the concerned GST Jurisdictional Officer

stating that the bidder has no GST dues pending.
16. Respondent no. 4 in the present Special Leave Petition

(petitioner before the High Court) vehemently submitted that the

petitioner herein has submitted the income tax return for the

financial year 2020-21 instead of year 2021-2022. Thus, it was

submitted that the petitioner failed to comply with the condition

no. 5.    Though at the first blush, this submission may look
20
attractive but on perusal of the material, we are unable to accept

this submission.
17. Admittedly, the petitioner had submitted the requisite

documents along with his income tax return. Tahasildar for his

satisfaction had made an enquiry with the managing partner Shri.

G.N.   Subrahamanyeswar       Rao      of   M/s.   Sri   Venkateswara

Constructions. In response to the query made by the Tahasildar,

the representative i.e. the managing partner submitted certificate

of the chartered accountant. It was clarified in the certificate that

the due date of filing of audited balance sheet and profit and loss

account for financial year 2021-22 is 30th September, 2022 and

the due date of filing of IT return is 31st October, 2022. It was then

submitted that the income tax return for the financial year 2020-

21 may be treated as previous year income tax return. A support

was taken to the provision namely, Section 44 AB of Income Tax

Act, 1961 which state that in case of partnership firm whose

turnover was more than Rs. 1 crore, the due date of filing audited

balance sheet and profit & loss account for the year 2021-22 is 30th

September and the due date of filing ITR is 31st October, 2022. The

requisite amount of income tax return of the assessment year

2021-22 submitted by the petitioner is in consonance with the
21
income tax circular of Government of India and was also in

accordance with the tender requirement. The second condition in

respect of furnishing certificate/letter from the concerned GST

Jurisdictional Officer that no GST dues are pending is also

complied with by the petitioner.
18. Accordingly, the certificate was issued with the statement

that the certificate is not valid in case of any liability arises for the

said period and at the time of scrutiny of details. The Tahasildar

on his satisfaction that the petitioner has complied both the

conditions, he was declared as a successful bidder.
19. Needless to state, that the intention of laying down such

condition is to ascertain and assess the financial capacity and

capability of the bidder.       As stated above, the petitioner has

submitted his income-tax returns of the year 2020-21 which shows

that the petitioner has the financial capability to participate in the

bidding process, therefore, the income tax return as submitted by

the petitioner is sufficient to fulfil the purpose of such

condition/requirement      of   auction   notice   in   assessing    the

petitioner’s financial capability.
20. Income Tax Department issued notification providing thereby

extension of the period for filing the income-tax returns to
22
particular category.    Admittedly, the petitioner was from that

category and was entitled to avail the benefit of the notification.

Accordingly, the petitioner was entitled to file his returns of

financial year 2021-22 till 31st October, 2022 and this fact was

brought to the notice of Tahasildar.        Thus, the insistence of

respondent no. 4 for not submitting the income-tax return for the

year    2021-22   was    clearly    untenable   and   resultantly   the

submission that the petitioner failed to comply with the pre-

requisite condition is unsustainable.
21. In so far as the other condition is concerned the petitioner

has submitted the communication issued by the GST officer

revealing that there are no dues against the successful bidder,

merely because there is a rider attached to it, the same would not

ipso facto, lose the sanctity of the certificate issued by the GST

officer in favour of the petitioner.
22. On the contrary, the respondent no.4 himself failed to comply

this condition and instead of placing before the authority any

certificate issued by the GST officer the respondent no.4 only

placed on record a screenshot of his GST portal reflecting his GST

dues.    Such a screenshot could not have been accepted as

compliance    of condition     of   auction notice.   Therefore,    the
23
respondent no.4 had complied with only one condition and failed

to comply the other pre-requisite in the form of GST certificate.

Thus, considering the material placed on record, we are of the clear

opinion, that the submissions made on behalf of respondent no.4

is not sustainable for the simple reason that the Tahasildar was

satisfied on the aspect that the petitioner had complied with both

the conditions and there was no need for the him to further wait

for some approval and delay the process.
23. Another aspect which is also worth consideration is the bid

quoted by the petitioner was much more than the respondent no.4

and by way of accepting the tender of the petitioner the state ex-

chequer could have been benefitted and there was no reason for

the revenue authorities i.e., the Tahasildar and the Sub-Collector

to turn down the bid of the petitioner. However by accepting the

bid of respondent no.4 there could have been a loss to the public

ex-chequer.
24. Thus, considering all these aspects, we are of the opinion that

the decision of the revenue authorities namely the Tahasildar and

the Sub-Collector were just, and the High Court committed gross

error in allowing the petition.
24
25. Resultantly, the appeals are allowed. The order impugned is

quashed and set aside.
26. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
.................................J.
                                               [BELA M. TRIVEDI]



                                        ..................................J.
                                        [PRASANNA B. VARALE]

NEW DELHI;
APRIL 25, 2025.
25