[Cites
18
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Rakesh Kumar Verma vs Hdfc Bank Ltd on 8 April, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 473
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2282/2025



       RAKESH KUMAR VERMA                                                         … APPELLANT

                                                            VS.

       HDFC BANK LTD.                                                             … RESPONDENT

                                                          WITH

                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2286/2025

       HDFC BANK                                                                  … APPELLANT

                                                            VS.

       DEEPTI BHATIA                                                              … RESPONDENT




                                                    JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
THE CHALLENGE
1.               In the lead appeal1, Rakesh has called in question the judgment and

                            order of the High Court of Judicature at Patna2 dated 25th January, 2022,
Signature Not Verified
allowing a civil revisional application3 filed by HDFC Bank.
Digitally signed by
rashmi dhyani pant
Date: 2025.04.08
18:29:40 IST
Reason:
1
Civil Appeal No. 2282/2025
2
Patna High Court, hereafter
3
Civil Revision No. 23 of 2020
1
2.    In the connected appeal4, HDFC Bank has taken exception to the

          judgment and order of the High Court of Delhi5 dated 12th November,

          2011, dismissing its civil revisional application6.

THE FACTS
3.    The lead appeal rests on a simple set of facts, which are as follows:
I.   Vide letter dated 24th July, 2002, HDFC Bank appointed Rakesh on

                the post of Executive, Transaction Banking Group (Operation), in

                the Wholesale Banking Operations. Pursuant thereto, Rakesh joined

                his service at Wholesale Banking Operations at Exhibition Road,

                Patna.
II.   The appointment letter of Rakesh had an exclusive jurisdiction

                clause, reading as under:
“The terms and conditions set out in this letter of appointment
                         constitute service conditions applicable to your employment in the
                         Bank and with regard to any dispute thereof, the Bombay Courts
                         will have exclusive jurisdiction.”

         III.   Service of Rakesh was terminated on 28th August, 2016 due to

                allegations of fraud and misconduct.
IV.    Aggrieved thereby, Rakesh instituted a civil suit7 in the court of the

                Sub-Judge-1, Patna, seeking the following relief:
“a) Declaration that termination letter dated 28.06.2016 being
                         annexure – C hereto is illegal, arbitrary, unreasonable,
                         unwarranted, unconstitutional, mala fide, bad in law as well as
                         without jurisdiction, violative of … illegible … on facts, principles of
                         natural justice and the same may be adjudged null and void and
                         cancelled.
b) Ad-interim injunction restraining the defendants from giving
                         any effect to the termination letter dated 28.06.2016 and further
4
Civil Appeal No. 2286/2025
5
Delhi High Court, hereafter
6
Civil Revision Petition No. 79/2021
7
Title Suit No. 212 of 2017
2
directing the defendants to forthwith reinstate the plaintiff in
                       service with all consequential benefits.
c) Direction to the defendants to reinstate forthwith the plaintiff in
                       service with all consequential benefits including the arrears of
                       salary with 18% interest per annum.”

           V.    On receipt of summons, HDFC Bank filed a petition under
Order

                 VII, Rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure
, 19088 for rejection of

                 the plaint on the ground that it is the courts in Mumbai which have

                 jurisdiction and not the court where the suit was instituted.
VI.    The petition filed by HDFC Bank came to be dismissed by the trial

                 court, vide order dated 14th December, 2018.
VII.   Dissatisfied with the dismissal of the said petition, HDFC Bank filed

                 the revisional application before the Patna High Court, which has

                 since succeeded.
4.     The connected appeal too rests on similar set of facts, which are as

           follows:
I.   Deepti was appointed as “Clerk” in Lord Krishna Bank, which was

                 merged with HDFC Bank in 2009. Vide Employment Agreement

                 dated 23rd March, 2009, Deepti was appointed as an officer in the

                 Retail Banking Branch at Janak Puri, Delhi. This agreement also

                 included a similar exclusive jurisdiction clause as the one in the

                 case of Rakesh. In terms thereof, any dispute between the parties

                 leading to legal action had to be thrashed out in the competent

                 court in Mumbai.
8
CPC
3
II.   Service of Deepti was terminated on 31st May, 2017, also due to

                allegations of fraud and misconduct.
III.   Aggrieved thereby, Deepti instituted a civil suit9 in the court of the

                Senior Civil Judge, Rohini Courts, Delhi, seeking inter alia the

                following relief:
“a) Declare the termination letter dated 31.05.2017 as null and
                       void since the same is illegal and quash the same;
b) Direct the Defendant to reinstate the Plaintiff in service with all
                       consequential benefits including back wages and continuity of
                       services.”

         IV.    HDFC Bank filed its written statement stating that the cause of

                action arose wholly in Mumbai and the courts in Delhi have no

                jurisdiction.
V.    The trial court, vide order dated 17th April, 2021, answered the

                preliminary issue as to whether it had jurisdiction to try the suit

                and held that the exclusive jurisdiction clause did not fully oust the

                jurisdiction of the courts in Delhi.
VI.    Dissatisfied with the order of the trial court, HDFC Bank filed the

                civil revisional application before the Delhi High Court which, as

                noted above, stands dismissed.
THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENTS
5.    The impugned judgment in the lead appeal, after condoning the delay in

          filing of the civil revisional application, allowed the same on the ground

          that courts in Patna do not have the jurisdiction in light of the exclusive

          jurisdiction clause and that such a clause would operate in matters of
9
Civil Suit No. 1164 of 2017
4
termination of service too. Relying on the decision of the Supreme Court

         in
Swastik Gases (P) Ltd. v. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd.10
, the Patna High

         Court observed that while the general principle is that the suit could be

         instituted at any place where a substantial part of the cause of action

         arises, however, when a clause such as the one in the instant case exists,

         the jurisdiction will lie with the court at the place which has been

         expressly agreed to by and between the parties, i.e., the courts in

         Bombay in the instant case.
6.      The impugned judgment and order in the connected appeal dismissed

         the civil revisional application on the ground that Deepti was residing in

         Delhi, was working in Rohini, Delhi and the termination letter was served

         upon her in Delhi and that the exclusive jurisdiction clause in the

         employment agreement did not oust the jurisdiction of the courts in

         Delhi. The learned Judge relied on the decision of a coordinate Bench of

         the Delhi High Court in
Vishal Gupta v. L & T Finance11
while declining

         to grant relief to HDFC Bank in exercise of revisional jurisdiction.

THE QUESTION
7.      The pure question of law arising for decision on these appeals is, whether

         the civil suits could have been instituted in courts in Patna and Delhi by

         Rakesh and Deepti, respectively, in view of the specific clause(s) in the

         appointment letter/employment agreement that the courts in Mumbai

         would have exclusive jurisdiction to decide disputes by and between the

         contracting parties?
10
(2013) 9 SCC 32
11
2009 SCC OnLine Delhi 2806
5
ANALYSIS AND REASONS
8.      Before we proceed to appreciate the rival claims, it would be appropriate

         to notice the applicable legal regime.
9.      Section 28 of the Indian Contract Act, 187212 ordains:
28. Agreements in restraint of legal proceedings, void. — Every
                agreement,—
(a) by which any party thereto is restricted absolutely from enforcing his
                rights under or in respect of any contract, by the usual legal proceedings
                in the ordinary tribunals, or which limits the time within which he may
                thus enforce his rights; or
(b) which extinguishes the rights of any party thereto, or discharges any
                party thereto, from any liability, under or in respect of any contract on
                the expiry of a specified period so as to restrict any party from enforcing
                his rights, is void to the extent.
…”
10.      It is also important to refer to
Section 20
of the CPC which is reproduced

         hereunder:
20. Other suits to be instituted where defendants reside or cause
                of action arises. — Subject to the limitations aforesaid, every suit shall
                be instituted in a Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction—
(a) the defendant, or each of the defendants where there are more than
                one, at the time of the commencement of the suit, actually and
                voluntarily resides, or carries on business, or personally works for gain;
or
(b) any of the defendants, where there are more than one, at the time
                of the commencement of the suit, actually and voluntarily resides, or
                carries on business, or personally works for gain, provided that in such
                case either the leave of the Court is given, or the defendants who do not
                reside, or carry on business, or personally works for gain, as aforesaid,
                acquiesce in such institution; or
(c) The cause of action, wholly or in part, arises.
                Explanation. —A corporation shall be deemed to carry on business at its
                sole or principal office in India or, in respect of any cause of action arising
                at any place where it has also a subordinate office, at such place.
11.      This is the umpteenth time that this Court has been called upon to deal

         with a clause in contracts restricting adjudication of disputes exclusively

         to the jurisdiction of a court of a party’s choice, not disagreed by the
12
Contract Act
6
other party13. In fact, the principles pertaining to institution of suits and

       the jurisdiction of the courts in a case where the parties have by

       agreement, conferred jurisdiction on courts at a particular place, have

       been
laid down by
this Court in numerous cases which are entirely

       consistent and have not required a relook. A perusal of a couple of these

       decisions may not be inapt for a proper decision on these appeals.
12.    This Court in
Hakam Singh v. Gammon (India) Ltd.14
held that:
4. The
Code of Civil Procedure
in its entirety applies to proceedings
               under the
Arbitration Act
. The jurisdiction of the courts under the
Arbitration Act
to entertain a proceeding for filing an award is accordingly
               governed by the provisions
of the Code of Civil Procedure
. By clause 13
               of the agreement it was expressly stipulated between the parties that
               the contract shall be deemed to have been entered into by the parties
               concerned in the city of Bombay. In any event the respondents have
               their principal office in Bombay and they were liable in respect of a cause
               of action arising under the terms of the tender to be sued in the courts
               at Bombay. It is not open to the parties by agreement to confer by their
               agreement jurisdiction on a Court which it does not possess under the
               Code. But where two courts or more have under
the Code of Civil
               Procedure
jurisdiction to try a suit or proceeding an agreement between
               the parties that the dispute between them shall be tried in one of such
               Courts is not contrary to public policy. Such an agreement does not
               contravene
Section 28
of the Contract Act.
(emphasis supplied)
13.    A decade later, another coordinate Bench had the occasion to deal with

       a    similar     exclusive   jurisdiction    clause    in
Globe     Transport

       Corpn. v. Triveni Engg. Works15
. One sentence in paragraph 3

       captures the essence of the law, reading as follows:
3. It is now settled law that it is not competent to the parties by
               agreement to invest a court with jurisdiction which it does not otherwise
               possess but if there are more than one forums where a suit can be filed,
               it is open to the parties to select a particular forum and exclude the other
13
exclusive jurisdiction clause
14
(1971) 1 SCC 286
15
(1983) 4 SCC 707
7
forums in regard to claims which one party may have against the other
               under a contract. …
14.      A few years later came the decision in A.B.C. Laminart Pvt. Ltd. v.
A.P. Agencies, Salem16. This Court held that:
21. From the foregoing decisions it can be reasonably deduced that
               where such an ouster clause occurs, it is pertinent to see whether there
               is ouster of jurisdiction of other courts. When the clause is clear,
               unambiguous and specific accepted notions of contract would bind the
               parties and unless the absence of ad idem can be shown, the other courts
               should avoid exercising jurisdiction. As regards construction of the
               ouster clause when words like “alone”, “only”, “exclusive” and the like
               have been used there may be no difficulty. Even without such words in
               appropriate cases the maxim “expressio unius est exclusio alterius” —
               expression of one is the exclusion of another — may be applied. What is
               an appropriate case shall depend on the facts of the case. In such a case
               mention of one thing may imply exclusion of another. When certain
               jurisdiction is specified in a contract an intention to exclude all others
               from its operation may in such cases be inferred. It has therefore to be
               properly construed.
15.
In
Swastik Gases (P) Ltd.
(supra), a three-judge Bench of this Court

         succinctly articulated the purport of an exclusive jurisdiction clause in

         any contract in the following words:
32. For answer to the above question, we have to see the effect of the
               jurisdiction clause in the agreement which provides that the agreement
               shall be subject to jurisdiction of the courts at Kolkata. It is a fact that
               whilst providing for jurisdiction clause in the agreement the words like
               “alone”, “only”, “exclusive” or “exclusive jurisdiction” have not been used
               but this, in our view, is not decisive and does not make any material
               difference. The intention of the parties—by having Clause 18 in the
               agreement—is clear and unambiguous that the courts at Kolkata shall
               have jurisdiction which means that the courts at Kolkata alone shall have
               jurisdiction. It is so because for construction of jurisdiction clause, like
               Clause 18 in the agreement, the maxim expressio unius est exclusio
               alterius comes into play as there is nothing to indicate to the contrary.
This legal maxim means that expression of one is the exclusion of
               another. By making a provision that the agreement is subject to the
               jurisdiction of the courts at Kolkata, the parties have impliedly excluded
               the jurisdiction of other courts. Where the contract specifies the
               jurisdiction of the courts at a particular place and such courts have
               jurisdiction to deal with the matter, we think that an inference may be
               drawn that parties intended to exclude all other courts. A clause like this
16
(1989) 2 SCC 163
8
is not hit by
Section 23
of the Contract Act at all. Such clause is neither
             forbidden by law nor it is against the public policy. It does not offend
Section 28
of the Contract Act in any manner.
(emphasis supplied)
16.   There are multiple other decisions of this Court upholding similar

      exclusive jurisdiction clauses. The decisions in
Patel Roadways Ltd. v.

      Prasad Trading Co.17
,
Angile Insulations v. Davy Ashmore India

      Ltd.18
,
New Moga Transport Co. v. United India Insurance Co.

      Ltd.19
,
Shree Subhlaxmi Fabrics (P) Ltd. v. Chand Mal Baradia20
,

      Rajasthan SEB v. Universal Petrol Chemicals Ltd.21 and
A.V.M.

      Sales Corpn. v. Anuradha Chemicals (P) Ltd.22
are some of them

      providing ample guidance in this behalf.
17.   The issue as to how an exclusive jurisdiction clause has to be read and

      understood is, thus, no longer res-integra.
18.   A bare perusal of the above decisions leads to the conclusion that for an

      exclusive jurisdiction clause to be valid, it should be (a) in consonance

      with
Section 28
of the Contract Act, i.e., it should not absolutely restrict

      any party from initiating legal proceedings pertaining to the contract, (b)

      the Court that has been given exclusive jurisdiction must be competent

      to have such jurisdiction in the first place, i.e., a Court not having

      jurisdiction as per the statutory regime cannot be bestowed jurisdiction

      by means of a contract and, finally, (c) the parties must either impliedly
17
(1991) 4 SCC 270
18
(1995) 4 SCC 153
19
(2004) 4 SCC 677
20
(2005) 10 SCC 704
21
(2009) 3 SCC 107
22
(2012) 2 SCC 315
9
or explicitly confer jurisdiction on a specific set of courts. These three

      limbs/criteria have to be mandatorily fulfilled.
19.
Swastik Gases (P) Ltd.
(supra) is wholly applicable to the facts at

      hand, and being a larger Bench decision, binds us.
20.   However, in none of the precedents of this Court, noticed above, did an

      service/employment contract fell for consideration. According to Mr.

      Deshmukh and Mr. Chaturvedi, learned counsel for Rakesh and Deepti,

      respectively, the decision in
Vishal Gupta
(supra) correctly explains the

      legal position vis-à-vis service/employment contracts and, therefore,

      this Court may consider accepting the forward-looking posture and

      practical view expressed by the learned Judge. It has been contended

      that in an unequal battle between the mighty lion (employer) and the

      timid rabbit (employee), where the dice is heavily loaded from the

      inception against the employee, no further embargo ought to be placed

      in his/her pursuit for justice by pinning him/her down to the courts in

      the city (Mumbai) mentioned in the appointment letter/employment

      agreement.
21.   At this stage, it would be appropriate to glance through a legal position

      having a bearing on these appeals. There is a gulf of difference between

      a public service and a service contract with a private employer. The

      origin of government service is contractual. There is an offer and

      acceptance in every case. But once appointed to his post or office, the

      government servant acquires a status and his rights and obligations are

      no longer determined by the consent of both the parties, but by the
10
statute or statutory rules as framed. In other words, the legal position

      of a government servant is more one of status than that of contract. A

      government servant may not be tied down by his employer to a court at

      a particular place, should a dispute arise for adjudication by a law court.
Articles 14
, 16
and
21
could stand in the way. On the other hand, service

      in the private sector is governed by the terms of the employment

      contract entered into by and between the parties inter-se. Like any other

      contract, even in an employment contract, a concluded contract pre-

      supposes the existence of at least two parties with mutual rights and

      obligations. Once a concluded contract comes into existence, it is

      axiomatic that such rights and obligations of the parties are governed by

      the terms and conditions thereof. Since there is a prior meeting of minds

      of the contracting parties, their intentions have to be gathered from the

      contract (appointment letter/employment agreement, here) and looking

      at the same, it can safely be inferred that the contracting parties were

      ad idem on the terms of the appointment letter/employment agreement

      which specified courts in Mumbai exclusively as the situs of dispute

      resolution.
22.   Nowadays, the private sector employs individuals pan-India for providing

      services to reach people in the last mile. Therefore, it may not be

      possible for all employers in the private sector to contest suits at far-off

      places from the registered office. This seems to be the overwhelming

      reason why exclusion clauses are inserted. Rakesh and Deepti having

      accepted      the   terms    and        conditions   of   the   appointment
11
letter/employment agreement and acted upon its terms by joining their

      respective posts, they could not have possibly avoided the contract on a

      second thought that a term contained therein may not be beneficial for

      them at a subsequent stage.
23.   As long as an employment contract does not offend the provisions of any

      applicable legislation, such as the
Contract Act
or
the CPC
, ordinarily,

      there should be no reason to interfere. It cannot but be gainsaid that the

      scope of interference, in such matters, is quite narrow.
24.   The contention on behalf of Rakesh and Deepti that the decisions
referred to above
would not be applicable in the case of a service

      contract has not really impressed us. A contract – be it commercial,

      insurance, sales, service, etc. – is after all a contract. It is a legally

      binding agreement, regardless of the parties involved or their inter se

      strengths. To make a distinction for employment contracts on the

      specious ground that a mighty lion and a timid rabbit are the contracting

      parties would violate the principle of equality, in the sense that rights

      and liabilities would not be dependent on the parties’ status, power or

      influence. Contracts should be treated equally, without bias or

      distinction. The fact that one party is more powerful or influential (the

      mighty lion) and the other more vulnerable (the timid rabbit) does not

      justify making exceptions or distinctions in the application of contractual

      principles.
25.   We may also emphasize that unequal bargaining power is not unique to

      contracts of personal service. In many areas, such as business,
12
commerce, or real estate, contracts may involve parties with dissimilar

      levels of strength, resources or negotiating power. As and by way of

      illustration, we can cite instances where big builders sub-contract a part

      of the development work entrusted to them to sub-contractors. Such

      contracts too involve the mighty lion and, though not a timid rabbit, but

      a weak lamb. Based on the status of the parties, the latter cannot escape

      from the consequences if the former seeks to enforce a condition in the

      contract which the latter perceives is oppressive or the latter, refusing

      to perform any of its obligations considering it as onerous faces a law

      suit for breach of contract.
26.   Law treats all contracts with equal respect and unless a contract is

      proved to suffer from any of the vitiating factors, the terms and

      conditions have to be enforced regardless of the relative strengths and

      weakness of the parties.
27.   Thus, we are unable to approve the law
laid down in
Vishal Gupta
(supra).
28.   Upon a perusal of the service contract and the exclusive jurisdiction

      clause under consideration in the instant appeals, we are convinced that

      the Patna High Court has offered a sound legal opinion with reference to

      the facts at hand while the Delhi High Court has erred in dismissing the

      civil revisional application placing entire reliance on the decision in
Vishal Gupta
(supra). All the three applicable mandatory criteria to hold

      that the clause is valid have been fulfilled in the instant appeals. We

      propose to assign brief reasons for each of the applicable limbs.
13
29.   First,
Section 28
of the Contract Act does not bar exclusive jurisdiction

      clauses. What has been barred is the absolute restriction of any party

      from approaching a legal forum. The right to legal adjudication cannot

      be taken away from any party through contract but can be relegated to

      a set of Courts for the ease of the parties. In the present dispute, the

      clause does not take away the right of the employee to pursue a legal

      claim but only restricts the employee to pursue those claims before the

      courts in Mumbai alone.
30.   Secondly, the Court must already have jurisdiction to entertain such a

      legal claim. This limb pertains to the fact that a contract cannot confer

      jurisdiction on a court that did not have such a jurisdiction in the first

      place. The explanation to
Section 20
of the CPC is essential to decide

      this issue. In the instant case, considering that the decision to employ

      Rakesh and Deepti were taken in Mumbai, the appointment letter in

      favour of Rakesh was issued from Mumbai, the employment agreement

      was dispatched from Mumbai, the decision to terminate the services of

      Rakesh and Deepti were taken in Mumbai and the letters of termination

      were dispatched from Mumbai, we are convinced that the courts in

      Mumbai do have jurisdiction.
31.   Lastly, the clause in the contract has clearly and explicitly barred the

      jurisdiction of all other courts by using the word “exclusive”. A profitable

      reference may be made to the extract of ABC Laminart (supra)

      reproduced above.
14
RELIEF
32.      HDFC Bank is, thus, justified in its claim that the suits ought to have

         been instituted in an appropriate court in Mumbai.
33.      We hasten to observe that the Patna High Court, while correctly holding

         in favour of HDFC Bank on the point of law, has committed a

         fundamental error. It has allowed the application of HDFC Bank under
Order VII, Rule 11 of the CPC
meaning thereby the plaint stands

         rejected. Since the courts in Mumbai have the jurisdiction to decide the

         dispute raised by Rakesh and his plaint is not otherwise liable to rejection

         on attraction of any of the clauses of Rule 11, the proper course for the

         Patna High Court would have been to direct return of the plaint by the

         trial court under
Order VII, Rule 10 of the CPC
to Rakesh for its

         presentation before the competent court in Mumbai. While directing the

         trial court to return the plaint to Rakesh and to make the necessary

         endorsement in terms of sub-rule (2) of Rule 10, we grant him the liberty

         to present such plaint in the competent court in Mumbai.
34.      If Rakesh wishes to institute a fresh suit in a competent court in Mumbai,

         in such a case he need not take back the plaint but may have the suit

         instituted by him withdrawn.
35.      Insofar as the suit instituted by Deepti too is concerned, the plaint has

         to be returned to her for presentation in a court in Mumbai. In the

         alternative, she may have her pending suit withdrawn and file a fresh

         suit in a competent court in Mumbai.
15
36.   We have also noticed from the pleadings and prayers made in the

      respective plaints by Rakesh and Deepti that the same are defective. We

      grant them liberty to seek amendment of their respective plaints. If

      applications in this behalf are made, the trial courts may, in their

      discretion, allow the prayers therein. If fresh suits are instituted, this

      liberty would cease to operate.
37.   If fresh suits are instituted, Rakesh and Deepti may plead in their plaints

      the grounds on which exemption from the law of limitation is claimed in

      terms of
Order VII, Rule 6 of the CPC
.
CONCLUSION
38.   The impugned judgment and order of the Patna High Court is affirmed

      to the extent mentioned above and the lead appeal is dismissed. The

      connected appeal, however, stands allowed and the impugned judgment

      and order of the Delhi High Court is set aside.
39.   We clarify that the merits of the disputes have not been examined and

      all points are left open.
40.   No order as to costs.
………………………………J.
                                                       (DIPANKAR DATTA)



                                                     ………………………………J.
                                                          (MANMOHAN)
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 08, 2025.
16