[Cites
14
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Ankit Mishra vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 17 April, 2025
Author:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
Bench:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
,
Sanjay Karol
1


2025 INSC 501



                                                                   REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(s). __________ OF 2025
                              (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No(s). 14566 of 2024)


            ANKIT MISHRA                                         ... APPELLANT


                                                VERSUS


            THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH
            & ANR.                                              ...RESPONDENTS




                                             JUDGMENT
PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA, J.
Leave granted.
2.              The appellant/de facto complainant has challenged the

            impugned judgment and final order dated 10.04.2024 passed
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
VARSHA MENDIRATTA
by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh in MCRC No. 11000 of
   Date: 2025.04.17
   15:13:40 IST
   Reason:
2024 wherein the High Court has allowed anticipatory bail
2
under
Section 438
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19731 to

respondent no. 2 (Abdul Razzak) in connection with FIR No.

176 of 2023 registered at P.S. Omti, Distt. Jabalpur under
Sections 195A
,
294
and
506
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.2
3.          Briefly stated, the factual matrix of the case is that at

around 1.00 P.M on 30.03.2023, the appellant went to Victoria

Hospital along with his friend (Sandeep Dubey) for a checkup.

Respondent No. 2 happened to be in the hospital premises at

the same time for his MLC in connection with some other

criminal case. On seeing the appellant, respondent no. 2

became agitated and started hurling obscene abuses, using

derogatory language and extended death threats to the

appellant telling him to withdraw the complaint lodged by him

against respondent no. 2 and to change his testimony failing

which the appellant and his family members would not be

spared.         On   appellant’s   complaint,   the   subject   FIR   was

registered on the same day i.e. 30.03.2023. His statement

under
Section 164
Cr.P.C was also recorded wherein the

appellant reiterated the allegations against respondent no. 2.
1
‘
Cr.P.C
.’
2
‘
IPC
’
3
4.      It is the case of the appellant that respondent no. 2 is a

known gangster and habitual offender operating in and around

Jabalpur having 58 members in his gang. Documents to this

effect have been filed along with this appeal. There are 45

FIRs registered against him, therefore, the High Court ought

not to have exercised the discretion of allowing the benefit of

anticipatory bail in favour of a habitual offender. Respondent

No. 2 is also convicted and awarded imprisonment of 02 years

in a case arising out of FIR No. 41 of 1996 registered at P.S.

Madan Mahal, Jabalpur and that he has committed several

other offences of similar nature akin to the present one. It is

also highlighted that respondent no. 2 may misuse his liberty

by indulging in similar activities considering his track record.

Therefore, respondent no. 2 is not entitled for anticipatory

bail.
5.      Per contra, learned counsel for respondent no. 2 would

submit that the High Court has dealt with the criminal history

of respondent no. 2 and yet concluded that the present is a fit

case for his release on anticipatory bail. It is submitted that

most of the criminal cases were registered during the period
4
from 1991 to 2012 for which the respondent no. 2 has either

been acquitted or released on bail. There was no FIR against

him during the period from 2012 to 2021. However, from

26.08.2021 onwards other FIRs were registered against

respondent no. 2 including a case under
National Security Act
.

However, the said proceedings under
National Security Act
have been quashed by this Court in Special Leave Petition

(Crl.) No. 8597 of 2012 vide order dated 31.01.2013.
6.   Mr. K.M. Nataraj, learned ASG appearing for the State of

Madhya Pradesh would vehemently submit that considering

the criminal history of respondent no. 2 the High Court ought

not to have allowed the prayer for grant of anticipatory bail.

However, he would fairly submit that the special leave petition

(Crl.) No. 14223 of 2024 preferred by the State of Madhya

Pradesh against the present impugned order has already been

dismissed by this Court vide order dated 15.10.2024.
7.   We have heard learned counsel for the parties and

perused the material on record.
5
8.        Before proceeding to deal with the merits of the case it

would be appropriate to bear in mind the law laid down by this

Court in the matter of
Deepak Yadav vs. State of Uttar

Pradesh & Anr.3
as to when bail once granted should be

cancelled by the same Court or by the higher Court. The

following is held in paras 31 to 36:
“31. This Court has reiterated in several
               instances that bail once granted, should not be
               cancelled in a mechanical manner without
               considering      whether      any     supervening
               circumstances have rendered it no longer
               conducive to a fair trial to allow the accused to
               retain his freedom by enjoying the concession
               of bail during trial. Having said that, in case of
               cancellation    of    bail,  very   cogent    and
               overwhelming circumstances are necessary for
               an order directing cancellation of bail (which
               was already granted).
32. A two-Judge Bench of this Court in
Dolat
               Ram v. State of Haryana
, (1995) 1 SCC 349 :
1995 SCC (Cri) 237] laid down the grounds for
               cancellation of bail which are:
(i) interference or attempt to interfere with
                  the due course of administration of justice;
(ii) evasion or attempt to evade the due
                  course of justice;
(iii) abuse of the concession granted to the
                  accused in any manner;
(iv) possibility of the accused absconding;
3
(2022) 8 SCC 559
6
(v) likelihood of/actual misuse of bail;
(vi) likelihood of the accused tampering with
  the evidence or threatening witnesses.
33. It is no doubt true that cancellation of bail
cannot be limited to the occurrence of
supervening circumstances. This Court certainly
has the inherent powers and discretion to
cancel the bail of an accused even in the
absence     of   supervening     circumstances.
Following are the illustrative circumstances
where the bail can be cancelled:
33.1. Where the court granting bail takes into
account irrelevant material of substantial
nature and not trivial nature while ignoring
relevant material on record.
33.2. Where the court granting bail overlooks
the influential position of the accused in
comparison to the victim of abuse or the
witnesses especially when there is prima facie
misuse of position and power over the victim.
33.3. Where the past criminal record and
conduct of the accused is completely ignored
while granting bail.
33.4. Where bail has been granted on
untenable grounds.
33.5. Where serious discrepancies are found in
the order granting bail thereby causing
prejudice to justice.
33.6. Where the grant of bail was not
appropriate in the first place given the very
serious nature of the charges against the
accused which disentitles him for bail and thus
cannot be justified.
33.7. When the order granting bail is
apparently whimsical, capricious and perverse
in the facts of the given case.
34.
In
Neeru Yadav v. State of U.P.
, (2014) 16
SCC 508 : (2015) 3 SCC (Cri) 527], the
7
accused was granted bail by the High Court.
In
an    appeal     against    the   order   [
Mitthan
Yadav v. State of U.P.
, 2014 SCC Online All
16031] of the High Court, a two-Judge Bench of
this Court examined the precedents on the
principles that guide grant of bail and observed
as under : (SCC p. 513, para 12)
   “12. … It is well settled in law that
   cancellation of bail after it is granted
   because the accused has misconducted
   himself      or    of     some     supervening
   circumstances warranting such cancellation
   have occurred is in a different compartment
   altogether than an order granting bail which
   is unjustified, illegal and perverse. If in a
   case, the relevant factors which should have
   been taken into consideration while dealing
   with the application for bail have not been
   taken note of or it is founded on irrelevant
   considerations, indisputably the superior
   court can set aside the order of such a grant
   of bail. Such a case belongs to a different
   category and is in a separate realm. While
   dealing with a case of second nature, the
   court does not dwell upon the violation of
   conditions     by    the    accused    or   the
   supervening      circumstances     that    have
   happened subsequently. It, on the contrary,
   delves into the justifiability and the
   soundness of the order passed by the court.”
   (emphasis supplied)
35. This Court in
Mahipal [Mahipal v. Rajesh
Kumar
, (2020) 2 SCC 118 : (2020) 1 SCC (Cri)
558] held that : (SCC p. 126, para 17)
  “17. Where a court considering an application
  for bail fails to consider relevant factors, an
  appellate court may justifiably set aside the
  order granting bail. An appellate court is thus
  required to consider whether the order
  granting bail suffers from a non-application of
  mind or is not borne out from a prima facie
8
view of the evidence on record. It is thus
          necessary for this Court to assess whether, on
          the basis of the evidentiary record, there
          existed a prima facie or reasonable ground to
          believe that the accused had committed the
          crime,    also   taking    into   account   the
          seriousness of the crime and the severity of
          the punishment.”
36. A two-Judge Bench of this Court in
Prakash
        Kadam v. Ramprasad         Vishwanath      Gupta
,
        (2011) 6 SCC 189 : (2011) 2 SCC (Cri) 848]
        held that : (SCC p. 195, paras 18-19)
          “18. In considering whether to cancel the
          bail, the court has also to consider the gravity
          and nature of the offence, prima facie case
          against the accused, the position and
          standing of the accused, etc. If there are very
          serious allegations against the accused, his
          bail may be cancelled even if he has not
          misused the bail granted to him. …
19. In our opinion, there is no absolute rule
          that once bail is granted to the accused then
          it can only be cancelled if there is likelihood
          of misuse of bail. That factor, though no
          doubt important, is not the only factor. There
          are several other factors also which may be
          seen while deciding to cancel the bail.”
9.   Reverting back to the present case, the High Court has

dealt with the previous criminal cases registered against

respondent no. 2. The High Court has also considered the

facts and circumstances including the allegations in the

present case. The alleged offences in the present FIR are all

triable by Judicial Magistrate, First Class. None of the offences
9
would carry sentence of more than seven years. The previous

offence in relation to which respondent no. 2 has extended

threats constituting the present offence is also triable by

Judicial Magistrate, First Class, hence, the present offences

would also be triable by Judicial Magistrate, First Class in

terms of
Section 195A
of the IPC. Thus, the present offence is

not triable by Sessions and does not carry sentence more than

seven years. Respondent no. 2 is in jail in connection with

some   other   offences.   However,    still,   he   was   allowed

anticipatory bail in the present case because he has not been

arrested by the concerned police in the present case and it

appears that if he is released on bail in other cases, he may

be arrested in the present case also so as to keep him in jail.
10. Having given anxious consideration to the arguments

placed by both the sides, we are of the considered view that

the view taken by the High Court to release respondent no. 2

on anticipatory bail does not suffer from any fundamental

error of law. It is not a case where respondent no. 2 has been

released on anticipatory bail in a heinous offence. True it is

that ordinarily habitual offender ought not to be released on
10
bail in a routine manner, however, in the case at hand, the

High Court has elaborately dealt with the cases against

respondent no. 2. Once the benefit of anticipatory bail has

been given by the High Court, the consideration for its

cancellation has to be tested on the anvil as to whether the

High Court has committed any serious error in law while

granting anticipatory bail in the facts and circumstances of the

case. In our view, had it been a case where respondent no. 2

is alleged to have committed any heinous offence, the

consideration would have been different but as noted infra the

offences    are   triable    by   Judicial   Magistrate,   First   Class.
Therefore, we are not inclined to interfere with the order

passed     by   the   High    Court.     Accordingly,   the   appeal   is

dismissed.
However, considering the criminal record of respondent

no. 2, it is directed that as and when he is released on bail in

other cases, he shall report to the concerned police station on

1st or 2nd day of every month during the pendency of the trial

and shall not be involved in any other criminal activity failing

which it will remain open for the appellant or the first
11
respondent/State of Madhya Pradesh to move before the High

Court for cancellation of bail granted to respondent no. 2.
………………………………………J.
                              (SANJAY KAROL)


                               .......……………………………….J.
                              (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA)
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 17, 2025.