[Cites
12
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Durga Prasad vs Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi on 23 April, 2025
Author:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
2025 INSC 548

                                                                    REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF 2025
                                     (Arising out of SLP (C) No.2111/2023)


                            DURGA PRASAD                             …APPELLANT(S)
                                                     VERSUS

                            GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI & ORS.           …RESPONDENT(S)


                                                JUDGMENT
MANOJ MISRA, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. This appeal impugns the judgment and order of

                            the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi1 dated

                            12.09.2022 passed in W.P. (C) No.1085/2002 by

                            which, though the writ petition of the appellant

                            against the order of the Central Administrative

                            Tribunal2 in O.A. No. 232/2002 was allowed, liberty

                            was given to the disciplinary authority to issue a fresh
Signature Not Verified
note of disagreement to the appellant, within a period
Digitally signed by
JAGDISH KUMAR
Date: 2025.04.23
16:08:55 IST
Reason:
1
The High Court
2
CAT
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                          Page 1 of 39
of four weeks, and pass appropriate orders after

                 considering the response.
Background Facts
3. This case has a checkered history. The appellant

                 at the relevant time (i.e. 1984) was posted as Inspector

                 of Police (i.e., Station House Officer3) at Police Station

                 Kingsway Camp, North District, Delhi. During that

                 period, post assassination of the then Prime Minister

                 Smt. Indira Gandhi, “Anti-Sikh Riots4” broke out. In

                 May 1985, the appellant was promoted to the post of

                 Assistant Commissioner of Police, inter alia, on

                 appraisal of service record. Later, a Committee was

                 constituted to look into the failure of the police in

                 effectively tackling the 1984 riots. In its preliminary

                 report, the Committee castigated certain police

                 officers for their failure in controlling the riots. Based

                 on that, charge memo was issued to the appellant on

                 20.08.1992, inter alia, charging him for dereliction of

                 duty/ negligence in controlling those riots in the area

                 under his command. In the ensuing inquiry, vide
3
SHO
4
1984 riots
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                           Page 2 of 39
report   dated     28.01.1999,       the    Inquiry     Officer

           exonerated the appellant of the charges. However, the

           Disciplinary Authority disagreed with the report of the

           Inquiry Officer and ordered a de novo inquiry vide

           office order dated 07.10.1999.
4. Aggrieved by direction for a de novo inquiry, the

           appellant filed Original Application5 No.1841/2000

           before Principal Bench of CAT at New Delhi.                 CAT

           allowed the said O.A. vide order dated 27.09.2000.
The operative portion of the order is extracted below:
“6…We find that the disciplinary authority is …
                    not justified in ordering a de novo enquiry. If one
                    has regard to the …..rule 15 ….., all that he could
                    have ordered was a further enquiry and not a de
                    novo enquiry.        In the circumstances, the
                    impugned order passed by the disciplinary
                    authority on 06.08.1999…is quashed and set
                    aside.
7. Consequent upon the aforesaid order of the
                    disciplinary     authority   of   06.08.1999,     a
                    corrigendum has been issued by the disciplinary
                    authority on 07.10.1999…, whereby, an
                    amended charge has been framed. Since the
                    order of the disciplinary authority of 06.08.1999
                    is    set    aside,     aforesaid    consequential
                    corrigendum of 07.10.1999 is also quashed and
                    set aside.
8. In view of the aforesaid order, we find that it
                    would be open to the disciplinary authority, if he
                    is so advised, to issue fresh orders disagreeing
                    with the findings of the enquiry officer, but this
                    he can do only after issue of a notice and after
                    affording applicant a reasonable opportunity of
                    being heard. Thereafter, in case he is inclined to
5
O.A.
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                          Page 3 of 39
issue a direction for a fresh enquiry, the same
                  would not be a de novo enquiry in the matter.
9. Present OA is allowed in the aforesaid terms.
No order as to costs.”
5. Pursuant to the aforesaid order of CAT, on

         04.01.2001 the Disciplinary Authority issued a

         disagreement note calling upon the appellant to

         submit his representation within 15 days of its

         receipt. The Inquiry Report was supplied later vide

         letter dated 18.01.2001.
6. After getting response from the appellant, the

         Disciplinary Authority, vide order dated 28.12.2001,

         imposed a penalty of reduction in rank upon the

         appellant thereby demoting him to the post of

         Inspector from the post of Assistant Commissioner of

         Police, till retirement (i.e., till 31.03.2004).
7. The appellant challenged the order of punishment

         before CAT through O.A. No.232/2002, which was

         dismissed vide order dated 29.01.2002.
8. Aggrieved by CAT’s order dated 29.01.2002, the

         appellant        filed   writ   petition   (i.e.,   W.P.     (C)

         No.1085/2002) before the High Court, which was

         allowed in the following terms:
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                       Page 4 of 39
“14. … This court is of the opinion that the order
                  passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal as
                  well as the order passed by the Disciplinary
                  Authority are liable to be set aside. The
                  Disciplinary Authority is, therefore, granted the
                  liberty to issue a fresh note of disagreement to
                  the petitioner within a period of four weeks, and
                  the petitioner is also granted 4 weeks’ time to file
                  a response to the note of disagreement.
                  Thereafter, the Disciplinary Authority shall be at
                  liberty to pass appropriate orders in accordance
                  with law.
15. This court has been informed that the
                  petitioner    has      attained   the     age     of
                  superannuation and, therefore, the competent
                  Disciplinary Authority shall be at liberty to pass
                  the appropriate orders of punishment, keeping
                  in view the date of retirement and the CCS
                  (Pension) Rules, 1972.
16. The petition is disposed of with the above
                  observations. Pending applications, if any, stand
                  disposed of.”
9. The High Court found fault with the so-called

         disagreement      note    issued     by    the    Disciplinary

         Authority before passing the punishment order. In the

         view of the High Court the disagreement note was not

         a note of dissent but an expression of opinion that the

         charged officer is guilty. Thus, in the view of the High

         Court, the Disciplinary Authority had pre-judged the

         matter and, therefore, the show cause notice was

         rendered nugatory, akin to a post decisional hearing,

         which violated the principles of natural justice as also

         the extant service rules.
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                         Page 5 of 39
10.      Importantly, the correctness of the order of the

         High Court to the extent it set aside the order of

         punishment has not been questioned by the Govt. (i.e.

         the Disciplinary Authority). It is the appellant alone

         who has impugned the order of the High Court to the

         extent it grants liberty to the Disciplinary Authority to

         proceed afresh from the stage where the mistake crept

         in.
11.      We have heard learned counsel for the parties

         and have perused the materials on record.
Submissions of the Appellant
12.      The appellant contends that charges relate to

         the year 1984; inquiry was initiated in 1992; inquiry

         report was submitted in 1999; de novo inquiry

         directed by the Disciplinary Authority was set aside;
punishment order was passed in 2001; the writ

         petition was filed in the year 2002 whereas the matter

         came up for final hearing in the year 2022; and, in

         between the appellant retired, therefore, once the

         order of punishment was found bad in law, the matter

         should have been closed with no liberty to the
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                  Page 6 of 39
Disciplinary Authority. Otherwise, it would be nothing

         but persecution of the appellant on a charge which

         was found not proved by the Inquiry Officer. In

         anyway liberty to the Disciplinary Authority to pass a

         fresh order in accordance with law would be an

         exercise in futility as the Disciplinary Authority has

         already disclosed its intent to punish the appellant. It

         was thus prayed on behalf of the appellant that this

         Court may look into the matter, satisfy itself as to

         whether there is any good reason to differ with the

         findings returned in the inquiry report and pass

         appropriate orders.
Submissions on behalf of Respondent
13.      On behalf of respondent it was submitted that

         though respondents have not challenged the order of

         the   High       Court,   the   facts   disclosed   in     the

         disagreement note would indicate that there were

         good and cogent reasons to differ with the findings of

         the Inquiry Officer as from the materials on record

         charges were duly proved. However, since the High

         Court found fault with the disagreement note, fresh
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                      Page 7 of 39
steps would be taken and there is no question of bias

         as by now there would be a fresh set of officers.
Hence, on behalf of the respondents, it was prayed

         that the appeal may be dismissed.
Analysis/ Discussion
14.      Having taken note of the background facts as

         well as the rival submissions, in our view, the only

         question that arises for our consideration is whether,

         in the facts of the case, the High Court ought to have

         given liberty to the Disciplinary Authority to correct

         its mistake. If not, then what would be the appropriate

         relief to the appellant.
15.      In that context, we have carefully perused the

         materials on record. A perusal of the record would

         reveal that the charges are in respect of failure to

         control the 1984 riots in the area under the command

         of the appellant. At the relevant time, the appellant

         was in the rank of an Inspector.        Later, he was

         promoted to the post of an Assistant Commissioner of

         Police, which he held when the charge-sheet was

         served upon him in the year 1992. Notably, the
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                Page 8 of 39
appellant was exonerated of the charges by the

         Inquiry Officer. Initially, disagreeing with the inquiry

         report, the Disciplinary Authority directed for a de

         novo inquiry, which CAT found unjustified. However,

         CAT gave liberty to the Disciplinary Authority to issue

         a disagreement note and proceed. Instead of issuing a

         disagreement     note   simpliciter,   the   Disciplinary

         Authority issued a notice along with a note expressing

         his opinion that appellant is guilty and, thereafter,

         proceeded to impose punishment of reduction in rank.
The High Court found fault with the procedure and

         held that the show cause notice was just an eye wash

         as the Disciplinary Authority had already made up its

         mind to punish the appellant. Consequently, the High

         Court set aside the order of punishment and gave

         liberty to issue a fresh note of disagreement and pass

         consequential order in accordance with law.
16.      The aforesaid decision of the High Court has

         been questioned in this appeal to the extent it gave

         liberty to the Disciplinary Authority to proceed

         further. The appellant claims that in the facts of the
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                  Page 9 of 39
case the writ petition should have been allowed in

                terms prayed for, with full consequential benefits to

                the appellant.
17.         In our view, what assumes importance is that

                the decision of the High Court came in the year 2022

                when already 38 years had passed from the year in

                which those riots occurred. In between, the appellant

                retired from service and is now aged about 80 years.
We are conscious of the law that ordinarily where

                enquiry is found deficient, procedurally or otherwise,

                High Court should remand the matter back to the

                authority concerned for redoing the exercise from the

                stage where the error crept in. However, it is equally

                settled       that       where        there       is     long      time-lag           or

                circumstances are such that a remand at that stage

                would be unfair, or harsh, or otherwise unnecessary,

                the High Court can exercise its discretion and pass

                suitable orders as the facts and circumstances of the

                case may demand6. At times, where enquiry is found

                faulty, necessitating a remand, the Court may, on
6
See:
Allahabad Bank & others v. Krishna Narayan Tewari
, (2017) 2 SCC 308 (paragraph 8)
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                                                      Page 10 of 39
account of long delay, instead of remanding the

             matter, mould the relief as was done by this Court in

             the case of
M.V. Bijlani v. Union of India7
.
18.         In the instant case, admittedly, there was no

             procedural lapse in conducting the inquiry by the

             Inquiry Officer. No doubt, initially, the Disciplinary

             Authority ordered for a de novo inquiry but that order

             was set aside by CAT. Thereafter, the Disciplinary

             Authority issued a disagreement note and proceeded

             to impose punishment upon the appellant. There can

             be no cavil to the existence of power with the

             Disciplinary Authority to disagree with the opinion of

             the Inquiry Officer. But, in the event of disagreement,

             he has to give brief reasons for his disagreement and

             provide an opportunity to the employee to respond to

             such disagreement note before forming its own

             opinion with regard to imposition of punishment on

             the delinquent8.
In the instant case, the note issued

             by the Disciplinary Authority was more an expression
7
(
2006) 5 SCC 88
8
Punjab National Bank v. Kunj Behari Misra
, (1998) 7 SCC 84; and
Yoginath Bagde v. State of Maharashtra &
Another
, (1999) 7 SCC 739
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                                                 Page 11 of 39
of opinion regarding the appellant being guilty than a

         note of dissent with the findings returned by the

         Inquiry Officer. The High Court, therefore, set aside

         the     order    of   punishment   with   liberty    to    the

         Disciplinary authority to issue fresh disagreement

         note.
19.       In ordinary circumstances, the order of the

         High Court giving such liberty to the Disciplinary

         Authority may be justified. But here is a case of huge

         delay as also appellant retiring in between. Moreover,

         the Disciplinary Authority on its own did not impose

         punishment of dismissal or removal from service upon

         the appellant which might have resulted in forfeiture

         of pension. No doubt, a punishment of reduction in

         rank, as was imposed, might also have a bearing on

         the quantum of pension payable to a retired employee

         but its consequences would be much less severe. In

         that light, and by taking into account the advanced

         age of the appellant, we propose to examine whether

         it is a fit case to put a quietus to the proceeding.
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                      Page 12 of 39
20.      For that end, we propose to carefully examine

         the findings in the inquiry report as well as the dissent

         note issued by the Disciplinary Authority. The Inquiry

         Officer’s report, dated 28.01.1999, exonerating the

         appellant of the charges is on record as a part of

         Annexure P-6. The same is reproduced below:
“Inquiry Officer’s Report in case of Sri Durga
                  Prasad Assistant Commissioner of Police,
                  Charged Officer
                  Sri Durga Prasad, Assistant Commissioner of
                  Police (referred to as C.O hereinafter) is being
                  proceeded against Rule 14 of the CCS (CCA)
                  Rules, 1965 (vide Directorate of Vigilance
                  Memorandum No. F7(9)/92-DOV /1017 dated
                  20.3.1992 for his alleged lapses in handling law
                  and order situation which prevailed in Delhi in
                  the wake of the assassination of the Prime
                  Minister Smt. Indira Gandhi on 31.10.1984. The
                  C.O. gave his written reply to the Articles of
                  Charges on 20.8.1992 and this inquiry was
                  referred to the undersigned vide Vigilance
                  Department order No. F7(9)/92 /DOV/4297
                  dated 13.8.1998. By an order of the same date,
                  Sri Puli Chand, Sales Tax Officer was appointed
                  the Presenting Officer in this case.
In annexure IV to the Charge Memorandum,
                  seven witnesses were those who had filed
                  affidavits in connection with the Nov. ‘84 riots
                  before Inquiry Commission set up in this matter.
                  None of them appeared before this inquiry in
                  spite of summons. It was learnt that Sri Piara
                  Singh, Sri Rajinder Pal Singh, Jaimal Singh and
                  Sri Pritpal Singh were not reciting at the
                  addresses available with the Police Department.
                  Since their present whereabouts are not known
                  they could not be contacted. Two witnesses,
                  namely, Sri J.S. Uppal and Shri Satnam Singh
                  did not appear in spite of repeated summons and
                  they had to be dropped.
As a result, the Presenting Officer had to rely on
                  the documentary evidence like the radio log
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                       Page 13 of 39
book, curfew order etc., all of which have been
                  admitted by the C.O. Now I propose to deal with
                  each Article of Charge read with the imputations,
                  and the evidence available against each.
Charge No.1
                  That Shri Durga Prasad while functioning as
                  SHO, Kingsway Camp failed to utilize his staff
                  effectively and to take effective / preventive
                  measures to control the violence which started
                  in the wake of the assassination of Smt. Indira
                  Gandhi which resulted in heavy loss of life and
                  property during November 1984 riots. About 15
                  deaths occurred during riots in his area. No
                  preventive arrests were made either on
                  31.10.1984 or up to 4.11.1984 when the riots
                  were in full swing.
Statement of Imputations in support of
Article 1
of Charge
                  “Shri Durga Prasad, while functioning as SHO,
                  Kingsway Camp was supposed to be (sic) and
                  exercise overall supervision over the police
                  station under his control. The facts emerge from
                  the police records and affidavits that during Nov.
                  ‘84 riots, Shri Durga Prasad failed to rise to the
                  occasion. No preventive measures were taken
                  when the riots were in full swing.”
                  On behalf of the disciplinary authority, radio
                  logbook of North District has been produced as
                  the evidence against the C.O. who has admitted
                  the radio logbook entries as correct (exhibit S4).
                  The Presenting Officer has, however, not been
                  able to prove the Daily Diary register of police
                  station Kingsway Camp as it was not made
                  available to him.
Similarly, he could not produce the radio logbook
                  of P.S. Kingsway Camp or the logbook of vehicles
                  of P.S. Kingsway Camp for the relevant period.
                  FIR Nos. 785, 786 and 789 all of which were cited
                  as documents to be relied on for proving the
                  charges against the C.O. as mentioned in
                  annexure III to the Charge Memo, have also not
                  been made available. In short, the only items of
                  documentary evidence produced to prove the
                  charges are the order under
section 144
CrPC
                  (exhibit S1), curfew order (exhibit S 2), Deputy
                  Commissioner, Delhi’s report on the number of
                  deaths (exhibit S3) and radio logbook of North
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                       Page 14 of 39
District (exhibit S4). All of these documents were
                  readily admitted by the C.O. and he has been
                  able to make better use of them in his defense.
                  None of the documents mentioned above throw
                  any significant light on any laxity or lapses on
                  the part of the C.O. They do not mention any
                  occasions or locations where lathi-charge, tear
                  gas or firing was needed but was not resorted to.
                  There is nothing in these documents to show
                  that effective preventive measures were not
                  taken where the police was present. The
                  Presenting Officer has argued that in
                  departmental proceedings, preponderance of
                  probability, and not proof beyond reasonable
                  doubt as applicable in criminal cases, should be
                  seen while judging the culpability or otherwise of
                  the delinquent officer. But here is a case where
                  there is hardly any evidence to prove any of the
                  charges, let alone preponderance of probability.
                  Similarly, he argues that in departmental
                  proceedings the question of proof of documents
                  should not arise as most of the documents are
                  maintained officially and should be presumed to
                  be correct. If this argument was true, there
                  would be no need of any departmental
                  proceedings as the disciplinary authority which
                  awards punishment could have summoned all
                  these documents maintained officially then
                  taken decision on the basis of them. The
                  Presenting Officer has not appreciated time-
                  honored maxim of natural justice that no
                  evidence even in departmental proceedings can
                  be made use of unless it has passed through the
                  test of cross-examination by the C.O. The very
                  object of cross-examination is to question the
                  accuracy, credibility of the evidence adduced and
                  highlight the discrepancies therein. Where this
                  procedure has not been followed the evidentiary
                  value of witnesses or documents becomes zero.
                  A number of judicial pronouncements have
                  emphasized that cross examination is a very
                  valuable right, and prevention of its effective
                  exercise would be shared the proceedings.
                  The Presenting Officer has also argued that the
                  documentary evidence is to be considered more
                  important than the oral evidence as the
                  document does not lie or forget. Without
                  questioning the validity of this argument, it may
                  be observed that he has not been able to produce
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                       Page 15 of 39
any document which is relevant to prove the
                  charges regarding the lack of effective preventive
                  measures, gross negligence or dereliction of
                  duties with mala fide intention - the charges
                  which have been cited in Annexure II as the
                  constituents of misconduct in this case.
                  The Presenting Officer has further argued that
                  the burden of proof in certain cases lies on the
                  C.O as it is done in case of misappropriation etc.
                  In such cases, according to him, the onus of
                  disproving essential facts lies on the C.O. This
                  principle is not applicable in the present case for
                  the reason that a number of violent incidents or
                  deaths occurring in the jurisdiction of a police
                  officer do not, ipso facto, prove his incompetence,
                  negligence or dereliction of duty unless it is
                  established that he was given adequate men and
                  resources to tackle the law and order situation
                  and yet he willfully decided not to use them with
                  some ulterior motive. In the present case, there
                  is an abundance of evidence to show that the
                  C.O. exercised all due care and caution at his
                  command and made all possible efforts to control
                  the law and order situation in his jurisdiction.
                  The Presenting Officer’s case is that according to
                  the radio logbook entry dated 31.10.84 at 12.24
                  hours and 17.20 hours, C.O. was instructed to
                  mobilize maximum force in the area of P.S.
                  Kingsway Camp ensuring that no untoward
                  incident took place. He argues that in spite of
                  these instructions, C.O. failed to do this and his
                  failure resulted into incidents of looting, arson
                  and murder of many persons. In order to prove
                  this allegation, the P.O. had to show that
                  additional force was made available to the C.O.
                  in time and also that the C.O. had been informed
                  in time to take preventive action. None of these
                  points has been proved by any evidence. On the
                  other hand, the C.O. has stated in his defense
                  statement (placed on record on 30.10.98) that on
                  1.11.1984, he tried his level best with the help of
                  force available with him, to control the situation
                  and that special care was taken to protect the
                  residences of Sardar Richpal Singh, Nirankari
                  Baba and Ashwani Minna, proprietor of the
                  newspaper ‘Punjab Kesri’ - all prominent persons
                  residing in the area of Kingsway Camp. Similarly,
                  important installations like telephone exchange
                  and the radio station were also protected by his
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                        Page 16 of 39
force. In this connection, he has also given the
                  sequence of events (annexure II of his defense
                  statement) to show that he and his force made
                  all possible efforts to combat the deteriorating
                  situation during the riots. In the said annexure
                  he has mentioned that on 1.11.84 he had no
                  extra force except the meagre staff available at
                  the police station. At 8:30 AM he also requested
                  for the fire brigade. The fire brigade was not
                  made available to him. His force, however,
                  succeeded in stopping and disbursing a mob
                  coming from Shakti Nagar side. A small
                  additional force was made available to him
                  consisting of 18 persons of the CRPF at 10:25
                  a.m. on 1.11.84 who were deployed at
                  gurudwara Nanak Piau and the radio station. As
                  a result, these places were saved from any kind
                  of mischief or loss.
At about 11:00 AM, the C.O. received a message
                  that more than a thousand persons (Sikhs) had
                  gathered in Model Town making the situation
                  tense. He reached the spot and pacified the
                  crowd. Similarly, he tackled the law and order
                  situation at GT Karnal Rd. by dispersing the mob
                  assembled there and also at gurudwara
                  Parmanand colony and gurudwara Gujranwala
                  Town. He has also mentioned about a number of
                  bogus calls received by him, which distracted the
                  attention of force from the real troubled spots. In
                  this way, the C.O. has mentioned number of
                  incidents that took place at gurudwara
                  Mukherjee Nagar, along the GT Karnal Rd.,
                  gurudwara Dhirpur, gurdwara ‘D’ Block and a
                  few residential units at Gujranwala Town, Model
                  Town III, C.C. Colony, Rana Pratap Bagh,
                  Nirankari Colony etc., which he and his force
                  tackled during the day. The Presenting Officer
                  has not been able to refute this portion of the
                  defense statement by any evidence or cogent
                  argument.
In annexure III (295/C) to this defense
                  statement, the C.O. mentioned that the strength
                  of his police station Kingsway Camp during the
                  riots consisted of one Inspector, 9 Sub-
                  Inspectors, 7 Assistant Sub-Inspectors, 18 Head
                  Constables and 75 Constables - a force which
                  was too inadequate to tackle hundreds of
                  incidents that occurred within a short span of 2-
                  3 days. The C.O. does admit 8 deaths that
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                        Page 17 of 39
occurred in his jurisdiction out of which six were
                  the Sikhs and two non-Sikhs.
The C.O. has also produced 6 defense witnesses
                  to prove his case. Sri DL Kashyap (DW1) was the
                  Assistant Commissioner of Police, Kingsway
                  Camp and the C.O.s immediate superior. He has
                  deposed that in the morning of 1.11.84, SHO
                  Durga Prasad (the C.O.) accompanied him to
                  Rana Pratap Bagh and they managed to disperse
                  the unruly mob by resorting to a vigorous lathi
                  charge. According to him, the C.O. did a good
                  work in the area of Model Town, where he also
                  rescued a Sikh family from the clutches of the
                  rioters and protected a number of prominent
                  Sikh leaders. He also ensured the safety and
                  security of gurudwara Model Town, another
                  sensitive and vulnerable place. In brief, he
                  emphasized that the C.O. remained alert,
                  vigilant and active throughout the period of riots
                  continued and that in his opinion ‘he spared no
                  efforts to combat the situation that arose in his
                  jurisdiction’. It may be mentioned that Shri
                  Kashyap (now Deputy Commissioner of Police)
                  was not accused, in any manner, in these riots
                  and got commendations from many quarters for
                  his good work. His testimony in favor of the C.O.
                  should therefore be totally relied on.
                  Shri Shiam Singh, ACP, Crime Branch (DW 2)
                  has deposed that he investigated as a member of
                  the special investigating agency headed by the
                  DCP (Vigilance) the complaint of atrocities
                  committed during the riots including complaint
                  of Sardar Piara Singh of GT Karnal Road and
                  found that the allegations of Sardar Piara Singh
                  against the C.O. could not be substantiated.
                  Shri K.L. Kiara, retired Inspector of Police (DW3)
                  stated that on 7th of November 1984, Sardar
                  Piara Singh had made a complaint about his
                  workplace cum residence having been looted. In
                  this connection, four persons were arrested on
                  the identification made by Sardar Piara Singh
                  and the case was put to Court. He has also stated
                  that Sadar Piara Singh’s family was dispatched
                  in a car to a place of safety. His complaint
                  against the C.O. was thus totally unfounded.
                  Inspector Satya Prakash (DW4) has deposed to
                  the effect that Sardar Piara Singh had some
                  animus against him as he had arrested Sardar
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                       Page 18 of 39
Piara Singh under
Delhi Police Act
, a few months
                  back.
Constable Anil Kumar (DW 5) of police station
                  Model Town proved with the help of the original
                  daily diary PS Model Town that on 1.11.84
                  twenty-six persons were arrested under the
                  preventive
sections 107
/
151
CrPC in connection
                  with these riots. He also proved the arrest of
                  eight persons in the jurisdiction of PS Kingsway
                  Camp on 2.11.84.
Head Constable Hukum Singh of PS Model Town
                  has proved with the help of original Malkana
                  Register (exhibit DW6 /A) that a substantial
                  quantity of property looted by the rioters was
                  recovered by the C.O. and his staff, and restored
                  to their owners.
In view of facts and circumstances mentioned
                  above the
Article 1
of Charge regarding the lack
                  of effective control and non-utilization of staff
                  and lack of preventive measures, etc. remains
                  unproved.
Charge No.2
                  “That Shri Durga Prasad did not take any action
                  to control the mob either by the use of tear gas,
                  lathi charge or firing.”

                  Statement of imputations in support of
                  charge 2
                  “It is evident from the record that mob violence
                  started in the area of PS Kingsway camp on
                  1.11.84 and continued up to 4.11.84. Cases of
                  arson and looting were reported at Rana Pratap
                  Bagh, Mukherjee Nagar, Model Town, Wazirabad
                  on 1.11.84. At taxi stand Rana Pratap Bagh,
                  taxis and buses were set on fire by the mob.
                  Incidents of arson and looting occurred at Model
                  Town and Outer Ring Rd. Gurudwara at
                  Mukherjee Nagar was set on fire by the mob.
                  Violence was reported at Mukaraba Chowk and
                  Wazirabad. During riots mobs burnt several cars
                  and two wheelers and about 15 persons were
                  killed. No arrests were made under the cases
                  registered during the riot. No effective firing was
                  resorted to by the SHO.”
                  The incidents mentioned in the statement of
                  imputations may have taken place, but none of
                  them has been proved by any evidence produced
                  on behalf of the disciplinary authority with the
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                        Page 19 of 39
help of any independent eyewitness. Some of
                  these incidents do find mention in the radio
                  logbook in respect of PS Kingsway Camp. The
                  C.O. has mentioned in his defense that as many
                  as 106 persons were arrested by him and his
                  staff during these riots. The details have been
                  given in the handwritten copies of the extracts
                  from the relevant daily diaries (annexure III of his
                  defense statement, 286/C to 292/C) regarding
                  the 8 persons who had died in his area. Four
                  persons, according to the C.O., had come from
                  Punjab who got caught into the clutches of the
                  riots. According to him, 53 rounds were fired at
                  different places at different times and dates
                  during this period. He further says that no tear
                  gas was available at his disposal. This statement
                  has not been refuted by any evidence or
                  argument by the Presenting Officer. The C.O.
                  also takes the credit of recovering property worth
                  Rs. 4.1 lakhs under his supervision. The details
                  given in his defence statement (annexure IV
                  221/C to 271/C). No prosecution evidence has
                  come forth to refute these facts. It has already
                  been mentioned while discussing
Article 1
of
                  Charge that whenever needed the C.O. and his
                  force resorted to lathi charge. In short, this
                  Article has not been supported with any type of
                  evidence either oral or documentary. The
                  Presenting Officer argues that D.D. entries
                  No.6A, 9A and 73B dated 1.11.84 show that no
                  action was taken by the C.O. He has, however,
                  not mentioned as to what these entries were
                  about. Nor has he been able to summon any
                  witness to prove the veracity of the contents of
                  those entries after a proper cross- examination
                  of the witnesses by the C.O. In spite of this, the
                  C.O. has replied to this point in his written
                  arguments. He says that action taken by Sub-
                  Inspector Karan Singh is mentioned in D.D.
                  entry No.49 dated 1.11.84 and in case of
                  incident, some local police officer was also
                  present on the spot to control the situation
                  before arrival of S.I. Karan Singh. Likewise, he
                  has given details of actions taken in respect of all
                  the D.D. entries mentioned by the Presenting
                  Officer.
In fact,
Article 2
of the Charge is hardly any
                  different in substance from
Article 1
of Charge
                  which has been discussed above in detail. What
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                         Page 20 of 39
is, however, really important to notice is that the
                  allegation of inaction on the part of the C.O.
                  seems to be totally baseless, and that his non-
                  use of tear gas was occasioned by its non-
                  availability to him. In view of the facts and
                  circumstances discussed above,
Article 2
of
                  charge remains unproved.
Charge No.3
                  “That Shri Durga Prasad, SHO had not made any
                  efforts to implement order under
section 144
CrPC which was promulgated on 31.10.84 and
                  to enforce the curfew which was imposed
                  subsequently.”

                  Statement of imputations in support of
Article 3
of Charge
                  “He made no efforts to implement the order
                  under
section 144
CrPC which was promulgated
                  on 31/10/84 and the curfew which was imposed
                  subsequently. He did not use lathi charge, tear
                  gas or resorted to effective firing to control the
                  mob as no one was injured or killed by the police
                  firing.”
                  This Article of Charge is again a substantial
                  repetition of the earlier two charges. It has been
                  made abundantly clear while discussing the
                  earlier Articles of charge, that there is no
                  evidence on record to show any inaction, lack of
                  effective control, inaction on preventive
                  measures, etc. on the part of the C.O. On the
                  contrary, there is adequate evidence and
                  explanations in the C.O's defense statement to
                  prove that he and his staff spared no efforts in
                  controlling the riots, although with varying
                  degrees of success. In view of this, the charge
                  that he did not make any efforts to implement
                  the prohibitory order under
section 144
CrPC
                  appears to be rather far-fetched. Every action
                  taken with a view to dispersing the mob was an
                  effort to implement
section 144
CrPC.
                  The C.O. has stated in his written arguments
                  that the mobs were dispersed but no arrest
                  under
section 188
of the IPC for the reason that
                  he did not have enough manpower for effecting
                  arrests of such overwhelming number as were
                  encountered on the troubled spots.
In view of this,
Article 3
of the charge remains
                  unproved.
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                        Page 21 of 39
Charge No.4
                  “That Shri Durga Prasad, SHO did not make any
                  efforts to utilize even the additional force which
                  was made available to him on 1st, 2nd and 3rd
                  November 1984.”

                  Statement of imputations in support of
                  Charge No.4
                  “Additional force of 2 SIs, 13 HCs and 177
                  Constables was made available to him on
                  1.11.84, 2.11.84 and 3.11.84 but he did not
                  utilize the additional force properly to monitor
                  the incidents of rioting and did not make
                  adequate efforts to control the situation in the
                  area of PS Kingsway Camp.”
                  Replying to this charge, the C.O. has stated that
                  additional force provided to his police station
                  was inadequate. Besides, it was made available
                  to him long after it was demanded. The meagre
                  additional force provided to him during 1st
                  November to 4th November was deployed to
                  protect the important installations, gurudwaras
                  and other vulnerable areas depending on the
                  situation prevailing on that particular moment.
                  Annexure 11 of his defence statement gives all
                  the details. The crux of the C.O.'s argument is
                  that some additional force was supplied to him
                  but its arrival was not timely. Reinforcement
                  arrived as and when available, and not as and
                  when needed. The Presenting Officer has not
                  been able to specify any particular case or
                  incident which was allowed to happen in spite of
                  the fact that adequate force was available to him
                  to prevent that situation. Nor has he been able
                  to show that additional force provided was sitting
                  idle or was deployed at places which did not need
                  them. In absence of evidence on such vital
                  points, this charge remains unproved.
Summing Up
                  During his general questioning, the C.O. has
                  summed up the entire situation prevailing at
                  that time in a satisfactory manner. He says that
                  in the firings the aim was to disperse the mob
                  rather than to injure them. That is how no
                  injuries were reported in cases of police firings.
                  The outside police force placed at his disposal
                  was too small especially in view of the fact that
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                       Page 22 of 39
the incidents were happening in a very
                  haphazard manner and at locations very far from
                  each other. With the help of a force consisting of
                  100 armed persons, or so, it was not possible to
                  control the riots which happened at an
                  unprecedented scale. There was no prior
                  information of any of these happenings and the
                  police were just taken by surprise at the
                  developments. He also mentions that his
                  superior officers never gave him an indication
                  that his work during the riots was in any way
                  less than what was expected of him. He was, in
                  fact, promoted to the rank of Assistant
                  Commissioner of Police in the year 1985 i.e.,
                  soon after these riots, obviously, on the basis of
                  good reports on his conduct and performance
                  given by senior officers.
Considering all these facts and circumstances,
                  and that none of the individual charges has been
                  proved against him, there is no case of any
                  misconduct, or contravention of the provisions of
                  rule 3 of CCS (Conduct) Rules, 1964, against Sri
                  Durga Prasad, the Charged Officer.
Signed RP Rai
                                                Inquiring Authority
                          Dated: 28.1.1999”
                                              (Emphasis supplied)
21.      On the aforesaid report, the disagreement note

         of the disciplinary authority sent along with the notice

         issued to the appellant dated 04.01.2001, which is

         part of Annexure P-6, is reproduced below:
“Note giving reasons for disagreement
                  with the findings of inquiry officer in the case
                  of Sh. Durga Prasad, A.C.P. By the
                  Disciplinary authority i.e. Governor, Delhi.
1.   I have examined the Inquiry Report on the
                  charges against Shri Durga Prasad, formerly
                  Station House Officer, Police Station Kingsway
                  Camp, Delhi. Although the Inquiry Officer has
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                       Page 23 of 39
held that none of the charges have been proved
                  against the Charged Officer, I am not in
                  agreement with the findings of the Inquiry
                  Officer. These findings are, in the first place, not
                  based on a correct appreciation of evidence and
                  the documents available on record. Moreover,
                  the Inquiry Officer, in the summing up of his
                  report, has used extraneous factors to absolve
                  the Charged Officer of any wrong doing which
                  have nothing to do with either the facts on record
                  or the inquiry process, for instance by alluding
                  to the promotion earned-by the Charged Officer
                  in 1985, “soon after the riots”, which has led the
                  Inquiry Officer to presume that this was so on
                  the basis of his good conduct and performance.
The charges framed against the officer have to be
                  considered on their own merits and based on the
                  relevant evidence. Neither adverse nor positive
                  ACR entries, nor even the fact of subsequent
                  promotion, should be used to prejudice the
                  evaluation of charges against any official who is
                  subject to disciplinary proceedings, except his
                  actions in respect to the charges faced by him. If
                  this were not true, no action could possibly be
                  taken against an officer promoted subsequent to
                  the period in which he has committed
                  misdemeanour attracting a major or minor
                  penalty.
2.       The Charged Officer had inspected the
                  original documents (copies of which had been
                  made available to him with the charge sheet),
                  except the radio logbook of the Control Room of
                  North District. The logbook of vehicles of the
                  Police Station Kingsway Camp, also not
                  provided, was incidentally not a listed document.
                  It is also true that none of the 7 witnesses who
                  had filed affidavits in connection with the
                  November, 1984 riots before the Inquiry
                  Commission set up on the matter appeared
                  before the Inquiry Officer, despite summons
                  (given that the precise whereabouts of the
                  majority of the witnesses were known). As a
                  result, the Presenting Officer had to rely upon
                  the documentary material at hand. A reading of
                  the Inquiry Report, however, reveals that the
                  Inquiry Officer was unable to take account of the
                  documentary evidence presented in arriving
                  upon his conclusions, for instance, he has stated
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                         Page 24 of 39
in the Inquiry Report that the “radio logbook of
                  P.S. Kingsway Camp” and FIR nos.785, 786 &
                  789, all of which were listed documents, could
                  not be produced. This is incorrect. In his letter
                  dated October 7, 1992 sent in response to the
                  letter forwarding prosecution documents sent by
                  the then Deputy Commissioner of Police
                  (Vigilance), Delhi, dated August 28, 1992 the
                  Charged Officer confirmed receipt of, inter alia,
                  the radio logbook of P.S. Kingsway Camp dated
                  31.10.1984 - 4.11.1984 as also the relevant
                  FIRs. Furthermore, in his written submission
                  made on July 30, 1998, made in response to the
                  charge memo, dated August 20, 1992, the
                  Charged Officer admitted to having received the
                  documents.       Thereupon, in his defence
                  statement made before the inquiry officer on
                  October 21, 1998, Shri Durga Prasad once again
                  acknowledged      the   foregoing    documents,
                  including the radio logbook of P.S. Kingsway
                  Camp and the FIRs as “admitted by the Charged
                  Officer as a matter of record.” The principal
                  infirmity in the findings of the Inquiry Officer
                  stems from the fact of his having not considered
                  the full documentary evidence and his erroneous
                  surmise that the prosecution documents were
                  deficient.
3.      Article I of the charge concerns the failure
                  on the part of the Charged Officer, while
                  functioning as SHO, to utilise his staff effectively
                  and to take effective preventive measures to
                  control the violence which started in the wake of
                  the assassination of Mrs. Indira Gandhi that
                  resulted in heavy loss of life and property during
                  the November 1984 riots. According to the radio
                  logbook entries dated 31.10.1984 at 12.24 hrs.,
                  17.20 hrs and 19.22 hrs., the Charged Officer
                  was instructed to mobilize maximum force in the
                  area of P.S. Kingsway Camp and to maintain law
                  and order so that no untoward incidents could
                  take place, despite these instructions, the
                  Charged Officer failed to effectively mobilize his
                  force in the area. Besides the regular force with
                  the Police Station constituted by the Charged
                  Officer, 9 Sub-Inspectors, 7 Assistant Sub-
                  Inspectors, 18 Head Constables and 75
                  Constables, additional force was also made
                  available to him from 01.11.1984 onwards. No
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                         Page 25 of 39
preventive arrests were made or bad characters
                  arrested on 31.10.1984 or 01.11.1984. This fact
                  has been admitted by DW-5 in the cross-
                  examination during his deposition in the inquiry
                  proceedings. The observation of the Inquiry
                  Officer that on 01.11.1984, 26 persons were
                  arrested under the preventive
sections 107
/
151
Cr.P.C. in connection with the riots is contrary
                  to the documentary evidence available on record.
4. Considerable information of ongoing violent
                  incidents of looting, arson and clashes was
                  passed on to the Charged Officer as shown by the
                  radio logbook and daily diary register, but the
                  action taken by him was not commensurate to
                  the requirements, which resulted in loss of
                  innocent lives and destruction of property. While
                  the Kusum Lata Mittal report on the conduct of
                  Delhi Police during the November 1984 riots
                  mentioned 15 deaths in the area within the
                  jurisdiction of P.S. Kingsway Camp. Even a
                  single death, if it was avertable and a result of
                  ineffective action on the part of those responsible
                  for law enforcement, is unacceptable and for
                  which responsibility must be fixed.
5. The Charged Officer was expected to take
                  stock of the serious situation and take timely
                  preventive measures, but he failed to rise to the
                  occasion. The case is thus not one of a routine
                  dereliction of duty of a disciplinary proceeding
                  concerning a normal occurrence of inaction and
                  negligence. It is part of the November 1984 riots
                  that had resulted in a terrible loss of lives and
                  disturbance of public peace that had torn the
                  fabric of civic society in Delhi.      Given the
                  evidence cited above, the Charged Officer cannot
                  possibly be absolved of his responsibility in the
                  failure to make effective measures to control the
                  violence within the area under the jurisdiction.
                  Article-I of the charge thus stands proved.
6. Article-II of the charge relates to the failure of
                  the Charged Officer to take any action to control
                  the mob either by the use of tear-gas, lathi-
                  charge or firing, according to the entries made in
                  the radio logbook of P.S. Kingsway Camp, mob
                  violence began within the area on 01.11.1984
                  and continued until 04.11.1984. Both the radio
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                          Page 26 of 39
logbook and the daily diary entries of the Police
                  Station indicate that many serious instances of
                  arson and looting were reported from areas
                  within the jurisdiction covered by the Charged
                  Officer. At Rana Pratap Bagh taxi stand, buses
                  and taxis were burnt by the mob. The Gurdwara
                  at Mukherjee Nagar was set on fire. Daily diary
                  entries nos.A-4, A-5, A-6, A-9 and 8-73 and radio
                  logbook entries at 8.35, 11.20, 11.30, 12.03,
                  12.40, 12.47, 13.20, 13.40, 15.10, 15.25, 16.02,
                  16.4, 17.15 and 22.25 hrs. dated 01.11.1984
                  indicate that no action was taken by me Charged
                  Officer either to use lathi-charge or resort to
                  effective firing to control the mobs as not a single
                  person was injured in the police firing. There is
                  no daily diary entry to this effect either on
                  31.10.1984 or 01.11.1984. The organised mobs
                  could only have been prevented from indulging
                  in criminal acts of killing of innocent people and
                  destroying property if they had been firmly
                  deterred, which was unfortunately not the case.
                  Article-II of the charge thus also stands proved.
7.    According to Article-III of the charge, the
                  Charged Officer had made no effort to implement
                  prohibitory order under
section 144
Cr.P.C.,
                  which was promulgated on 31.10.1984 and the
                  curfew that was imposed subsequently. There is
                  not a single entry on the records of the Police
                  Station that announcements of the promulgation
                  of the order under
section 144
Cr.P.C. in the area
                  was made on 31.10.1984 or that of imposition of
                  curfew on 01.11.1984. The Charged Officer has
                  admitted in written reply to the arguments
                  submitted by the Presenting Officer in support of
                  the charges framed against the Charged Officer
                  on December 14, 1998 that he made no arrest
                  under
section 188
IPC for violating the
                  prohibitory orders. According to him, “no person
                  was apprehended on the spot for violating the
                  above orders due to shortage of manpower in
                  comparison of rioters at one place.” The Charged
                  Officer has not detailed any other steps taken by
                  him to quell the rioting in the absence of arrests.
                  A scrutiny of the daily diary and radio logbook
                  shows that numerous instances of rioting were
                  reported in the areas under the command of the
                  Charged Officer. FIR No.785, registered n
                  01.11.1984 at 06 p.m. mentioned the incident of
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                         Page 27 of 39
burning of taxis and buses at the Rana Pratap
                  Bagh taxi stand, the gathering large crowds
                  indulging in looting and arson around
                  Gurdwaras and the discovery of dead bodies at
                  various places. Neither the FIR, registered on the
                  basis of a report by the Charged Officer himself,
                  nor the daily diary entries of the relevant period
                  speak of how many teargas shells or live rounds
                  were fired to disperse the unruly mobs. They
                  were allowed to assemble despite the
                  promulgation of
Section 144
Cr.P.C. and the
                  imposition of curfew. There is little evidence of
                  any serious effort made by the Charged Officer to
                  implement the prohibitory orders effectively
                  within the area under his jurisdiction. Article III
                  of the charge is, therefore, also established.
8. Article IV of the charge concerns the failure of
                  the Charged Officer to utilize the additional force
                  provided to him to monitor and control the
                  incidents of rioting in his area on 1-3 November,
                  1984. Besides the regular force available to him
                  at the Police Station, he had been given an
                  additional force of 2 Sub-Inspectors, 13 Head
                  Constables and 177 Constables from 01.11.1984
                  onwards.       But he seems to have made
                  inadequate use of this force. In addition, the
                  burning of 6 Gurdwaras, cases of arson, looting
                  and killings were reported at Rana Pratap Bagh,
                  G.T.    Karnal     Road,     Gujaranwala     Town,
                  Mukherjee Nagar, Kingsway Camp and Model
                  Town. A number of factories on G.T. Karnal
                  Road Industrial Area were also looted and burnt
                  by rioters. Police force were little in evidence at
                  these trouble spots. Article IV of the charge is
                  thus also proved.
9. The Inquiry Officer has not fully taken into
                  account the detailed documentary evidence
                  including the meticulous entries made in the
                  radio logbooks, in the course of the disciplinary
                  proceedings. The entire inquiry process has
                  thus been flawed by the selective manner in
                  which evidence had been used in this case. For
                  this reason, I am not inclined to accept the
                  findings of the Inquiry Officer.”

                                               (Emphasis supplied)
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                        Page 28 of 39
22.      A careful reading of the inquiry report would

         make it clear all the four charges against the appellant

         were overlapping. Those were in respect of:
(a) failure to utilise staff and to take effective

               preventive measures to control the violence

               erupting on assassination of the then Prime

               Minister;
(b) non-use of tear gas, lathi-charge and firing to

               control the mob;
(c) not making efforts to implement prohibitory

               orders issued under
Section 144
CrPC;
(d) non-utilisation   of   additional   force   made

               available.
23.      The Inquiry Officer found charges not proved.
While holding so, it considered evidence in detail and

         made certain observations which form the bedrock of

         exoneration. Some of those observations, which are

         underscored in the inquiry report extracted above,

         indicate:
(a) that there was no evidence led to disclose any
               occasion or location where lathi-charge, tear gas
               or firing was needed but was not resorted to;
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                    Page 29 of 39
(b) that    the   Presenting    Officer   raised      a
              misconceived plea that the burden of proof in
              such cases lies on the Charged Officer;
(c) that occurrence of violent incidents or deaths
              in the jurisdiction of a police officer does not, ipso
              facto, prove his incompetence, negligence or
              dereliction of duty unless it is established that he
              was given adequate men and resources to tackle
              the law-and-order situation, yet he willfully did
              not use them with some ulterior motive;
(d) that the Presenting Officer failed to show that
              additional force was made available to the
              Charged Officer in time with information to take
              preventive action.
(e) that the Charged Officer claimed that on
              1.11.1984 he tried his level best, with the help of
              force available with him, to control the situation;
he took special care to protect the residences of
              Sardar Richpal Singh, Nirankari Baba and
              Ashwani Minna, proprietor of the newspaper
              ‘Punjab Kesri’ - all prominent persons residing in
              the area of Kingsway Camp including important
              installations like telephone exchange and the
              radio station; on 1.11.84 he had no extra force
              except the meagre staff available at the police
              station; further, at 8:30 AM, he requested for fire
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                   Page 30 of 39
brigade, which was not made available to him; the
              additional force made available to him, consisting
              of 18 persons of the CRPF, were deployed at
              Gurdwara Nanak Piau and the radio station, as a
              result, those places were saved from vandalism;
(f) that the Presenting Officer failed to refute the
              claim of Charged Officer regarding tackling
              number of incidents that took place at Gurdwara
              Mukherjee Nagar, along the GT Karnal Rd.,
              Gurdwara Dhirpur, Gurdwara ‘D’ Block and a few
              residential units at Gujranwala Town, Model
              Town III, C.C. Colony, Rana Pratap Bagh,
              Nirankari Colony etc.;
(g) that the defense witness Sri DL Kashyap
              (DW1), who was the Assistant Commissioner of
              Police, Kingsway Camp and the Charged Officer’s
              immediate superior, had deposed that in the
              morning of 1.11.84, SHO Durga Prasad (the C.O.)
              accompanied him to Rana Pratap Bagh, and they
              managed to disperse the unruly mob by resorting
              to a vigorous lathi charge. According to him, the
              C.O. did good work in Model Town, where he also
              rescued a Sikh family from the clutches of the
              rioters and protected a number of prominent Sikh
              leaders; he also ensured the safety and security of
              Gurdwara Model Town, another sensitive and
              vulnerable place;
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                  Page 31 of 39
(h) that the reliability of DW-1 could not be
               doubted because he was not an accused in
               connection with those riots, rather he got
               commendations from many quarters for his good
               work;
(i) that Charged Officer and his men arrested as
               many as 106 persons during those riots, which
               was proved by handwritten copies of extracts
               drawn from relevant daily diaries (annexure III of
               defense statement, 286/C to 292/C);
(j) that out of eight deaths in Charged Officer’s
               area, four were of those who, while coming from
               Punjab, got caught in the riots;
(k) that 53 rounds were fired at different places
               and at different points in time during this period
               with an intent to disperse the crowd, not to injure
               anyone; and
(l) that the statement of the Charged Officer that
               there was no tear gas at his disposal was not
               refuted by the Presenting Officer.
24.      The aforesaid observations in the inquiry

         report would indicate that it was not a case where

         there was inaction on the part of the appellant in

         controlling the riots. Arrests were made, lathi-charge
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                  Page 32 of 39
was done and firing was resorted to, though not to

         injure. Considering the limited force available, focus

         was on saving crucial installations and potential

         targets. The immediate senior of the appellant D L

         Kashyap, who appeared as a defence witness, stated

         that the appellant did a commendable job with the

         limited resources available with him. Importantly, this

         witness was also part of the team responsible for

         controlling      riots   but   was   not   charge-sheeted.
Therefore, the Inquiry Officer relied on his statement.
Most importantly, there was no evidence to show that

         the force was sitting idle.
25.      In the context of the detailed inquiry report,

         the disagreement note is cryptic and ignores vital

         aspects that were considered by the Inquiry Officer in

         his report, such as, (a) force was limited; (b) focus was

         on saving critical installations and potential targets;
(c) firing was resorted to, though not to injure; (d) DW-
1, Charged Officer’s immediate senior applauded the

         work of the Charged Officer under the circumstances;
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                    Page 33 of 39
and (e) 106 arrests were effected as borne out from

         hand written notes extracted from daily diaries.
26.      Interestingly, the Disciplinary Authority in his

         disagreement note laid emphasis on what was not

         done, or what could have been done, namely, (a)

         entries were not made in the relevant diaries regarding

         announcement of prohibitory order; (b) no tear gas

         shells were used; (c) no injury caused to anyone in

         lathi-charge or police firing; (d) additional force not

         properly deployed; and (e) no preventive arrests

         effected between 31.10.1984 and 01.11.1984.
27.      As regards observation of not making entries

         in    relevant   diaries    regarding   announcement            of

         prohibitory orders, the statement of imputation in the

         context of that charge (i.e., charge no.3) makes no

         such allegation on the Charged Officer. Had there

         been a specific charge there could have been an

         explanation. May be such entries are made by

         different set of employees posted at the police station.
Be that as it may, in absence of a specific imputation

         in    respect    of   not   making      entries   of     public
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                         Page 34 of 39
announcement of prohibitory orders in the diaries, in

         our view, adverse inference ought not to have been

         drawn against the appellant on that count, as the

         same would be beyond the scope of the charge (i.e,

         charge no.3) when read in conjunction with the

         statement of imputation.
28.      Regarding non-use of tear gas shells, first

         there ought to have been evidence that they were

         available for use.    Dissent note does not indicate

         presence of evidence in that regard. Therefore, in our

         view, dissent on that count is not warranted.
29.      Absence of gunshot injury to any of the rioters,

         in our view, is not a ground to assume inaction on the

         part of the police force. Firing at mob has dangerous

         consequences. If shots are fired in air to disperse the

         crowd, the purpose stands served. Whereas firing at

         the crowd may not only injure the persons targeted

         but also several others who may be innocent. It is a

         matter of common knowledge that rifle bullets travel

         at a high velocity and may pierce the targeted person

         to strike unintended targets as well. Therefore, the
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                  Page 35 of 39
plea of the Charged Officer that shots were fired not

         with a view to injure but to disperse the mob, in our

         view, is a bona fide plea, which does not call for any

         adverse inference against him.
30.       Regarding deployment of additional force,

         there is no evidence that such number of police

         personnel were to be deployed here and such number

         were to be deployed there. Inquiry Officer has

         observed that there was complete lack of evidence that

         police force was sitting idle and were not deployed.
Importantly, the defence plea is that deployment of

         forces were at important Government installations

         and at potential targets. Considering the scale at

         which riots broke out it is difficult to assume that with

         limited resources, as is found in the inquiry report,

         deployment of forces could be across the entire area

         under the command of the concerned police station.
Therefore, in our view, dissent on this count also is

         unwarranted, particularly, in absence of evidence that

         police force was sitting idle with no deployment

         orders.
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                  Page 36 of 39
31.        As regards allegation that no preventive

         arrests were made by the Charged Officer, suffice it to

         say that it is an allegation easy to make but difficult

         to    prove.     There   is   no   evidence   cited    in    the

         disagreement note that reports of a plan to indulge in

         rioting came to the knowledge of the Charged Officer

         but he took no preventive action. Admittedly, riots

         broke out suddenly as soon as information of

         assassination of the then Prime Minister spread.
Thus, absence of preventive arrest is not a ground to

         believe that there was inaction on the part of the

         Charged Officer. Notably, as per observations in the

         inquiry report, arrests were effected. May not be by

         way of preventive measure but as a response to

         rioting.
32.        Besides above, we note that the disciplinary

         proceeding against the appellant was initiated after 8

         years of the incident when by that time the appellant

         had already earned his promotion. We are conscious

         of the law that promotion does not automatically wipe

         out any misconduct of a delinquent employee,
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                        Page 37 of 39
particularly when it comes to light later. Here also,

         police personnel were put in the dock when a

         Committee, appointed later, reported laxity on the

         part of police in handling 1984 Riots. No doubt,

         misconduct may arise out of an act or an omission.
Where it relates to an alleged omission, greater

         caution is required before putting an officer in the

         dock. In case of such nature, the disciplinary

         authority may also have to empathise with the

         situation in which the charged officer was placed at

         the relevant time. Because in hindsight it is easy to

         say that things could have been handled better if they

         had been done this way, or that way. But if this alone

         is taken as a basis to punish police personnel who,

         though may not have delivered the desired result,

         have done their best, commensurate to the resources

         available to them at the relevant time, grave injustice

         would be done. Instant case appears to be of that

         kind.
33.      For all the reasons above, we are of the

         considered view that it would be too harsh upon the
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                Page 38 of 39
appellant to undergo a fresh exercise of disagreement

         note and consequential process, particularly when the

         incident is over 40 years old and the appellant has

         demitted office long time back.
34.      The appeal is, therefore, allowed. The order of

         the High Court giving liberty to the disciplinary

         authority to issue a fresh disagreement note, and

         proceed accordingly, is set aside. The writ petition of

         the appellant stands allowed. The order of the High

         Court to the extent it quashed the order of

         punishment is affirmed. The appellant shall be

         entitled   to    all   consequential         benefits      including

         revision of pension, if any payable, accordingly.
35.      Pending applications, if any, stand disposed

         of.
36.      There is no order as to costs.
….............................................J.
                                 (Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha)


                                 ................................................J.
                                                            (Manoj Misra)


    New Delhi;
April 23, 2025
SLP (C) No.2111 OF 2023                                               Page 39 of 39