[Cites
15
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Dashrath vs The State Of Maharashtra on 24 April, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 654


                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.          OF 2025
                            [ARISING OUT OF SLP (Crl.) NO. 13997 OF 2024]


     DASHRATH                                                           ...APPELLANT


                                                 VERSUS


     THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                                           ...RESPONDENT




                                               JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
1.            Leave granted.
2.            The judgment and order dated 3rd September, 20241 of a learned Judge of

                   the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, Bench at Aurangabad, is under

                   challenge in this criminal appeal. By the impugned order, the learned Judge

                   dismissed a criminal appeal2 carried by the appellant from the judgment of

                   conviction and order on sentence dated 26th April, 2004 of the Special

                   Judge, Parbhani3 in Special Case No.05/2000. Upon maintaining the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
INDU MARWAH
Date: 2025.05.08
18:26:16 IST
Reason:
1
impugned order
2
Crl. Appeal No. 303 of 2004
3
Special Court
1
conviction of the appellant under Sections 7 and 13(1)(d) read with 13(2)

       of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 19884, the learned Judge also upheld

       the punishment of R.I. of two years and fine of Rs.2,000/- for the offence

       punishable under Section 7, and R.I. of a year and fine of Rs.1,000/- for

       the offence punishable under Section 13, with default stipulation, imposed

       on the appellant.
3.     The facts giving rise to the incident of the offence, the trap proceedings and

       other factual details have been noted in details by the Special Court as well

       as by the High Court. We do not consider it necessary to repeat the same

       here.
4.     The conviction of the appellant as well as the sentence imposed on him are

       questioned by Ms. Meenakshi Arora, learned senior counsel for the

       appellant, by raising the following legal contentions:
i.    sanction to prosecute was mechanically granted;
ii.    investigation was conducted by an Inspector of Police (PW-4),

               although in terms of the statutory mandate contained in
Section 17
of the PC Act, no officer lower in rank than a Deputy Superintendent

               of Police can investigate the crime;
iii.   the demand was not proved and the conviction is indefensible having

               regard to the law declared by the Constitution Bench of this Court in
Neeraj Dutta v. State (NCT Delhi
)5; and

        iv.    one of the seizure witnesses was related to the complainant.
4
PC Act
5
(2023) 4 SCC 731
2
5.     Ms. Arora, in the alternative, submitted that the incident being more than

       25 years old and the appellant by passage of time having become a

       septuagenarian, the Court may consider altering the sentence, if it were not

       inclined to disturb the conviction, so that at this age the appellant is not

       made to suffer any imprisonment.
6.
In support of her contention, Ms. Arora referred to an order dated 23rd

       January, 2025 passed by a coordinate Bench of this Court in
H.P.

       Venkatesh v. State of Karnataka6
in a case also arising out of a

       conviction under the
PC Act
. There, taking into consideration the facts that

       the appellant was a sexagenarian, that the occurrence took place in 2007

       and that he had also been dismissed from service, the coordinate Bench in

       the peculiar circumstances of the case and in exercise of powers under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India, modified the sentence to 15 days

       imprisonment. She prayed for similar indulgence.
7.     Per contra, Ms. Rukhmini Bobde, learned counsel for the respondent-State,

       contended that the findings returned by the Special Court and the High

       Court are based on the evidence led in the trial and having regard to the

       answers given by the appellant to the questions in course of his examination

       under
Section 313
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19737, there could be

       little doubt that he had demanded and accepted bribe and, therefore, was

       guilty of the charges. She also submitted that the appellant had not spent

       a single night in custody and in light of the fact that maximum sentence

       permitted by law was not imposed, no interference is called for with the
6
Criminal Appeal No.1466 of 2017
7
Cr. PC
3
discretion exercised by the Special Court. She, accordingly, prayed for

     dismissal of the appeal.
8.   We have heard Ms. Arora and Ms. Bobde and perused the materials on

     record as well as a relevant ‘ORDER’ of the Government of Maharashtra,

     referred to in the judgment of the Special Court, on which we have been

     able to lay our hands through the search processes that are now available.
9.   In developing the first contention, exception has been taken by Ms. Arora

     to the sanctioning authority approving the draft order of grant of sanction

     without making any changes. From the evidence of the Sub-Divisional

     Officer, Parbhani (PW-3), being the sanctioning authority, we find a

     categorical assertion that he did not change the wording of the draft

     because he did not find it necessary.
10. We find no reason to accept the contention for the reason that follows.
11. There is a legal impediment to prosecute a public servant for corruption, if

     there be no sanction. Grant of sanction is an administrative function based

     on the subjective satisfaction of the sanctioning authority after due

     application of mind to the materials placed before him. Whether sanction

     should be granted or not is, however, not about mental satisfaction of the

     truth of the facts placed before the officer competent to grant sanction but

     all that is necessary for a sanction to be granted is for him to be satisfied

     about the existence of a prima facie case.
12. It is no longer res integra that requirement of sanction has a salutary object.
Provisions requiring sanction to prosecute, either under
Section 19
, PC Act

     or Section 197 of the (now repealed) Cr. PC or under Section 218 of the

     Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 are intended to protect an
4
innocent public servant against unwarranted and mala fide prosecution.
Indubitably, there can be no tolerance to corruption which has the effect of

       undermining core constitutional values of justice, equality, liberty and

       fraternity; however, at the same time, the need to prosecute and punish

       the corrupt is no ground to deny protection to the honest. This is what was

       held by this Court in its decision in
Manzoor Ali Khan v. Union of India8
while repelling a challenge raised in a Public Interest Litigation to the

       constitutional validity of
Section 19
of the PC Act.
13. Even otherwise, merely because there is any omission, error or irregularity

       in the matter of granting sanction, that does not affect the validity of the

       proceedings unless the court records its own satisfaction that such error,

       omission or irregularity has resulted in a failure of justice.
14. If a draft order is placed before the sanctioning authority and he is satisfied

       that nothing needs to be added/deleted therefrom, the grant of sanction

       cannot be faulted merely on the ground of absence of addition of words

       to/deletion of words from the draft. We have noticed that PW-3 made four

       minor corrections to ensure that the substance conforms to the form in

       which the sanction was required to be given, without altering the substance

       (i.e. the contents). That there has been a complete absence of application

       of mind by PW-3 is, thus, not proved; also, that there has been a failure of

       justice, has not been shown. On facts, we are satisfied that there has been

       no irregularity, far less illegality, in grant of sanction. We are, thus, not even

       required to invoke provisions of Section 465, Cr. PC.
8
(2015) 2 SCC 33
5
15. The first contention, therefore, has no merit.
16. Insofar as the second contention urged by Ms. Arora is concerned, we have

    noted that the Special Court referred to Government Order dated 19th April,

    1969 bearing no. MIS0389/767/CR-140/POL-3, issued in exercise of powers

    conferred by the 1st proviso to
Section 17
of the PC Act authorizing all the

    police inspectors in the Anti-Corruption Bureau of the State of Maharashtra

    to investigate any offence punishable thereunder. Considering such legal

    position, it was held by the Special Court there was no merit in the

    contention that investigation had not been conducted by an officer

    competent to do so.
17. Ms. Arora has taken exception by contending that the relevant Government

    Order was not brought on record in a manner known to law. Significantly, it

    is not the case of the appellant that the such an order does not at all exist.

    As
referred to above
, we have successfully searched for the relevant

    Government Order. We have found that it does exist, except that the

    relevant year of issuance thereof was mentioned in the judgment of the

    Special Court as 1969. We do not know whether the Special Court’s

    judgment does refer to the year as 1969 or the paper book version, which

    is a typed copy of the judgment of the Special Court, incorrectly mentions

    so. Whatever be the position on facts, nothing turns on it. The relevant

    Government Order was issued on 19th April, 1989, close on the heels of

    enactment of the
PC Act
. For the sake of satisfaction of the appellant, we

    quote the same hereunder:
6
ORDER


                                 Home Department,
                            Mantralaya, Bombay 400 032
                                                               Dated the 19th April 1989

         No. MIS/0389/767/CR-140/POL-3. – In exercise of the powers conferred by
         the first proviso to
section 17
of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (XLIX
         of 1988), the Government of Maharashtra hereby authorizes all the
         Inspectors of Police in the Anti-Corruption Bureau, Maharashtra State, to
         investigate any offence punishable under the said Act and to make arrest
         therefor without a warrant.
By order and in the name of the
                                            Governor of Maharashtra,

                                                         Sd/-
(S.J. Mahajan)
                                      Assistant Secretary to the Government of
                                                    Maharashtra
18. Statutory     instruments,       including      rules/regulations/orders        are

    framed/issued     through     delegated      legislative    powers    within    the

    administrative framework, which mirrors the lawmaking process of the

    legislature within its framework. The Government Order dated 19th April,

    1989 having been issued in terms of authority conferred by the first proviso

    to
Section 17
of the PC Act, it is an order having the force of a statute and

    is, therefore, law.
Section 56
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 ordains that

    a fact judicially noticeable need not be proved. In terms of Section 57

    thereof, the courts shall take judicial notice of, inter alia, all laws in force in

    the territory of India. The State Government having authorised by a general

    order, which is the law for the present case, that a police officer not below

    the rank of an Inspector of Police may investigate any offence punishable

    under the
PC Act
and PW-4 who conducted the investigation being an officer

    of the rank of Inspector of Police in the Anti-Corruption Branch, it was not
7
necessary to bring the law on record as evidence in the trial before it could

    be relied on; on the contrary, it was the duty of the special court to take

    judicial notice of such law, which it did, and we approve of such approach.

    In any event, the vires of the said Government Order not having been

    questioned by the appellant on any ground, we affirm the finding of the

    Special Court in this behalf.
19. On the question of demand not being proved and reliance placed by her on

    the decision in
Neeraj Dutta
(supra), which is the third contention

    advanced by Ms. Arora, we are simply not impressed in view of the evidence

    tendered by the witnesses for the prosecution, which are on record, as well

    as the answers given by the appellant in course of his examination under

    Section 313, Cr. PC. The demand, in our view, has been proved without a

    doubt. In fact, we appreciate the candour of the appellant while answering

    the questions when the circumstances appearing in the evidence against

    him were sought to be explained by the Special Court. He answered them

    quite frankly. However, the amount of arrears being Rs.5/- + and there

    being no material produced by the appellant, in defence, to support his

    claim that the sum of arrears were a little short of Rs.500/-, acceptance of

    Rs.500/- has not been justified particularly when it was the assertion of the

    complainant (PW-1) that after bargaining with the appellant, he had

    reduced the demand from Rs.2,000/- to Rs.500/- for making over the 7/12

    extracts. The third contention of Ms. Arora is, therefore, equally without

    merit.
20. The contention relating to the evidence of the seizure witness (PW-2) has

    also not impressed us. His evidence need not be discarded, on the facts of
8
this case, merely because he was related to the complainant, as alleged.

    The evidence of the said witness had been found creditworthy as his version

    in-chief was not shaken after thorough cross-examination. Hence, we see

    no reason to hold that by reason of mere relationship, the conviction would

    stand vitiated. In any event, even apart from the seizure witness, the other

    evidence on record do suggest that no error was committed by the Special

    Court in convicting the appellant and by the High Court in affirming such

    conviction.
21. All contentions on merit, therefore, fail.
22. Turning to the final contention regarding alteration of sentence, much

    emphasis has been laid by Ms. Arora on the advanced age of the appellant

    and the date of the incident and in line with the decision in
H.P. Venkatesh
(supra), she has urged us to exercise power under
Article 142
of the

    Constitution to relieve him of the necessity to serve his prison term.
23. At the outset, we may observe that although a proved offence under
Section

    7
of the PC Act (as it stood on the date of the offence committed by the

    appellant) carried a minimum punishment of six months and maximum of

    seven years imprisonment, with fine, and a proved offence under
Section

    13(1)(d)
read with
Section 13(2)
of the PC Act, at the time of commission

    of offence by the appellant, carried a minimum sentence of a year and a

    maximum of seven years’ imprisonment, with fine, the appellant was not

    sentenced to the maximum terms of punishment but R.I. for two years’ for

    each count of offence, to run concurrently. Since the State has not

    challenged the sentence, we say no more.
9
24. Before we proceed to consider the prayer for alteration of sentence, which

        is based on the decision in
H.P. Venkatesh
(supra), it would be profitable

        now to have a look at some of the precedents as to whether
Article 142
of

        the Constitution can be invoked for reducing the term of imprisonment lower

        than what is prescribed in the statute as the minimum punishment.
25.
Narendra Champaklal Trivedi v. State of Gujarat9
is a decision

        rendered by a coordinate Bench arising out of a case under the
PC Act
. The

        following passage is instructive:
“30. In view of the aforesaid pronouncement of law, where the minimum
               sentence is provided, we think it would not be at all appropriate to exercise
               jurisdiction under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India to reduce the
               sentence on the ground of the so-called mitigating factors as that would
               tantamount to supplanting statutory mandate and further it would amount
               to ignoring the substantive statutory provision that prescribes minimum
               sentence for a criminal act relating to demand and acceptance of bribe.
               The amount may be small but to curb and repress this kind of proclivity
               the legislature has prescribed the minimum sentence. It should be
               paramountly borne in mind that corruption at any level does not deserve
               either sympathy or leniency. In fact, reduction of the sentence would be
               adding a premium. The law does not so countenance and, rightly so,
               because corruption corrodes the spine of a nation and in the ultimate
               eventuality makes the economy sterile.”
26. Further, in
Mohd. Hashim v. State of Uttar Pradesh10
, a further

        coordinate Bench of this Court made the following pertinent observations:
“19. … We may further elaborate that when the legislature has prescribed
               minimum sentence without discretion, the same cannot be reduced by the
               courts. In such cases, imposition of minimum sentence, be it imprisonment
               or fine, is mandatory and leaves no discretion to the court. However,
               sometimes the legislation prescribes a minimum sentence but grants
               discretion and the courts, for reasons to be recorded in writing, may award
               a lower sentence or not award a sentence of imprisonment. Such discretion
               includes the discretion not to send the accused to prison. Minimum
               sentence means a sentence which must be imposed without leaving any
               discretion to the court. It means a quantum of punishment which cannot
               be reduced below the period fixed. If the sentence can be reduced to nil,
               then the statute does not prescribe a minimum sentence. A provision that
               gives discretion to the court not to award minimum sentence cannot be
9
(2012) 7 SCC 80
10
(2017) 2 SCC 198
10
equated with a provision which prescribes minimum sentence. The two
               provisions, therefore, are not identical and have different implications …”
27.
In
State of Madhya Pradesh v. Vikram Das11, another
coordinate Bench

       of this Court after referring, inter alia, to the aforesaid decisions held:
“8. In view of the aforesaid judgments that where minimum sentence is
               provided for, the court cannot impose less than the minimum sentence. It
               is also held that the provisions of
Article 142
of the Constitution cannot be
               resorted to, to impose sentence less than the minimum sentence.”
28. Law is, thus, well-settled that exercise of power conferred by
Article 142
, in

       a case such as the present where a minimum sentence is prescribed by the

       statute, cannot be tinkered, for, the same would amount to legislation by

       the Court; and, prescription of a term of sentence quite contrary to what

       the Parliament has legislated would be legally impermissible. The statutory

       prescription in relation to punishment for a minimum period, unless

       challenged, cannot be reduced by this Court even in exercise of powers

       under
Article 142
of the Constitution.
29. In any event, offences under the
PC Act
stand on a completely different

       footing. Obviously, no court, far less this Court, ought to tolerate corruption

       by public servants while discharging official duty attracting provisions of the
PC Act
. In exceptional cases, while exercising appellate jurisdiction, a court

       may, in judicious exercise of discretion and for reasons to be recorded, alter

       the sentence to serve justice for both the society and the offender. However,

       to reduce the sentence to a term of imprisonment which is not provided in

       the statute and below the minimum period, as prescribed, could be seen as

       usurpation of the function of the legislature by this Court.
11
(2019) 4 SCC 125
11
30. At the same time, we are of the view that it is only rarely, and in

    extraordinary cases, that this Court may, in the exercise of its plenary power

    to temper justice with mercy grant a convict a prison-term waiver. As and

    by way of illustration, a convict (on bail) who is too ill to understand why

    he needs to be sent to prison or too ill to be taken to prison or the like,

    could qualify for grant of extreme leniency by this Court but only on

    production of unimpeachable evidence to that effect.
31. This is not such a rare or extraordinary case where justice calls for being

    tempered with mercy and hence, we express our inability to follow
H.P.

    Venkatesh
(supra).
32. The statutory provisions contained in the
PC Act
, relating to prison terms

    that could be imposed by way of sentence at the time the appellant indulged

    in committing the offences, have been noted.
33. While affirming the conviction of the appellant under
Section 7
and
Section

    13(1)(d)
read with
Section 13(2)
, PC Act, but having regard to the date of

    the incident of offence, the advanced age of the appellant, the mental

    anxiety and continued stress that he must have experienced all these years

    induced by the pendency of proceedings, we are of the considered opinion

    that imposition of sentence of prison term for the minimum period would

    sufficiently serve the interests of justice. Accordingly, we alter the sentence

    of 2 years R. I. for the offence under
Section 7
to a term of S.I. for a year

    without, however, altering the sentence of imprisonment ordered for the

    offence under
Section 13(1)(d)
. Both sentences shall run concurrently. This

    would be in addition to the fine that has been imposed by the Special Court.

    Ordered accordingly.
12
34. The appellant shall surrender within 6 (six) weeks from date to serve his

    sentence. If not paid, the amount of fine may also be paid within such time

    as indicated above. In the event, the appellant fails to surrender and or

    make payment of the fine amount, this order of alteration of sentence shall

    stand recalled and he shall be under obligation to serve the sentence

    imposed by the trial court, i.e., term of 2 years R.I.
35. The appeal, accordingly, stands partly allowed.
36. Connected applications, if any, stand closed.
……………….…………….. J.
(DIPANKAR DATTA)




                                                      …………………….……….. J.
(MANMOHAN)

     NEW DELHI;
APRIL 24, 2025.
13