[Cites
18
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Aejaz Ahmad Sheikh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 22 April, 2025
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
,
Abhay S Oka
2025 INSC 529


                                                                           Reportable
                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2142 OF 2017

                            Aejaz Ahmad Sheikh                            … Appellant


                                                           versus


                            State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.             … Respondents


                                                            with

                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 2143-2144 OF 2017


                                                        J U D G M E N T
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1.   These appeals arise from the same impugned

                            judgment of the High Court by which one Hasim Sheikh

                            (the accused) was acquitted of the offence punishable

                            under
Section 302
of the Indian Penal Code (for short ‘the
IPC
’). The incident is very gruesome. It is the death of
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ASHISH KONDLE
Date: 2025.04.22
Amina (wife of the accused) and her three daughters,
   14:28:36 IST
   Reason:
namely, Najma, Fatima and Salma, due to burn injuries.
Criminal Appeal No. 2142 of 2017, etc.                          Page 1 of 26
Even Aslam (cousin of the accused) died due to the burn

        injuries sustained in the same incident.
2.       The accused and Amina had three daughters Najma,

        Fatima and Salma and two sons Kamar Hasim and

        Kadam. The complainant is PW-1 Aejaz Ahmad Sheikh.

        He is the real brother of the deceased Amina.        As the

        accused used to abuse and beat his deceased wife and

        deceased daughters, PW-1 visited the house of the accused

        on 26th December 2008. He made an attempt to resolve

        the issue. He was not successful. He was told to leave the

        house.          While he was leaving the house, the deceased

        Amina told him not to go as the accused and his family

        members were intending to kill her. A few hours after PW-

        1 reached his home, he received a call that the accused,

        out of anger, along with his cousin Aslam, poured kerosene

        on Amina and the three daughters and set them on fire.

        Daughter Najma died on the spot, and the other three were

        admitted to the District Hospital.       PW-1 rushed to the

        hospital and met his sister Amina, who disclosed that after
Criminal Appeal No. 2142 of 2017, etc.                       Page 2 of 26
his departure, the accused, along with Aslam, poured

        kerosene on her and three daughters and set them on fire.

        On the very same day, Aslam was also admitted to the

        hospital due to burn injuries. On 26th December 2008, the

        dying declaration of daughter Fatima was recorded by

        Tahsildar, Deoria, Harish Chandra Singh (PW-11). Fatima

        stated that her father and the village people poured

        kerosene oil and set it on fire. She blamed her paternal

        grandparents for being the root cause of the burning. On

        the same day, a dying declaration of the wife, Amina, was

        recorded by PW-11, in which she stated that the accused

        locked her and her three daughters and poured kerosene

        on her and her daughters and set them on fire. She stated

        that Najma died, and she, along with her two daughters,

        sustained burn injuries.
3.       On 26th December 2008, on the complaint of PW-1, a

        first information report was registered for the offences

        punishable under
Sections 302
,
307
and
120B
of the IPC.

        On the next day, the recovery of burnt clothes and a plastic
Criminal Appeal No. 2142 of 2017, etc.                      Page 3 of 26
can containing 100 gms. of kerosene was recovered from

        the site of the incident. On 1st January 2009, Salma died.

        On 2nd January 2009, co-accused Aslam died.        On the

        same day, Fatima succumbed to burn injuries.       On 6th

        January 2009, Amina died. All of them died due to burn

        injuries. A charge sheet was filed against the accused for

        the offences punishable under
Section 302
of the IPC.
4.       The learned Addl. District and Sessions Judge, by

        judgment dated 19th April 2014, convicted the accused.

        The learned Judge accepted the testimony of PW-5 Kamar

        Hasim, the minor son of the accused. The learned Judge

        also accepted the dying declarations of Amina and Fatima

        recorded by PW-11, Tahsildar. He held the accused guilty

        of the offence punishable under
Section 302
of the IPC.

        The learned Judge held that this case was falling under

        the category of rarest of the rare cases and proceeded to

        award capital punishment.
Criminal Appeal No. 2142 of 2017, etc.                     Page 4 of 26
5.       By the impugned judgment, the High Court not only

        declined to confirm the capital punishment but proceeded

        to acquit the accused.
6.       Criminal Appeal nos.2143-44 of 2017 has been

        preferred by the State, and Criminal Appeal no.2142 of

        2017 has been preferred by PW-1 complainant. As no one

        represented PW-1, this Court appointed learned counsel

        Shri Shubhranshu Padhi as Amicus to espouse the cause

        of PW-1. He and the counsel for the State made detailed

        submissions.
SUBMISSIONS
7.       Learned counsel appointed as amicus curiae to

        espouse the cause of the PW-1 (Appellant in Criminal

        Appeal No.2142 of 2017) has taken us through the

        depositions of the material prosecution witnesses and

        dying declarations.              He submitted that the dying

        declarations of Amina and Fatima were properly recorded

        by PW-11, Tahsildar, after obtaining a fitness certificate

        from PW-14, Dr. KC Rai. He submitted that the evidence
Criminal Appeal No. 2142 of 2017, etc.                        Page 5 of 26
of both witnesses has not been shaken in the cross-
examination. He submitted that the dying declarations

        were substantive pieces of evidence based on which the

        conviction of the accused could be based. He submitted

        that the dying declarations inspire confidence. He

        submitted that PW-1 complainant, PW-2 Rayajul Haq, PW-

        3 Sadaqat Ali and PW-4 Sajjad Ahmad have deposed that

        deceased Amina was in a condition to speak and point out

        the role of the accused. He invited our attention to the

        testimony of the PW-5, a child witness. He submitted that

        there are bound to be some minor omissions and

        contradictions in the evidence of a 15 years old boy who

        had seen his mother and three sisters being burnt by his

        father. His evidence cannot be discarded for that reason.

        Moreover, in the examination-in-chief, he deposed that he

        was threatened not to make any statement before the

        police authorities. He pointed out that though the High

        Court had held that there was no explanation for the

        severe burn injuries sustained by Aslam, PW-5 deposed

        that he was holding the victims at the time of the incident,
Criminal Appeal No. 2142 of 2017, etc.                      Page 6 of 26
which caused the burn injuries to him. Learned counsel

        submitted that the High Court had misread the medical

        evidence and came to the erroneous conclusion that Najma

        committed suicide and others were injured in the process

        of saving her. He would, therefore, submit that the guilt

        of the accused was proved beyond a reasonable doubt and,

        on reappreciation of the evidence, any court will come to a

        conclusion that the only possible finding was that the guilt

        of the accused was proved beyond a reasonable doubt.
8.         Learned counsel appearing for the first informant

        relied upon the following decisions:
i.
Raju Devade v. State of Maharashtra1
;
ii.
J. Ramulu & Anr. v. State of Andhra Pradesh2
;
and

             iii.
Balbir Singh & Anr. v. State of Punjab3

        He
also relied upon a decision of this Court in the case of
Baleshwar Mahto and Anr. v. State of Bihar and Anr.4
.
Relying upon the decision, he submitted that primacy
1
(2016) 11 SCC 673
2
(2009) 16 SCC 432
3
(2006) 12 SCC 283
4
(2017) 3 SCC 152
Criminal Appeal No. 2142 of 2017, etc.                          Page 7 of 26
must always be given to the ocular evidence and not to

        medical evidence.
9.       Learned counsel appearing for the accused pointed

        out that the evidence of dying declarations was not put to

        the accused in his statement recorded under
Section 313
of the CrPC. He relied upon a decision of this Court in the

        case of
Raj Kumar v. State (NCT of Delhi
)5.


        CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
10. We will deal with evidence of eye-witness PW-5

        Kamar Hasim, who was 15 years old at the time of

        recording his evidence. It is well settled that a minor is also

        a competent witness. This Court in the case of
P.Ramesh

        v. State6
has dealt with this issue. Under
Section 118
of

        the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (the ‘
Evidence Act
’), a minor

        is a competent witness.          In paragraph 16 of
the said

        decision
in the case of P. Ramesh, this Court held thus:
“16. In order to determine the
                      competency of a child witness, the
                      Judge has to form her or his opinion.
5
(2023) 17 SCC 95
6
(2019) 20 SCC 593
Criminal Appeal No. 2142 of 2017, etc.                         Page 8 of 26
The Judge is at liberty to test the
                      capacity of a child witness and no
                      precise rule can be laid down regarding
                      the    degree      of   intelligence    and
                      knowledge which will render the child
                      a competent witness. The competency
                      of a child witness can be ascertained by
                      questioning her/him to find out the
                      capability      to     understand       the
                      occurrence witnessed and to speak the
                      truth before the court. In criminal
                      proceedings, a person of any age is
                      competent to give evidence if she/he is
                      able to (i) understand questions put as
                      a witness; and (ii) give such answers to
                      the questions that can be understood.
A child of tender age can be allowed to
                      testify if she/he has the intellectual
                      capacity to understand questions and
                      give     rational     answers      thereto.
[
Ratansinh                    Dalsukhbhai
                      Nayak v. State of Gujarat
, (2004) 1
                      SCC 64 : 2004 SCC (Cri) 7] A child
                      becomes incompetent only in case the
                      court considers that the child was unable
                      to understand the questions and answer
                      them in a coherent and comprehensible
                      manner. [ Sarkar, Law of Evidence, 19th
                      Edn., Vol.
2, Lexis Nexis, p. 2678
                      citing
Director of Public Prosecutions v. M
,
                      1998 QB 913 : (1998) 2 WLR 604 : (1997)
                      2 All ER 749 (QBD)] If the child
                      understands the questions put to
                      her/him and gives rational answers to
                      those questions, it can be taken that
                      she/he is a competent witness to be
                      examined.”
                                                (emphasis added)
Criminal Appeal No. 2142 of 2017, etc.                               Page 9 of 26
In the case of
Pradeep v. State of Haryana7
in

        paragraphs 9 and 10, this Court held thus:
“9.    It is a well settled principle that
                      corroboration of the testimony of a child
                      witness is not a rule but a measure of
                      caution and prudence. A child witness of
                      tender age is easily susceptible to
                      tutoring. However, that by itself is no
                      ground to reject the evidence of a child
                      witness. The Court must make careful
                      scrutiny of the evidence of a child witness.
                      The Court must apply its mind to the
                      question whether there is a possibility of
                      the   child    witness    being     tutored.
                      Therefore, scrutiny of the evidence of a
                      child witness is required to be made by
                      the Court with care and caution.
10. Before recording evidence of a
                      minor, it is the duty of a Judicial
                      Officer to ask preliminary questions to
                      him with a view to ascertain whether
                      the minor can understand the
                      questions put to him and is in a
                      position to give rational answers. The
                      Judge must be satisfied that the minor
                      is able to understand the questions and
                      respond to them and understands the
                      importance of speaking the truth.
Therefore, the role of the Judge who
                      records the evidence is very crucial. He
                      has to make a proper preliminary
                      examination of the minor by putting
                      appropriate questions to ascertain
                      whether the minor is capable of
7
(2023) SCC Online SC 777
Criminal Appeal No. 2142 of 2017, etc.                               Page 10 of 26
understanding the questions put to
                      him and is able to give rational
                      answers. It is advisable to record the
                      preliminary questions and answers so
                      that the Appellate Court can go into
                      the correctness of the opinion of the
                      Trial Court.”

                                                 (emphasis added)
11.         We may note here that before administering oath to

        PW-5, even preliminary questions were not put to him by

        the learned Trial Judge for ascertaining whether he is able

        to understand the questions put to him and is in a position

        to answer the same. The learned Judge should have asked

        preliminary questions to him to ascertain whether he

        understood the importance of the oath. The learned Judge

        ought to have recorded satisfaction that the minor was

        competent to depose. However, this was not done by the

        learned Judge. He straightaway administered oath to the

        minor witness. In the deposition, it is not even mentioned

        that certain preliminary questions were put to the

        witnesses.            Thus, it is apparent that the learned Trial

        Judge administered oath to PW-5 and recorded his

        deposition             without   satisfying   himself   about      the
Criminal Appeal No. 2142 of 2017, etc.                              Page 11 of 26
competence of the minor to depose. This raises a question

        mark on the testimony of PW-5 especially when a minor

        witness can be easily tutored.
12. PW-5 deposed that PW-1 came around 4 o’clock to

        their house on the day of the incident. One Sajjad Jaif and

        one more uncle had come with him. All of them arrived in

        a jeep. Before he arrived, the accused Aslam and other

        family members were verbally abusing his mother, three

        sisters and his younger brother.          The witness further

        deposed that the accused (his father) had assaulted him.

        When PW-1 arrived, the accused, Aslam and family

        members started verbally abusing him. His father held

        PW-1’s collar and Aslam and Saiyyad were threatening to

        slap him. PW-1 told his mother that he would come on the

        next day with his maternal grandfather. He described the

        main incident as under:
“……Suddenly after that, Hasim, Saiyyad,
                      Hamid, Aslam, Ayesha, Sahdun, Shama
                      Parvez aka Gudiya, all of them came and
                      started dragging my mother and three
                      sisters towards the kitchen. After that I
Criminal Appeal No. 2142 of 2017, etc.                            Page 12 of 26
and my younger brother Kadim started
                      pulling our mother and sisters towards
                      us. Sahidun and Shama Parvez pushed
                      me and my brother away. After that my
                      younger brother sat and started crying in
                      the doorway of the outside room but I
                      continued trying to pull them towards
                      myself. Then I saw Hasim, Saiyyad,
                      Hamid, Aslam, Ayesha, Sahidun, Shama
                      Parvez aka Gudiya, they started pushing
                      my mother and sisters, and after that
                      Saiyyad, Hasim, took a huge gallon and
                      started pouring kerosene oil on them. And
                      Aslam was holding my mother and
                      sisters. After Saiyyad took a match and
                      gave it to Hasim and told him to set them
                      on fire and get rid of the trouble. As soon
                      as Hasim lit the match and threw it on my
                      mother and sisters, the fire went out of
                      control. I got very scared after seeing all
                      this. After that I thought of saving my own
                      life. When I went out from the kitchen, I
                      came across my younger brother sitting
                      and crying. I opened the door and I and
                      my younger brother Kadim ran out.”

        The witness further deposed that after he ran out of the

        house, he met Imran and requested Imran to save

        everyone. In the cross-examination, PW-5 stated that he

        was 12 years old when the incident happened and he was

        in 5th class.
Criminal Appeal No. 2142 of 2017, etc.                              Page 13 of 26
13. We find that material contradictions have been

        brought on record in the evidence of PW-5 which have been

        proved through evidence of investigating officer PW-10,

        Shri Rajiv Singh. PW-5 was confronted with the following

        statements made by him in his statement recorded under
Section 161
of CrPC:
a. On seeing the smoke during the argument and fight

                   inside, Aslam (co-accused), Shah Alam and other

                   people went in to save his sisters Najma, Fatima and

                   Salma and his mother who were burning;
b. While trying to put out the fire, Aslam also caught

                   on fire and Sayyed and Shah Alam also suffered

                   some burns. His father’s hand and body were also

                   burnt; and


               c. He did not know how the fire started.
In the evidence of PW-10, the prior statements by which

        PW-5 was confronted, have been duly proved. These are

        major          contradictions    brought   on   record.      These
Criminal Appeal No. 2142 of 2017, etc.                            Page 14 of 26
contradictions, apart from the fact that the learned Trial

        Judge did not satisfy himself about the capacity of PW-5

        to understand and answer questions, make the testimony

        of PW-5 vulnerable.
14. In the cross-examination, PW-5 stated that after the

        incident, the village Pradhan took him to police station.

        When the inspector asked him, he stated that he did not

        know anything. He admitted that he did not tell anything

        about the incident to his paternal grandparents. In the

        cross-examination, he stated that the Inspector did not

        take his statement. He stated that he was giving testimony

        about the incident for the first time three years after the

        incident. In view of what we have discussed above, it is

        unsafe to rely upon his evidence.
15. Now, we come to the dying declarations of deceased

        Fatima and Amina allegedly recorded by PW-11, who was

        the Tahsildar on duty. PW-11 in the cross-examination

        has accepted that after recording the statements of both

        the victims, he did not read over the same to the victims.
Criminal Appeal No. 2142 of 2017, etc.                    Page 15 of 26
He admitted that there is no such endorsement made on

        the statements. He also accepted that the doctor had

        simply mentioned on the dying declarations that both of

        them were “fit” and had not stated that they were in a

        condition to make a statement.
16. The most unfortunate part is that the evidence of PW-

        11 about the dying declarations made by these two victims

        has not been put to the accused in his examination under
Section 313
of CrPC. Not only that what is stated in the

        evidence by PW-11 is not put to the accused in his

        statement under
Section 313
of CrPC, but even the fact

        that the dying declarations were made by Fatima and

        Amina to PW-11 was not put to the accused.
17. According to the prosecution, the deceased Amina

        made a dying declaration even to PW-1.         Even the

        testimony of PW-1 to that effect has not been put to the

        accused in his statement under
Section 313
of CrPC.
Criminal Appeal No. 2142 of 2017, etc.                   Page 16 of 26
18. The case of the prosecution is that Amina also made

        a dying declaration before PW-2.                He stated in his

        deposition that “we found Amina Khatun in the hospital

        and she told us everything in relation to the incident.” He

        has not deposed what exactly deceased Amina told him.

        Therefore, it cannot be said that Amina made a dying

        declaration before PW-2 implicating the accused.
19. Now, coming to the evidence of PW-3, he stated that

        in hospital Amina told PW-1 that the accused and Aslam

        poured kerosene oil and set her and her daughters on fire.

        In the cross-examination, he admitted that he gave a

        statement to the investigating officer according to whatever

        PW-1 told him.                   When he was confronted with his

        statement under
Section 161
of CrPC, he admitted that his

        statement regarding the accused pouring kerosene and

        setting the deceased and her daughters on fire was made

        by him as per the narration of PW-1. Therefore, it is very

        difficult to believe the testimony of PW-3.
Criminal Appeal No. 2142 of 2017, etc.                           Page 17 of 26
20. Now, we come to the testimony of PW-4. He deposed

        that while he was in hospital, Amina informed PW-1 that

        the accused and Aslam dragged her and her daughters

        towards the room, sprinkled kerosene on them and set

        them on fire. It is pertinent to note that even this part of

        the testimony regarding dying declaration of Amina has

        not been put to the accused in the statement under
Section 313
of the CrPC. In the cross-examination, he

        stated that he visited the hospital regularly from the time

        Amina and her two daughters were admitted to the

        hospital. He admitted that though he attempted to talk to

        Amina in the hospital, she was not able to talk, and she

        just asked for water.
21.       Thus, the evidence of prosecution regarding the

        dying declaration was not put to the accused in his

        statement under
Section 313
of CrPC. The law on this

        aspect is well-settled.
In the case of
Raj Kumar v. State

        (NCT of Delhi
)5, this Court has summarised the law on his

        aspect. Paragraph 22 of
the said decision
reads thus:
Criminal Appeal No. 2142 of 2017, etc.                     Page 18 of 26
“22. The law consistently
laid down by
this Court can be summarised as under:
22.1. It is the duty of the trial court to
                      put    each     material   circumstance
                      appearing in the evidence against the
                      accused specifically, distinctively and
                      separately. The material circumstance
                      means the circumstance or the
                      material on the basis of which the
                      prosecution is seeking his conviction.

                      22.2. The object of examination of the
                      accused under Section 313 is to enable
                      the    accused    to    explain    any
                      circumstance appearing against him in
                      the evidence.
22.3. The    Court   must  ordinarily
                      eschew material circumstances not put
                      to the accused from consideration
                      while dealing with the case of the
                      particular accused.
22.4. The failure to put material
                      circumstances to the accused amounts
                      to a serious irregularity. It will vitiate
                      the trial if it is shown to have
                      prejudiced the accused.
22.5. If any irregularity in putting the
                      material circumstance to the accused
                      does not result in failure of justice, it
                      becomes a curable defect. However, while
                      deciding whether the defect can be cured,
                      one of the considerations will be the
                      passage of time from the date of the
                      incident.
Criminal Appeal No. 2142 of 2017, etc.                             Page 19 of 26
22.6. In case such irregularity is curable,
                      even the appellate court can question the
                      accused on the material circumstance
                      which is not put to him.
22.7. In a given case, the case can be
                      remanded to the trial court from the stage
                      of recording the supplementary statement
                      of the accused concerned under Section
                      313CrPC.
22.8. While     deciding    the    question
                      whether prejudice has been caused to the
                      accused because of the omission, the
                      delay in raising the contention is only one
                      of the several factors to be considered.”

                                              (emphasis added)
22. The prosecution has heavily relied upon the dying

        declarations of the two victims. As this evidence was not

        put to the accused in his statement under
Section 313
of

        the CrPC, he was denied an opportunity to explain the

        same.          Hence, this omission causes prejudice to him.

        Therefore, the evidence of dying declaration will have to be

        kept out of consideration.
23. The incident occurred on 26th December 2008. Even

        assuming that omission in recording the statement of the

        accused is curable, the question is whether, after a lapse
Criminal Appeal No. 2142 of 2017, etc.                              Page 20 of 26
of more than 14 years, the case can be remanded to the

        Trial Court for further examination of the accused under
Section 313
of the CrPC. After such a long gap of 14 years,

        it will be unjust to compel the accused to face such an

        examination. The accused has undergone incarceration

        for more than 6 years. From the date of the Trial Court

        judgment till the date of the impugned judgment, there

        was a hanging sword over him of the capital punishment.

        Therefore, we are of the view that it will be unjust now at

        this stage to pass an order of remand for recording further

        statements under
Section 313
of the CrPC. The remand at

        this stage will cause prejudice to the accused. Though we

        do not agree with some of the findings recorded by the High

        Court, it is not possible to find fault with the ultimate

        conclusion drawn by it.
24. There are two other important aspects of the case.

        Co-accused Aslam, a cousin of the accused, also suffered

        burn injuries in the incident. He died on 2nd January 2009

        with septicaemia. He suffered 40% burn injuries.        The
Criminal Appeal No. 2142 of 2017, etc.                    Page 21 of 26
prosecution also suppressed the fact that the accused also

        suffered superficial to deep burn injuries on the face and

        both forearms to the extent of 20%. This fact was brought

        to the record by the accused by examining Dr. K.C. Rai as

        a defence witness.
25. According to the prosecution's case, after pouring

        kerosene oil on the victims, the accused and Aslam were

        standing outside the room and were not allowing anybody

        to enter the room. Co-accused Aslam is himself a victim of

        the fire. There is no explanation offered by the prosecution

        of how the accused and Aslam suffered burn injuries. The

        burn injuries to Aslam proved to be fatal. This also raises

        suspicion about the prosecution's case.
26. We are dealing with an appeal against acquittal.

        After reappreciation of evidence, we find that the view

        taken by the High Court that the guilt of the accused was

        not proved beyond a reasonable doubt is a possible view

        which could have been taken on the basis of the evidence
Criminal Appeal No. 2142 of 2017, etc.                     Page 22 of 26
on record. Even assuming that another view is possible,

        that is no ground to overturn the order of acquittal.
27. It is true that the incident is very shocking in which

        a woman and her three daughters were burnt, and one of

        them died on the spot, the other three died after a few days.

        However, in the absence of legal evidence on record to

        prove the guilt of the accused beyond a reasonable doubt,

        we cannot interfere with the impugned judgment of the

        High Court.
28. Before we part with this judgment, we have a

        suggestion to make. There are several criminal appeals

        which come to this Court where we find that vital

        prosecution evidence is not put to the accused in

        statement under
Section 313
of the CrPC. The Court

        becomes helpless, as due to the long lapse of time, the

        defect cannot be cured by passing an order of remand.
In

        the case of
Raj Kumar v. State (NCT of Delhi
)5, this Court

        dealt with this issue. In paragraphs 29 and 30, this Court

        held thus:
Criminal Appeal No. 2142 of 2017, etc.                      Page 23 of 26
“29. In many criminal trials, a large
                      number of witnesses are examined, and
                      evidence is voluminous. It is true that the
                      Judicial Officers have to understand the
                      importance of Section 313. But now the
                      court is empowered to take the help of the
                      prosecutor and the defence counsel in
                      preparing relevant questions. Therefore,
                      when the trial Judge prepares questions
                      to be put to the accused under Section
                      313, before putting the questions to the
                      accused, the Judge can always provide
                      copies of the said questions to the learned
                      Public Prosecutor as well as the learned
                      defence counsel and seek their assistance
                      for ensuring that every relevant material
                      circumstance appearing against the
                      accused is put to him. When the Judge
                      seeks the assistance of the prosecutor
                      and the defence lawyer, the lawyers must
                      act as the officers of the court and not as
                      mouthpieces of their respective clients.
                      While recording the statement under
                      Section 313CrPC in cases involving a
                      large number of prosecution witnesses,
                      the Judicial Officers will be well advised
                      to take benefit of sub-section (5) of
                      Section 313CrPC, which will ensure that
                      the chances of committing errors and
                      omissions are minimised.
30.
In 1951, while delivering the verdict
                      in
Tara Singh [Tara Singh v. State
, 1951
                      SCC 903 : 1951 SCC OnLine SC 49] , this
                      Court lamented that in many cases, scant
                      attention is paid to the salutary provision
Criminal Appeal No. 2142 of 2017, etc.                              Page 24 of 26
of Section 342CrPC, 1898. We are sorry to
                      note that the situation continues to be the
                      same after 72 years as we see such
                      defaults in large number of cases. The
                      National     and    the   State    Judicial
                      Academies must take a note of this
                      situation. The Registry shall forward a
                      copy of this decision to the National and
                      all the State Judicial Academies.”


        We want to supplement what is reproduced above. When

        an appeal against conviction is preferred before the High

        Court, at the earliest stage, the High Court must examine

        whether there is a proper statement of the accused

        recorded under
Section 313
of CrPC (Section 351 of the

        Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023). If any defect

        is found, at that stage, the same can be cured either by

        High Court recording further statement or by directing the

        Trial Court to record. If this approach is adopted, the

        argument of delay and prejudice will not be available to the

        accused.
Criminal Appeal No. 2142 of 2017, etc.                              Page 25 of 26
29. We must record our appreciation for the very

        valuable assistance rendered by Mr. Shubhranshu Padhi,

        appointed as amicus curiae.
30. The appeals are, accordingly, dismissed.
…........………………….J.
                                         (Abhay S Oka)


                                          ....………..……………...J.
                                         (Pankaj Mithal)


                                         ……......………………….J.
                                         (Ahsanuddin Amanullah)

        New Delhi;
April 22, 2025.
Criminal Appeal No. 2142 of 2017, etc.                  Page 26 of 26