[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Chatha Service Station vs Lalmati Devi on 8 April, 2025
Author:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
2025 INSC 468




                                                                           Reportable

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   Civil Appeal Nos.____________of 2025
                            (@ Special Leave Petition (C) Nos.25789-25792/2019)


                            M/S. CHATHA SERVICE STATION
                                                                      …APPELLANT (S)
                                                            VERSUS
                            LALMATI DEVI & ORS.
                                                                     …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                      JUDGMENT
K. VINOD CHANDRAN, J.
1.     Leave granted.
2.     The above four appeals are filed from the orders in

                            two first appeals by the High Court of Punjab and

                            Haryana, arising from two separate orders of the Motor

                            Accidents Claims Tribunal and the orders in two Review

                            Applications filed from the aforesaid orders in first
Signature Not Verified   appeals, both of which stood rejected.
Digitally signed by
Nirmala Negi
Date: 2025.04.08
17:43:24 IST
Reason:
Page 1 of 20
C.A. @ SLP (C) No. 25789-25792 of 2019
3.     Before us, the appeals are filed by the owner of the

offending vehicle involved in the motor accident, in

which the breadwinners of the claimants’ family, who

were respectively; riding a bicycle and a pedestrian,

died in the accident involving an oil tanker. The First

Information Report was registered against the driver of

the oil tanker which was rashly and negligently driven,

by reason of which it hit the bicyclist and the pedestrian.

The Tribunal found negligence based on the FIR

registered and the deposition of CW2, who was an eye-

witness. Ext. C1-FIR and Ext.C3-Charge Sheet points to

the rash and negligent driving of the oil tanker, which

stands corroborated by the deposition of CW2: eye-

witness. The awards were passed in both the claim

petitions, the quantum of which has not been challenged

by the owner of the offending vehicle; the oil tanker,

either in the High Court or this Court. Having fixed the

quantum, the Tribunal directed the insurance company
Page 2 of 20
C.A. @ SLP (C) No. 25789-25792 of 2019
to pay the award amounts and recover it from the owner

and driver of the offending vehicle, since the driver did

not have a valid licence to drive a vehicle carrying

dangerous and hazardous goods. Appeals were filed

before the High Court by the owner of the oil tanker,

against the order to pay and recover. The review

applications were also filed against the very same

direction by the owner of the oil tanker; the offending

vehicle, both of which stood rejected.
4.        Before us, the learned Counsel appearing for the

appellant only argued on the direction to pay and

recover as issued to the insurance company. It was

argued based on decisions of different High Courts that

as long as there is no case that the accident occurred due

to the dangerous and hazardous goods carried in the

vehicle, the absence of an endorsement as required

under Rule 9 of Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 19891,
1
“the Rules
Page 3 of 20
C.A. @ SLP (C) No. 25789-25792 of 2019
would not result in a finding of breach of the policy

conditions. The vehicle at the time of accident was not

carrying any dangerous or hazardous goods, is also the

submission. Moreover, the learned Counsel for the

appellant, also pointed out that there was a certificate

produced in the first appeal which indicated that the

driver had undergone the three days training course,

which equipped him to drive the offending vehicle even

when it was loaded and the absence of an endorsement

is a venial breach.
5.        The learned Counsel for the insurance company

pointed out that under Rule 14 of the Motor Vehicles Act,

19882, the driver of a goods vehicle carrying dangerous

and hazardous goods is required to undergo a training

as prescribed under Rule 9 of the Rules and is further

required to get an endorsement of such training having

been undergone, in the transport vehicle license
2
“the Act”
Page 4 of 20
C.A. @ SLP (C) No. 25789-25792 of 2019
possessed by him. The driver who was examined before

the Tribunal clearly accepted that there was no such

endorsement made in his driving licence. The driver

also stated that at the time of the accident, there was oil

carried in the tanker. The respondent-insurer submits

that the High Court has rightly declined reliance on the

training certificate produced in the first appeal, finding

it to be not acceptable as per Order 41 Rule 27 of the

Civil Procedure Code, 19083 and further, emphasised

the absence of an endorsement made in the driving

licence.
6.         We have looked at Section 14 of the Act, the proviso

to which; as it stood at the time of the accident, restricted

the validity of a license to drive a transport vehicle

carrying goods of dangerous and hazardous nature to

one year and required a one day refresher course in the

prescribed syllabus, for its renewal. Pertinent is Section
3
“
the C.P.C
.”
Page 5 of 20
C.A. @ SLP (C) No. 25789-25792 of 2019
11, with the nominal heading ‘Additions to driving

license’, sub-section (1) of which requires any addition to

an existing license to drive any class or description of

motor vehicle to be procured by making an application

for the same to any licensing authority in the State and

sub-section         (2)       makes   the   consideration   of   the

application so filed, subject to the rules prescribed by

the Central Government and the provisions of
Section 9
;

which provision speaks generally about ‘Grant of driving

license’.
7.        We will first notice the decisions of the High Courts

relied on by the appellant before us.                 In
National

Insurance Co. Ltd. v. K. Ramasamy4
, the High Court of

Judicature at Madras was concerned with a similar case

where breach was alleged by the insurer for reason of

absence of endorsement as prescribed under Rule 9 of

the Rules, in the heavy goods vehicle licence obtained
4
2006 SCC OnLine Mad 963
Page 6 of 20
C.A. @ SLP (C) No. 25789-25792 of 2019
by the driver of the offending vehicle. It was held by the

learned Single Judge that it was for the insurer to

establish breach and even when it is so established the

insurer would not be allowed to avoid its liability unless

the said breach is so fundamental to have contributed to

the cause of the accident; which the absence of

endorsement does not qualify as fundamental. The

reasoning was also that the purpose of the training was

to equip the driver to meet exigencies of spillage of the

dangerous or hazardous goods transported in the

vehicle. It was held on the facts of that case, the accident

occurred only by reason of the rash and negligent

driving of the vehicle and the absence of training cannot

be attributed as a cause of the accident.
8.        Reliance was also placed on
National Insurance

Co. Ltd vs. Swaran Singh5
to hold that “the main purpose

of the qualification and training prescribed in Rule 9 of the
5
(2004) 3 SCC 297
Page 7 of 20
C.A. @ SLP (C) No. 25789-25792 of 2019
Rules seems to equip the driver of the tanker lorries

transporting hazardous substances to meet certain

emergencies and to make him aware of certain basic

emergency procedures, in case if any spillage of

hazardous substances transported in the vehicle is caused

due to an accident.” (sic). We are afraid, the High Court

erroneously made the above observations, despite

extracting Rule 9; as we will shortly demonstrate, and

failed to appreciate that there was no extraneous cause

attributable to the accident, as spoken of in Swaran

Singh5, but for the defective driving of the goods vehicle

carrying hazardous goods, the driving of which itself

would require special training.
9.        Likewise in
United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. A.

Verlaxmi6
, the Chhattisgarh High Court considering the

absence of an endorsement under          Rule 9 held that the

endorsement neither increases the efficiency of the
6
2013 SCC OnLine Chh 272
Page 8 of 20
C.A. @ SLP (C) No. 25789-25792 of 2019
driver nor by its absence reduces such efficiency in any

manner. It was categorically held that “for driving such a

vehicle, no further expertise or driving skill is required,”

(sic) which interpretation unfortunately does not flow

from a plain reading of Rule 9 and the syllabus

prescribed therein.
10.       The Punjab and Haryana High Court also in
National Insurance Company v. Harbans Kaur7
, held

that “perusal of Rule 9 of the Rules would make it evident

that before a driver can file an application for obtaining

necessary endorsement as required under sub-rule (3) of

Rule 9 of the Rules, he is to undergo some training for a

period of two to three days but the same does not deal with

the professional skill of driving. With regard to

professional skill of driving, it has already been clarified

by the licensing authority at the time of granting licence to

the driver authorizing him to drive a transport vehicle”
7
FAO Nos. 1210 & 8292 of 2004 decided on 26.03.2018
Page 9 of 20
C.A. @ SLP (C) No. 25789-25792 of 2019
(sic). Rule 9 as we will presently see demonstrates

otherwise and deals with the professional skill of driving

a specially designed vehicle carrying dangerous or

hazardous goods.
11.    Rule 9 requires that “any person driving a goods

carriage carrying goods of dangerous or hazardous nature

to human life shall, in addition to being the holder of a

driving licence to drive a transport vehicle, also has the

ability to read and write at least one Indian language

specified in the VIIIth Schedule of the Constitution of India

and English and also possess a certificate of having

successfully passed a course consisting of the syllabus

detailed thereunder”. The syllabus stipulated cannot be

found to be that which is confined to proper care being

taken of the dangerous or hazardous goods carried in the

vehicle; which is only one part of the three-part syllabus

tabulated in the Rules as parts ‘A’, ‘B’ & ‘C’. Parts ‘A’ &

‘B’ specifically emphasise the driving skill and efficiency
Page 10 of 20
C.A. @ SLP (C) No. 25789-25792 of 2019
that is required while carrying dangerous or hazardous

goods; the Product Safety, including Product Information

and Emergency Procedures having been delineated in

Part ‘C’. The syllabus in Part ‘A’ includes defensive

driving and Part ‘B’ is with respect to advanced driving

skills and training. Under ‘Product Safety’ comes the

emergency procedures to deal with spillage handling,

firefighting, toxic release control, first aid, use of

protective equipment etc. The statute having provided

for a course of three days and the rules having

prescribed the syllabus; which prescription is not

confined to the product safety or safe handling of goods,

while in transportation or when put in danger, we cannot

find the absence of such endorsement of the training

course having been undertaken to be a venial breach,

not absolving the Insurance Company of its liability.
12.    We have to also emphasise that in the present case,

the tanker was carrying oil; for which it is intended, while
Page 11 of 20
C.A. @ SLP (C) No. 25789-25792 of 2019
the accident occurred. We hasten to add that we may not

be misunderstood as agreeing to the corollary to the

argument that a licence holder without the endorsement

under Rule 9, could drive an empty goods vehicle

intended       to    carry      hazardous       goods,    designed

specifically for that purpose. The breach of non-

compliance of the statutory requirement to undergo a

training course to upskill the driving efficiency and

product safety cannot be brushed aside as a technical

breach not contributing to the accident.
13.    We are conscious of the fact that
Section 10
enumerates the various classes of vehicles for which

license is granted and goods vehicle, simpliciter and

those designed to carry dangerous and hazardous

goods, fall within the class of ‘transport vehicle’. Clause
(j) of
Section 10(2)
specifically speaks of ‘motor vehicle

of a specified description’.
Section 11
; in relation to

additions to driving licence, speaks of an existing
Page 12 of 20
C.A. @ SLP (C) No. 25789-25792 of 2019
driving licence to which any other class or description of

motor vehicles can be added entitling the holder to thus

drive a motor vehicle of more than one class or

description. By the use of the words ‘class’ or

‘description’ independently, it is clear that the statute

has used it disjunctively and not alternatively.       This

interpretation is in tune with the statutory scheme, which

defines under
Section 2
of the definition clause, vehicles

of varying description like goods vehicle, heavy

passenger vehicle medium goods vehicle and so on and

so forth.
14.    Further,
Section 41
dealing with how registrations

are to be carried out, by sub-section (4) empowers the

Central Government to specify the type of motor

vehicles, having regard to the design, construction and

use of motor vehicles and bring out notifications in the

Official Gazette, specifying the type of a motor vehicle to

be included in the registration certificate along with
Page 13 of 20
C.A. @ SLP (C) No. 25789-25792 of 2019
other particulars required. The Central Government has

brought out notifications under the above provision,

presently vide S.O.1248 (E) dated 05.11.2004, which

specifies good carriers, trucks, tankers or mail carriers

as a different type of vehicle.          It is with the above

description in mind that we have to look at Rule 9 of the

Rules.
15.    Swaran Singh5 distinguished an ‘effective licence’

as used in Section 3 of the Act and the words ‘duly

licenced’ used in Section 149 of the Act; as it existed

before the amendment of 2019.              The said decision

considered the various contingencies in which the

insurer could absolve themselves from their liability to

indemnify. These contingencies were in relation to the

driver of the offending vehicle, (i) having a licence of one

type, at the time of accident driving another type of

vehicle (ii) procuring a fake licence; (iii) possessing a

learner’s licence and (iv) admittedly having not obtained
Page 14 of 20
C.A. @ SLP (C) No. 25789-25792 of 2019
a license. We are concerned in the present case, with a

situation where the driver of the offending goods vehicle

having licence to drive a transport vehicle, under which

class a goods vehicle falls; which however does not

enable him to drive a goods vehicle carrying dangerous

& hazardous goods. To enable this a transport vehicle

licence holder; which vehicle includes the description of

a goods carriage vehicle, will have to submit an

application and obtain an endorsement under
Section 11
read with Rule 9 of the Act and Rules. As has been held

in Swaran Singh5 it is incumbent on the Court/Tribunal

considering a case of a licensee driving another type of

vehicle, for which he has not obtained a licence, to take

a decision as to whether this fact was the main or

contributory cause of negligence.        This factum of

absence of licence to drive another type of vehicle is

inconsequential if that is not the main or contributory

cause of accident. It was so held in Swaran Singh5:
Page 15 of 20
C.A. @ SLP (C) No. 25789-25792 of 2019
        “… In each case, on evidence led before the
        Tribunal, a decision has to be taken whether the
        fact of the driver possessing licence for one type
        of vehicle but found driving another type of
        vehicle, was the main or contributory cause of
        accident. If on facts, it is found that the accident
        was caused solely because of some other
        unforeseen         or     intervening   causes    like
        mechanical failures and similar other causes
        having no nexus with the driver not possessing
        requisite type of licence, the insurer will not be
        allowed to avoid its liability merely for technical
        breach       of   conditions     concerning   driving
        licence.” [sic. Para 89]
16.    In the present case there was a contention taken by

the driver of the vehicle who was examined before the

Tribunal that he swerved the vehicle to save pedestrians

and this caused the accident. However, the deposition

of CW2, the eye-witness goes contrary to the said self-

serving statement of the driver, coupled with the fact that

the charge sheet also was against the driver, for the
Page 16 of 20
C.A. @ SLP (C) No. 25789-25792 of 2019
offence of causing death by reason of rash and negligent

driving. The eye-witness clearly deposed that the

accident was caused by the reason of “rash and

negligent driving of the vehicle” which the driver was

not entitled to drive for reason of lack of endorsement on

his licence as required under
Section 11
read with Rule

9 of the Act and Rules.
17.    Admittedly, the driver did not have a licence as

required under the Act and the Rules to drive a vehicle

carrying dangerous and hazardous goods. There is also

no dispute that the offending vehicle; the oil tanker, was

a vehicle intended to carry goods of dangerous and

hazardous nature. The contention taken by the owner of

the offending vehicle that there was no goods carried at

the time of the accident, was negated by both the

Tribunal and the High Court finding from the testimony

of the driver that it was carrying oil at the relevant time.
Page 17 of 20
C.A. @ SLP (C) No. 25789-25792 of 2019
18.    We also perfectly agree with the findings of the

High Court that the production of the certificate at the

stage of the appeal is not worthy of acceptance looking

at the contours of
Order 41 Rule 27 of the C.P.C
.

Admittedly, the certificate was not produced before the

Tribunal and hence, there is no question arising of the

Court from which the appeal arises having refused to

accept the evidence proffered. There was also no

explanation for non-production of the certificate before

the Tribunal; which was produced at the appellate stage

for the first time. Only if there is a satisfactory

explanation for the non-production before the original

court, i.e. despite exercise of due diligence or the same

was not within the knowledge of the party or it could not

be produced despite exercise of due diligence, could

there be an acceptance of the document at the appellate

stage. In the present case, not only was there any

explanation offered by the owner of the vehicle, but also
Page 18 of 20
C.A. @ SLP (C) No. 25789-25792 of 2019
the driver was present before the Tribunal and

examined; when such a contention was not taken by him.

The transport vehicle driving licence produced by the

driver, admittedly did not have an endorsement. The

driver also did not have a claim that he had undergone a

training as prescribed under the Rules; despite being

cross-examined on the point of absence of a valid

license.
19.    This raises genuine suspicion on the veracity of the

certificate produced at the appellate stage. We have

looked at the certificate as pointed out by the learned

Counsel, a copy of which is available in the record. The

document certifies the driver to have successfully

completed        a   three-day       training course     between

13.01.2012 to 16.01.2012 in line with Rule 9 of the Rules.

It is also seen from the certificate that the institution is

approved by the Punjab Government. However, we have

to notice that there is no serial number of issuance in the
Page 19 of 20
C.A. @ SLP (C) No. 25789-25792 of 2019
said document nor is there a round seal of the institution

which issued the certificate affixed. The licence of the

driver also did not have an endorsement as required

under the Act. We find absolutely no reason to entertain

the appeals and dismiss the same affirming the direction

to the insurance company to pay the amounts to the

claimants and recover it from the owner of the oil-tanker.
20.    Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed

of.
……………..……………, J.
[SUDHANSHU DHULIA]



                                         ……………..……………, J.
[K. VINOD CHANDRAN]

NEW DELHI;
APRIL 08, 2025.
Page 20 of 20
C.A. @ SLP (C) No. 25789-25792 of 2019