[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sushila vs State Of U.P on 16 April, 2025
Author:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
Bench:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
,
Sanjay Karol
1


2025 INSC 505
                                                                      REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(s). __________ OF 2025
                               (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No(s). 270 of 2022)


             SUSHILA & ORS.                                       ... APPELLANTS


                                                 VERSUS


             STATE OF U.P. & ORS.                                ...RESPONDENTS


                                             JUDGMENT
PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA, J.
Leave granted.
2.             Under the impugned order, the High Court has disposed of

             the appellants’ prayer for quashing of the summoning order

             dated 23.04.2018 issued by the Trial Court in Complaint Case

             No. 2789 of 2015 under Sections 498A, 323, 504, 506 of the
Signature Not Verified
Indian Pernal Code, 18601 and Section 4 of the Dowry
Digitally signed by
SAPNA BISHT
Date: 2025.04.17
17:26:18 IST
Reason:
1
‘
IPC
’
2
Prohibition Act, 1961
without deciding the quashing petition on

merits.
3.   Kumar Saurabh is the husband of respondent no. 2 (Smt.

Charusmita) and the appellants are the relatives of Kumar

Saurabh. The appellant no.1 - Sushila is the mother, appellant

no. 2- Shailendra Dablu is the elder brother, appellant no. 3-

Seema is the sister-in-law, appellant no. 4- Kulshreshtha

Upadhyay is the elder brother and appellant no. 5 – Kanak is

the sister of Kumar Saurabh. Kumar Saurabh and respondent

no. 2 (Smt. Charusmita) were married on 17.06.2010. After

the marriage, they lived in Kota (Rajasthan) for a brief period

before she left the matrimonial home in October, 2010 taking

away all her possessions including stridhan and started living

with her parents.
4.   It is the case of the appellants that effort made by Kumar

Saurabh to bring back respondent no. 2 to resume matrimonial

life was not successful, compelling him to prefer a divorce

petition in the court of Family Judge, Kota, Rajasthan bearing

Case No. 476 of 2011. Respondent no. 2 failed to appear

before the Family Court despite receiving notice resulting in an

ex-parte divorce decree dated 31.05.2012 passed by the
3
Family Court, Kota. After about 03 years from the date of

passing of the divorce decree, respondent no. 2 moved an

application under
Section 156(3)
Cr.P.C. before the Chief

Judicial Magistrate, Gautam Budh Nagar for registration of a

criminal case and making investigation. The said application

was treated as a complaint case wherein after recording

statement of respondent no. 2 and other witnesses, the learned

Magistrate issued summoning order on 23.04.2018 against the

appellants under
Section 498A
IPC.
5.   Being aggrieved, the appellants approached the High

Court by filing a petition under
Section 482
Cr.P.C for quashing

the summoning order which was dismissed vide impugned

order.
6.   It is argued that the learned Magistrate has taken

cognizance against the appellants without there being any

specific allegation against any one of them and only bald

statement has been made against the appellants stating that

they are also involved in harassing respondent no. 2 by

demanding dowry.
7.   Per contra, learned counsel for the respondents would

support the impugned order on submission that the appellants
4
being relatives of the husband were also involved in illtreating

respondent no. 2 and the truth will emerge during trial.

According to him, the present is not a fit case for quashing the

complaint at the threshold.
8.   A reading of the complaint (Annexure P-2) would reveal

that the marriage took place on 17.06.2010 and the couple

stayed at Varanasi for five days and proceeded to live in Kota

on and from 22.06.2010 where they lived for most of the time.

The complainant returned from Kota in October, 2010 and

thereafter, it is said that on 16.08.2015 the appellants came to

her house at Kota and demanded dowry by threatening and

illtreating her. It is also alleged that they snatched her

Mangalsutra and ran away.
9.   Admittedly, the marriage has already been dissolved by a

decree of divorce passed on 31.05.2012 and the present

complaint was filed after three years of divorce. Except for the

bald statement against the appellants, the other allegations are

against the husband.            There is absolutely no reason or

justification   as   to   why    the       appellants   would   try   for   a

reconciliation by visiting the house of the complainant on

16.08.2015 when the divorce has already taken place by order
5
dated 31.05.2012. Even if such an incident has happened on

16.08.2015, the fact remains that on the said date the

relationship of husband and wife has already come to an end as

such the appellants being relatives of the husband cannot be

proceeded for offence under
Section 498A
IPC and
Section 4
of

the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961.
10. This Court in the matter of
Geeta Mehrotra & Anr. vs.

State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.2
has deprecated the practice

of involving the relatives of the husband for the offence under
Section 498A
IPC and
Section 4
of Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961.

The following has been held in para 18:
“18. Their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Ramesh
               case [(2005) 3 SCC 507 : 2005 SCC (Cri) 735] had
               been pleased to hold that the bald allegations made
               against the sister-in-law by the complainant appeared
               to suggest the anxiety of the informant to rope in as
               many of the husband's relatives as possible. It was held
               that neither the FIR nor the charge-sheet furnished the
               legal basis for the Magistrate to take cognizance of the
               offences alleged against the appellants. The learned
               Judges were pleased to hold that looking to the
               allegations in the FIR and the contents of the charge-
               sheet, none of the alleged offences under Sections 498-
               A, 406
IPC
and
Section 4
of the Dowry Prohibition Act
               were made against the married sister of the
               complainant's husband who was undisputedly not living
               with the family of the complainant's husband. Their
               Lordships of the Supreme Court were pleased to hold
               that the High Court ought not to have relegated the
               sister-in-law to the ordeal of trial. Accordingly, the
2
(2012) 10 SCC 741
6
proceedings against the appellants were quashed and
               the appeal was allowed.”
11.
In a recent judgment in the matter of
Dara Lakshmi

Narayana & Ors. vs. State of Telangana & Anr.3
, this Court

has again reiterated and deprecated the practice of involving

the relatives of the husband in dowry related matters. The

following has been held in paras 24, 25, 28, 30, 31 & 32:
“24. Insofar as appellant Nos.2 to 6 are concerned, we
               find that they have no connection to the matter at hand
               and have been dragged into the web of crime without
               any rhyme or reason. A perusal of the FIR would
               indicate that no substantial and specific allegations
               have been made against appellant Nos.2 to 6 other
               than stating that they used to instigate appellant No.1
               for demanding more dowry. It is also an admitted fact
               that they never resided with the couple namely
               appellant No.1 and respondent No.2 and their children.
               Appellant Nos.2 and 3 resided together at Guntakal,
               Andhra Pradesh. Appellant Nos.4 to 6 live in Nellore,
               Bengaluru and Guntur respectively.
25. A mere reference to the names of family members
               in a criminal case arising out of a matrimonial dispute,
               without specific allegations indicating their active
               involvement should be nipped in the bud. It is a well-
recognised fact, borne out of judicial experience, that
               there is often a tendency to implicate all the members
               of the husband’s family when domestic disputes arise
               out of a matrimonial discord. Such generalised and
               sweeping accusations unsupported by concrete
               evidence or particularised allegations cannot form the
               basis for criminal prosecution. Courts must exercise
               caution in such cases to prevent misuse of legal
               provisions and the legal process and avoid unnecessary
               harassment of innocent family members. In the present
               case, appellant Nos.2 to 6, who are the members of the
               family of appellant No.1 have been living in different
               cities and have not resided in the matrimonial house of
3
(2024) INSC 953: (2024) 12 SCR 559
7
appellant No.1 and respondent No.2 herein. Hence,
they cannot be dragged into criminal prosecution and
the same would be an abuse of the process of the law
in the absence of specific allegations made against each
of them.
28. The inclusion of
Section 498A
of the IPC by way of
an amendment was intended to curb cruelty inflicted on
a woman by her husband and his family, ensuring swift
intervention by the State. However, in recent years, as
there have been a notable rise in matrimonial disputes
across the country, accompanied by growing discord
and tension within the institution of marriage,
consequently, there has been a growing tendency to
misuse provisions like
Section 498A
of the IPC as a tool
for unleashing personal vendetta against the husband
and his family by a wife. Making vague and generalised
allegations during matrimonial conflicts, if not
scrutinized, will lead to the misuse of legal processes
and an encouragement for use of arm twisting tactics
by a wife and/or her family. Sometimes, recourse is
taken to invoke
Section 498A
of the IPC against the
husband and his family in order to seek compliance
with    the   unreasonable    demands     of   a   wife.
Consequently, this Court has, time and again, cautioned
against prosecuting the husband and his family in the
absence of a clear prima facie case against them.
30.
In the above context, this Court in
G.V. Rao vs.
L.H.V. Prasad
(2000) 3 SCC 693 observed as follows:
“12. There has been an outburst of
     matrimonial disputes in recent times. Marriage
     is a sacred ceremony, the main purpose of
     which is to enable the young couple to settle
     572 [2024] 12 S.C.R. Digital Supreme Court
     Reports down in life and live peacefully. But
     little matrimonial skirmishes suddenly erupt
     which often assume serious proportions
     resulting in commission of heinous crimes in
     which elders of the family are also involved
     with the result that those who could have
     counselled and brought about rapprochement
     are rendered helpless on their being arrayed
     as accused in the criminal case. There are
     many other reasons which need not be
     mentioned     here    for   not    encouraging
     matrimonial litigation so that the parties may
8
ponder over their defaults and terminate their
              disputes amicably by mutual agreement
              instead of fighting it out in a court of law
              where it takes years and years to conclude
              and in that process the parties lose their
              “young” days in chasing their “cases” in
              different courts.”
31. Further, this Court in
Preeti Gupta vs. State of
        Jharkhand
(2010) 7 SCC 667 held that the courts have
        to be extremely careful and cautious in dealing with
        these complaints and must take pragmatic realties into
        consideration while dealing with matrimonial cases. The
        allegations of harassment by the husband’s close
        relatives who had been living in different cities and
        never visited or rarely visited the place where the
        complainant resided would have an entirely different
        complexion. The allegations of the complainant are
        required to be scrutinized with great care and
        circumspection.
32. We, therefore, are of the opinion that the impugned
        FIR No.82 of 2022 filed by respondent No.2 was
        initiated with ulterior motives to settle personal scores
        and grudges against appellant No.1 and his family
        members i.e., appellant Nos.2 to 6 herein. Hence, the
        present case at hand falls within category (7) of
        illustrative parameters highlighted in Bhajan Lal.
        Therefore, the High Court, in the present case, erred in
        not exercising the powers available to it under
Section
        482
CrPC and thereby failed to prevent abuse of the
        Court’s process by continuing the criminal prosecution
        against the appellants.”
12.          Having examined the allegations in the present case

vis-à-vis the law settled by this Court in
Geeta Mehrotra
(supra) &
Dara Lakshmi Narayana
(supra), we have no

hesitation    in   holding   that   the   present    appellants     have

unnecessarily been roped in the complaint without there being
9
any specific allegation against them for any incident which had

taken place between the husband and the wife during

subsistence of marriage and the period when they stayed

together at Kota. As a matter of fact, the complaint is largely

devoted to the ill-treatment committed by the husband and the

only reference to the appellants is made for the incident dated

16.08.2015 at her own house at NOIDA. However, by that time,

the ex-parte decree of divorce has already been passed. In

such view of the matter, we are of the considered view that

allowing the trial to proceed against the appellants shall

amount to vexatious trial only for the reason that they are

relatives of the husband.
Accordingly, we quash the Complaint

Case No. 2789 of 2015 against the appellants. The appeal

stands allowed.
………………………………………J.
                                 (SANJAY KAROL)


                               .......……………………………….J.
                             (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA)
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 16, 2025.