[Cites
23
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Lilaben vs State Of Gujarat on 21 April, 2025
Author:
Sanjay Karol
Bench:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
,
Sanjay Karol
2025 INSC 519




                                                                        NON- REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2101 OF 2025
                                       (Arising out of SLP(Crl) No.18017 of 2024)


                            LILABEN                                       … APPELLANT(S)


                                                            Versus


                            STATE OF GUJARAT & ANR.                      … RESPONDENT(S)




                                                         JUDGMENT
SANJAY KAROL J.
Leave Granted
2.      This appeal is at the instance of the mother of a minor,
                            who was a victim of sexual assault in connection with which a
Signature Not Verified   First      Information          Report,   bearing   particulars         -
Digitally signed by
No.11215003220383, PS Anklav, District Anand, under
   RAJNI MUKHI
   Date: 2025.04.21
   18:09:41 IST
   Reason:
Crl A. @ SLP(Crl) No. 18017 of 2024                      Page 1 of 10
Sections 363
,
366
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and Section
18 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act,
20121, was registered. After investigation, the accused person,
who is Respondent No.2 before this Court, was convicted by the
Trial Court2. The sentence handed down to him was as under :
“In the proceedings of Special POCSO case
         No.66/2022, the Accused Jigresh Kumar alias Jigo
         Rajubhai Padhiyar, Aged 23 years, Occupation Labour,
         Residing at Asodar, Udu Faliyu, Taluka Anlav, District
         Anand is held liable for the guilty of offences punishable
         under
Sections 363
,
366(A)
,
376(3)
of the IPC and
Section
         6
of the POCSO Act in connection with Crime Register
         No.11215003220383/22, dated 4.8.22 registered with
         Anklav Police Station under
Section 235(1)
of the Code of
         Criminal Procedure.
It is hereby ordered that accused Jigresh Kumar alias
         Jigo Rajubhai Padhiyar shall suffer rigorous imprisonment
         for the term of three years and fine of Rs.1,000 (Rupees
         One Thousand only) for the offence under Section 363 of
         the I.P. Code under
Section 235(2)
of the Criminal
         Procedure Code and in case of failure to pay amount of
         fine, accuse shall suffer additional simple imprisonment of
         one month.
It is hereby ordered that accused Jigresh Kumar alias
         Jigo Rajubhai Padhiyar shall suffer rigorous imprisonment
         for the term of five years and fine of Rs.2,000 (Rupees
         Two Thousand only) for the offence under 366(A) of the
         I.P. Code under
Section 235(2)
of the Criminal Procedure
         Code and in case of failure to pay amount of fine, accuse
         shall suffer additional simple imprisonment for two
         months.
It is hereby ordered accused Jigresh Kumar alias
         Jigo Rajubhai Padhiyar shall suffer rigorous imprisonment

1 ‘
POCSO Act
’
2 Special POCSO Judge and Additional Sessions Judge, Anand at Anand in Sp. POCSO
Case No. 66 of 2022
Crl A. @ SLP(Crl) No. 18017 of 2024                                  Page 2 of 10
for the term of 20 years (twenty years) and fine of
         Rs.5,000 (Rupees Five Thousand only) for the offence
         under
Section 6
of the POCSO Act and in case of failure to
         pay amount of fine, accused shall suffer additional simple
         imprisonment for three months.
The accused Jigresh Kumar alias Jigo Rajubhai
         Padhiyar is hereby ordered to suffer imprisonment
         concurrently and imprisonment suffered during the trial as
         Kachcha prisoner is ordered to be set off. ......”
3.      He approached the High Court seeking suspension of
sentence.3 The Learned Division Bench observed that the age
of the victim is in doubt. The records of the Panchayat and the
Birth Certificate were produced before the Trial Court;
however, the person who produced them, i.e., PW-7, had no
personal knowledge thereof, rendering the entry in the register
suspect without proof of the source of such information. The
sentence was, therefore, suspended pending the outcome of the
criminal appeal. He was directed to be released on bail on
furnishing bond of Rs. 10,000/- with one surety thereto subject
to the satisfaction of the Trial Court and on the condition that he
shall not leave India without permission of the High Court; that
he shall not enter Village Asodar, Taluka Anklav, District
Anand, for a period of two years, and that he shall not change
his address. In case he does, it was directed that both the
concerned police station and the High Court were to be
informed.
3 Criminal Misc Application (for Suspension of Sentence) No. 1 of 2024, in R/
Criminal Appeal No. 1434 of 2024.
Crl A. @ SLP(Crl) No. 18017 of 2024                                Page 3 of 10
4.       Aggrieved by the suspension of sentence awarded to
Respondent No.2, this appeal has been preferred. The grounds
urged are that the facts considered by the High Court that the
victim had run away with Respondent No.2 and hence
commenced a physical relationship between the two is contrary
to the record and the findings of the Trial Court; instead, it is
submitted that the first time they met was in 2019 when the
victim was only eleven years of age in 2019, and he has been
harassing her since then. Further, it has been urged that the
finding regarding the proof of age of the victim being suspect, is
contrary to law. In this regard, reference is made to
Sections 34
of the POCSO Act and 94 of the
Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act, 2015
. Suspension of Sentence, it
was then submitted, is the exception and not the rule. For this
proposition, reliance is placed on
Shivani Tyagi v. State of
U.P.4
.
5.       We have heard Ms. Shahrukh Alam and Ms. Swati
Ghidiyal for the appellant and the State, and Mr. Varinder
Kumar Sharma for Respondent No.2.
6.       Although      various        arguments   stand   advanced,     in
particular, the different takes on facts by the High Court - our
analysis is only limited to the correctness and legality of the


4 2024 SCC OnLine SC 842
Crl A. @ SLP(Crl) No. 18017 of 2024                          Page 4 of 10
exercise of power under
Section 389
, Code of Criminal
Procedure, 19735. The Section reads as under :
“389. Suspension of sentence pending the appeal; release
      of appellant on bail.—(1) Pending any appeal by a
      convicted person, the Appellate Court may, for reasons to be
      recorded by it in writing, order that the execution of the
      sentence or order appealed against be suspended and, also, if
      he is in confinement, that he be released on bail, or on his
      own      bond:
[Provided that the Appellate Court shall, before
      releasing on bail or on his own bond a convicted person who
      is convicted of an offence punishable with death or
      imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not less
      than ten years, shall give opportunity to the Public Prosecutor
      for showing cause in writing against such release:
Provided further that in cases where a convicted person
      is released on bail it shall be open to the Public Prosecutor to
      file an application for the cancellation of the bail.]
      (2) The power conferred by this section on a Appellate Court
      may be exercised also by the High Court in the case of an
      appeal by a convicted person to a Court subordinate thereto.
      (3) Where the convicted person satisfies the Court by which
      he is convicted that he intends to present an appeal, the Court
      shall,—
(i) where such person, being on bail, is sentenced to
            imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years, or
(ii) where the offence of which such person has been
            convicted is a bailable one, and he is on bail, order that
            the convicted person be released on bail, unless there
            are special reasons for refusing bail, for such period as
            will afford sufficient time to present the appeal and
            obtain the orders of the Appellate Court under sub-
section (1); and the sentence of imprisonment shall, so

5 ‘
CrPC
’
Crl A. @ SLP(Crl) No. 18017 of 2024                              Page 5 of 10
long as he is so released on bail, be deemed to be
            suspended.
(4) When the appellant is ultimately sentenced to
      imprisonment for a term or to imprisonment for life, the time
      during which he is so released shall be excluded in
      computing the term for which he is so sentenced.”
7.      When an accused person applies to the Appellate Court
for suspension of sentence and succeeds in getting the Court to
make an order in his favour, what gets stayed is only the
execution of the sentence and nothing more.               The sentence
remains and is only, not acted upon [See:
K. Prabhakaran v. P.
Jayarajan6
].
In doing so, there has to be a recording of
reasons, which, of course, can only be possible after due
consideration [See:
State of Haryana v. Hasmat
7;
Vijay Kumar
v. Narendra8
and
Ramji Prasad v. Rattan Kumar Jaiswal
9].
The rationale behind such power is appropriately captured in the
words of Bhagwati J., (as his Lordship then was) in the case of
Kashmira Singh v. State of Punjab10
.                 The observations
(reproduced below) were made in the context of the sentence of
life imprisonment in connection with offences under
Section
302
IPC, however, the same is relevant here as well, since the
sentence imposed is 20 years, i.e., greater than life

6 (2005) 1 SCC 754
7 (2004) 6 SCC 175
8 (2002) 9 SCC 364
9 (2002) 9 SCC 366
10 (1977) 4 SCC 291
Crl A. @ SLP(Crl) No. 18017 of 2024                           Page 6 of 10
imprisonment, which is, as unless otherwise specified, for a
period of 14 years. It was said -
“2. The appellant contends in this application that pending the
      hearing of the appeal he should be released on bail. Now, the
      practice in this Court as also in many of the High Courts has been
      not to release on bail a person who has been sentenced to life
      imprisonment for an offence under Section 302 of the Penal Code,
      1860. The question is whether this practice should be departed
      from and if so, in what circumstances. It is obvious that no practice
      howsoever sanctified by usage and hallowed by time can be
      allowed to prevail if it operates to cause injustice. Every practice of
      the Court must find its ultimate justification in the interest of
      justice. The practice not to release on bail a person who has been
      sentenced to life imprisonment was evolved in the High Courts and
      in this Court on the basis that once a person has been found guilty
      and sentenced to life imprisonment, he should not be let loose, so
      long as his conviction and sentence are not set aside, but the
      underlying postulate of this practice was that the appeal of such
      person would be disposed of within a measurable distance of time,
      so that if he is ultimately found to be innocent, he would not have
      to remain in jail for an unduly long period. The rationale of this
      practice can have no application where the Court is not in a
      position to dispose of the appeal for five or six years. It would
      indeed be a travesty of justice to keep a person in jail for a period
      of five or six years for an offence which is ultimately found not to
      have been committed by him. Can the Court ever compensate him
      for his incarceration which is found to be unjustified? Would it be
      just at all for the Court to tell a person: “We have admitted your
      appeal because we think you have a prima facie case, but
      unfortunately we have no time to hear your appeal for quite a few
      years and, therefore, until we hear your appeal, you must remain in
      jail, even though you may be innocent?” What confidence would
      such administration of justice inspire in the mind of the public? It
      may quite conceivably happen, and it has in fact happened in a few
      cases in this Court, that a person may serve out his full term of
      imprisonment before his appeal is taken up for hearing.
Would a
      Judge not be overwhelmed with a feeling of contrition while
      acquitting such a person after hearing the appeal? Would it not be
      an affront to his sense of justice? Of what avail would the acquittal
      be to such a person who has already served out his term of
      imprisonment or at any rate a major part of it? It is, therefore,
Crl A. @ SLP(Crl) No. 18017 of 2024                                    Page 7 of 10
absolutely essential that the practice which this Court has been
      following in the past must be reconsidered and so long as this
      Court is not in a position to hear the appeal of an accused within a
      reasonable period of time, the Court should ordinarily, unless there
      are cogent grounds for acting otherwise, release the accused on bail
      in cases where special leave has been granted to the accused to
      appeal against his conviction and sentence.”
                                                     (Emphasis Supplied)


In the same vein, it would be useful to note the contours of this
power as discussed in the recent case of
Afjal Ansari v. State of
U.P.11
. Surya Kant, J., speaking for the majority, held :
“19. This Court has on several occasions opined that there is no
      reason to interpret
Section 389(1)
CrPC in a narrow manner, in the
      context of a stay on an order of conviction, when there are
      irreversible     consequences.
Undoubtedly, Ravikant         S.
      Patil v. Sarvabhouma S. Bagali [Ravikant S. Patil
v. Sarvabhouma
      S. Bagali, (2007) 1 SCC 673, para 15 : (2007) 1 SCC (Cri) 417],
      holds that an order granting a stay of conviction should not be the
      rule but an exception and should be resorted to in rare cases
      depending upon the facts of a case. However, where conviction, if
      allowed to operate would lead to irreparable damage and where the
      convict cannot be compensated in any monetary terms or
      otherwise, if he is acquitted later on, that by itself carves out an
      exceptional situation. Having applied the specific criteria outlined
      hereinabove to the present factual matrix, it is our considered view
      that the appellant's case warrants an order of stay on his award of
      conviction, though partially.
x                                x                             x
25. Having said so, we hasten to hold that societal interest is an
      equally important factor which ought to be zealously protected and
      preserved by the courts. The literal construction of a provision such as
Section 389(1)
CrPC may be beneficial to a convict but not at the cost
      of legitimate public aspirations. It would thus be appropriate for the
      courts to balance the interests of protecting the integrity of the
      electoral process on one hand, while also ensuring that constituents
11 (2024) 2 SCC 187
Crl A. @ SLP(Crl) No. 18017 of 2024                                  Page 8 of 10
are not bereft of their right to be represented, merely consequent to a
      threshold opinion, which is open to further judicial scrutiny.”
8.      In the present facts, Respondent No.2 has been convicted
by the Trial Court. In its conclusion necessarily then, the victim
had to be a minor. Whether or not the finding regarding the age
of the victim is correct or not, or the manner in which was
sought to be proved before the Trial Court, was in accordance
with the law or not, is a question that is open for consideration
in the jurisdiction under
Section 374
CrPC as may be provided
therein, and not under
Section 389
CrPC. Casting doubt upon a
finding returned by the Court below, when the same isn’t within
immediate purview, cannot be justified.
9.      Till and such time, the finding of the Trial Court is
examined independently by the High Court, and proven to be
incorrect, it has to be taken as the position in law. So, at the
present moment, it is proven that Respondent No.2 has
committed the offences for which he stands convicted, subject
to confirmation or setting aside by the High Court in the
pending appeal. Considering this, and also the nature of offence
on one hand, and his age on the other, in the attending facts and
circumstances, we are of the considered view, that the High
Court ought not to have suspended the sentence as was imposed
by the Trial Court.
Crl A. @ SLP(Crl) No. 18017 of 2024                                 Page 9 of 10
10.     The judicious use of this power being the path to be
adopted by the Courts, as held in
Angana v. State of
Rajasthan12
, and also the said exercise not being at the cost of
‘legitimate public aspirations’ which here would be, all things
considered, Respondent No.2 be confined in jail, both do not
justify the conclusion arrived at by the High Court. Respondent
No.2 is accordingly directed to surrender before the competent
authority forthwith. It is clarified that if the appeal pending
before the High Court is not heard in eighteen months, he shall
be at liberty to approach the High Court seeking regular bail.
11.     With the aforementioned observations, which are limited
to the examination of the correctness of the order of suspension
of sentence, the appeal is allowed. Pending Applications, if any,
shall stand closed.
………….................……………J.
                                                (SANJAY KAROL)



                                      ……………................……………J.
                                      (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA)
New Delhi;
21st April, 2025.
12 (2009) 3 SCC 767
Crl A. @ SLP(Crl) No. 18017 of 2024                       Page 10 of 10