[Cites
18
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Angeline Randolph Pereira vs Suyog Industrial Estate Premises Co ... on 21 April, 2025
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Abhay S Oka
2025 INSC 524

                                                                                     REPORTABLE
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO.5377 OF 2025
                            (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No.5432 of 2021)


                            ARUNKUMAR H SHAH HUF                                 … APPELLANTS


                                                             versus


                            AVON ARCADE PREMISES
                            CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETY
                            LIMITED & ORS.                                    ... RESPONDENTS


                                                        J U D G M E N T
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL DETAILS
1.   Leave granted.
2.   This appeal takes exception to the judgment and

                            order dated 25th February 2021 passed by the learned

                            Single Judge of the Bombay High Court. To appreciate
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
the controversy, a brief reference to the facts of the case
   Date: 2025.04.21
   18:45:08 IST
   Reason:
would be necessary.
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021                 Page 1 of 42
3.       One Champaben Hiralal Shah owned a plot of land

        being Final Plot No.61 in Town Planning Scheme III, Vile

        Parle (West), admeasuring 2814.38 sq.mtrs. (for short

        ‘the larger plot’). On 1 st April 1972, Champaben Hiralal

        Shah and the Hindu Undivided Family consisting of her

        three sons, Lalbhai, Ranjit and Arun, constituted a

        partnership firm M/s. CH Shah & Sons (for short, ‘the

        firm’) by executing a deed of partnership. The larger plot

        was Champaben Hiralal Shah's contribution to the firm's

        capital. After the death of Champaben, the firm was

        reconstituted, amongst the rest of the partners, as per

        the deed of reconstitution dated 30 th June 1983.
4.       A deed of dissolution of partnership was executed

        on 13th February 1987 (‘the deed of dissolution’) by which

        the firm was dissolved. The larger plot was partitioned

        between one Lalbhai H. Shah (predecessor of the 2 nd to 5th

        respondents) and one Arun H. Shah (the Karta of the

        appellant).            Under the deed of dissolution dated 13 th

        February 1987, the portion of the larger plot shown in a
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021           Page 2 of 42
verged blue colour line on a plan attached (for short,

        ‘Lalbhai Plot’) was allotted to Lalbhai, being the Manager

        and Karta of Lalbhai Hiralal Shah HUF. The remaining

        portion of the larger plot below building No.3 and the

        land surrounding it, shown in a verged yellow line (for

        short ‘the Arun Plot’), was allotted to Arun as the Karta

        and manager of Arun Hiralal Shah HUF (the appellant). It

        was provided that construction on the Lalbhai Plot will be

        restricted to the development potential thereof, and the

        construction on the Arun Plot will be restricted to the

        development potential thereof in accordance with the

        prevailing Development Control Regulations.                         Lalbhai

        took over the firm as the sole proprietor. It was provided

        that if Lalbhai transfers his interest in favour of an

        organisation             of      flat   purchasers,    then    Lalbhai/such

        organisation would execute a perpetual lease in favour of

        the appellant or its nominees in respect of the Arun plot.
5.       10th Respondent firm was constituted with Lalbhai

        as one of its partners by a deed of partnership dated 30 th
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021                  Page 3 of 42
March 1987. Lalbhai brought in the Lalbhai Plot as his

        capital contribution to the firm.                   The 10 th respondent

        constructed a building consisting of two wings, each with

        ground plus two upper floors on the Lalbhai Plot. The

        10th respondent entered into flat purchase agreements

        (for short, ‘the FPAs’) from the year 1991 onwards with

        the flat purchasers in respect of flats in the building. It

        was claimed that the FPAs were executed in terms of
Section          4
of       the   Maharashtra       Ownership     Flats

        (Regulation of the Promotion of Construction, Sale,

        Management and Transfer Act) 1963 (for short, ‘the

        MOFA’).           On         6th   November    1993,         the   Municipal

        Corporation of Greater Mumbai (for short, ‘the MCGM’)

        issued an occupation certificate in respect of the building.

        It is pointed out by the appellant that the first

        respondent, a co-operative society of the flat purchasers

        in the building constructed on Lalbhai Plot, was formed

        and registered on 15th July 2005.
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021                Page 4 of 42
6.       The first respondent filed a complaint before the

        Additional             Consumer          Disputes      Redressal        Forum,

        Mumbai, seeking conveyance of only the Lalbhai Plot.

        The District Forum allowed the complaint and directed

        the 10th respondent to convey the Lalbhai plot to the first

        respondent by order dated 19th August 2017.
7.       Thereafter,             on   13th   January          2020,   the   first

        respondent filed an application under
Section 11(3)
of the

        MOFA seeking a deemed conveyance of the Lalbhai Plot

        along with the portion of Arun Plot (totally admeasuring

        2,753 sq. mtrs). The conveyance was sought of the larger

        plot. But after taking into account the road setback area

        of 131.40 sq. meters, the area thereof was mentioned as

        2753 sq meters. The application was filed before the

        District Deputy Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Mumbai

        City [3] (11th respondent), being the competent authority

        appointed under
Section 5A
of the MOFA. On 18 th

        September 2020, the said application was allowed. Ex

        parte deemed conveyance in respect of the larger plot was
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021                 Page 5 of 42
granted, and a certificate of deemed conveyance was

        issued to the first respondent on the condition of the first

        respondent executing a permanent lease in respect of the

        Arun Plot in favour of Arun Hiralal Shah HUF (the

        appellant) or its nominees. Being aggrieved by the said

        order, Arun Hiralal Shah HUF (the appellant), filed a writ

        petition before the Bombay High Court, which was

        decided by the impugned judgment and order of the

        Bombay High Court.               The order of the competent

        authority was confirmed. But a liberty was reserved to

        the appellant to file a suit for adjudication of the title.


        SUBMISSIONS
8.            The learned senior counsel appearing for the

        appellant invited our attention to the relevant clauses in

        the dissolution deed dated 13 th February 1987 by which

        the said firm was dissolved. He pointed out that the deed

        of dissolution recites that Ranjit (the predecessor of the

        6th to 9th respondent) and Arun were not interested in

        carrying on the real estate business of the firm.             He
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021        Page 6 of 42
pointed out that the deed of dissolution of the firm

        provided that on the dissolution, the goodwill and trade

        name of the firm as well as the right to recover all the

        outstandings of the said firm shall remain with Lalbhai

        who was entitled to carry on the business of the erstwhile

        firm as the sole proprietor in the name of M/s. CH Shah

        & Sons.           However, it was provided that if any rental is

        received from any tenant of building No.3, the same shall

        be paid over by Lalbhai to Arun without any deduction

        whatsoever therefrom.            It was also provided that Arun

        will bear all the outgoings of the said building No.3. The

        learned counsel pointed out that in                    the deed of

        dissolution, it is provided that the portion of the larger

        plot shown in verged blue colour line (the Lalbhai Plot)

        shall belong to Lalbhai as the Manager and Karta of

        Lalbhai Hiralal Shah HUF and the remaining portion of

        the said property being building marked no.3 and the

        surrounding land shown in verged yellow line on the said

        plan (the Arun Plot) shall belong to the present appellant
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021          Page 7 of 42
(Arun Hiralal Shah HUF). It is also provided in the deed

        that the Floor Space Index (FSI) of the Lalbhai plot shall

        be utilised by Lalbhai save and except the FSI which is

        utilised for the construction of the existing building No.3.

        It was provided that the appellant will be entitled to

        reconstruct structure or structures in place of existing

        building No.3.                   Another important clause which he

        pointed out was that after Lalbhai develops the remaining

        property excluding building No.3, the incorporated body

        of the purchasers of the premises in the redeveloped

        property/ Lalbhai shall execute a lease in perpetuity in

        favour of Arun at nominal yearly lease rent of Re.1 in

        respect of the Arun plot.
9.       Thereafter, the learned counsel invited our attention

        to the order dated 18th September 2020 passed by the

        11th respondent, which is the competent authority within

        the meaning of
Section 5A
of the MOFA. He submitted

        that the power of the 11 th respondent was to enforce the

        rights         of     the        first   respondent       society   and   the
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021                  Page 8 of 42
corresponding obligation of the 10th respondent developer

        to execute the conveyance in terms of the agreements

        executed in favour of the flat purchasers.                     Learned

        counsel relied upon a decision of the Bombay High Court

        in the case of
Mazda Construction Company & Ors. v.

        Sultanabad Darshan CHS Ltd. & Ors.1
. He submitted

        that the Arun Plot allotted to Arun under the deed of

        dissolution was not the subject matter of the agreement

        between the 10th respondent and members of the 1 st

        respondent society.              Therefore, the 11th respondent had

        no jurisdiction to pass an order granting deemed

        conveyance to the first respondent in respect of the Arun

        Plot allotted to the appellant. He further submitted that

        the appellant was not amenable to the jurisdiction of the

        11th respondent.
10. After            noticing    that   serious    disputed   questions

        regarding the title and demarcation of the land were

        arising, the competent authority ought to have directed


        1 (2012) SCC Online Bombay 1266
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021              Page 9 of 42
the first respondent society to file a suit. Relying upon

        the judgment of the learned Single Judge of Bombay High

        Court in the case of
Marathon Next Gen Realty Ltd.,

        Mumbai and another v. Competent Authority, District

        Deputy Registrar of Co-Operative Societies, Mumbai
and others2, the learned counsel submitted that the

        competent authority under
Section 5A
of the MOFA is not

        empowered to adjudicate upon the disputed questions of

        fact and the questions which will have impact on third

        parties. He submitted that the competent authority is not

        empowered to decide any lis between the parties.
He

        relied upon another decision of a learned Single Judge of

        the Bombay High Court in the case of
ACME Enterprises

        and        Another               v.   Deputy   Registrar,      Co-operative

        Societies and Others3
.
Learned counsel also placed

        reliance on a decision of this Court in the case of
Abdul

        Kuddus v. Union of India4
. He submitted that the

        competent authority is not empowered to receive any

        2 (2015) 5 Maharashtra Law Journal 318
        3 (2023) SCC Online Bombay 1102
        4 (2019) 6 SCC 604
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021                 Page 10 of 42
evidence.           He submitted that the order passed by the

        competent authority under
Section 11(4)
of the MOFA is

        not       final      inasmuch        as   the     registration        officer   is

        empowered under
Section 11(5)
, after hearing the parties,

        to decide whether such a unilateral deed of conveyance

        ought to be registered or not.
11. Learned                counsel    appearing          for    the   appellant

        submitted that the impugned order of the competent

        authority dated 18th September 2020 is as vague as

        possible, and even the terms and conditions on which the

        permanent lease deed is to be executed by and between

        the appellant and the first respondent have not been

        specified.
12. Another                submission      of     the       learned     counsel

        appearing for the appellant is that the first respondent

        had already filed a consumer complaint before the State

        Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission (the State

        Commission) and therefore, the first respondent should

        not have taken recourse to the proceedings under the
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021                  Page 11 of 42
MOFA. Lastly, he submitted that the High Court ought to

        have interfered and set aside the impugned order of the

        competent authority.
13. Learned senior counsel appearing for the first

        respondent on facts submitted that the larger plot was

        not subdivided after the execution of the deed of

        dissolution, and the building constructed by the 10 th

        respondent developer is an extension of the building No.3.

        He submitted that no prejudice has been caused to the

        appellant by the impugned order of the 11 th respondent,

        as admittedly the appellant will be entitled to perpetual

        leasehold rights in respect of land below building No.3

        and the land abutting thereto (the Arun Plot). He invited

        our attention to the FPAs between the members of the 1 st

        respondent and the 10th respondent under the MOFA. He

        submitted that the leasehold rights of the appellant have

        been protected under the impugned order passed by the

        11th respondent.
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021   Page 12 of 42
14. He submitted that there are 93 flat purchasers who

        are members of the first respondent. Even after the grant

        of the occupation certificate, the 10 th respondent delayed

        the execution of the conveyance. He pointed out that the

        occupation certificate was granted as far back as in 1993.

        In fact, the obligation of the 10 th respondent was to

        execute a conveyance within four months from the date of

        registration of the first respondent society. He submitted

        that the execution of the conveyance in respect of the

        larger plot has been pending for over three decades, and

        the appellant, in collusion with the 10 th respondent, has

        always been making efforts to delay the execution of the

        conveyance.
15. He invited our attention to Rule 13 and other

        relevant          rules          forming   part      of      the    Maharashtra

        Ownership              Flats       (Regulation      of     the     Promotion   of

        Construction, Sale, Management and Transfer) Rules,

        1964 (for short, ‘the MOFA Rules’), which explain the

        powers of the competent authority. He also invited our
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021                    Page 13 of 42
attention to the object of incorporating
Section 11(3)
of

        the MOFA with effect from 25th February 2008. The object

        was to curb malpractices by the developers. The object of

        the said amended provision is to safeguard the interests

        of flat purchasers. After inviting our attention to various

        provisions contained in the MOFA Rules, learned counsel

        appearing for the first respondent relied upon a decision

        of this Court in the case of
Indian National Congress (I)

        v. Institute of Social Welfare & Ors.
5. He submitted

        that, looking to the powers of the competent authority, it

        is required to adhere to the principles of natural justice

        and act judicially. He submitted that the object of the

        provisions of the MOFA cannot be defeated by allowing

        parties to raise frivolous disputes.
The learned counsel

        relied upon a decision of the Bombay High Court in the

        case       of
Tanish         Associates    &      Ors.    v.   State   of

        Maharashtra & Ors.6
, which was confirmed by this

        Court.           He also relied upon observations made in


        5 (2002) 5 SCC 685
        6 (2016) SCC Online Bombay 12653
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021                Page 14 of 42
paragraph 7 of the decision of the learned Single Judge of

        the      Bombay            High   Court   in     the       case   of   Tanish

        Associates & Ors.6.
He also relied upon a decision of the

        Bombay High Court in the case of
Subash Ramchandra

        Navare v. Premji Megji Rambia & Ors.
7. He submitted

        that the observations made in paragraph 7 of
the said

        decision
protect the appellant.                  He also relied upon a

        decision of the Bombay High Court in the case of Mazda

        Construction Company & Ors.1, which was relied upon

        by the appellant.
He submitted that the decision of the

        learned Single Judge of the Bombay High Court in the

        case of Mazda Construction Company & Ors.1 has been

        affirmed by a Division Bench of the Bombay High Court

        in the case of M/s. Shree Chintamani Builders v. State

        of Maharashtra and Ors.8.                       He also relied upon a

        decision of the Bombay High Court in the case of

        Mahanagar Housing Partnership Firm and Others v.




        7 (2020) SCC Online Bombay 316
        8 (2016) SCC Online Bombay 9343
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021                 Page 15 of 42
District Deputy Registrar of Co-operative Societies

        (Pune City), Pune and Others9.
CONSIDERATION

        POWER OF THE COMPETENT AUTHORITY UNDER
        SECTION 11 OF THE MOFA
16. Now, we turn to the scope of powers conferred on

        the competent authority under the MOFA.            The term

        ‘promoter’ is defined in
Section 2(c)
, which means a

        person or a partnership firm or a body or association of

        persons who constructs or causes to be constructed a

        building consisting of flats or apartments.        Thus, the

        developer (10th respondent) is a promoter. Under
Section

        4(1)
of the MOFA, a promoter is required to execute a

        registered agreement for sale in favour of the flat

        purchasers in the form prescribed under the MOFA

        Rules. Under
Section 10
, it is the promoter's obligation to

        take steps to form a cooperative society or a company

        representing the flat purchasers.
9 (2018) SCC Online Bombay 19563
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021     Page 16 of 42
17.
Section 11
is the most important provision, which

        calls for interpretation in this appeal.
Section 11
reads

        thus:
“11. – Promoter to convey title, etc.,
                      and execute documents, according to
                      agreement

                      (1) A promoter shall take all necessary
                      steps to complete his title and convey to
                      the organisation of persons, who take
                      flats, which is registered either as a co-
operative society or as a company as
                      aforesaid or to an association of flat
                      takers [or apartment owners], his right,
                      title and interest in the land and
                      building, and execute all relevant
                      documents therefor in accordance with
                      the agreement executed under
section 4
and if no period for the execution of the
                      conveyance is agreed upon, he shall
                      execute the conveyance within the
                      prescribed period and also deliver all
                      documents of title relating to the
                      property which may be in his possession
                      or power.
(2) It shall be the duty of the promoter to
                      file with the Competent Authority, within
                      the prescribed period, a copy of the
                      conveyance executed by him under sub-
section (1).
(3) If the promoter fails to execute the
                      conveyance     in    favour     of   the
                      Cooperative society formed under
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021         Page 17 of 42
section 10
or, as the case may be, the
                      Company or the association of
                      apartment owners, as provided by sub-
section (1), within the prescribed
                      period, the members of such Co-
operative society or, as the case may
                      be, the Company or the association of
                      apartment owners may, make an
                      application,   in    writing,   to  the
                      concerned      Competent       Authority
                      accompanied by the true copies of the
                      registered   agreements       for  sale,
                      executed with the promoter by each
                      individual member of the society or
                      the Company or the association, who
                      have purchased the flats and all other
                      relevant documents (including the
                      occupation certificate, if any), for
                      issuing a certificate that such society,
                      or as the case may be, Company or
                      association, is entitled to have an
                      unilateral     deemed       conveyance,
                      executed in their favour and to have it
                      registered.
(4) The Competent Authority, on
                      receiving such application, within
                      reasonable time and in any case not
                      later than six months, after making
                      such enquiry as deemed necessary
                      and after verifying the authenticity of
                      the documents submitted and after
                      giving the promoter a reasonable
                      opportunity of being heard, on being
                      satisfied that it is a fit case for issuing
                      such    certificate,     shall    issue   a
                      certificate to the Sub-Registrar or any
                      other appropriate Registration Officer
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021         Page 18 of 42
under the
Registration Act, 1908
,
                      certifying that it is a fit case for
                      enforcing unilateral execution, of
                      conveyance deed conveying the right,
                      title and interest of the promoter in
                      the land and building in favour of the
                      applicant, as deemed conveyance.
(5) On submission by such society or
                      as the case may be, the Company or
                      the association of apartment owners,
                      to the Sub-Registrar or the concerned
                      appropriate     Registration    Officer
                      appointed under the
Registration Act,
                      1908
, the certificate issued by the
                      Competent Authority alongwith the
                      unilateral instrument of conveyance,
                      the Sub-Registrar or the concerned
                      appropriate registration Officer shall,
                      notwithstanding anything contained
                      in the
Registration Act, 1908
, issue
                      summons to the promoter to show
                      cause why, such unilateral instrument
                      should not be registered as 'deemed
                      conveyance' and after giving the
                      promoter and the applicants a
                      reasonable opportunity of being heard,
                      may on being satisfied that it was fit
                      case    for   unilateral   conveyance,
                      register that instrument as, ‘deemed
                      conveyance '.”
                                             (emphasis added)
18. Thus, sub-section (1) of
Section 11
contains the

        obligation of the promoter to convey title in respect of the
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021      Page 19 of 42
land and the building developed by him. Sub-section (3)

        of
Section 11
gives a remedy to a cooperative society or a

        company formed under
Section 10
or the association of

        apartment owners, as the case may be, to apply to the

        competent authority appointed under Section 5A for

        issuing a certificate that the said society or the company,

        as the case may be, is entitled to have unilateral deemed

        conveyance             executed   in   their   favour      and   have   it

        registered.           This provision has been enacted to ensure

        that a speedy remedy is available to the flat purchasers

        for enforcing the promoter's obligation under sub-section

        (1) of
Section 11
. The MOFA has been enacted with the

        object of protecting the flat purchasers.
19. The procedure for dealing with applications made

        under sub-section (3) of
Section 11
has been laid down in

        the MOFA Rules. Rule 11(2) provides for the competent

        authority to issue a notice of the application to the

        promoter.           Even the form of application under
Section

        11(3)
has been prescribed by the MOFA Rules. Under
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021             Page 20 of 42
Rule 13(3), the opponent to whom a notice is issued is

        entitled to file a written statement.                     Rule 13(4) permits

        the production of documents.                      Sub-rule (5) of Rule 13

        provides for the procedure for the hearing of the

        application. It provides that on receiving a written

        statement of the opponent, the applicant shall prove the

        contents of the application and also deal with the

        contention of the defence.                     However, it is specifically

        provided that no cross-examination of any of the parties

        shall be permitted. Clause (c) of sub-rule (5) of Rule 13

        provides that the outer limit for passing an order on a
Section 11
application is six months. It provides that the

        competent authority shall make such enquiry as may be

        deemed necessary, and after verifying the authenticity of

        the documents submitted by the parties and after

        hearing them, the competent authority shall pass an

        order. The requirement to comply with the principles of

        natural         justice          is   also   incorporated        in   clause   (c).

        Considering the nature of the power conferred on the
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021                   Page 21 of 42
competent authority, it follows that while passing orders

        on the application under
Section 11(3)
, the competent

        authority must record reasons.
20. It is undoubtedly true that quasi-judicial powers

        have been conferred upon the competent authority while

        dealing with applications under
Section 11(3)
of the

        MOFA.          However,           proceedings       before      the   competent

        authority under
Section 11(3)
are of summary nature, as

        can be seen from the MOFA Rules.                                   Even cross-

        examination of the parties is not permissible. There is an

        absolute           prohibition         under    Rule       13(5)      on   cross-

        examination              of      parties.   Thus,    it    follows     that   the

        competent            authority,        while    following       the    summary

        procedure, cannot conclusively and finally decide the

        questions of title. Therefore, notwithstanding the order

        made under sub-section (4) of
section 11
, aggrieved

        parties can always file a civil suit for establishing their

        rights.
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021                  Page 22 of 42
21. The parties have relied upon several decisions of the

        Bombay High Court. We do not think that any of the

        decisions have taken a view which is contrary to the legal

        position explained by us, though none of the decisions

        exhaustively             deal    with   the   issues          which   we   have

        considered.
SCOPE OF THE POWERS OF THE REGISTRATION
        OFFICERS UNDER SECTION 11(5)
22. Now, we deal with the scope of powers of the

        registration officer under the
Registration Act, 1908
(for

        short, ‘the 1908 Act’) under sub-section (5) of
Section 11
.

        As provided in sub-section (4) of
Section 11
, a certificate

        regarding the entitlement of the applicant to deemed

        conveyance has to be issued by the competent authority

        to the appropriate registration officer under the 1908 Act.

        After receiving the certificate, the registration officer is

        required to issue a summons to the promoter to show

        cause why such a unilateral instrument should not be

        registered as a deemed conveyance.                            After giving an

        opportunity of being heard to the promoter and after
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021                Page 23 of 42
being satisfied that it was a fit case for registration of a

        unilateral conveyance, the registration officer can register

        the certificate as deemed conveyance.                         We may make it

        clear that the power conferred on the registration officer

        does not enable him to reopen or set aside the findings

        recorded by the competent authority while passing an

        order of grant of certificate.            The registration officer is

        neither an appellate authority nor a revisional authority.
23. The requirement of sub-section (5) of
Section 11
has

        been incorporated to enable the registering officer to give

        an opportunity to the promoter, as the certificate issued

        by the competent authority is a “unilateral certificate”. In

        a given case, there may be a statutory requirement of

        obtaining prior permission or consent of an authority

        before the execution and registration of a conveyance.

        The registering officer cannot register the instrument

        unless such statutory consent/permission is produced.

        Therefore, he can refuse to register the certificate of

        deemed           conveyance      till   the     permission/consent        is
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021                Page 24 of 42
produced.              There may be a prohibitory order of a

        competent court restraining the promoter from executing

        a conveyance. In such a case, the certificate cannot be

        registered as a conveyance till the restraint order is in

        force. Moreover, the registering officer must be satisfied

        that the requirements, such as payment of stamp duty

        and other procedural requirements under the 1908 Act,

        are complied with.               This is the limited scope of

        adjudication by the registering officer under sub-section

        (5) of
Section 11
. The registering officer has no power to

        sit in appeal over the order of the competent authority

        while exercising the power under
Section 11(5)
. He has

        no power to go into the correctness or otherwise of the

        order of the competent authority.                      He can refuse

        registration only on the grounds indicated above. Thus,

        the scope of the powers conferred on the registering

        officer is limited as indicated above. This is the only way

        sub-sections (4) and (5) of
Section 11
of the MOFA can be

        harmoniously construed.
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021         Page 25 of 42
ON FACTUAL ASPECTS
24.        A perusal of the deed of dissolution dated 13 th

        February 1987 shows that Lalbhai, Ranjit and Arun were

        the three parties to the deed of dissolution who were the

        partners of the firm. The brothers executed the deed of

        dissolution after the demise of their mother Champaben.

        The description of the larger plot in the schedule to the

        deed of dissolution is final plot No.61 admeasuring 2726

        sq. mtrs. more particularly described in the schedule.

        The setback area of 131.40 sq. mtrs. has been excluded.

        There is a plan annexed to the deed of dissolution

        marked as Exhibit ‘A’.           It is provided in the deed of

        dissolution that the goodwill and trade name of the firm,

        as well as the right to recover all the outstandings of the

        said firm, have been taken over                   by   Lalbhai   and

        accordingly, he was entitled to use the goodwill and trade

        name of the firm and continue the business of the firm

        as the sole proprietor of M/s CH Shah & Sons with

        authority to collect outstandings of the said firm in

        respect of building No.3 which is allotted to Arun. It was
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021        Page 26 of 42
provided that the right to develop the Lalbhai plot was

        allotted to Lalbhai, and the right to develop the remaining

        portion of the said property, being building No.3 and the

        land surrounding it, shown in a verged yellow line (the

        Arun plot), was allotted to Arun. Even the valuation of

        the properties was mentioned. Clause 6 reiterates that

        the Arun plot on the plan Exhibit ‘A’ shall belong to Arun

        HUF, representing the present appellant.
25. We may note here that there was a subsequent

        partnership deed entered into on 30 th March 1987 by and

        between Lalbhai and six other persons under which the

        firm       Avon        Enterprises   (the    10th       respondent)   was

        incorporated. In the recitals of the said document, it is

        mentioned that the larger property, being the entire plot

        No.61, is delineated on a plan annexed to the said

        document. It refers to a portion admeasuring 1823 sq

        mtrs. thereof, which was brought into partnership by

        Lalbhai.          It is stated that the said portion is shown in

        blue verged lines. That is the Lalbhai plot. It is also
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021              Page 27 of 42
specifically provided that the remaining portion of the

        said property on which building No.3 has been standing

        and the area shown by yellow verged lines (the Arun plot)

        will belong to Arun.
26. A prototype flat purchase agreement (FPA) between

        the 10th respondent and the flat purchasers has been

        placed on record. It refers to the property described as

        the said property admeasuring 1911.32 sq.mtrs. out of

        the larger plot. It is recorded that the remaining portion

        of the plot, admeasuring 903.06 sq. mtrs, on which

        building No.3 was standing, belongs to the appellant. The

        first schedule describes the larger property admeasuring

        2814.38 sq. mtrs. (which includes the setback area) and

        the second schedule describes the area of 1911.32 sq.

        mtrs.         Clause No.36 of the agreement is the relevant

        clause which deals with the execution of the conveyance.

        The relevant portion of the clause reads thus:
“……the Developer shall execute a
                      Conveyance in respect of the said
                      Property in favour of such Co-
operative Society subject to the said
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021      Page 28 of 42
Deed of Lease dated 16th day of July,
                      1991 in respect of Arun's property in
                      favour of Arun Hiralal Shah H.U.F.
                      and/or his nominee or nominees as
                      aforesaid. Until the execution of the
                      Conveyance the possession of the said
                      Property in the said Building and the
                      Premises thereon shall be deemed to be
                      of the Developers and the Purchasers
                      who shall have been given possession of
                      the premises sold to him/her/them shall
                      be merely occupants thereof.”
                                             (emphasis added)
27. At this stage, we may also refer to the deed of

        dissolution dated 13th February 1987 (‘the deed of

        dissolution’). Arun Hiralal Shah, the erstwhile Karta of

        the appellant, is a party to the said dissolution deed.

        Clause 3 thereof reads thus :
“3.                                On
                such Dissolution the portion of the said
                property shown in verged blue colour
                line on the said plan with right to
                develop the same is allotted to Lalbhai
                being the party of the First Part as the
                Manager and Karta of Lalbhai Hiralal
                Shah H.U.F. The remaining portion of
                the said property being building marked
                No. 3 on the said plan Exhibit “A” hereto
                and assessed to tax by the Municipal
                Corporation of Greater Bombay vide No.
                KW-8653 (3) which is let out to Bank of
                Baroda, Post Office, a Shop and other
                residential   Tenants,   as    per    the
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021      Page 29 of 42
particulars given in Exhibit 'B' hereto
                      and the land surrounding it and shown
                      in verged yellow line on the said plan is
                      allotted to Arun being the Party of the
                      Third Part as the Karta and Manager of
                      Arun Hiralal Shah, H.U.F.”
28. There is no dispute about the execution of the deed

        of dissolution. There is no dispute that the area allotted

        to Lalbhai for development is separate and distinct from

        the area allotted to Arun. The area allotted to Lalbhai is

        1911.32 sq mtrs. (the Lalbhai plot) out of final plot No.61,

        which         includes           the   area   of   the         road   set   back

        admeasuring 131.40 sq mtrs. The remaining area of

        903.06 sq mtrs. (the Arun plot) was allotted to Arun

        representing HUF out of the final plot No.61 on which

        building No.3 has been standing. The deed of dissolution

        specifically provides that the said area allotted to Arun as

        the Karta and manager of Arun Hiralal Shah HUF (the

        appellant) has been shown on the plan annexed to the

        deed of dissolution. It consists of the building marked as

        building No.3 and the surrounding land shown in yellow

        lines. The deed of dissolution and in particular sub-
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021                 Page 30 of 42
clause (f) of clause 8 clearly provides that Arun,

        representing the appellant HUF, shall be entitled to

        reconstruct the structure or structures in place of

        building No.3 and consume Floor Space Index (for short

        ‘FSI’) to the extent of 9717 sq.ft. Sub-clause (a) of Clause

        8 provides that the remaining FSI available in respect of

        the entire final plot admeasuring 2814.38 sq.mtrs.

        (Lalbhai plot) shall be utilised by Lalbhai. Sub-clause (g)

        of clause 8 also provides that in case of a future increase

        in FSI, 32% of it shall be owned by Arun, representing

        the HUF, and the remaining FSI shall be utilised by

        Lalbhai. There is one important clause incorporated in

        the deed of dissolution in the form of sub-clause (h) of

        Clause 8. Sub-clause (h) reads thus:
“h) that Lalbhai in the process of his
                business as developer and dealer in real
                estates and consequent upon the
                construction of the new building conveys
                the property more particular description
                of the property is as per Schedule of the
                property hereunder written, to a Co-
                operative Society and/or similar body
                Lalbhai    and/or     the   Co-operative
                Society or similar body shall execute a
                Lease in perpetuity in favour of Arun
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021   Page 31 of 42
at the cost of Arun including the cost
                      of stamp and registration charges at
                      the yearly lease rent of Re.1/- in
                      respect of building No.3 together with
                      the land underneath and shown under
                      yellow verged line in the copy of the
                      plan hereto annexed upon the terms
                      and conditions as may be agreed and
                      settled by the respective advocates of
                      Arun and Lalbhai.”
                                            (emphasis added)
29. The first part of clause (h) provides for Lalbhai

        executing a conveyance in respect of the property as per

        the schedule to a co-operative society.             The property

        described in the schedule is the larger plot. The reason

        for providing the execution of conveyance in favour of a

        co-operative society in respect of the larger plot is

        apparent. The larger plot bearing the plot No.61 was not

        subdivided into the Arun plot and the Lalbhai plot in the

        records. Therefore, Lalbhai and Arun agreed to share the

        FSI, which may be available in future, to the extent of

        68% and 32% respectively.          This is why this clause

        provides for the execution of a lease in respect of the

        Arun plot in favour of Arun by Lalbhai or a cooperative
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021      Page 32 of 42
society formed after the construction of new buildings by

        Lalbhai. This is to protect the interests of the appellant.
Admittedly, the deed of dissolution has been signed by

        Arun in his capacity as Karta of Arun Hiralal Shah HUF.

        Therefore, the deed of dissolution and the aforesaid

        clause are binding on the present appellant.
30. Based on the deed of dissolution, a deed of

        partnership was executed by Lalbhai Hiralal Shah by

        which a firm, Avon Enterprises, the 10 th respondent-

        developer, was formed.           The said document clearly

        specifies that the partnership firm has the right over an

        area of 1823 sq. mtrs. out of the larger plot bearing final

        plot No.61. It also records that the partners of the 10 th

        respondent are aware that the remaining portion of the

        property on which building No.3 is standing as shown by

        yellow verged lines belongs to the present appellant and

        that 10th respondent will not have any claim over the

        same.
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021      Page 33 of 42
31. The said deed of partnership shows that the 10 th

        respondent had no right over the property allotted to the

        appellant under the deed of dissolution. At this stage, we

        may note that in the FPAs for sale executed by the 10 th

        respondent in favour of flat purchasers, there is a recital

        that the 10th respondent has executed a deed of lease

        dated 16th July 1991 in favour of the present appellant in

        respect of the area of 903.06 sq.mtrs. out of final plot

        No.61. Even in the application under
Section 11(3)
of the

        MOFA made by the 1st respondent, in paragraph 4,

        reliance was placed on the lease in perpetuity executed in

        favour of the appellant in respect of the Arun plot on 16 th

        July 1991 by the 10th respondent. In the reply filed by the

        appellant, this fact is not denied. However, a copy of the

        lease is not placed on record.
32. The legal heirs of Arun, Lalbhai and Ranjit were the

        opponents to the application under
Section 11(3)
made

        by the 1st respondent. The prayer therein was for the

        execution of the conveyance in respect of the larger plot in
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021   Page 34 of 42
favour of the 1st respondent. By the order dated 18 th

        September 2020 passed by the competent authority, a

        direction was issued in the exercise of powers under
Section 11(3)
of MOFA to grant ex parte deemed

        conveyance in favour of the first respondent society. A

        certificate of deemed conveyance was issued under the

        said order.              The certificate records that the deemed

        conveyance shall be in respect of the entire larger plot

        bearing plot No.61 (admeasuring 2753 sq.mtrs. as per

        the Property Register Card and 2814.38 sq.mtrs. as per

        the Sanctioned Building Plan) subject to the first

        respondent executing a permanent lease deed in favour of

        the present appellant in respect of an area of 903.06 sq.

        mtrs. (Arun plot) as shown on the plan annexed to the

        FPAs executed by the 10th respondent in favour of the flat

        purchasers. We have already referred to the deed of lease

        dated 16th July 1991 executed by the 10 th respondent in

        favour of the appellant in respect of the Arun plot.

        Therefore, the 10th respondent is the lessor of the
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021           Page 35 of 42
appellant. Hence, the effect of the order dated 18 th

        September 2020 is that there shall be a deemed

        conveyance in favour of the first respondent in respect of

        the entire larger plot (final plot no.61) subject to the

        condition of executing a permanent lease deed in favour

        of the appellant or its nominees in respect of an area of

        903.06 sq. mtrs. (the Arun plot). This order appears to

        have been passed, as plot No.61 has not been subdivided

        into Lalbhai plot and Arun plot.             Moreover, the 1 st

        respondent, after a conveyance in its favour, steps into

        the shoes of the appellant’s lessor.
33. Some criticism is made by the appellant of the

        impugned order of the competent authority on the

        ground that the terms and conditions of the lease have

        not been incorporated in the order and the certificate,

        and therefore, the order is vague. We may note here that

        the impugned order of the competent authority refers to

        sub-clause (h) of clause 8 of the deed of dissolution,

        which we have quoted earlier, and the fact that there was
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021    Page 36 of 42
already a lease deed dated 16 th July 1991 in favour of the

        present appellant. Therefore, it is obvious that the lease

        deed to be executed by the first respondent must be in

        terms of the deed of dissolution, which provides for the

        appellant's entitlement to a specific FSI and percentage of

        additional           FSI         which   may   be    available   in   future.

        Moreover, the lease to be executed will have to be in

        accordance with the terms and conditions of the lease

        deed dated 16th July 1991 and the deed of dissolution.
34. In view of the fact that sub-clause (h) of Clause 8 of

        the deed of dissolution is binding, the appellant cannot

        object to the condition of the first respondent executing a

        lease incorporated in the certificate. Sub-clause (h) itself

        provides for the Society of the flat purchasers after the

        construction of the building by Lalbhai executing a lease

        in favour of the appellant for yearly lease rent of Re.1. To

        protect the appellant's interest, the impugned order of the

        competent authority dated 18th September 2020 and the

        certificate provide for the execution of a permanent lease
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021                 Page 37 of 42
in favour of the appellant. Thus, there will be a perpetual

        lease executed by the first respondent in favour of the

        appellant or its nominees in terms of sub-clause (h) of

        Clause 8 of the deed of dissolution and in terms of the

        lease deed dated 16th July 1991 at the instance of the

        appellant, no fault can be found with the order of the

        competent authority.
35. The MOFA is a beneficial legislation enacted to

        protect home buyers, considering the ever-increasing

        housing shortage in urban areas. The Legislature has

        noted the increasing malpractices by the developers.

        The provisions of
Section 11
are for the benefit of the flat

        purchasers.             In writ jurisdiction, the Court should not

        interfere with the order granting deemed conveyance

        under
Section 11 (4)
, unless the order is manifestly

        illegal. The writ court should generally be slow in

        interfering          with        such   orders.   The         reason   is   that,

        notwithstanding the order under
Section 11(4)
, the

        remedy of aggrieved parties to file a civil suit remains
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021                Page 38 of 42
open. In this case, substantial justice has been done by

        protecting the appellant's rights as a perpetual lessee

        with a right to develop the Arun plot.           Therefore,

        interference in writ jurisdiction was not warranted.


        CONCLUSIONS
36. As held earlier, there is no reason to find fault with

        the impugned order dated 18 th September 2020 of the

        competent authority and consequently, the impugned

        order of the High Court. The registration of the certificate

        issued under the impugned order of the competent

        authority shall be subject to the condition of the first

        respondent executing a permanent lease in favour of the

        appellant, as directed in the certificate appended to the

        impugned order dated 18th September 2020.        The lease

        shall be on the terms and conditions incorporated in the

        deed of dissolution and the lease deed dated 16 th July

        1991. Even if such a lease is not executed in favour of

        the appellant, the rights of the appellant as a perpetual

        lessee under the deed dated 16 th July 1991 and under
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021   Page 39 of 42
the deed of dissolution in respect of the Arun plot shall

        remain unaffected. The first respondent cannot dispute

        the appellant's rights as a perpetual lessee.
37. Our conclusions on the interpretation of sub-

        sections (4) and (5) of
Section 11
of the MOFA are as

        under:
i.    It is no doubt true that quasi-judicial powers

                      have been conferred on the competent authority

                      while dealing with applications under
Section

                      11(3)
of the MOFA. However, proceedings before

                      the competent authority under
Section 11(3)
are

                      of a summary nature, as can be seen from the

                      MOFA Rules. Therefore, the competent authority,

                      while passing the final order, must record

                      reasons;
ii.    The competent authority, while following the

                      summary procedure, cannot conclusively and

                      finally decide the question of title. Therefore,
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021       Page 40 of 42
notwithstanding the order under sub-section (4)

                      of
Section 11
, the aggrieved parties can always

                      maintain a civil suit for establishing their rights;
iii.    The provisions of
Section 11
are for the benefit of

                      the flat purchasers.          In writ jurisdiction, the

                      Court         should   not   interfere         with   the   order

                      granting deemed conveyance unless the same is

                      manifestly illegal. The writ court should generally

                      be slow in interfering with such orders. The

                      reason is that, notwithstanding the order under
Section 11(4)
, the remedy of aggrieved parties to

                      file a civil suit remains open; and


               iv.    The registering officer has no power to sit in

                      appeal over the order of the competent authority

                      while exercising the power under
Section 11(5)
.
He can refuse registration only on the grounds

                      indicated in paragraph 23 above and not beyond.
Thus, the scope of the powers conferred on the

                      registering officer is limited.
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021               Page 41 of 42
38. Subject to what is held in this judgment, the appeal

        is dismissed. There will be no order as to costs.
…......………………….J.
                                             (Abhay S Oka)


                                            .......…………………...J.
                                            (Ujjal Bhuyan)
        New Delhi;
April 21, 2025.
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.5432 of 2021   Page 42 of 42