[Cites
17
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Ramyash @ Lal Bahadur vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh And Anr. Etc. ... on 23 April, 2025
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
B.R. Gavai
REPORTABLE
                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

              CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1153-55 OF 2021

RAMYASH @ LAL BAHADUR                                      …APPELLANT

                                        VERSUS

THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH
AND ANOTHER ETC. ETC.                                   …RESPONDENTS

                                          WITH

                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1175 OF 2021


                                  JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1.       These criminal appeals challenge the judgement and

final order dated 8th February 2019 passed by the Division

Bench of the Allahabad High Court in Criminal Misc.

Correction Application No. 2 of 2019 which had been

preferred by the accused persons namely, Bhupendra Singh,

Moti Lal and Prahlad.
2.       The      Correction        Application    purportedly   sought   a

clarification of a previous judgment and final order passed by

the Division Bench of the High Court on 21st May 20181, by
1
Hereinafter referred to as “First Judgment”.
1
which the High Court had dismissed the criminal appeals

preferred by the accused persons and had affirmed the

judgment passed by the Court of Additional Sessions Judge,

Court No.4, Jaunpur in Sessions Trial No. 277 of 20122

wherein the trial court had convicted the accused persons for

the offences punishable under Sections 302 and 323 read

with 34, and
Sections 452
,
504
and
506
of the Indian Penal

Code, 18603 and sentenced them to suffer imprisonment for

life.
3.        Subsequently however, the High Court by way of the

impugned judgment and order allowed the Correction

Application preferred by the accused persons and modified

its First Judgment. While so modifying its First Judgment,

the High Court partly allowed the criminal appeals thereby

converting the conviction awarded to the accused persons to

one under
Section 304
Part II of the
IPC
and consequently

sentenced accused Bhupendra Singh to undergo rigorous

imprisonment for 10 years and sentenced accused Moti Lal

and Prahlad to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 5 years.
2
Hereinafter referred to as ‘trial court’.
3
‘
IPC
’ for short.
2
4.   We have two sets of criminal appeals before us. The first

set of criminal appeals being Criminal Appeal Nos. 1153-

1155 of 2021 has been preferred by one Ramyash @ Lal

Bahadur, the original complainant, taking exception to the

modification undertaken by the High Court in the impugned

judgment and order. The second appeal being Criminal

Appeal No. 1175 of 2021 has been filed by accused

Bhupendra Singh with a plea for acquittal. For the sake of

convenience and to avoid confusion, the parties will be

referred to as per their positions in the first set of appeals.
5.   The brief facts leading to the present appeals are as

follows:-
5.1 On 13th May 2012 at about 7:30 a.m., the appellant

lodged a complaint at P.S. Sikrara, District Jaunpur against

the accused persons, alleging therein that owing to a

previous enmity between the families of the appellant and the

accused persons, on that very morning at around 06:30 a.m.,

the accused persons had verbally and physically assaulted

the appellant and his family members with various weapons

which led to severe injuries being suffered by the appellant

and his family members. On the basis of the complaint, a
3
First Information Report4 being Case Crime No. 290 of 2012

was registered against the accused persons for the offences

punishable under
Sections 323
,
324
,
452
,
504
and
506
of

the IPC.
5.2 According to the prosecution story, the families of the

appellant and the accused persons were related by blood and

there was a long-standing land dispute between the two

families. The dispute had led to a lot of litigation between the

parties, pursuant to which the land belonging to the

appellant’s grandmother was set to be measured and

demarcated on the date of the incident. Owing to the existing

animosity, in the early morning of 13th May 2012, the

accused persons arrived at the appellant’s house armed with

various weapons such as gandasi, danda and lathi and

started verbally abusing the appellant and his family. On

objections being raised to the verbal abuse, accused

Bhupendra Singh instigated the co-accused to beat up the

appellant and his family and thereafter all the accused

persons attacked the appellant and his family with the

various weapons that they were carrying. On hearing their
4
‘FIR’ for short.
4
cries, the appellant’s father Jeet Lal, his sister-in-law

Amrawati, his cousin Kalawati and his niece Priyanka ran

out to rescue them, however, they were also beaten up. The

appellant ran into the house in order to save himself,

however, the accused persons rushed into the house and

severely assaulted him with lathi, danda and gandasi. Upon

cries of alarm being raised, several persons reached the spot

and intervened, thereby putting an end to the matter.

5.3 As a result of the assault, the appellant and his family

members and particularly his father Jeet Lal sustained

serious injuries. The injured persons were initially taken to

the    primary   health   centre       at   Sikrara   wherefrom   the

appellant’s father Jeet Lal was referred to the Sadar Hospital

considering his severe condition. However, the appellant’s

father Jeet Lal died on the way to the hospital. As per the

post-mortem report, the cause of death was haemorrhage,

shock and coma caused by ante-mortem injuries.

5.4 Upon the death of the appellant’s father, the offence

punishable under
Section 304
of the IPC was added to the

FIR.
5
5.5 Upon completion of the investigation, the chargesheet

was filed before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jaunpur.

5.6 As the case was exclusively triable by the Sessions

Court, it was committed to the Court of the Learned Sessions

Judge, Jaunpur where it was registered as Sessions Trial No.

277 of 2012 and was subsequently made over to the Court of

the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Court No.4, Jaunpur

for trial.
5.7 The trial court framed charges against the accused

persons for the offences punishable under
Sections 302
,
323
and
324
read with
Section 34
and
Sections 452
,
504
and
506
of the IPC.
5.8 The accused persons denied the charges and asked to

be tried. To bring the charges home, the prosecution

examined 8 witnesses and produced several documents. In

their defence, the accused persons submitted that the

incident was false and fabricated and they had been falsely

implicated in the matter owing to the ongoing land disputes

between the parties.
6
5.9 On the conclusion of the trial, the trial court vide

judgment and order dated 10th March 2015 convicted the

accused persons and sentenced them as aforementioned.

5.10 Aggrieved thereby, the accused persons preferred three

criminal appeals before the High Court being Criminal

Appeal Nos. 1078 and 1691 of 2015 and 1094 of 2016.

5.11 A Division Bench of the High Court by the First

Judgment dismissed the criminal appeals and upheld the

judgment of the trial court dated 10th March 2015.

5.12 Thereafter,              the     accused   persons   preferred   an

application under
Section 362
of the Code of Criminal

Procedure, 18735 being Criminal Misc. Correction Application

No. 2 of 2019 seeking that the criminal appeals be partly

allowed. It was pleaded in the Correction Application that

when the aforesaid judgment had been pronounced in open

court, to the extent of the sentence awarded, the criminal

appeals had been partly allowed and the convictions for the

offence punishable under
Section 302
of the IPC had been

converted to one under
Section 304
Part II of the
IPC
.

Accordingly, the sentence awarded to each of the accused
5
Hereinafter referred to as “
Cr.P.C
.”
7
persons had been reduced as aforementioned. However, it

was further pleaded when the First Judgment was delivered

by the High Court, the criminal appeals had been dismissed.

It was subsequently found that despite the dismissal, the

case status showed that the criminal appeals had been partly

allowed. Therefore, the accused persons prayed that the last

five paragraphs of the First Judgment be corrected to reflect

the order which had been pronounced in open court.

5.13 The High Court by the impugned judgment and order

allowed the Correction Application and modified its First

Judgment as aforementioned.
5.14 Being aggrieved thereby, these appeals.
6.   We have heard Mr. Narender Singh Yadav, learned

counsel appearing for the appellant, Mr. Shaurya Krishna,

learned counsel appearing for Respondent No.1, Mr. Sushil

Balwada, learned counsel appearing for Respondent No.2,

and Ms. Nanita Sharma, learned counsel appearing for

Respondent No.3.
7.   Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant

submitted that the procedure adopted by the learned Judges

of the Division Bench of the High Court is totally contrary to
8
the provisions of
Section 362
of the Cr.P.C. It is submitted

that by the impugned judgment, the High Court has totally

changed its earlier judgment. It is submitted that, under
Section 362
of Cr.P.C., it is not permissible for any Court to

alter or review its earlier judgment except to correct a clerical

or arithmetical error.
8.   Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent,

on the contrary, tried to support the impugned judgment.
9.   For appreciating the issue, it will be relevant to refer to
Section 362
of Cr.P.C., which reads thus:
“362. Court not to alter judgment.- Save as
     otherwise provided by this Code or by any other law
     for the time being in force, no Court, when it has
     signed its judgment or final order disposing of a
     case, shall alter or review the same except to correct
     a clerical or arithmetical error.”
10. It can thus be seen that, under
Section 362
of Cr.P.C.,

once the judgment and final order is signed disposing of a

case, no Court is allowed to alter or review the same except

to correct a clerical or arithmetical error. No doubt that the

High Court while delivering the impugned judgment has said

that it was only correcting a clerical error. However, for

testing the correctness of the said finding, it will be pertinent
9
to refer to certain paragraphs of both the judgments of the

High Court.
11. In its first judgment, the High Court referred to various

injuries sustained by the deceased Jeet Lal and the injured

victims. It is to be noted that insofar as the injuries of

deceased Jeet Lal is concerned, as many as 11 injuries are

recorded. Thereafter, the High Court also referred to the

autopsy report conducted by the Medical Expert, wherein 10

injuries were recorded. Thereafter, the High Court referred to

the evidence of 8 witnesses. It is to be noted that in the

arguments advanced on behalf of the appellants therein

before the High Court, it was submitted that the evidence of

eye witnesses was not reliable and truthful. Rejecting the

said argument, the High Court has observed thus:
“We are not impressed with the said argument
     of learned counsel for the appellants in view of the
     fact that P.W. 1 informant Lal Bahadur @ Ramyash
     Maurya is an injured witness of the incident. His
     presence on the date, time and place of incident has
     been cogently and unerringly established by the
     prosecution. Even his injuries have not been
     seriously challenged by the prosecution and he in a
     natural and truthful manner has narrated the
     entire incident and has assigned specific role to
     each of the accused persons of wielding blows by
     lathi and danda and assaulting the deceased by
     gadansi. Merely because in the later part of his
     testimony instead of assigning the role of assault by
10
gadansi, the weapon 'ballam' has been used, will
not discredit his entire testimony. Moreover from a
meticulous scrutiny of his entire evidence as a
whole, in our opinion, he is a truthful and reliable
witness and except minor contradictions which do
not go to the root of the case, his testimony inspires
confidence and cannot be discredited. Furthermore,
his testimony finds complete corroboration from the
statement of P.W.2 Amrawati, who in her statement
has clearly stated that she has not witnessed any
accused-appellant holding a ballam and stated that
her father in law Jeet Lal and Lal Bahadur received
injuries by gadansi.
Now coming to the testimony of P.W.2
Amrawati, who in her statement has clearly stated
that on account of dispute over the measurement of
land on the date of incident at 6:30 a.m, appellants
Bhupendra, Moti Lal and Prahlad along with non-
appellant Sunil had on instigation of Bhupendra,
assaulted them and at the time of incident,
Bhupendra was holding a gadansi whereas Moti Lal,
Sunil and Prahlad were armed with lathi. She has
further stated that on account of alarm raised by
her father in law and brother in-law, she, her
daughter Priyanka and sister-in law Kalawati
(nanad) rushed to rescue them and intervened in
the matter and they were also assaulted by the
assailants and when ·his brother in-law P.W. l Lal
Bahadur@ Ramyash Maurya with an intention to
rescue them, entered in the house followed by the
assailants who also assaulted his dewar with
gadansi and lathi because of which they received
serious injuries and when the assailants had left
the scene of incident, she along with her father-in-
law, brother-in-law, daughter and sister-in law
(nanad) were brought at the police station and after
registration of the case, they were sent for medical
examination and on account of serious injuries
received by her and her father-in-law, they were
referred to Sadar Hospital where his father-in-law
succumbed to his injuries. The said witness has
also been subjected to rigorous cross-examination.
11
However, the defence has not been able to elicit any
     material contradictions in her statement and she
     has corroborated the prosecution story on material
     particulars and nothing could be elicited by the
     defence to doubt his credibility. The defence has not
     challenged her presence at the time of incident and
     the injuries on her person completely establishes
     the complicity of the appellants in the present case.
As such we are of the opinion that she is a
     reliable witness and has completely corroborated
     the prosecution story and the trial court has rightly
     relied upon her evidence. The defence has not been
     able to point out any inconsistency or material
     contradictions in her statement and finds
     corroboration from the medical evidence as well as
     the testimony of P.W. l informant Lal Bahadur @
     Ramyash Maurya. In the backdrop of said
     circumstances, the argument of learned counsel for
     the appellants that the testimony of P.W.2 Amrawati
     does not inspire confidence, is not tenable and is
     liable to be discarded.”
12. Thereafter, the High Court referred to the arguments

advanced on behalf of the appellants therein with regard to

discrepancies in the medical examination report prepared by

Dr. Manoj Kumar Chaurasiya (PW-3). Rejecting the said

contention, the High Court observed that the opinion of a

medical expert should be accepted to support the direct

evidence in the case. Thereafter, finally the High Court

concluded thus:
“From the ocular testimony, it is clinchingly
     established that the victim was assaulted by lathi,
     danda and gadansi and even from careful perusal of
12
the postmortem report, the injuries of the said
weapons find corroboration. Therefore, in view of
inconsistency in the nature of injuries found in the
medical examination and postmortem report, the
otherwise consistent testimony of the injured
witnesses cannot be thrown over board. As such, we
are of the opinion that the said argument of the
learned counsel for the appellants also does not
shake the credibility of the witnesses.
The next argument of learned counsel for the
appellants is that since the weapon of assault could
not be recovered by the police and even the blood-
stained clothes have not been handed over to the
police, therefore, the prosecution story becomes
doubtful. The said argument of learned counsel for
the appellants also does not appeal to us in view of
the fact that ocular testimony of the witnesses
clearly establishes the prosecution story beyond any
reasonable doubt and, therefore, in view of the
lapses on the part of the Investigating Officer in
making the recovery of the weapon and producing
the clothes, whole of the prosecution story
supported by the witnesses cannot be thrown over
board. The two injured witnesses whose injuries
and presence has been clearly established by the
prosecution and when the defence has not been
able to elicit any material contradictions in their
statements pointing towards the guilt of the
accused, the prosecution story cannot be discarded.
In view of the foregoing discussion, we are of
the opinion that the prosecution has successfully
proved its case beyond all reasonable doubt against
the appellants and their conviction is liable to be
affirmed.
This appeal lacks merit and is accordingly
dismissed.
Bhupendra Singh, appellant in Criminal
Appeal No. 1078 of 2015 is in jail. He shall serve out
the remaining part of his sentence.
Moti Lal, appellant in Criminal Appeal No.
1691 of 2015 and Prahlad, appellant in Criminal
Appeal No. 1094 of 2016 are on bail. Their bail
13
bonds are cancelled and their sureties discharged.
    Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jaunpur is forthwith
    directed to take them into custody and send them to
    jail for serving out the remaining part of their
    sentences.”
13. Whereas, in the impugned judgment, the High Court

observed thus:
“We have perused the record and the court
    register maintained by the Bench Secretary which
    briefly records the order passed by the Court in
    different cases and upon perusing the relevant page
    of the court register dated 21.05.2018, we find that
    the Bench Secretary had also recorded in the
    register that all the three appeals had been partly
    allowed. The notes made by us on the paper books
    also support the case of the applicants/ appellants.
    To us, it appears that the last five paragraphs of
    the judgement and order sought to be corrected
    were wrongly typed out inadvertently.
Thus, since the facts that the mistakes which
    have crept into the final judgement and order and
    the last five paragraphs of the judgement and order
    sought to be corrected are not in consonance with
    the operative order pronounced in the court, are
    admitted to the learned counsel for the informant
    and learned A.G.A. for the State who had made
    similar notes on their file after hearing had been
    concluded, the correction application is allowed.
The last five paragraphs of the judgement and
    order sought to be corrected are deleted and
    substituted by the following paragraphs :-
Thus, in view of the foregoing discussion, it
    follows that although in the F.I.R. it was alleged that
    the accused-appellants were present at the place of
    occurrence armed with lathis and gandasi and had
    attacked the deceased and the injured namely Jeet
    Lal, Amrawati, Lal Bahadur, Priyanka and Kalawati.
    However, their injury reports (Ext.Ka.2 to Ka. 6) do
    not contain any injuries which could be caused by
14
spears. Moreover, the doctor has opined that the
injuries received by the deceased as well as the
injured were caused by blunt objects except injury
no. 4 sustained by the deceased which could have
been caused by a ballam as deposed by the
prosecution witnesses which was not assigned to
any of the accused in the F.I.R.
Upon a wholesome consideration of the facts of
the case, the attending circumstances and the
evidence on record, both oral as well as
documentary, we find that a dispute had taken
place between the parties over the measurement of
the land of the informant's grand mother which the
accused-appellants claimed to be their property and
although it has been alleged by the prosecution that
on the date of the incident, the measurement of the
land in dispute was to be carried out by an Officer
of the Revenue Department but the prosecution
failed to lead any evidence to show that the date on
which the occurrence had taken place was fixed for
measurement of land of informant's grand mother
by an officer of the Revenue Department which
thus,     indicates   that   the    prosecution   has
suppressed the true genesis of the occurrence. The
incident, in our opinion, appears to be a result of
sudden provocation and at the heat of the moment
and thus, the recorded conviction of the accused-
appellants deserves to be converted to one u/ s 304
Part II I.P. C. and the imprisonment of life awarded
to them palliated to a lesser period of imprisonment.
Accordingly, the appeal is allowed in part.
      The conviction of Bhupendra Singh, Moti Lal
and Prahlad, appellants in Criminal Appeal Nos.
1078 of 2015, 1691 of 2015 and 1094 of 2016
respectively is converted to one
u/s 304
Part II
I.P.C
. The sentence of life imprisonment awarded to
Bhupendra Singh, appellant in Criminal Appeal No.
1078 of 2015 is reduced to ten years rigorous
imprisonment. However, he shall pay a sum of Rs.
1,00,000/- as cost to the heirs and legal
representatives of the deceased Jeet Lal within six
months of his release from jail without prejudice to
15
the right of the relatives of the deceased to seek
     compensation under the provisions of The Uttar
     Pradesh Victim Compensation Scheme, 2014.
Considering the fact that the appellants, Moti
     Lal and Prahlad, appellants in Criminal Appeal Nos.
     1691 of 2015 and 1094 of 2016 respectively were
     aged around 50 years at the time of the occurrence,
     we are of the opinion that the ends of justice shall
     be met if the the sentences of life imprisonment
     awarded to them is palliated to five years rigorous
     imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 5, 000/- each and in
     case of default in payment of fine, three months
     additional rigorous imprisonment each.
Bhupendra Singh, appellant in Criminal
     Appeal No. 1078 of 2015 is in jail. He shall be
     released after serving out the remaining part of his
     sentence.
Moti Lal and Prahlad, appellants in Criminal
     Appeal Nos. 1691 of 2015 and 1094 of 2016
     respectively who were taken into custody and sent
     to jail on account of the mistakes in the operative
     portion of the judgement and order, shall be
     released forthwith if they have served the sentence
     of five years imprisonment.”
14. It could thus clearly be seen that whereas in the First

Judgment, the High Court clearly rejected the contention as

raised on behalf of the appellants therein and confirmed the

conviction under
Section 302
of IPC, the entire reasoning is

changed in the impugned judgment. The High Court, in the

impugned judgment, came to a finding that the incident

appeared to be a result of a sudden provocation and occurred

in the heat of a moment and therefore converted the
16
conviction from
Section 302
of IPC to Part-II of
Section 304
of

IPC.
15. We have already referred to the provisions of
Section

362
of Cr.P.C. Even upon a plain reading of the provisions of
Section 362
of Cr.P.C., the procedure adopted by the High

Court was totally untenable.
16.
In the case of
Smt. Sooraj Devi v. Pyare Lal and

Another6
, this Court has considered what would fall within

the meaning of a clerical and arithmetical error and observed

thus:
“4. ………A clerical or arithmetical error is an error
        occasioned by an accidental slip or omission of the
        court. It represents that which the court never
        intended to say. It is an error apparent on the face
        of the record and does not depend for its discovery
        on argument or disputation. An arithmetical error is
        a mistake of calculation, and a clerical error is a
        mistake in writing or typing.
Master Construction Co.
        (P) Ltd. v. State of Orissa
[AIR 1966 SC 1047 : (1966)
        3 SCR 99 : (1966) 17 STC 360].”
17. Thereafter, this Court observed thus:
“5. The appellant points out that he invoked the
        inherent power of the High Court saved by
Section
        482
of the Code and that notwithstanding the
        prohibition imposed by
Section 362
the High Court
        had power to grant relief. Now it is well settled that
        the inherent power of the court cannot be exercised
        for doing that which is specifically prohibited by the
6
(1981) 1 SCC 500
17
Code (
Sankatha Singh v. State of U.P.
[AIR 1962 SC
        1208 : 1962 Supp 2 SCR 817 : (1962) 2 Cri LJ 288]
        ). It is true that the prohibition in
Section 362
against the court altering or reviewing its judgment
        is subject to what is “otherwise provided by this
        Court or by any other law for the time being in
        force”. Those words, however, refer to those
        provisions only where the court has been expressly
        authorised by the Code or other law to alter or
        review its judgment. The inherent power of the court
        is not contemplated by the saving provision
        contained in
Section 362
and, therefore, the attempt
        to invoke that power can be of no avail.”
18. An exercise similar to the one done by the Allahabad

High Court in the instant matter had come up for

consideration before this Court in the case of
Naresh and

Others v. State of Uttar Pradesh7
. In the said case also,

the High Court had pronounced the judgment on 25 th

February 1980 confirming the conviction as recorded by the

trial court under
Section 302
of IPC. Subsequently however,

the High Court by its judgment dated 14th April 1980

converted the conviction to one under
Section 304
Part I of
IPC
and reduced the sentence to rigorous imprisonment for 7

years. It will be relevant to refer to the following observations

of this Court:
7
(1981) 3 SCCC 74
18
“2. …..Thereafter on an application filed by the
appellant Naresh, the High Court made the
following order on April 14, 1980:
“The application is allowed as there is a
      clerical mistake in the operative part of
the judgment in Criminal Appeal No. 674
of 1975 regarding the conviction and
      sentence of appellant Naresh. The
      sentence, “but his conviction under
Section 302
of the IPC and sentence of
      imprisonment for life awarded thereunder
      are affirmed” be substituted by the
      sentence: “He is convicted under
Section
      304
(Part I) of the
IPC
instead of
Section
      302
of the IPC and sentenced to undergo
      rigorous imprisonment for seven years”.
We are entirely at a loss to understand the order
dated April 14, 1980. In their judgment dated
February 25, 1980 while discussing the case
against Naresh the learned Judges had given a
specific and express finding that he intended to kill
the deceased Bahadur and, therefore, had
committed an offence punishable under
Section 302
of the Penal Code, 1860. The operative part of the
judgment also said the same thing. We do not
understand what the learned Judges mean when
they state in their order dated April 14,1980, “there
is a clerical mistake in the operative part of the
judgment”. The High Court was wholly wrong in
altering the judgment pronounced by them
disposing of the criminal appeals. That was clearly
in contravention of the provisions of
Section 362
of
the Code of Criminal Procedure. What was worse,
the High Court acted in purported exercise of the
power to correct clerical mistakes when in fact there
was none. The conviction under
Section 302
of the
Penal Code, 1860 was perfectly correct and the
conviction had been rightly affirmed by the High
Court in the first instance. There was no occasion at
all for the purported exercise of power to correct a
clerical mistake and alter the conviction under
Section 302
to one under
Section 304
of the Penal
19
Code, 1860. We are greatly concerned that the High
         Court should have committed this grievous error.
         There is, however, nothing that we can do about it
         at this juncture as the State has not chosen to file
         any appeal against the order dated April 14, 1980.”
19. It could thus clearly be seen that this Court had

observed that the similar exercise undertaken by the High

Court
in that case
was in contravention of the provisions of
Section 362
of Cr.P.C. This Court had expressed its great

concern that the High Court should have committed this

grievous error. We fail to understand as to how the High

Court, in the present case also, in spite of the plain and

unambigious words used in the provisions of
Section 362
of

Cr.P.C., has committed such an error.
20. We have no other option but to allow the appeals filed

by the complainant.
21. In the result, we pass the following order:
(i)      Criminal Appeal Nos.1153-1155 of 2021 are allowed;
(ii)     Criminal Appeal No.1175 of 2021 is dismissed;
(iii)    The   impugned    judgment    and   order   dated    8th

           February 2019 is quashed and set aside inasmuch as

           it was not competent for the High Court to have
20
reviewed its judgment and order dated 21st May

         2018;
(iv)   The accused, if they have not undergone their

         sentence as recorded by the High Court in its first

         judgment dated 21st May 2018, are directed to

         surrender before the Chief Judicial Magistrate,

         Jaunpur within a period of 4 weeks from the date of

         this judgment, after which they shall undergo the

         remaining period of sentence;
(v)    We, however, reserve the right of the accused persons

         to challenge the judgment and order dated 21st May

         2018. If such an appeal is filed, the same shall be

         considered on its own merits.
22. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
..............................J.
                                                         (B.R. GAVAI)



                             .............................................J.
                               (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)

NEW DELHI;
APRIL 23, 2025.
21