[Cites
20
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
R. Nagaraj (Dead) Thr. Lrs vs Rajmani on 9 April, 2025
1


2025 INSC 478                                                                   REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5131 OF 2025
                                        (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 36 OF 2021)


             R. NAGARAJ (DEAD) THROUGH LRs.
             AND ANOTHER                                                        ... APPELLANTS

                                                               VERSUS

             RAJMANI AND OTHERS                                                … RESPONDENTS


                                                      JUDGMENT
R. MAHADEVAN, J.
Leave granted.
2.             This appeal is directed against the judgment and decree dated 17.02.2020

             passed by the High Court of Judicature at Madras1 in Second Appeal No.406 of

             1998. By the impugned judgment, the High Court allowed the second appeal,

             thereby setting aside the judgment and decree passed by the Courts below, and

             remitting the matter to the trial Court for framing additional issues in respect of

             limitation. The trial Court was further directed to conduct the trial afresh on the

             aspect of whether the suit was barred by limitation, and to complete it within a

             period of six months.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHANDRESH
Date: 2025.04.09
18:00:11 IST
Reason:
1
Hereinafter referred to as “the High Court”
2
3.         The genesis of the litigation traces back to a joint Hindu family consisting

of Rangappa Gowdar and his sons, Dasappa Gowdar and Samiappan. Originally,

the suit bearing O.S.No.851 of 19652 had been filed by the wife and daughter of

the said Samiappan viz., Sunderammal and Vennila, who are Respondent Nos.6

and 7 herein, seeking maintenance against the said Samiappan and his father

Rangappa Gowdar and brother Dasappa Gowdar. The suit came to be decreed on

26.08.1965 and the suit properties were attached for the maintenance amount in

the execution proceedings initiated by the plaintiffs. During the pendency of the

execution proceedings, the said Rangappa Gowdar and Dasappa Gowdar died and

their legal heirs were brought on record. Through court auction, the suit ‘A’

schedule property was purchased by one Karivarada Gowdar and the sale was

confirmed by issuing certificate dated 25.09.1970 in E.P.No.424 of 1969 in

O.S.No.851 of 1965 by the Court of District Munsif, Coimbatore. Since the said

Samiappan tried to encroach the suit ‘A’ schedule property, the said Karivarada

Gowdar filed a suit viz., O.S.No.1978 of 1972 for permanent injunction and the

same came to be decreed on 11.06.1973. Subsequently, the suit ‘A’ schedule

property was purchased by Respondent Nos.8 to 10 from the said Karivarada

Gowdar and they also filed a suit in O.S.No.3390 of 1981 seeking permanent

injunction, which came to be decreed on 24.07.1982. Thereafter, the suit ‘A’
2
Hereinafter referred to as “the first suit”
3
schedule property was purchased by Respondent No.11 and later-on, by

Appellant Nos.1 and 2.
4.      In the above background, Respondent Nos.1 to 3 who are the daughters

and wife of Dasappa Gowdar, instituted a suit bearing O.S.No.257 of 19823

before the II Additional District Munsif, Coimbatore4, to set aside the decree

passed by the Court of District Munsif, Coimbatore in O.S.No.851 of 1965 and

to partition the suit ‘A’ and ‘C’ schedule properties by metes and bounds in 12

equal parts and to allot the 5/12 shares to the plaintiffs and for permanent

injunction restraining the subsequent purchasers from in any manner disturbing

with the peaceful possession of the suit properties by the plaintiffs.
5.      After trial, the suit was dismissed, by judgment dated 08.09.1994, against

which, Respondent Nos.1 to 3 filed Appeal Suit bearing No.207 of 1994 before

the Additional District Judge, Coimbatore5. By judgment dated 28.01.1997, the

appeal suit came to be dismissed. Challenging the same, Respondent Nos.1 to 3

went on further appeal viz., S.A.No.406 of 1998, which was allowed by the High

Court, by judgment dated 17.02.2020. Aggrieved by the same, the appellants,
3
Hereinafter referred to as “the second suit”
4
Hereinafter referred to as “the trial Court”
5
Hereinafter referred to as “the First Appellate Court”
4
who are the subsequent purchasers of the suit ‘A’ schedule property, have

preferred this appeal before us.
6.     On 25.01.2021, when the matter was taken up for consideration, this Court

passed the following order:
“Exemption from filing O.T. and c/c of the impugned order is granted.
                 Issue notice.
In the meantime, further proceedings in pursuance of the order dated
                17.02.2020 passed by the High Court shall remain stayed.”
7.     During the pendency of this appeal, Respondent Nos.1 and 2 have passed

away, and their legal representatives have been brought on record and

accordingly, the cause title has been amended. Vide order dated 21.10.2022

passed in Interlocutory Application No. 101397/2022, Respondent Nos. 4, 8, 9,

11, 14 and 18 to 21 have been deleted from the array of parties, since they are

proforma parties, and they do not have any surviving interest in the suit property.

Vide    order      dated    21.10.2022     passed     in   Interlocutory     Application

No.101402/2022, the appellants have been exempted from the requirement of

substituting the legal representatives of deceased Respondent Nos.10 and 12.

Despite the service of notice, none appeared on behalf of the other proforma

respondents viz., Respondent Nos.5 to 7, 13, 15, 16 and 17. Thus, Respondent

Nos.1 to 3 are the only contesting parties.
5
8.     Heard the learned counsel for the appellants and the learned counsel for the

contesting Respondent Nos.1 to 3 and also perused the materials available on

record.
9.     The main contention of the learned counsel for the appellants is that

Respondent Nos.1 to 3 had been arrayed as respondents / judgment debtors in the

execution proceedings initiated in O.S.No.851 of 1965 and hence, they had the

knowledge of the proceedings even prior to filing of the suit in O.S.No.257 of

1982. Since the second suit was filed after a period of 17 years, it was hopelessly

barred by limitation. In such circumstances, the High Court ought not to have

allowed the second appeal and remitted the matter to the trial Court for

conducting trial afresh, on the aspect of limitation.
9.1.   It is further submitted that the suit 'A' schedule property could no longer

remain as joint family property, when the same was brought into court auction

and the sale was confirmed and possession was also handed over to the auction

purchaser. However, Respondent Nos.1 to 3 did not take any steps to set aside the

said sale, but they conveniently filed the second suit bearing O.S. No. 257 of 1982

to set aside the decree dated 26.08.1965 passed in the first suit bearing O.S. No.

851 of 1965 without any subsisting legal right.         Further, the documentary

evidence clearly proved that Respondent Nos. 1 to 3 were aware of the execution

proceedings and that, the courts below discussed the limitation point in detail
6
before dismissing the suit / appeal suit filed by Respondent Nos.1 to 3, and

therefore, the necessity to frame an issue on limitation does not arise.


9.2.   The learned counsel also pointed out that the suit was not dismissed solely

on the ground of limitation, but on merits as well, observing that Respondent Nos.

1 to 3 herein are not entitled to any relief, since they had knowledge about the

earlier suit.
9.3.   It is further submitted that after admitting the second appeal, the High

Court ought to have decided the question of law relating to limitation, instead of

remitting the case to the trial Court, specially, after more than two decades from

the inception of the Second Appeal. Further, according to the learned counsel,

Respondent Nos. 1 to 3 herein, failed to approach the Court with clean hands and

abused the process of law by filing such frivolous suit.
9.4.   Thus, the learned counsel submitted that the suit was rightly dismissed by

the trial Court as time-barred and the same was affirmed by the First Appellate

Court. As such, the decision of the High Court to remand the matter for framing

the issue of limitation and conducting trial afresh, is unwarranted and is liable to

be set aside.
10.    Per contra, the learned counsel for Respondent Nos.1 to 3 submitted that

the High Court rightly allowed the second appeal filed by Respondent Nos. 1 to

3 and remitted the matter to the trial Court for fresh trial, after framing the issue
7
of limitation. According to the learned counsel, the said issue is a mixed question

of fact and law; to decide the maintainability of the suit and without framing such

question, the trial Court and the First Appellate Court ought not to have come to

the conclusion that Respondent Nos.1 to 3 are not entitled to the relief to set aside

the decree passed in the first suit viz., O.S. No. 851 of 1965 and to partition the

suit 'A' and 'C' schedule properties by metes and bounds in 12 equal parts and to

allot the 5/12 shares to Respondent Nos.1 to 3, and for a permanent injunction.
In

this regard, reliance was placed on the decision of this Court in
Vaish Aggarwal

Panchayat v. Inder Kumar & Others6
.
10.1. The learned counsel further submitted that the trial Court as well as the

First Appellate Court without framing any issue, any pleadings, and without

leading any evidence, rejected the relief sought by Respondent Nos.1 to 3 as

barred by limitation. Therefore, the High Court rightly remanded the matter to

the trial Court to frame a specific issue with regard to limitation and decide the

matter afresh. Reliance was made to the decision of this court in
Ramesh B. Desai

& Ors. v. Bipin Vadilal Mehta & Others7
.
10.2. It is also submitted that the decree obtained in O.S. No. 851 of 1965 is an

asseveration of fraud and collusion.
6
(2020) 12 SCC 809
7
(2006) 5 SCC 638
8
10.3. With these submissions, the learned counsel prayed for dismissal of this

appeal filed by the appellants.
11.       Upon considering the rival submissions, the only question that arises for

our consideration is whether the High Court was justified in remanding the matter

to the trial Court for a fresh trial on the issue of limitation, despite the existence

of concurrent findings, when
Section 100
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 19088

empowered the High Court to decide the matter.
12.       It is a well settled legal position that
Section 100
CPC confers jurisdiction

on the High Court to entertain a second appeal, only when it is satisfied that the

case involves a substantial question of law. For better appreciation, the said

provision is extracted below:
“9[100. Second appeal.—(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in the body of
          this Code or by any other law for the time being in force, an appeal shall lie to
          the High Court from every decree passed in appeal by any Court subordinate to
          the High Court, if the High Court is satisfied that the case involves a substantial
          question of law.
(2) An appeal may lie under this section from an appellate decree passed ex parte.
          (3) In an appeal under this section, the memorandum of appeal shall precisely
          state the substantial question of law involved in the appeal.
          (4) Where the High Court is satisfied that a substantial question of law is involved
          in any case, it shall formulate that question.
(5) The appeal shall be heard on the question so formulated and the respondent
          shall, at the hearing of the appeal, be allowed to argue that the case does not
          involve such question:
8
For short, “
CPC
”
9
Substituted by Act 104 of 1976,
sec.37
, for
section 100
(w.e.f. 1-2-1977)
9
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to take away or abridge
      the power of the Court to hear, for reasons to be recorded, the appeal on any
      other substantial question of law, not formulated by it, if it is satisfied that the
      case involves such question.]”



Thus, sub-section (1) of
Section 100
says that the second appeal would be

entertained by the High Court only if the High Court is satisfied that the case

involves a substantial question of law. Sub-section (3) makes it obligatory upon

the appellant to precisely state in memo of appeal the “substantial question of

law” involved in the appeal. Sub-section (4) provides that where the High Court

is satisfied that any substantial question of law is involved in the case, it shall

formulate that question. In other words, once the High Court is satisfied after

hearing the appellant or his counsel, as the case may be, that the appeal involves

a substantial question of law, it has to formulate that question and then direct

issuance of notice to the respondent of the memo of appeal along with the

question of law framed by the High Court. Sub-section (5) provides that the

appeal shall be heard only on the question formulated by the High Court under

sub-section (4). In other words, the jurisdiction of the High Court to decide the

second appeal is confined only to the question framed by the High Court under

sub-section (4). The respondent, however, at the time of hearing of the appeal is

given a right under sub-section (5) to raise an objection that the question framed

by the High Court under sub-section (4) does not involve in the appeal. The

reason for giving this right to the respondent for raising such objection at the time

of hearing is because the High Court frames the question at the stage of
10
admission, which is prior to issuance of the notice of appeal to the respondent. In

other words, the question is framed ex parte and, therefore, sub-section (5)

enables him to raise such objection at the time of hearing that the question framed

does not arise in the appeal. The proviso to sub-section (5), however, also

recognizes the power of the High Court to hear the appeal on any other substantial

question of law which was not initially framed by the High Court under sub-
section (4). However, this power can be exercised by the High Court only after

assigning the reasons for framing such additional question of law at the time of

hearing of the appeal [See:
Surat Singh (Dead) v. Siri Bhagwan & Others
(2018) 4 SCC 562].
12.1. Furthermore, this Court has consistently underscored that under
Section

100
CPC, the High Court possesses the authority to entertain second appeals

strictly on substantial questions of law. Upon admitting such an appeal, the High

Court is empowered to frame substantial questions and adjudicate them directly,

without the necessity of remanding the matter to the trial court. This approach

ensures judicial efficiency and prevents unnecessary prolongation of litigation. A

few decisions are outlined below:
(
i) Santosh Hazari v. Purushottam Tiwari (Deceased) by LRs10
“16. Reverting to the facts of the case at hand, prima facie we find the first appellate
          Court did not discharge the duty cast on it as a Court of first appeal. The
10
(2001) 3 SCC 179
11
High Court having noticed failure on the part of the appellant in not discharging
      the statutory obligation cast on him by sub-section (3) of
Section 100
of the Code,
      on account of the substantial question of law involved in the appeal having not been
      stated, much less precisely, in the memorandum of second appeal, ordinarily an
      opportunity to frame such question should have been afforded to the appellant
      unless the deficiency was brought to the notice of the appellant previously by the
      High Court Registry or the court and yet the appellant had persisted in his default.
That was not done. In our opinion, the following substantial question of law does
      arise as involved in the case and worth being heard by the High Court:-
“Whether on the pleadings and the material brought on record by the defendant,
      the first appellate Court was right in holding that the case of adverse possession
      was made out by the defendant and the suit filed by the plaintiff was liable to be
      dismissed as barred by time under
Article 65
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
, more so
      when such finding was arrived at in reversal of the findings of the trial Court?”
17. The appeal is allowed. The case is remitted back to the High Court for hearing
      and deciding the second appeal afresh.
18. We make it clear that we have not expressed any opinion either way on any of
      the issues arising for decision in the case. We also make it clear that our framing
      the question of law involved in the appeal shall not take away the jurisdiction of the
      High Court vesting in it under proviso to sub-section (5) of
Section 100
of the
      C.P.C. to formulate any other question of law involved in the case The second
      appeal shall be decided by the High Court uninfluenced by any of the observations
      made hereinabove which have been made solely to support our opinion that the
      appeal did not merit a summary dismissal by the High Court.”
(ii)
Surat Singh
(supra)

      “29. The scheme of Section 100 is that once the High Court is satisfied that the
      appeal involves a substantial question of law, such question shall have to be framed
      under sub-section (4) of Section 100. It is the framing of the question which
      empowers the High Court to finally decide the appeal in accordance with the
      procedure prescribed under sub-section (5). Both the requirements prescribed in
      sub-sections (4) and (5) are, therefore, mandatory and have to be followed in the
      manner prescribed therein. Indeed, as mentioned supra, the jurisdiction to decide
      the second appeal finally arises only after the substantial question of law is framed
      under sub-section (4). There may be a case and indeed there are cases where even
      after framing a substantial question of law, the same can be answered against the
      appellant. It is, however, done only after hearing the respondents under sub-section
      (5).”
12
(iii) Mehboob-Ur-Rehman (Dead) Through Lrs. V. Ahsanul Ghani11

          “21. As per
Section 100
CPC, the appeal would lie to the High Court from the
          decree passed in appeal by any Court subordinate only if the High Court is satisfied
          that the case involves a substantial question of law; such question is required to be
          stated in the Memorandum of Appeal; the High Court is required to formulate the
          question on being satisfied that the same is involved in the case; the appeal is to be
          heard on the question so formulated; and at the time of hearing, the respondent
          could urge that the case does not involve such a question. The proviso to sub-
section (5) of
Section 100
CPC makes it clear that the Court could hear the appeal
          on any other substantial question of law not formulated by it, but only after
          recording the reasons that the case involves such a question.
In
Surat Singh (Dead)
          v. Siri Bhagwan and others
(2018) 4 SCC 562 this Court has pointed out the
          contours of the powers of High Court under the proviso to sub-section (5) of
Section
          100
CPC as under:-
“21……… The proviso to sub-section (5), however, also recognises the power of
          the High Court to hear the appeal on any other substantial question of law which
          was not initially framed by the High Court under sub-section (4). However, this
          power can be exercised by the High Court only after assigning the reasons for
          framing such additional question of law at the time of hearing of the appeal”.
22. We are clearly of the view that the proviso to sub-section (5) of
Section
          100
CPC is not intended to annul the other requirements of Section 100 and it
          cannot be laid down as a matter of rule that irrespective of the question(s)
          formulated, hearing of the second appeal is open for any other substantial question
          of law, even if not formulated earlier…”
(iv)      This Court pointing out the principle
laid down in
Surat Singh
case, set

aside the judgment of the High Court on the ground of violation of mandatory

procedure prescribed under
section 100
CPC, and remanded the matter to the

High Court for deciding the appeal afresh on merits in accordance with law

[Refer: Vijay Arjun Bhagat and others v. Nana Laxman Tapkire and others,

(2018) 6 SCC 727].
11
AIR 2019 SC 1178/(2019) 19 SCC 413
13
(v)       This Court in
Ramakrishnan Kadinhipally & Ors. v. P.T. Karunakaran

Nambiar12
criticized the High Court for remanding a case to the trial court without

proper justification, especially when concurrent findings of fact existed. It

reiterated that in second appeals under
Section 100
CPC, the High Court should

not interfere with concurrent findings unless there is a substantial question of law.

The relevant paragraphs read as under:
“7. By the impugned judgment and order and without answering anything on the
          substantial questions of law framed/formulated, absolutely in a casual manner, the
          High Court has allowed the Second Appeal and has set aside the concurrent
          findings recorded by both the courts below and thereafter has remanded the matter
          to the learned trial Court permitting the original plaintiff to amend the plaint and
          pray for fixation of the boundary.
9. Having heard learned counsel for the respective parties and having gone through
          the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court, we are constrained to
          observe that the manner in which the High Court has dealt with the Second Appeal
          under
Section 100
of the CPC is not appreciable at all. From the impugned
          judgment and order passed by the High Court, it appears that the High Court has
          exercised the powers as if the High Court was deciding the Writ Petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India. The High Court has not appreciated at all
          that the High Court was deciding the Second Appeal under
Section 100
of the CPC
          and that too against the concurrent findings of fact by both the courts below, which
          were, as such, on appreciation of evidence on record. Under the circumstances, the
          impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court is unsustainable.
11. At the cost of repetition, it is observed that the High Court was dealing with the
          Second Appeal under
Section 100
CPC and the concurrent findings recorded by
          both the courts below which were on appreciation of evidence on record. Neither
          at the stage of deciding the suit nor even before the first Appellate Court even such
          a prayer was made to amend the plaint, which is now permitted by the High Court,
          despite the fact that earlier in the suit during the course of trial, the plaint was
12
2023 SCC OnLine SC 323
14
amended. Under the circumstances also, the impugned judgment and order passed
      by the High Court is unsustainable.
12. Even for remand, a specific case is to be made out as per Order 41 Rule 23,
      23A and 25
of the CPC
. No findings are recorded by the High Court that the case
      falls within Order 41 Rule 23, 23A and 25
of the CPC
and the matter is required to
      be remanded to the learned trial Court on setting aside the concurrent findings of
      fact recorded by both the courts below. The High Court has mechanically remanded
      the suit, which is wholly impermissible.
13. Even the substantial questions of law framed by the High Court, while admitting
      the second appeal, which are reproduced herein above cannot be said to be as such
      substantial questions of law at all. The same are on questions of fact. Under the
      circumstances, the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court
      quashing and setting aside the concurrent findings recorded by both the courts
      below, while exercising the powers under
Section 100
CPC, is unsustainable.
14. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the present Appeal
      succeeds. The impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court is hereby
      quashed and set aside. The judgment and decree passed by the learned trial Court
      confirmed by the first Appellate Court is, hereby, ordered to be restored.”
13.   In the present case, evidently, the first suit viz., O.S.No.851 of 1965 seeking

maintenance was decreed on 26.08.1965 in favour of the plaintiffs / Respondent

Nos.6 and 7 herein. Consequently, the suit properties were attached for realizing

the maintenance amount. In the court auction, the suit ‘A’ schedule property was

purchased by Karivarada Gowdar and the sale was confirmed vide certificate

(Ex.B1) dated 25.09.1970 and possession was also handed over to him on

22.12.1970. Patta book (Ex.B5) was also issued in his favour. Subsequently, the

suit ‘A’ schedule property was purchased by Respondent Nos.8 to 10 and

thereafter, by Respondent No.11 and thereafter, by the appellants herein. It is also

to be noted here that the subsequent purchasers filed two separate suits for
15
permanent injunction restraining the defendants therein from interfering with

their possession of the suit ‘A’ schedule property and the same also came to be

decreed, in their favour. It is significant to point out at this juncture that though

the father of Respondent Nos.1 and 2 and the husband of Respondent No.3 viz.,

Dasappa Gowdar was party to the said suit, he did not contest the suit effectively.
After his death, Respondent Nos.1 to 3 were duly impleaded in the execution

proceedings and a court guardian was also appointed for the minor daughter of

the said Dasappa Gowdar. However, they did not take any immediate steps to set

aside the decree passed in the first suit. It was only in 1982, approximately

seventeen years after the first suit that Respondent Nos.1 to 3 filed the second suit

viz., O.S.No.257 of 1982 seeking to set aside the decree in O.S.No.851/1965,

partition of the suit 'A' and 'C' schedule properties, permanent injunction, etc. As

such, it cannot be contended that Respondent Nos.1 to 3 were unaware of the first

suit and upon becoming aware of it, they filed the second suit after a period of 17

years. Further, in the second suit, Respondent Nos.1 to 3 did not specify when

they became aware of the decree passed in the first suit.
14.   In the second suit viz., O.S.No. 257 of 1982, Respondent Nos.1 to 3

predicated their case on allegations of fraud and collusion between the

defendants, claiming a lack of knowledge about the earlier proceedings. They

further asserted that Respondent No.3 was in mental distress following her

husband's death and that they were in continuous possession of the suit properties.
16
15.   The trial court, after a comprehensive examination of the evidence, both

oral and documentary, concluded that Respondent Nos.1 to 3 are not entitled to

any relief in the suit. On the pivotal issue of limitation, the trial court was of the

view that the action has to be taken to set aside the decree within a period of three

years, as per
Article 59
of the
Limitation Act
, whereas the suit was filed after a

period of seventeen years and hence, the relief sought by Respondent Nos.1 to 3

to set aside the decree passed in the first suit was hit by the doctrine of limitation.

The relevant paragraphs of the judgment passed by the trial Court are reproduced

below for ready reference:
“12. From the date of Ex.A1 about 17 years later, the relief which is sought for, to
      set aside the above said decree is hit by limitation is contended on the defendant's
      side. The defendants did not mention specifically in the written statement filed by
      them. If as per law a case is to filed within the stipulated period this court has the
      power to dismiss the case, and even though the counter argument is not made in
      this regard, the court has the power to dismiss the suit, as mentioned in the proviso
      of
Section 3
of Limitation Act was appointed out by the Learned Counsel for the
      defendants. Therefore, considering the proviso of
Section 3
of the above said Act,
      it is necessary to peruse whether the relief sought for by the plaintiff to set aside
      the order passed in O.S.No.851 of 1985 is made within the stipulated period, in this
      case.
13. As mentioned in the
Article 59
of the
Limitation Act
, the action has to be taken
      to set aside the Ex.A 1 decree, within a period of three years. That is within three
      years from the date of Ex.A1 the plaintiffs would have taken action for setting aside
      the above said decree. I find that it is pertinent to mention the clause on page 634
      of
The Limitation Act
, by B.B. Mitra. It is as follows:
12. Burden of proof. If a suit is prima facie within the time allowed by the Article
      then if the defendant takes a plea that the suit is barred by limitation then it is for
      the defendant to prove it. Where, however, on the averments of the plaint the suit
      seems to barred it is for plaintiff to make out the circumstances to prove that the
      suit is not barred by limitation. Mere assertion in the plaint that the plaintiff
      acquired knowledge on particular date does not by itself establish that fact and if
      on averments made in the plaint it is found that the plaintiff had acquired knowledge
      beyond the period prescribed by this Article then the suit will be barred. If the suit
17
is prima facie within the time but the defendant takes plea that the plaintiff was
      aware of the necessary facts to file the suit prior to the date when he admits in the
      plaint such knowledge of facts then it is for the defendant to allege and prove that
      the plaintiff had such knowledge prior to the period from which the time begins to
      run.
It is mentioned in the plaint that the 3rd plaintiff is not aware of the Ex.Al decree
      and the proceedings after this. It is not mentioned in the plaint as to when for the
      first time, they knew about the Ex.A1 decree and the proceedings initiated
      thereafter. In this connection, evidence was not let in by P.A.l in this court. As
      already stated by me, this suit has been filed about 17 years later from the date of
      the date of decree. It is the onus of the plaintiff to prove that the relief prayed for to
      set aside the decree was filed within the stipulated time. Only through Dasappa
      Gowdar, the plaintiffs claim the right over the suit A and C schedule properties. As
      already stated by me the above said Dasappa Gowdar is aware of the Ex.Al decree
      is revealed through the copy of the order Ex.A2. Even the above said Dasappa
      Gowdar did not take any action to set aside the decree Ex.Al. Thereafter, after the
      demise of Dasappa Gowdar, in the execution proceedings, these plaintiffs were
      impleaded as legal heirs is revealed through Ex.B1. Therefore, the averment that
      the 3rd plaintiff is not aware of the above said Ex.Al decree and the proceedings
      thereafter, as mentioned in the plaint is not proved. Per contra, it is proved through
      the documents in this case, that the plaintiffs are aware of the above said
      proceedings. Therefore, I hold that the relief as prayed for by the Plaintiff to set
      aside the exparte Decree Ex.Al is hit by the doctrine of limitation…”
16.   The First Appellate Court also, upon a thorough analysis, affirmed the

judgment of the trial Court. Especially, with respect to the conclusion reached by

the trial Court on the aspect of limitation, the First Appellate Court was of the

opinion that the plaintiffs had slept over for 17 years and had chosen to come to

the court violating the mandate under
Section 59
of the Limitation Act and

therefore, the suit was hopelessly barred by limitation as
laid down by
the trial

Court. The relevant paragraphs of the First Appellate Court’s judgment are

extracted below for ready reference:
18
“15.The 4th Defendant Sundarammal and her daughter Vennila have instituted a
suit against samiappan the 3rd Defendant herein in O.S.851/65 for maintenance and
also for creating a charge over the suit properties. The decree obtained by them in
the above suit by the 4th Defendant and 5th Defendant was marked as Ex.A1.
Thereafter it is found that the Defendants 4 and 5 took the Execution Proceedings
against Samiappan and in his presence the sale of the A- schedule property was
ordered by the Court under Exs.A-2 and A-3. It will have to be noted that the 3rd
Defendant Samiappan had contested the Execution Application filed by his wife and
daughter. After the demise of Rangan Gowder, the father of Samiappan, Kempakkal
the wife of Rangan Gowder and Subbammal the daughter of Rangan Gowder were
impleaded as legal representatives of Rangan Gowder as found from Ex.A.4. It
would be pertinent to note that the said Kempakkal is the 1st defendant and the said
Subbammal is the 2nd Defendant in this suit. It is not as if the Plaintiffs were in the
dark, while the proceedings for payment of maintenance were taken by
Sundarammal and Vennila Madammal in the name of Thoddammal and Rajamani
and Santhamani, the Plaintiffs herein have been impleaded as legal representatives
of Dasappan on his demise in the Execution Proceedings as found in Ex.B-1 to B-
3 would establish that the A-schedule property which was brought for sale for 4th
and 5th Defendants was knocked down by one Kerivaratha Gounder.
17. Dasappan the husband of the 3rd Plaintiff has contested the Execution Petition
filed by Sundaramal and Vennila by engaging a counsel for him. It is not as if that
the parties had remained ex parte throughout the proceedings as contended by the
Plaintiffs. Ex.B-1 would reveal that Rajamani and Santhamani the minor children
of Dasappan were represented by a Court guardian appointed by the Court,
Subbammal the 2nd Defendant also has been added as a party to the Execution
Proceedings on the demise of Rangae Gowder apart from his wife 1st Defendant
having been impleaded as a party to the suit. The plaintiffs and Defendants 1 to 3
were aware of the proceedings taken by Sundarammal and Vennila.
19. D.W.2 in his cross-examination would state that in their families the eldest
female member would be called as Thoddammal. No wonder Madammal being the
oldest female member in the family of Dasappan has been so-called as
Thoddammal. Further Ex.B-9 the returned cover would show that the postman has
made and endorsement after enquiry that the addressee viz. Thoddammal, wife of
Dasappan was out of Station. If Thoddammal was not the wife of Dasappan, the
Postman would not have stated that Thoddammal wife of Dasappan has gone out.
Further it is not the case of the Plaintiffs that any other wife was there for
Dasappan. Therefore, accepting the explanation given by D.W.2 the Court comes
to the conclusion that Madammal was called as Thoddammal also and that,
therefore, it is false to say that Madammal was not aware of the proceedings taken
by Sundarammal. Further when Rajamani and Santhamani were represented by
Court guardian the court guardian could not have acted affectively unless
Madammal gave proper instructions to contest the Execution proceeding taken by
19
sundrammal. It is highly ridiculous to state that Madammal was totally out of
      picture.
21. The execution Court while executing the decree obtained in O.S.No.851/65 has
      chosen to sell away the A Schedule property to satisfy the maintenance decree
      obtained by 4th and 5th Defendants through Court auction in the presence of all
      the Defendants herein. When the coparceners have not taken steps to partition the
      share of Samiappan at the time of the Execution proceeding taken by Defendants 4
      and 5 the Execution Court did not find the other way except bringing one of the
      schedule of properties for sale to satisfy the maintenance decree. I do not find any
      lacuna in the above execution proceedings. The plaintiffs have not cared to mention
      when they came to know of the maintenance decree obtained by 4th and 5th
      Defendants and the sale of the A-schedule property in Court auction. Nor have they
      stated anything about it in their evidence. For about 17 years, the Plaintiffs have
      slept over and have chosen to come to the court violating the mandate found under
      Sec.59 of the limitation Act. Therefore, the suit is hopelessly barred by limitation
      as
laid down by
the Trial Court…”
17.   Thereafter, when the concurrent findings were sought to be challenged by

way of second appeal, the High Court at the time of admission on 30.03.1998,

formulated the following substantial question of law:
“Whether the Court below was right in justifying the sale of the entire A schedule
      properties, which were admittedly joint family properties and in which the second
      respondent has only 1/3rd share, which alone would be liable to satisfy the decree
      for maintenance obtained by his wife and daughters viz., respondents 3 and 4.”

Upon hearing the arguments of the counsel for both sides, the High Court

formulated the following additional substantial question of law:
"Whether the lower Court was right in its conclusion that the suit is barred under
Section 59
of the Limitation Act, when the appellants had no knowledge of the sale
      proceedings till 1981, when they published the notice under Ex.A.6?"
Without deciding the substantial question of law involved in the second appeal,

the High Court only considered the additional substantial question of law,
20
observing that both the Courts failed to frame any issue in respect of the

limitation, though held that the suit was barred by limitation. Accordingly, the

High Court allowed the second appeal by setting aside the judgments passed by

the Courts below and remitted the matter to the trial Court for a fresh trial with a

direction to frame additional issue regarding limitation, let in evidence and decide

the matter after giving due opportunity to both sides, within a period of six

months. The relevant paragraphs of the High Court’s judgment are extracted for

ready reference:
“10. In this regard, it is relevant to extract the issues framed by the trial Court as
      follows:
1) Whether the Plaintiff is entitled to the relief to the Judgement in O.S.851/2005?
2) Whether the Plaintiffs are entitled to 5/12 Shares in suit 'A' and 'C' schedule
      properties?
3) Whether the Plaintiffs are entitled to the relied of permanent injunction as prayed
      in the plaint?
4) Whether the Plaintiffs have paid sufficient correct fees?
5) What other reliefs are the Plaintiffs entitled to?
Though, the trial Court discussed in respect of the above issues and also about the
      question of limitation, dismissed the suit as the suit itself barred by limitation.
11. The first appellate Court also framed the points for consideration as follows:
"1. Whether the plaintiffs are entitled to the relief of cancellation of the decree in
      O.S.No.851/65 on the file of the District Munsif Court, Coimbatore?
2. Whether the plaintiffs are in possession and enjoyment of the A schedule and
      consequently whether they are entitled to permanent injunction as prayed for by
      them?"
The first appellate Court also discussed about the limitation and concluded that the
      suit is filed after 17 years as such, violation of provision under
Section 59
of the
      Limitation Act and the suit is hopelessly barred by
Limitation Act
and dismissed.
21
12. Admittedly, both the Courts below did not frame any issue in respect of the
      limitation. As rightly pointed out by the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the
      plaintiffs, both the Courts failed to frame any issue in respect of limitation, though
      both the Court hold as the suit is barred by limitation. The first appellate Court
      also confirmed the judgment and decree passed by the trial Court without framing
      point for limitation for determination in the first appeal. Therefore this Court
      necessarily has to interfere with the finding of the Courts below. Accordingly, this
      Court answered only on the additional substantial question of law formulated by
      this Court in favour of the plaintiffs and against the defendants.
13. In fine, the second appeal stands allowed and the judgment and decree passed
      by Courts below are set aside. However considering the facts and circumstances,
      the suit is remitted back to the trial Court for fresh trial by framing additional issues
      in respect of limitation and let in evidence on those aspects and decide the matter
      after giving due opportunity to both sides in respect of the issue. Further the trial
      Court is directed to complete the trial within a period of six months from the date
      of receipt of the entire bundle. It is made clear that the trial court is directed to
      conduct the trial uninfluenced by the observation made by this Court while deciding
      the case. There is no order as to costs.”
18.   In our opinion, the judgment of the High Court is unsustainable, applying

the legal principles as stated above that once the High Court is satisfied that the

appeal involves a substantial question of law, such question shall have to be

framed and finally decided on merits in accordance with the procedure laid down

under
section 100
CPC. The High Court, has failed to decide the substantial

framed at the time of admission and went to decide, only the additional substantial

question of law, framed at the time of hearing. The first suit was decreed on

26.08.1965 and the auction purchaser got the suit ‘A’ schedule property on

22.12.1970 and thereafter, the appellants herein purchased the same from the

subsequent purchaser by name R.S.Ramaswamy / Respondent No.11; despite the

fact that the decree and sale were within the knowledge of the Respondent Nos.
22
1 to 3, they have thwarted the right of the purchasers over the suit ‘A’ schedule

property by filing second suit viz., O.S. No.257 of 1982, that too, after a period

of 17 years and the decision of the High Court remanding the matter to the trial

Court for a fresh trial on the limitation aspect, without deciding the same on

merits, by holding that a separate issue ought to have been framed is unsustainable

and will certainly prolong the litigation without any useful purpose.
19.   The object of framing an issue is to determine the material point of disputes

between the parties, for the purpose of adjudication. Issues can be framed on a

question of law or fact or a mixed question of law and fact. The decision on the

issue settles the lis in favour of either of the parties. A distinct issue is to be

formed when a material proposition of law or fact is affirmed by one party and

denied by another. Also, there is no necessity to frame an issue, when the parties

are not at dispute on a particular fact or law. At times, despite pleadings, when a

specific issue is not framed, but when both the parties to the lis have let in

evidence and rendered their arguments on a point, the decision on which is

intrinsically connected to the main issue, then the Court is bound to render a

finding on the point of dispute before deciding the connected issue, one way or

another. In that case, it becomes the duty of the Court to analyze the evidence

before it and render a decision on all disputed questions of fact or law, directly or

indirectly in issue, so as to put an end to the lis.
The Limitation Act,1963
restricts

the right of a litigant by prescribing a time limit within which action must be
23
initiated. Its object is to provide a time or period, within which, the action has to

be initiated. The object of the Act is not to destroy a vested right available in law

but to prevent indefinite litigation and therefore, only prescribes a period for

initiation of the litigation. This Court has described the object of the
Limitation

Act, 1963
in the following decisions:
(
i) Bharat Barrel & Drum Mfg. Co. Ltd. and Another v. Employees State

Insurance Corporation13
:
“7. …… The object of the Statutes of Limitations is to compel a person to exercise
         his rights of action within a reasonable time as also to discourage and suppress
         stale, fake or fraudulent claims. While this is so, there are two aspects of the
         Statutes of Limitation the one concerns the extinguishment of the right if a claim
         or action is not commenced with a particular time and the other merely bar the
         claim without affecting the right which either remains merely as a moral
         obligation or can be availed of to furnish the consideration for a fresh enforceable
         obligation. Where a statute prescribing the limitation extinguishes the right, it
         affects substantive right while that which purely pertains to the commencement of
         action without touching the right is said to be procedural”.
(
ii) N. Balakrishnan v. M. Krishnamurthy14
“that the
Limitation Act
is based upon public policy which is used for fixing a life
         span of a legal remedy for the purpose of general welfare. It has been pointed out
         that the Law of Limitation are not only meant to destroy the rights of the parties
         but are meant to look to the parties who do not resort to the tactics but in general
         to seek remedy. It fixes the life span for legal injury suffered by the aggrieved
         person which has been enshrined in the maxim ‘interest reipublicae ut sit finis
         litium’ which means the Law of Limitation is for general welfare and that the
         period is to be put into litigation and not meant to destroy the rights of the person
         or parties who are seeking remedy. The idea with regards to this is that every
         legal remedy must be alive for a legislatively fixed period of time”.
13
AIR 1972 SC 1935
14
(1998) 7 SCC 123
24
20.       Limitation, as we generally know is a mixed question of fact and law.

However, there is no hard and fast rule that every question of limitation is to be

treated as a mixed question of fact and law. In cases, where the action is initiated

after several years after the right to sue accrued, without any pleadings to explain

the reasons for delay or as to when the fraud was discovered, the question of

limitation is to be treated as a question of law. A recourse may be had to Order

VI Rules 4 and 10
CPC
, which mandates that specific particulars would have to

be given in the pleadings. Once such a plea is raised in the pleadings, then the

burden lies on the person to prove that the delay was due to any plausible reason

and it is always well within the knowledge of the other party to contend and prove

that the opposite party had prior knowledge about the disputed fact and that his

right to sue or defend had also accrued by that date. Even in the absence of

specific pleadings regarding the limitation in the plaint or a plea of defense, there

is a bounden duty on every civil Court to ascertain as to whether the lis has been

initiated within the time prescribed under law, even if the parties to the lis had not

raised any objections. This right flows from the mandate of
Section 3
of the

Limitation Act, 1963. A useful reference may be had to the judgment of this Court

on this aspect, in V.M. Salgaocar and Bros. v. Board of Trustees of Port of

Mormugao and another15, wherein, it was held as follows:
“20. The mandate of
Section 3
of the Limitation Act is that it is the duty of the
          court to dismiss any suit instituted after the prescribed period of limitation
          irrespective of the fact that limitation has not been set up as a defence. If a suit is
15
(2005) 4 SCC 613
25
ex facie barred by the law of limitation, a court has no choice but to dismiss the
      same even if the defendant intentionally has not raised the plea of limitation.
21. This Court in
Manindra Land & Building Corpn. Ltd. v. Bhutnath Banerjee
[(1964) 3 SCR 495 : AIR 1964 SC1336] held (AIR para 9):
“
Section 3
of the Limitation Act enjoins a court to dismiss any suit instituted,
      appeal preferred and application made, after the period of limitation prescribed
      therefor by Schedule I irrespective of the fact whether the opponent had set up the
      plea of limitation or not. It is the duty of the court not to proceed with the
      application if it is made beyond the period of limitation prescribed. The Court had
      no choice and if in construing the necessary provision of the
Limitation Act
or in
      determining which provision of the
Limitation Act
applies, the subordinate court
      comes to an erroneous decision, it is open to the court in revision to interfere with
      that conclusion as that conclusion led the court to assume or not to assume the
      jurisdiction to proceed with the determination of that matter.”


In cases, where the pleadings are silent, then it becomes the duty of the Court to

ascertain from the evidence and the overall facts of the case, as pleaded by either

party, and to render a finding on limitation where the question of limitation is to

be treated as a question of law, since the Court cannot entertain frivolous or stale

claims. It is also apropos to reiterate the settled position of law that a question of

law can be raised at any stage.
21.   We have in earlier paragraph discussed the object of framing the issues.
We also held that there could be several points directly or indirectly connected

with the main issue that has been framed. In such cases, when the larger issue that

has been framed is wide enough to cover different points of disputes within it,

there is no necessity to frame a specific issue on that aspect. Further, when the

parties go to trial with the knowledge that a particular point is at lis, had full

opportunity to let in evidence, they cannot later turn back to say that a specific
26
issue was not framed. All that is required under law, is for the Court to render a

finding on the particular fact or law in dispute, on the facts of the case. However,

we make it clear that such evidence, in the absence of pleadings, cannot permit

either of the parties to make out a new case. It is pertinent to mention here that

the Courts are vested with powers to go into the question of law, touching upon

either the limitation or the jurisdiction, even if no plea is raised and not in cases,

where facts have to be pleaded and evidence has to be let in. The Civil Procedure

Code and the law of limitation, being procedural laws, meant to assist the Courts

in the process of rendering justice, cannot curtail the power of the Courts to render

justice. Procedural laws after all are handmaid of justice. What is to be seen is

whether any irregularity arising from a failure to follow procedure has caused

serious prejudice to the parties. It is not to be forgotten that the process of

adjudication is to discern the truth.
21.1. It will be useful to refer to certain judgments of this Court on violation of

procedural law, which are as follows:
(
i) Sardar Amarjit Singh Kalra (Dead) by L.Rs. & Others v. Pramod Gupta (Smt.)
(Dead) by L.Rs. and Others16
:
“26. Laws of procedure are meant to regulate effectively, assist and aid the object
          of doing substantial and real justice and not to foreclose even an adjudication on
          merits of substantial rights of citizen under personal, property and other laws.
          Procedure has always been viewed as the handmaid of justice and not meant to
          hamper the cause of justice or sanctify miscarriage of justice........”
16
MANU/SC/1214/2002 : (2003) 3 SCC 272 (Constitutional Bench)
27
(
ii) Kailash v. Nanhku and Ors.17
:
“28. All the Rules of procedure are the handmaid of justice. The language employed
          by the draftsman of processual law may be liberal or stringent, but the fact remains
          that the object of prescribing procedure is to advance the cause of justice. In an
          adversarial system, no party should ordinarily be denied the opportunity of
          participating in the process of justice dispensation. Unless compelled by express
          and specific language of the statute, the provisions
of Code of Civil Procedure
or
          any other procedural enactment ought not to be construed in a manner which would
          leave the court helpless to meet extraordinary situations in the ends of justice. The
          observations made by Krishna Iyer, J. in Sushil Kumar Sen v. State of Bihar
          [MANU/SC/0028/1975 : (1975) 1 SCC 774] are pertinent: (SCC p. 777, paras 5-6)

          The mortality of justice at the hands of law troubles a judge's conscience and points
          an angry interrogation at the law reformer.
The processual law so dominates in certain systems as to overpower substantive
          rights and substantial justice. The humanist Rule that procedure should be the
          handmaid, not the mistress, of legal justice compels consideration of vesting a
          residuary power in judges to act ex debito justitiae where the tragic sequel
          otherwise would be wholly inequitable. ... Justice is the goal of jurisprudence --
          processual, as much as substantive.
29.
In
State of Punjab v. Shamlal Murari [ MANU/SC/0494/1975
: (1976) 1 SCC
          719 : 1976 SCC (L&S) 118] the Court approved in no unmistakable terms the
          approach of moderating into wholesome directions what is regarded as mandatory
          on the principle that: (SCC p. 720)

          “Processual law is not to be a tyrant but a servant, not an obstruction but an aid to
          justice. Procedural prescriptions are the handmaid and not the mistress, a
          lubricant, not a resistant in the administration of justice. In Ghanshyam Dass v.
Dominion of India [MANU/SC/0006/1984 : (1984) 3 SCC 46] the Court reiterated
          the need for interpreting a part of the adjective law dealing with procedure alone
          in such a manner as to subserve and advance the cause of justice rather than to
          defeat it as all the laws of procedure are based on this principle.”
17
MANU/SC/0264/2005 : (2005) 4 SCC 480 (3 Judge Bench)
28
(
iii) Sugandhi (Dead) by LRs & Others v. P. Rajkumar18
:
“9. It is often said that procedure is the handmaid of justice. Procedural and
         technical hurdles shall not be allowed to come in the way of the court while doing
         substantial justice. If the procedural violation does not seriously cause prejudice to
         the adversary party, courts must lean towards doing substantial justice rather than
         relying upon procedural and technical violation. We should not forget the fact that
         litigation is nothing but a journey towards truth which is the foundation of justice
         and the court is required to take appropriate steps to thrash out the underlying truth
         in every dispute. Therefore, the court should take a lenient view when an application
         is made for production of the documents under Sub-rule (3).”
22.      In the present case, the trial Court though had not framed a specific issue

on “limitation”, the same could very well fall under the broader issue. The

question of limitation can be encompassed within the larger question determined

by the First Appellate Court for determination. The failure of the trial Court and

the First Appellate Court to formulate a separate issue, in the view of this Court,

is not fatal to the judgment rendered by them and has not caused any prejudice to

the parties. Further, the trial Court, in the performance of its duty, mandated

under
Section 3
of the Limitation Act, 1963, has taken up the question of

limitation and upon perusal of the overall pleadings and evidence, has rightly

decided the same. Therefore, we do not agree with the decision of the High Court

in remanding the matter to the trial Court, that too after this length of time, when

all materials were available before it.
18
MANU/SC/0792/2020 : (2020) 10 SCC 706
29
23.   As already indicated above, the concurrent findings of the Courts below

were sought to be challenged before the High Court. It is a general rule that High

Court will not interfere with the concurrent findings of the Courts below. In the

present case, both the trial Court and the First Appellate Court, after detailed

analysis of the oral and documentary evidence let-in by the parties, categorically

held that the suit was hopelessly barred by limitation. We also find that the

evidence produced would abundantly make it clear that Dasappa Gowdar and

thereafter, Respondent Nos.1 to 3 were well aware of the earlier proceedings and

the decree passed in the first suit. The auction purchaser's title was confirmed by

court orders, and subsequent transfers were properly registered and recorded.

Therefore, Respondent Nos.1 to 3, who have knowingly slept over their right to

challenge the sale and allowed further rights to flow, cannot later question the

sale of larger extent of share in an unpartitioned property. We also do not find

any plausible reasons for delay. It is reiterated at this juncture that limitation is a

matter of statute and must be strictly enforced, more so when the earlier

transaction or sale is well within the knowledge of the parties. This principle

assumes greater significance in the present case, where the delay extends to

seventeen years for filing the suit, despite the fact that they were arrayed as

respondents/Judgment Debtors in the execution proceedings. Furthermore,

protection of bona fide purchasers for value is a significant consideration, and

any disturbance to their rights or titles after such a long period, would create

uncertainty in property transactions and undermine the sanctity of court sale.
30
Therefore, we are of the view that the High Court was not justified in remanding

the matter to the trial Court for fresh trial solely with respect to the issue of

limitation; and that, the Courts below have rightly held that the suit was barred

by limitation and Respondent Nos.1 to 3 are not entitled for any relief.
24.   In such view of the matter, the appeal is allowed. The impugned judgment

of the High Court is set aside. The judgment and decree of the trial court

dismissing the suit, as affirmed by the First Appellate Court, are restored. Parties

shall bear their own costs throughout.
25.   Connected Miscellaneous Application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
……………………J.
                                                             [J. B. Pardiwala]



                                                            ……………………J.
                                                             [R. Mahadevan]

NEW DELHI;
APRIL 09, 2025.