[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Himachal Pradesh vs Shamsher Singh on 17 April, 2025
Author:
Pankaj Mithal
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
NON-REPORTABLE
 2025 INSC 503

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 476 OF 2015


          STATE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH                                  …APPELLANT(S)

                                                VERSUS
          SHAMSHER SINGH                                           …RESPONDENT(S)


                                            JUDGMENT
PANKAJ MITHAL, J.
1.             Heard Shri Raj Kumar, learned counsel for the appellant and

                         Ms. Asha Gopalan Nair, learned counsel for the respondent.
2.             Under challenge in this criminal appeal preferred by the State

                         of Himachal Pradesh is the judgment and order dated

                         14.07.2014 of the High Court whereby it has reversed the

                         judgment and order of conviction passed by the trial court and

                         had acquitted the accused-respondent from the offence under
Signature Not Verified
Section 307 of the India Penal Code1 read with Section 27 of
Digitally signed by
SNEHA DAS
Date: 2025.04.17
17:20:08 IST
Reason:
1 In short ‘
IPC
’
1
the
Arms Act, 1959
but has convicted him for commission of

     offence under
Section 326
IPC. The consequential order dated

     28.07.2014, imposing punishment of the term already

     undergone by the accused-respondent, is also under challenge.
3.   The accused-respondent is the sole accused who was found

     guilty for an offence under
Section 307
IPC and
Section 27
of

     the Arms Act, 1959. He was sentenced to undergo seven years

     of rigorous imprisonment under Section 307 with fine of

     Rs.20,000/-. In default of payment of fine, he was ordered to

     undergo simple imprisonment of one year. He was also

     punished for an offence under
Section 27
of the Arms Act, 1959

     with rigorous imprisonment of two years and a fine of

     Rs.5,000/- and in default of payment of fine to undergo simple

     imprisonment of three months. Both the sentences were

     ordered to run concurrently.
4.   On an appeal preferred by the accused-respondent, the

     aforesaid conviction has been set aside and he has been

     acquitted for the offence under
Section 307
IPC and
Section 27
of the Arms Act, 1959 but has been convicted for the offence
2
under
Section 326
IPC and sentenced with imprisonment

     already undergone.
5.   The High Court in acquitting the accused-respondent held that

     for an offence under
Section 307
IPC, the court was obliged to

     see if the act was done with the intention or knowledge so as to

     cause death and since the facts do not prove such intention or

     knowledge on part of the accused-respondent, there cannot be

     an offence for attempt to murder under
Section 307
IPC. It also

     observed that the intention has to be gathered from the entire

     circumstances of the case such as nature of the weapon used,

     the manner in which it was used, severity of the blow or hurt,

     the part of the body where the injury was inflicted and so on

     and not merely from the end result.
6.   On the date of the incident i.e. 05.11.2010 which happened to

     be a day of Diwali festival, the accused-respondent was posted

     as Guard at Company Headquarter 2nd Indian Reserve

     Battalion in District Chamba, Himachal Pradesh. It appears

     that he was not satisfied with the quality of food served at the

     mess and, therefore, he had raised an objection regarding it,

     whereupon his colleagues advised him to wait for some time
3
since the incharge of the mess was out of station. However, the

        accused-respondent was in an aggressive mood and decided to

        settle scores with regard to the quality of food then and there.

        He finished his duties at about 9 p.m. and opened fire with his

        AK-47 rifle upon other constables. In the incident, Sanjeet

        Kumar (PW-2), Head Constable, suffered injuries in both his

        upper thighs. In that connection FIR No. 107 dated 06.11.2010

        was lodged by him before the Police Station, Tissa, District

        Chamba, Himachal Pradesh. The injured Head Constable who

        had suffered bullet injuries was admitted in the hospital for

        treatment and remained there till 08.12.2010.
7.      Upon completion of the investigation, a final report was

        submitted charging the accused-respondent for the offence

        under
Section 307
IPC and
Section 27
of the Arms Act, 1959.

        During the trial, prosecution examined as many as sixteen

        witnesses   to   prove   the   charges   against   the   accused-

        respondent. The statement of the accused-respondent under
Section 313
Code of Criminal Procedure2 was also recorded

        wherein he stated that he has been falsely implicated.



2 In short ‘
CrPC
’
4
8.   Admittedly, the accused-respondent on 05.11.2010 had

     performed his duty as a guard at the Company Headquarter,

     Tarela between 6 p.m. to 9 p.m. He was replaced by the

     Constable Ajeeb Kumar (PW-9) to perform duties from 9 p.m.

     to 12 midnight. At that time, the accused-respondent raised

     objection with regard to the quality of food served in the mess.

     Constable Sanjeet Kumar (PW-2) who was present with Head

     Constable Sarwan Kumar (PW-3) and Head Constable Satpal

     (PW-4) tried to pacify him but the accused-respondent was very

     annoyed and announced to settle things then and there. Since

     it was a Diwali day, some of the colleagues namely Constables

     Ashok Kumar and Vivek Garg (PW-7) were bursting crackers.

     The accused-respondent got further agitated with the bursting

     of the crackers. He asked them to stop and threatened that if

     they do not stop, he will fire. Constable Sanjeet Kumar (PW-2)

     after having dinner along with his colleagues went to urinate in

     the open, getting down from the stairs. On return, the accused-

     respondent followed them while climbing the stairs and

     abruptly opened fire with his AK-47 rifle. In the incident,

     Constable Sanjeet Kumar (PW-2) was hit and had sustained
5
injuries in his upper thighs. He was then taken to the

      dormitory. The accused-respondent, despite this, opened fire

      again but fortunately no one was hit the second time. He

      entered the dormitory with his AK-47 rifle but was overpowered

      by Head Constable Kulwant Kumar and Constable Ashok

      Kumar with the help of Constable Sunil Kumar and Constable

      Vivek Garg. He was nabbed and his AK-47 rifle was snatched.
9.    Seven empty cartridges were recovered lying at different places

      on the spot and were taken into possession. Dr. Ashish Kumar

      (PW-1) who had examined the injuries of Constable Sanjeet

      Kumar (PW-2) stated that he had suffered four injury wounds,

      two each on the right and left thighs. The injuries were grievous

      in nature but were not dangerous to life of the patient/injured.

      All the witnesses deposed against the accused-respondent and

      corroborated the incident and the involvement of the accused-

      respondent in the incident of firing resulting in gun shot

      injuries to the Constable Sanjeet Kumar (PW-2).
10.   The facts and circumstances reveal that the accused-
respondent in rage had fired indiscriminately with his service

      weapon AK-47 knowing fully well that the bullets may cause
6
bodily injury to any of his colleagues, which further may in all

       probability cause death. The incident of firing appears to have

       been done with the intention of causing bodily injury to the

       colleagues, fully knowing that such injury would likely to cause

       death of the person to whom it may hit.
11.
In a recent case of
The State of Madhya Pradesh vs. Kanha

       @ Omprakash3
before this Court, the facts were quite similar

       to the present case. In the said case, there was an altercation

       between the two parties and the accused with a firearm caused

       bleeding injuries on the right thigh of the injured. The accused

       was found guilty for the offence under Section 307 read with
Section 324
of the IPC and was sentenced to undergo rigorous

       imprisonment of three years along with fine of Rs.1,000/-. The

       other co-accused persons were acquitted of all the charges

       levelled against them. However, in appeal, the High Court set

       aside the conviction and acquitted him under Section 307 but

       sentenced him to imprisonment of forty days already

       undergone for the offence under
Section 324
IPC along with

       fine of Rs.3,000/-.
The court relying upon the observation



3 (2019) 3 SCC 605
7
made in
State of M.P. vs. Saleem4
, that the court in such

       cases has to see whether the act, irrespective of the result, was

       done with the intention or knowledge to cause death, held that

       the accused charged under
Section 307
IPC cannot be

       acquitted merely because the injuries inflicted on the victim

       were in the nature of a simple hurt. Section 307 uses the word

       ‘hurt’ and not grievous hurt or hurt of the nature which is

       dangerous or life threatening. Since the evidence establishes

       that the injuries were caused by firearm and the multiplicity of

       the wounds indicate that the accused fired more than once

       coupled with the fact that the hurt has been caused by the

       accused stands proved, the mere fact that the hurt, though,

       grievous but not dangerous to life, cannot be the basis to hold

       that
Section 307
IPC is inapplicable.
12.    It may be emphasized that to attract
Section 307
IPC, it is not

       necessary that the hurt should be grievous or of any particular

       degree. If hurt of any nature is caused and it is proved that

       there was intention or knowledge to cause death,
Section 307
IPC would stand attracted.
4 (2005) 5 SCC 554
8
13.   In the case at hand, the accused-respondent fired from his

      service weapon AK-47 and since he was a constable in the

      army, he was well aware that gunshot from such a weapon, if

      hits anyone will certainly result in causing death. There is no

      denial of the fact that the injured had sustained four injuries,

      two each on both the upper thighs and they were of grievous

      nature. The injuries may not be life threatening, but it leaves

      no doubt that there was intention to cause death.
14.   The judgment of the High Court overlooks these crucial aspects

      in acquitting the accused-respondent from the offence under
Section 307
IPC and
Section 27
of the Arms Act, 1959.
15.   In our opinion, the judgment and orders of the High Court

      dated 14.07.2014 and 28.07.2014 cannot be sustained and are

      accordingly set aside, restoring the judgment and order of the

      Trial Court dated 20.03.2013. However, as no minimum

      sentence is prescribed under
Section 307
Indian Penal Code,

      taking into consideration the fact that the accused respondent

      was in discipline force, the incident is of 2010 and that it had

      happened in a rage of anger, but with predetermined mind, in

      the interest of justice we reduce the punishment to that of
9
already undergone (about 1 year 5 months) in place of 7 years

      rigorous imprisonment.
16.   The Criminal Appeal is allowed in part accordingly.
...................………………………….. J.
(PANKAJ MITHAL)




                               .............……………………………….. J.
(S.V.N. BHATTI)
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 17, 2025.
10