[Cites
24
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Central Bureau Of Investigation vs Ramesh Chander Diwan on 22 April, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
2025 INSC 539                                                                      REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1527 OF 2025


             CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION                                … APPELLANT

                                                          VS.

             RAMESH CHANDER DIWAN                                           … RESPONDENT

                                                          WITH

                                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1528 OF 2025


             ASHOK KUMAR MANUJA                                             … APPELLANT

                                                          VS.

             CENTRAL BUREAU OF
             INVESTIGATION AND ANOTHER                                      … RESPONDENTS




                                                    JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
1. These two appeals, by special leave, are directed against a common

                            judgment and order dated 29th January, 20241 passed by the High

                            Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh. The impugned order of
Signature Not Verified
the High Court partly allowed a revision petition 2 of the respondent,
Digitally signed by
JATINDER KAUR
Date: 2025.04.22
17:37:00 IST
Reason:
1
impugned order
2
Crl. Revision Petition No.1388 of 2021
1
wherein an order of the Special Court (CBI) dated 29th October, 2021

      dismissing the respondent’s application for discharge was under
challenge. While the High Court discharged the respondent in respect

      of offences punishable under the
Indian Penal Code
, 18603 on the

      ground that no sanction had been obtained as per the statutory

      mandate contained in
Section 197
, Code of Criminal Procedure, 19734,

      the prayer of the respondent for discharge qua offences alleged against

      him under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 19885 was spurned. The

      High Court held that even though the respondent had retired from

      service, the amended provisions of
Section 19
of the PC Act would

      have no retrospective application and, therefore, he was not entitled

      to derive any benefit of such amendment.
2. Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) is the appellant in the lead

      appeal whereas the appellant in the connected appeal is the first

      informant/complainant.
3. An FIR was registered on 9th December, 2014 at Police Station ACB,

      CBI Chandigarh, under
Sections 120B
and
420
of the IPC and under
Section 13(2)
read with
Section 13(1)(d)
of the PC Act against the

      respondent. It was alleged in the FIR that while the respondent was

      functioning as the Executive Engineer, Public Health, Municipal

      Corporation, Chandigarh, in connivance and collusion with the co-

      accused, M/s Selvel Media Services Pvt. Ltd., he caused wrongful loss
3
IPC
4
Cr. PC
5
PC Act
2
in excess of Rs.13.66 crore to the Government exchequer by changing

        the terms and conditions of the Detailed Notice Inviting Tender. A

        detailed investigation followed and on completion thereof, a charge-

        sheet dated 10th October, 2016 under Section 173(2), Cr. PC was filed

        in the Court of the Special Judge, CBI, Chandigarh 6. Bare reading of

        the charge-sheet reveals that the respondent, along with the co-

        accused, had committed offences of the nature alleged in the FIR. The

        Special Judge vide order dated 23rd November, 2021 was pleased to

        frame charges against the accused persons.
4. The respondent had retired from service, having attained the age of

        superannuation on 30th September, 2016. Sanction under Section 197

        of the Cr. PC was not obtained by CBI. The respondent applied for

        discharge on the ground of absence of sanction at any stage. He also

        sought protection under the amended provisions of
Section 19(1)
of

        the PC Act too, effective from 26th July, 2018, which mandated sanction

        to be obtained even in respect of retired public servants. As noted

        above, the Special Court dismissed the application for discharge

        whereafter the High Court, on the respondent’s application under

        Section 401 read with Section 482 of the Cr. PC, passed the impugned

        order.
5. Appearing in support of the appeal, Mr. Suryaprakash V. Raju, learned

        Additional Solicitor General contended that the respondent though was

        a public servant removable from office by the Governor of Punjab but
6
Special Court
3
upon being sent to join his new assignment in the Municipal

     Corporation, Chandigarh, on usual terms and conditions, he ceased to

     be a public servant and the provisions of Section 197, Cr. PC had no

     application to him. According to Mr. Raju, the High Court fell in error

     in holding that without sanction under Section 197, Cr. PC, cognizance

     of the offence could not have been taken. Reliance was placed by Mr.

     Raju on several decisions of this Court in support of his prayer for

     interference with the impugned order. The same are:
(
i)       S.S. Dhanoa v. Municipal Corporation Delhi and

                       Others7
,
(
ii)      Mohd. Hadi Raja v. State of Bihar and Another8
,
(
iii)     N.K. Sharma v. Abhimanyu9
,
(iv)      Punjab     State   Warehousing    Corporation      v.
Bhushan Chander and Another10,
(v)       Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited and Others v.
Pramod V. Sawant and Another11
,
(
vi)      State of Kerala v. V. Padmanabhan Nair12
; and
(
vii)     Inspector of Police v. Battenapatla Venkata

                       Ratnam13
.
7
(1981) 3 SCC 431
8
(1998) 5 SCC 91
9
(2005) 13 SCC 213
10
(2016) 13 SCC 44
11
(2019) 16 SCC 63
12
(1999) 5 SCC 690
13
(2015) 13 SCC 87
4
6. We have heard Mr. Raju, at length. Except for seeking certain

  clarifications, we have not felt it necessary to call upon learned counsel

  for the respondent to argue.
7. The only question that has engaged our consideration is whether the

  High Court was right in holding that sanction under Section 197, Cr.

  PC not having been obtained, the respondent should be discharged for

  the offences registered under
Sections 120B
and
420
of the IPC against

  him.
8. Since a decision on these two appeals would depend entirely on how

  we read and interpret Section 197, Cr. PC in the light of the deputation

  assignment of the respondent, we prefer to commence our analysis by

  noting the relevant positions held by the officers/employees who were

  parties to the proceedings before this Court in the decisions cited by

  Mr. Raju, what precisely were the questions which arose for

  determination in such cases and how the same were answered.
9.
In
S.S. Dhanoa
(supra), the appellant was a member of the Indian

  Administrative Service. While the appellant was holding the office of

  Joint Commissioner (State Liaison) in the Ministry of Agriculture,

  (Department of Agriculture), his services were placed at the disposal

  of the Department of Co-operation, for his appointment as the General

  Manager, Super Bazar, Connaught Place, New Delhi. The short question

  that fell for determination in the appeal was whether a member of the

  Indian Administrative Service, whose services are placed at the

  disposal of an organisation which is neither a local authority, nor a
5
corporation established by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act,

   nor a Government Company, by the Central Government or the

   Government of a State, can be treated to be a ‘public servant’ within

   the meaning of clause Twelfth of
Section 21
of the IPC for the purpose

   of Section 197, Cr. PC. The question was answered in the negative.
10.
Mohd. Hadi Raja
(supra), however, did not involve a deputationist.

   The common question of law arising for decision
in that case
was

   whether the provisions of sanction under sub-section (1) of Section

   197, Cr. PC are applicable for prosecuting officers of public sector

   undertakings or government companies. Since such officers are

   removable from service by authorities other than the Government, it

   was held that they were not entitled to invoke Section 197 of the Cr.

   PC.
11. Whether a Class 1 officer of the Government of Haryana deputed to

   work as Managing Director of a cooperative society is entitled to

   protection under sub-section (1) of Section 197, Cr. PC was the

   question arising for decision in
N.K. Sharma
(supra). It was held that

   no sanction was required in the case therein as the appellant’s salary

   was not paid by the Government nor was he at the relevant time in

   service of the State, thereby, not satisfying the requirements of being

   a “public servant” within the meaning of Section 197, Cr. PC.
12.
Punjab State Warehousing Corporation
(supra) involved the

   question as to whether the first respondent, an employee of the

   appellant corporation, was a public servant and the trial in its entirety
6
stood invalid because sanction to prosecute under Section 197, Cr. PC

   had not been obtained.
It was held by this Court following the decision

   in
Mohd. Hadi Raja
(supra) that the appellant being an employee of

   the appellant corporation was not entitled to the benefit of Section

   197, Cr. PC and he cannot put forth the claim that breach of trust is

   connected with his official duty, thereby not necessitating sanction

   under Section 197, Cr. PC.
13. In Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (supra), Bharat Sanchar Nigam

   Limited was the first appellant whereas the other appellants were its

   employees. The complainant was the respondent. The appeal before

   this Court raised a short and pure question of law with regard to

   protection under Section 197, Cr. PC being available to the employees

   of a public sector corporation claiming the status of a ‘public servant’.

   This happened to be a case where, except one of the appellants who

   retired while on deputation, deputation of the other employees was

   followed by absorption in the undertaking.
Following Mohd. Hadi Raja
(supra), it was held that the employees of the first appellant were not

   entitled to invoke Section 197, Cr. PC.
14. This Court in
V. Padmanabhan Nair
(supra) held that an accused

   facing prosecution for offences under the
PC Act
cannot claim any

   immunity on the ground of want of sanction, if he ceased to be a public

   servant on the date when the court took cognizance of the offence.
15.
Battenapatla Venkata Ratnam
(supra) was cited for emphasizing

   that protection under Section 197, Cr. PC from harassment is given in
7
public interest and the same cannot be treated as a shield to protect

       corrupt officials.
16. Having considered the precedents cited by Mr. Raju, with which we

       have no quarrel, and on consideration of the applicable statutory

       provisions, we now proceed to assign reasons for our ultimate

       conclusion.
17. The question arising for decision cannot but be decided without

       keeping the concept of deputation in the field of public service law in

       perspective. We, therefore, see the need to briefly touch upon such

       concept.
18. The concept of deputation was explained by this Court in
State of

       Punjab v. Inder Singh14
as follows:
18. The concept of “deputation” is well understood in service law and
               has a recognised meaning. “Deputation” has a different connotation
               in service law and the dictionary meaning of the word “deputation”
               is of no help. In simple words “deputation” means service outside the
               cadre or outside the parent department. Deputation is deputing or
               transferring an employee to a post outside his cadre, that is to say,
               to another department on a temporary basis. After the expiry period
               of deputation the employee has to come back to his parent
               department to occupy the same position unless in the meanwhile he
               has earned promotion in his parent department as per the
               Recruitment Rules. Whether the transfer is outside the normal field
               of deployment or not is decided by the authority who controls the
               service or post from which the employee is transferred. There can be
               no deputation without the consent of the person so deputed and he
               would, therefore, know his rights and privileges in the deputation
               post. ...
(emphasis ours)
19.
In
Umapati Choudhary v. State of Bihar15
, this Court had the

       occasion to observe:
14
(1997) 8 SCC 372
15
(1999) 4 SCC 659
8
8. Deputation can be aptly described as an assignment of an
          employee (commonly referred to as the deputationist) of one
          department or cadre or even an organisation (commonly referred to
          as the parent department or lending authority) to another
          department or cadre or organisation (commonly referred to as the
          borrowing authority). The necessity for sending on deputation arises
          in public interest to meet the exigencies of public service. The
          concept of deputation is consensual and involves a voluntary decision
          of the employer to lend the services of his employee and a
          corresponding acceptance of such services by the borrowing
          employer. It also involves the consent of the employee to go on
          deputation or not. ...
(emphasis ours)
20. Where exigency of public service requires the parent department

   (lending authority) to send its employee on deputation to the receiving

   department (borrowing authority) and such an arrangement is

   preceded by a consensus among the three, i.e., the lending authority,

   the borrowing authority and the officer/employee, the statutory rules

   do normally provide for his repatriation. In such a case, there can be

   no severance of relationship with the parent department. However,

   during the period the officer/employee is sent on deputation to the

   receiving department, the parent department may fill up the post

   vacated by the deputationist in accordance with law under the category

   of ‘deputation vacancy’, which also is not unknown in public service

   law, but it is only for a limited period till the officer/employee is

   repatriated.
21. Insofar as disciplinary control over a deputationist is concerned, such

   control generally vests with the appropriate authority in the parent

   department in which the substantive appointment is held. However, it

   cannot be gainsaid that by statutory rules or by conditions contained
9
in the order of deputation, it can be provided that the deputationist,

       for the period he is serving on deputation, will be subject to the

       disciplinary control of the department to which he is deputed. Should

       there be a provision in this behalf, the deputationist may be proceeded

       against, if the occasion therefore arises, by the appropriate authority

       in the receiving department. Although generally an employee is

       supposed to have one master, in the context of deputation there could

       be a plurality of masters. Nonetheless, it is the statutory rules which

       would be the deciding factor. If the rules indicate that disciplinary

       control is retained by the parent department, the receiving department

       would have no jurisdiction to exercise such control.
22. Having noted the concept of assignment on deputation, a quick look

       at the object that Section 197, Cr. PC seeks to achieve would suffice

       for completeness of understanding. We may profitably refer to a

       Constitution Bench decision of this Court in
Matajog Dobey v. H.C.

       Bhari16
. While repelling a challenge that
Section 197
of the Code of

       Criminal Procedure, 1898 (pari materia with Section 197, Cr. PC)

       offended
Article 14
of the Constitution, this Court held:
15. ...
Article 14
does not render
Section 197
of the Criminal
               Procedure Code ultra vires as the discrimination is based upon a
               rational classification. Public servants have to be protected from
               harassment in the discharge of official duties while ordinary citizens
               not so engaged do not require this safeguard. It was argued that
Section 197
of the Criminal Procedure Code vested an absolutely
               arbitrary power in the Government to grant or withhold sanction at
               their sweet-will and pleasure, and the legislature did not lay down or
               even indicate any guiding principles to control the exercise of the
               discretion. There is no question of any discrimination between one
16
(1955) 2 SCR 925
10
person and another in the matter of taking proceedings against a
          public servant for an act done or purporting to be done by the public
          servant in the discharge of his official duties. No one can take such
          proceedings without such sanction. If the Government gives sanction
          against one public servant but declines to do so against another, then
          the government servant against whom sanction is given may possibly
          complain of discrimination. But the petitioners who are complainants
          cannot be heard to say so, for there is no discrimination as against
          any complainant. It has to be borne in mind that a discretionary
          power is not necessarily a discriminatory power and that abuse of
          power is not to be easily assumed where the discretion is vested in
          the government and not in a minor official. Further, we are not now
          concerned with any such question. We have merely to see whether
          the court could take cognisance of the case without previous sanction
          and for this purpose the court has to find out if the act complained
          against was committed by the accused while acting or purporting to
          act in the discharge of official duty. Once this is settled, the case
          proceeds or is thrown out. Whether sanction is to be accorded or not
          is a matter for the government to consider. The absolute power to
          accord or withhold sanction conferred on the government is irrelevant
          and foreign to the duty cast on the court, which is the ascertainment
          of the true nature of the act.
(emphasis ours)
23. Turning to the words ‘public servant’ appearing in sub-section (1) of

   Section 197, Cr. PC, it has not been defined in the Cr. PC; however,

   what the words ‘public servant’ denote is found in
Section 21
, IPC and

   by reason of
Section 2(y)
of the Cr. PC, the meaning of ‘public servant’

   as appearing in Section 197 thereof has to be understood in the light

   of its definition in
Section 21
, IPC.
Section 21
of the IPC, to the extent

   relevant, reads thus:
21. “Public servant”.—The words “public servant” denote a person
          falling under any of the descriptions hereinafter following, namely:—
          ***
          Twelfth.—Every person—
(a) in the service or pay of the Government or remunerated by fees
          or commission for the performance of any public duty by the
          Government;
(b) in the service or pay of a local authority, a corporation established
          by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act or a Government
          company as defined in
Section 617
of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of
          1956).
11
24. Although the respondent’s initial appointment letter is not on record,

        it has not been disputed before us (in view of the additional documents

        placed on record by the respondent in terms of an order dated 18 th

        March, 2025) that the respondent was initially appointed by the

        Government of Punjab. If not a member of the State’s civil service, the

        respondent was most certainly the holder of a civil post. It is further

        undisputed that the respondent was sent on deputation to the Union

        Territory, Chandigarh from the State of Punjab (P.W.D P.H Branch).

        Also, it is not in dispute that vide an order of the Administrator, Union

        Territory, Chandigarh17 dated 25th February, 2005, the respondent was

        relieved to join a new assignment in the Municipal Corporation,

        Chandigarh. From time to time, the Governor of Punjab extended the

        deputation period of the respondent with the Municipal Corporation,

        Chandigarh. Orders dated 13th October, 2006 and 12th July, 2007

        placed on record by the respondent evince extension of the deputation

        period of the respondent with the Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh

        by none other than the Governor of Punjab for specified periods.

        Effectively, what these orders did was to temporarily place the

        respondent’s service at the disposal of the Municipal Corporation,

        Chandigarh. It has not been demonstrated before us by CBI that upon

        assignment of the respondent on deputation with the Municipal

        Corporation, Chandigarh, he was either absorbed in its services
17
Administrator
12
resulting in severance of relationship with the Government of Punjab

       or that, by any order validly made, the respondent ceased to remain a

       Government servant once he left the post under the Government he

       was serving prior to his deputation.
25. Moreover, clause (1) of
Article 311
of the Constitution ordains that no

       authority subordinate to the appointing authority can dismiss or

       remove a member of the civil service of the State or a civil post holder.

       In case the respondent, while on deputation, were to commit a

       misconduct warranting either dismissal or removal, it has not been

       shown by referring to statutory rules that upon the respondent’s

       assignment on deputation, disciplinary control over him stood

       transferred from any authority of the Government of Punjab to an

       authority of equal rank in the Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh and

       such authority had been empowered to take disciplinary action against

       the respondent. In the absence thereof, neither the Board of the

       Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh nor its Municipal Commissioner

       would have the authority or jurisdiction to take disciplinary action

       against the respondent had he misconducted himself while discharging

       his duty under such corporation.
26. This legal position is fortified by a recent decision of this Court in
A.

       Sreenivasa Reddy v. Rakesh Sharma18
where a coordinate Bench

       has held that protection of sub-section (1) of Section 197, Cr. PC is

       available only to such public servants whose appointing authority is
18
(2023) 8 SCC 711
13
the Central Government or the State Government and not to every

   public servant.
27. We are of the considered opinion, having regard to the materials on

   record, that the respondent while rendering service for the State of

   Punjab as well as the administration of the Union Territory was a public

   servant covered by clause (a) of the 12th description in
Section 21
, IPC

   and despite his assignment on deputation to the Municipal Corporation,

   Chandigarh, he continued to remain a public servant for the purposes

   of sub-section (1) of Section 197, Cr. PC, being removable from office

   by an appropriate authority in the Government of Punjab and none

   else. We are afraid, no material which could persuade us to take a

   contrary view has been shown.
28. For the foregoing reasons, we find no reason to accept Mr. Raju’s

   contention that the respondent ceased to be a public servant upon

   being sent on deputation first to the Union Territory, Chandigarh or

   when he was relieved by the Administrator for joining a new

   assignment in the Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh. The inevitable

   result is that the lead appeal and the connected appeal ought to fail.
29. Mr. Raju, sensing the Court’s mind, requested for liberty being granted

   to seek sanction under Section 218 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha

   Sanhita, 2023, which has introduced the concept of deemed sanction.
30. In view of the provisions of Section 531 of the BNSS, the Cr. PC stands

   repealed; yet, pending proceedings are to be continued under the
14
repealed law. We, therefore, decline Mr. Raju’s prayer. However, liberty

   to seek sanction under the Cr. PC, if so advised, is reserved.
31. While holding the impugned order to be correct, these appeals stand

   dismissed on the above terms.
………....................J.
                                                   (DIPANKAR DATTA)



                                                   ………....................J.
                                                   (MANMOHAN)

NEW DELHI;
APRIL 22, 2025.
15