[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Naresh Kumar Sinha vs The State Of Bihar on 2 April, 2025
Author:
J.K. Maheshwari
Bench:
Aravind Kumar
,
J.K. Maheshwari
2025 INSC 814                                                         REPORTABLE
                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.            OF 2025
                                (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 8840 of 2022)


                          NARESH KUMAR SINHA                     APPELLANT (S)

                                                   VERSUS

                          STATE OF BIHAR & ORS.                  RESPONDENT(S)

                                               J U D G M E N T
J.K. MAHESHWARI, J.
1)    Leave granted.


                          2)    The appellant assails the order dated 17.05.2019
passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of

                          Judicature at Patna dismissing the Letters Patent

                          Appeal No.379 of 2018. In the LPA, the order passed

                          in C.W.J.C. No. 15852 of 2006 dated 20.02.2018 was

                          challenged wherein the order of termination dated

                          21.11.2005, was in question. As such, by the orders

                          impugned, interference in the order of termination of
Signature Not Verified
service of appellant had been declined.
Digitally signed by
NIDHI AHUJA
Date: 2025.07.10
17:09:41 IST
Reason:
3)    The facts shorn of details are that in furtherance
1
to an advertisement dated 22.06.1981, appellant was

appointed as clerk vide order dated 24.06.1989, and

posted at S.M.T. High School, Vaishali, Bihar. He

submitted     his     joining    on      04.07.1989     which      was

initially resisted by headmaster but later he was

allowed      to     join   and      he   performed     his     duty.

Thereafter, on transfer to other schools, he worked

for more than one and a half decade. On 19.09.2005,

the District Education Officer, Patna issued a show

cause notice, alleging that his appointment was

forged and vide order dated 21.11.2005, his services

were terminated without following the due process

of law. Appeal filed against such termination was

also rejected vide order dated 13.10.2006.
4)   Being    dissatisfied,         Writ    Petition     was      filed

which was dismissed. During pendency of the writ

petition,    learned       Single    Judge      vide   order      dated

27.07.2011        sought    report       with   respect      to     the

genuineness of the appointment order. The same was

filed along with an affidavit, inter alia, stating

that the original file of appointment could not be
2
traced, but the file relating to transfer of newly

appointed clerks in 10+2 secondary schools has been

traced out. It was said that the order of appointment

was issued in violation of the terms of Circular

No.16440    dated      02.12.1980       of   the    Personnel     and

Administrative      Reforms     Department.        Learned     Single

Judge while dismissing the writ petition and relying

on those averments held that the order of appointment

could have been issued at the level of the Directorate

and   not   at   the    level   of   Deputy        Director,    Human

Resources Development Department (in short “DDHRD”).

As such, appointment of the appellant was issued by

an incompetent authority and was illegal. Further,

with reference to dispatch number of the order, it

was   observed    that    the    register      was    relating     to

transfer of clerks which also does not tally. Thus,

the contention of appellant with respect to issuance

of appointment by the same dispatch was not accepted,

because it will not make the appointment of the

appellant    genuine.     As    such,    learned Single         Judge

refused to interfere and dismissed the writ petition.
3
5)      Aggrieved by such dismissal, the appellant filed

the impugned LPA before the Division Bench, which was

also    dismissed   relying     on   the     same   report   and

affidavit, wherein the Division Bench held that the

appointment    of   appellant    was   not     issued   at   the

appropriate level by the Department, hence, found to

be forged. Accordingly, the Division Bench maintained

the order of learned Single Judge.
6)      In the counter affidavit filed by the State, it

is inter-alia stated that the DDHRD was incompetent

to appoint Class III employees in the schools. Thus,

when the order of appointment was not issued by the

competent authority, appellant had illegally occupied

the post and he cannot claim equity after committing

such fraud. Further, in the case of fraud or forgery,

plea of violation of the principle of natural justice

is not tenable. It is said that the appellant and one

Sanjay Kumar Sinha were said to be appointed by the

then DDHRD issuing different orders of appointment

dated    24.06.1989;   however,      while    verifying,     the

Section Officer has denied issuance of such orders.
4
On the said pretext, while examining the orders of

transfers of 36 clerks, it was found that 12 were

appointed    before   02.10.1980,    2   were appointed      on

recommendation of Bihar Public Service Commission and

11 were appointed on compassionate ground. Remaining

11 including appellant and one more were also found

to be transferred. In the said context, dispatch

register was examined, but the same was not tallied.

As per the directions of the High Court, when enquiry

was conducted, the original file of the appointment

was   not   made   available   and   only a     part   of   file

relating    to     transfer    was   produced     before    the

Principal Secretary. Based on this, it was said that

the order of appointment, if any, dispatched along

with transfer orders, cannot be recognized as valid.

Hence, any interference in the order of termination

is not warranted.
7)    In the impugned judgment, the order of learned

Single Judge was maintained, refusing to interfere

with the order of termination of appellant, by merely

relying upon the report submitted by the Principal
5
Secretary, Human Resources Development Department. As

per   the   said   report,   it    was   specified    that   the

appointment ought to be issued at the directorate

level and not at the deputy director/DDHRD level. It

is also said that the dispatch number tallies with

the register to dispatch the transfer order, and not

with the register to dispatch the appointment order,

therefore, the appointment appears to be forged. With

these allegations, it is said the appointment of

appellant    was   forged    and    fabricated,      therefore,

principle of natural justice would not attract.
8)    From the proceedings of this case, it appears

that after filing of counter affidavit and rejoinder,

with an intent to lift the veil on the allegations,

vide order dated 22.01.2024, a direction to produce

the original records pertaining to the appointment

and working of the appellant was issued. Even after

granting repeated opportunities, respondents have not

produced    the    record.   Later,      vide   order     dated

12.02.2025, while granting further time, this Court

observed as under:
6
“In the facts of the case, we deem it appropriate
     that the record be traced and produced.    In the
     interest of justice, we grant six weeks’ further
     time to produce the record failing which drawing
     adverse inference, appropriate orders will be
     passed.”


     In reference to the above order, during hearing,

learned counsel of the State submitted that the record

is not traceable, as such the Court may proceed in

the matter.
9)   After    having   heard   learned   counsel   for   the

parties and on perusal of the counter affidavit, it

is luculent that the respondents have not disputed

the issuance of the advertisement, in furtherance to

which the appellant was appointed. In absence of any

specific denial, it may be concluded that appointment

of appellant was after following the due process of

law. On submitting joining, he was allowed to perform

his duties, later, transferred to Devipad Choudhary

Shaheed Asmarak (Millar) School and other schools

where he served for more than a decade. Surprisingly,

after serving for more than 16 years, a show cause

notice dated 19.09.2005 was issued questioning the

genuineness of his appointment order. On him filing
7
a   reply,    without    holding     any    enquiry    into    the

allegations    of     fraud   and   sans    the    procedure    as

prescribed,     the     service     of     the    appellant    was

terminated which led to the present litigation.
10)   After bestowing our consideration to the facts,

it is clear that the appointment of appellant was in

furtherance     to     the    advertisement       published    in

Aryabrata newspaper dated 22.06.1981 and the order

was issued on 24.06.1989 by the Government of Bihar,

Human Resource Development Department with signature

of Additional Director and its communication was made

by the DDHRD. The appellant was permitted to join,

and later he was transferred at different places. At

the time of issuing show cause notice, he was posted

as clerk at Parvati Higher Secondary School, Bikram,

Patna and while passing the order of termination, he

was posted as clerk at Urehan Girls Higher Secondary

School, Bihta, Patna. The show cause notice and the

order of termination were initiated from the office

of the District Education Officer, Patna and by that

time he had served the department for more than 16
8
years.
11)   Further, it is noted that the show cause notice

was issued in reference to L.P.A. No. 527/05 and

letter   No.    769     dated   23.07.2005      of     Director,

Secondary Education, Bihar, Patna. The context of the

above referred LPA and the letter has not been placed

for perusal. In this show cause notice, an explanation

was   sought   from     appellant    based     on    information

furnished by the DDHRD regarding non-issuance of the

appointment from the directorate, that why he should

not be terminated from the service. On furnishing the

explanation on 27.09.2005, the order of termination

was passed inter-alia stating that the appointment of

the   appellant   was    issued     by   the   DDHRD    and   the

appointment has not been issued from the secretariat.
In addition to referring the office letter, it was

said the directorate has not issued the appointment

order, so it is forged by the appellant. In the order

of termination, the directions of the department’s

letter   No.   17127    dated   12.06.1981     has     also   been

referred whereby it is admitted that appointment of

Class-III posts can be made at the district level
9
following the directions contained in letter No. 3/R-

1-103/73-7605      and     16440   dated    02.12.1980      of   the

Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms.
12)   On analyzing all those documents, the reasons of

termination    as    mentioned      in    the   order,     and   the

averments made in counter affidavit, it is clear that

appointment order was issued by Government of Bihar,

Human Resource Development Department, and signed by

Additional Director and not by DDHRD. Thus, on the

face of it, first reason assigned in the order of

termination that the appointment was issued by DDHRD

is incorrect. Moreover, in reference to the letter

No. 994 dated 08.09.2005 of DDHRD, it is said that

the appointment has not been issued at the secretariat

level which is not the defence taken in the counter

affidavit. Further, references made to directions

contained     in     the     departmental        letters     dated

12.06.1981 and 02.12.1980 are also not germane to the

issue, which merely prescribe that the appointment of

Class-III     post   can     be    made    at   district    level,

following the procedure as specified therein. In the
10
counter affidavit filed, it has not been stated that

the appointment of the appellant was not made after

following     due    process    of    law.    From       the    above

discussions, the reasons assigned in the order of

termination    are    factually      incorrect     and    based    on

extraneous consideration which cannot be accepted.
13)   In   this     regard,   stand   taken   in     the       counter

affidavit that appointment was issued by the DDHRD

and not from the directorate is not correct. The

perusal of appointment letter clearly indicates that

it was issued by the Government of Bihar, Human

Resource Development Department and signed by the

Additional     Director,       meaning    thereby        that     the

appointment has been issued either at directorate

level or at Government level and not at the level of

DDHRD. Therefore, findings of the High Court on this

issue are contrary to the record per se illegal.
14)   In addition to the above, it is to observe that

order of appointment issued from the office of the

Government of Bihar/directorate cannot be nullified

by an order of the District Education Officer, merely
11
by issuing a show cause notice and without following

any procedure.
15)   Since the plea of fraud taken by the respondents

has been accepted by the High Court in the order

impugned, the foundation of the said plea requires

consideration.   The    show   cause     notice    memo    dated

19.09.2005 is in reference to L.P.A. No. 527/05 and

letter No. 769 dated 23.07.2005. As per the contents

of the said memo, District Education Officer vide

letter   No.   1126    dated       31.08.2005     sought    some

information from the DDHRD which was furnished vide

letter no. 994 dated 08.09.2005 indicating that the

appointment memo No. 365 dated 24.06.1989 (wrongly

mentioned as dated 29.06.1989) was not issued from

the directorate. The stand taken before the High Court

and in the report sought is that the said record is

not traceable. This is not the stand of the government

that selection and appointment has not taken place,

further no record of such selection is available. In

such case where the record is not traceable, it would

not   ipso   facto    make   the    appointment     forged    or

fabricated. As discussed in para 13, the appointment
12
order       dated    24.06.1989        was     issued       at

Government/Directorate            level,          therefore,

correspondence of the DDHRD for non-issuance of the

memo of appointment without denying the process of

selection and existence of appointment order, is of

no help.
16)     The termination order was challenged in writ

petition before the High Court in 2006, which was

decided in 2018. During the pendency of the writ

petition, directions were issued on 27.07.2011 to

place      the   record    regarding       appointment.     In

furtherance of which, only a report was submitted.

The said report merely refers to the correspondence

of the DDHRD as referred in the show cause memo. On

filing LPA, the report produced pursuant to the order

dated 27.07.2011 has been referred. It is a matter of

prudence that when the allegation of forgery or fraud

has been made by the State Government, it must have

some foundation. Mere correspondence of an officer

alleging    non-issuance   of   appointment    memo   is   not

enough to prove such fraud, in particular when such
13
appointment     was   made    in       furtherance       to   an

advertisement, and while terminating the services, it

is said that order of appointment was issued by

incompetent authority, i.e., the DDHRD.
17)   Since the termination is based on allegation of

fraud which is accepted by the High Court, it is

necessary to refer when such allegation of fraud can

be substantiated. In this regard, we have to see what

is fraud. As per the Advance Law Lexicon, 3rd Edition

2005 by P. Ramanatha Aiyar, “fraud” means and includes

any of the following acts committed by a party to a

contract, or with his connivance, or by his agent,

with intent to deceive another party thereto or his

agent, or to induce him to enter into the contract:-
(1) the suggestion, as a fact, of that which is not

true, by one who does not believe it to be true; (2)

the   active   concealment   of    a   fact   by   one   having

knowledge or belief of the fact; (3) a promise made

without any intention of performing it; (4) any other

act fitted to deceive; (5) any such act or omission

as the law specially declares to be fraudulent.
14
18)   In the facts of the present case as discussed

above, no pleading or foundation which includes any

of the ingredients of fraud has been put forth or

substantiated. In the case of Lazarus Estates Ltd.
Vs. Beasley: (1956) 1 QB 702, the impact of fraud and

its importance has been discussed. Denning, L.J. has

stated as under:
“…No court in this land will allow a person

  to keep an advantage which he has obtained by

  fraud. No judgment of a court, no order of a

  Minister, can be allowed to stand if it has

  been   obtained   by     fraud.    Fraud   unravels

  everything. The court is careful not to find

  fraud unless it is distinctly pleaded and

  proved; but once it is proved, it vitiates

  judgments,   contracts    and     all   transactions

  whatsoever…”
19)   This Court has considered the said observations

in the case of
Ram Chandra Singh Vs. Savitri Devi and

Others
: (2003) 8 SCC 319, wherein the court discussed

what would constitute fraud:
15
“…Fraud     is a   conduct   either    by   letter   or

  words,     which   induces   the    other   person   or

  authority to take a definite determinative

  stand as a response to the conduct of the

  former either by word or letter.”
20)    In the case of Derry v Peek: (1889) 14 AC 337,

as well, the House of Lords observed that in case of

fraud, actual fraud on part of person must be proved.
It will be said to be proved when it is shown that

any false representation has been made knowingly, or

without belief in its truth, or recklessly, without

caring about its truthfulness or falsity. In this

regard,     any   false   statement   made    carelessly    and

without reasonable ground for believing it to be true

may be evidence of fraud. However, it does not mean

that   it   would    necessarily     amount   to   fraud.   Any

statement made with honest belief in its truthfulness

is not fraudulent and would not render the person

liable for a fraudulent act.
21)    As discussed in paras 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15

above, any pleading laying any foundation of alleged
16
fraud specifying any of the ingredients of fraud has

not been established. It is trite to say that without

any allegation of fraud, merely using word fraud is

not sufficient. In addition, this Court has taken

care to understand whether the allegation of “fraud”

is discernible from the record or not. For effective

adjudication,   the   original     records    pertaining    to

appointment and working of appellant were called on

22.01.2024   within   a   period     of   three    weeks.   The

government sought more time to produce the said record

on 16.02.2024 but they were not produced. However, on

12.02.2025 while granting last opportunity to produce

the record, it was observed that failure to produce

the   records   may   result    in    drawing      of   adverse

inference, and appropriate orders will be passed.

Even then, no records were placed before us for

perusal. It is to observe that direction in this

regard was also issued by the learned Single Judge of

the High Court on 27.07.2011 but except the report of

Principal    Secretary    and    affidavit,       nothing   was

produced. In the cases where mere allegation of fraud

has been made without any foundation, and then the
17
records have been called by the Court to assess such

allegations, it is the earnest duty of the Head of

the    Department     to    produce   the    same    for    perusal.

Otherwise in the facts, it was incumbent upon him to

conduct an internal enquiry and to find out whether

the process of selection was carried out or not. It

was also the duty of the Head of the Department to

place such record before the court. In the present

case, if the said record was not traceable, then it

is the duty of the Department to identify who is

responsible     for      misplacing    such       record,   and   an

enquiry in this regard ought to have been conducted

against the defaulting person and report in that

regard should have been placed. In absence thereof,

mere    plea   of   non-traceability         of    the   record   is

insufficient.       Thus,        despite     granting       multiple

opportunities, which resulted in non-production of

the record, in the above facts, we are constrained to

draw adverse inference against the respondents.
22)    In   view    of     the   above,     in    absence    of   any

foundation of fraud in the pleading or in the counter
18
affidavit, we are not inclined to accept such plea of

fraud.     Moreover,     the    reason        of    termination     as

mentioned in the order impugned is also contrary to

the documents placed on record. This is a case wherein

after appointment the appellant has worked for more

than 16 years regularly and was regularly paid salary

by the department, which is a fact. As such, he has

acquired       the    status        of   permanent        employee.

Thereafter, such issuance of show cause notice by

merely referring to one LPA and the correspondence of

the department regarding non-issuance of appointment

order is improper. Because, a mere correspondence

stating non-issuance is not sufficient to prove an

allegation     of    fraud    and   warrant        termination    from

service. In our view, mere bald statement that the

appointment was based on forged document or on fraud

is not sufficient. In case after such a long time of

service, if the department was of the opinion that

the order of appointment is not available on record,

an enquiry should have been conducted for looking

into     the   alleged       forgery     in    issuance     of     the

appointment order. In absence of any such enquiry,
19
such allegations of fraud and fabrication leading to

termination are unjustified.
23)    As per the discussion made hereinabove, in the

facts and circumstances, an inescapable conclusion is

reached that the order of termination is based on a

reasoning which is per se untenable on fact and

record. The allegation of fraud has not been pleaded

and substantiated. In absence of holding any enquiry

of such allegation, the order of termination is liable

to be quashed. The findings recorded by the learned

Single Judge and the Division Bench are also without

due consideration of the above facts and are not based

on sound reasoning, hence, liable to be set aside.
24)    Accordingly, we allow this appeal and set aside

the orders passed by the High Court and quash the

order of termination. Appellant is directed to be

reinstated in service with back wages to the extent

of    50%   from   the   date   of   termination   till   his

reinstatement. The appellant would also be entitled

to all the consequential benefits. In light of the

facts, we leave it open to the respondents to take
20
proper   recourse,   if   any,   against     the   appellant

following the due process of law.
25)   Pending   application,     if   any,    shall    stand

disposed of.
…………………………………………………………, J.
[ J.K. MAHESHWARI ]


                             …………………………………………………………, J.
[ ARAVIND KUMAR ]

New Delhi;
April 02, 2025.
21