[Cites
12
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Varshatai vs The State Of Maharashtra on 15 April, 2025
Author:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
1



2025 INSC 486                                                               REPORTABLE


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).          OF 2025

                         SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO(S).         OF 2025
                                                    DIARY NO. 24812 OF 2024


             MRS. VARSHATAI W/o. SH. SANJAY BAGADE

                                                                       …APPELLANT

                                                   Versus


             THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA THROUGH
             ITS SECRETARY, MINISTRY OF LAW
             AND JUDICIARY, MANTRALAYA, MUMBAI
             AND ORS. ETC.

                                                                      …RESPONDENTS



                                              JUDGMENT
SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J.
‘When you learn a language, you don’t just learn to
                              speak and write a new language. You also learn to
                              be open-minded, liberal, tolerant, kind and
Signature Not Verified     considerate towards all mankind.’
Digitally signed by
-   Mouloud Benzadi
   Nirmala Negi
   Date: 2025.04.15
   18:49:14 IST
   Reason:
1.                     Leave granted.
2
2.   The appellant before this Court is apparently not pleased with

     the use of Urdu on the signboard of the new building of the

     Municipal Council, Patur (hereinafter referred to as ‘Municipal

     Council’) in district Akola, Maharashtra. The board of the

     Council displays "Municipal Council, Patur", in Marathi at the

     top, with its translation below in Urdu language.
3.   According to the appellant, who is a former member of the

     Municipal Council, the work of the Municipal Council can only

     be conducted in Marathi, and the use of Urdu in any manner

     is impermissible, even though it may just be a writing on the

     signboard of the Municipal Council.
4.   The appellant first raised her objection before the Municipal

     Council itself. The Council made its deliberations on the

     question raised by the appellant and ultimately through its

     resolution dated 14.02.2020, the Municipal Council rejected

     the appellant’s objection by a majority, and it was resolved that

     the use of Urdu in addition to Marathi on the signboard of the

     Municipal Council is perfectly justified. At this stage, we may

     mention that the signboard is mainly in Marathi, with Urdu

     appearing below on the signboard, since a significant number

     of Council members and residents within the Municipal
3
Council area are familiar with Urdu language. This is not a

     new practice and in fact, it was pleaded before the Collector

     that this was displayed on the signboard since the existence of

     the Municipal Council, from the year 1956.
5.   The appellant, not satisfied with the resolution, however,

     moved an application under Section 308 of the Maharashtra

     Municipal   Council,    Nagar      Panchayats     and   Industrial

     Township Act, 1965 (hereinafter referred to as ‘1965 Act’)

     before the Collector Akola, praying for setting aside of the

     Municipal Council’s resolution. This application was allowed,

     and the following order was passed on 15.12.2020:
“Application of applicant, under section
             308 of Maharashtra Municipal Council, Nagar
             Panchayati and Industrial Township Act, 1965
             similarly, Maharashtra Municipal Council,
             Nagar Panchayati and Industrial Township
             Act, 1965 in respect of section 308 is allowed
             as per the Government circular explanatory
             instruction no. 4(b) it has been ordered to the
             Municipal Council that Rajbhasha Marathi
             shall be used 100% in the Government
             proceedings.”
6.   Some members of the Municipal Council challenged this order

     before the Divisional Commissioner, Amravati in revision

     under   Section   318   of   the    1965   Act.   The   Divisional
4
Commissioner vide order dated 30.04.2021 set aside the order

     of the Collector, against which Writ Petition No. 2219 of 2021

     was filed by the appellant before the Bombay High Court

     (Nagpur Bench).
7.   The main ground of challenge by the appellant before the High

     Court was that Marathi is the official language of the State and

     all work conducted by government or government bodies,

     including local bodies, must be done only in Marathi.
Therefore, according to the appellant, the use of Urdu in any

     manner is wrong, and should not be permitted.
8.   In their reply, the members of the Municipal Council, apart

     from presenting their case on merits, raised a preliminary

     objection that the appellant’s application before the Collector

     under Section 308 of the 1965 Act, was not maintainable in

     the first place. It was argued that there is a resolution of the

     Municipal Council upholding its decision of displaying Urdu

     on the signboard of the Council, and in terms of the plain

     language of Section 308 of 1965 Act, any application, seeking

     suspension of execution of a Municipal Council’s resolution,

     can only be entertained by the Collector when moved by the
5
Chief Officer of the Municipal Council; which was not the case

      here.
9.    Sub-section (1) of Section 308 was amended in the year 2018.
Prior to this amendment, if the Collector was of the opinion

      that the execution of any order or resolution of a Council was

      likely to cause injury or annoyance to the public and may lead

      to a breach of peace, or was unlawful, he had the powers to

      suspend its execution or prohibit its enforcement. The

      Collector could even exercise such power suo motu in an

      appropriate situation. All the same, subsequent to the

      amendment in sub-section (1) of Section 308 in the year 2018,

      it can be done only when such a resolution is sent by the Chief

      Officer before the Collector.
10.   Section 308(1) of 1965 Act before and after the amendment

      reads as under:
Old                             New

        “Section 308. Powers to         “Section 308. Powers to
        suspend       execution    of   suspend       execution       of
        orders and resolutions of       orders and resolutions of
        Council        on     certain   Council        on       certain
        grounds-                        grounds-
(1) If, in the opinion of the   (1) If the Council or any
        Collector, the execution of     Committee resolves contrary
        any order or resolution of a    to provisions of this Act or any
6
Council, or the doing of           other law, or rules, bye-laws,
        anything which is about to be      or the Government directions,
        done or is being done by or on     then    it   shall    be    the
        behalf of a Council, is            responsibility of the Chief
        causing or is likely to cause      Officer to send it to the
        injury or annoyance to the         Collector for suspension of
        public or is against public        execution of such a resolution
        interest or to lead a breach of    or prohibition of doing thereof,
        the peace or is unlawful, he       within the period of three
        may by order in writing            days from the receipt of the
        under his signature suspend        said resolution. The Collector
        the execution or prohibit the      shall decide on such proposal
        doing thereof.”                    within the period of thirty
                                           days from the date of receipt
                                           of such proposal …”
                                                      (Emphasis provided)
11.   It is therefore clear that, after the amendment, the Collector

      can exercise powers only when the Chief Officer of the

      Municipal Council brings it to the Collector’s notice that the

      Municipal Council has passed a resolution contrary to the

      provision of the 1965 Act or any other law, rule or bye-laws. In

      such a situation, the Chief Officer of the Municipal Council

      alone   has   the   responsibility     to   move   an   appropriate

      application before the Collector in terms of Section 308(1) of

      the 1965 Act and more importantly it is only on an application

      moved before the Collector by the Chief Officer of the

      Municipal Council that the powers can be exercised by the

      Collector under the amended Section 308 of 1965 Act. In this
7
case, the application was admittedly not made by the Chief

      Officer of the Municipal Council but by the appellant, which

      should not have been entertained in the first place.
12.   The High Court accepted this argument of the members of the

      Municipal Council, but nevertheless, the High Court also went

      into the merits of the matter and ultimately did not consider it

      a case calling for any interference. In its order dated

      30.06.2021, while dismissing the petition it was said:
“16.     Even on facts, this Court is not at all
              impressed with the contentions sought to be
              raised on behalf of the petitioner. It is obvious
              that the Government Resolution / circulars
              being executive instructions would not prevail
              over statutory provisions. Even otherwise,
              resolution of the Municipal Council was passed
              by majority and it is still in force. The resolution
              specifically states that the writing on the board
              on the new building of Municipal Council would
              be in Marathi at the top and below that in Urdu
              language. There cannot be any dispute about
              the fact that as per entry No.22 of the VIIIth
              Schedule of the Constitution of India, Urdu is
              very much included in the list of languages.
              Thus, this Court sees no reason to entertain the
              contentions raised on behalf of the petitioner.
              Accordingly, the Writ Petition is dismissed.”
13.   This order was challenged before this Court in SLP (Civil) No.

      13820 of 2021. During arguments in this SLP, the appellant’s

      contention was that now a new legislation i.e. the Maharashtra
8
Local Authorities (Official Languages) Act, 2022 (hereinafter

‘2022 Act’) had been enacted during the pendency of the SLP,

in terms of which, the use of Urdu language on the signboard

of the Municipal Council is not permitted. Consequently, this

Court had passed the following order on 29.04.2022:
“The challenge in the present special
        leave petition is to an order passed by the High
        Court of Judicature at Bombay dated
        30.06.2021 wherein challenge to the decision
        of the Municipal Council to write the name of
        Municipal Council on the sign Board in Urdu
        language as well remained unsuccessful.
The learned counsel for the petitioner and
        learned counsel for the State has pointed out
        that a recent enactment by the State of
        Maharashtra i.e.
Maharashtra Act
No.XXXI of
        2022 (Maharashtra Local Authorities (Official
        Languages) Act, 2022) which mandates that
        ‘all sign boards, name plates, notice boards
        and other display matters pertaining to public
        interface and public interest to the Local
        Authority or any Department or office thereof’
        shall be in Marathi.
Since the Act has come into force during
        the pendency of the present proceedings, we
        find that the order of the High Court on account
        of subsequent development is not sustainable.
        However, it shall be open to the aggrieved
        person to seek recourse to the remedy as may
        be available to him against the impugned Act
        in accordance with law.
The special leave petition is disposed of
        in above terms.
Pending application(s), if any, also stand
        disposed of.”
9
14.   Under these circumstances, the matter was heard again by the

      Division Bench of the Bombay High Court (Nagpur Bench),

      and an order was passed on 10.04.2024, which is presently

      under challenge before this Court:
“5.        Perusal of the Act of 2022, would
              indicate that Marathi has been declared as
              official language of all the Local Authorities in
              the State of Maharashtra, to be used for all
              official purposes as well as purposes related to
              public interface and public interest in all offices
              of the Local Authorities.
Section 3 (1) (a)
to (i) of
              the Act of 2022 elucidates as to in which
              communications, actions, forms, signboards
              etc. the Marathi language is to be used.
6.         We are herewith concerned with the
              display of the name of the Municipal Council on
              its building, which in addition to Marathi, has
              also been written in Urdu script.
7.         A perusal of the Act of 2022, would
              indicate, that all that it does, is to ensure that
              the business and affairs of the Council, are to
              be conducted in Marathi language, including
              Marathi script. Insofar as the erection of
              signboard and display of the name of the
              Municipal Council is concerned, it does not
              prohibit use of an additional language, to
              display the name, in addition to the name
              being displayed in Marathi language. Till such
              time, Marathi language continues to be the
              official language of the Local Authorities, in
              terms of the Act of 2022, in our considered
              opinion, the use of an additional language to
              display the name of Municipal Council on its
              building would not indicate any violation of the
              provisions of the Act of 2022. What is to be also
              noted is that there is no prohibition in the Act
10
of 2022 for any such use of a language, in
              addition to the official language, in view of
              which, insofar as Writ Petition No.2703/2023
              is concerned, the impugned communication
              dated 10/02/2023 by the Administrator,
              cannot be sustained and the same is hereby
              quashed and set aside. The writ petition is
              accordingly allowed in the above terms. No
              order as to costs.
8.       Insofar      as      Writ    Petition
              No.1568/2023 is concerned, in view of what
              has been said above, we do not see any reason
              to interfere therein. The writ petition is
              dismissed. No order as to costs.”
15.   The High Court to our mind rightly concluded that the 2022

      Act, on which the appellant placed significant reliance, does

      not prohibit the use of an additional language, which is Urdu

      in the present case, on the signboard of the Municipal Council

      building. The argument before the High Court in the second

      round of litigation by the present appellant was that
Section

      3(1)
of the 2022 Act provides for Marathi to be the official

      language of all local authorities in the State, except for the

      purposes specified in sub-section (2) and the only exception

      which was provided was the use of English in the specified

      communications under sub-section (2). All the same, this

      argument is incorrect. There is no prohibition on using any

      other language, especially one included in the VIIIth Schedule
11
of the Constitution of India. Sub-section (2) of
Section 3
is an

      enabling provision to use English in situations where the

      communications,     in   which   the   subject   matter   of   the

      communication cannot be properly conveyed in Marathi or in

      situations where the persons to whom such communications

      are addressed cannot understand Marathi. This makes it more

      than explicit that even the enactment recognizes that language

      essentially is a tool of communication; which, according to us,

      cannot be condemned, when this language is being used by a

      community or group. We have to emphasize that Marathi and

      Urdu occupy the same position under Schedule VIII of the

      Constitution of India.
16.   Before us is a fellow citizen who has taken great pains to take

      this matter twice to the High Court and then twice again before

      this Court.   What the appellant thinks may also be the

      thinking of many of our fellow citizens. These need to be

      addressed.
17.   Let our concepts be clear. Language is not religion. Language

      does not even represent religion. Language belongs to a

      community, to a region, to people; and not to a religion.
12
18.   Language is culture. Language is the yardstick to measure the

      civilizational march of a community and its people. So is the

      case of Urdu, which is the finest specimen of ganga-jamuni

      tahzeeb, or the Hindustani tahzeeb, which is the composite

      cultural ethos of the plains of northern and central India. But

      before language became a tool for learning, its earliest and

      primary purpose will always remain communication.
19.   Coming back to our case, the purpose here for the use of Urdu

      is merely communication. All the municipal council wanted to

      do was to make an effective communication.           This is the

      primary purpose of a language, which the Bombay High Court

      has laid emphasis on.
20.   We must respect and rejoice in our diversity, including our

      many languages. India has more than hundred major

      languages. Then there are other languages known as dialects

      or ‘Mother Tongues’ which also run into hundreds. According

      to the 2001 Census, India had a total of 122 major languages

      including the 22 scheduled languages, and a total of 234

      mother tongues. Urdu was the sixth most spoken scheduled

      language of India. In fact, it is spoken by at least a part of the

      population in all States and Union Territories, except perhaps
13
in our north-eastern States. In the 2011 Census, the number

      of mother tongues increased to 270. However, it is to be noted

      that this number was also arrived at by taking into

      consideration only those mother tongues which had more than

      ten thousand speakers. Thus, it would not be wrong to say

      that the actual number of mother tongues in India would run

      into thousands. Such is the immense linguistic diversity of

      India!
21.   The Constitution of India though mentions twenty-two Indian

      languages in its VIIIth Schedule, which includes both Marathi

      and Urdu, and significantly, ‘English’ is not a language

      mentioned in the VIIIth Schedule as it is not an Indian

      language. With this linguistic diversity, India is the most

      multilingual country in the world. In such a country, what

      should   be   the   language   for   communication   and   use

      throughout the country, and what should be the national

      language became a vexed question during the debate in the

      Constituent Assembly. We have to keep in mind that language

      is not just a language, it is also representative of a culture.

      That makes a discussion on language both sensitive and

      delicate and this is where one of our principal Constitutional
14
values of ‘tolerance’ must also come into play. We, the people

      of India, have taken great pain in resolving the language issue

      at the Centre, which is our unique achievement considering

      the linguistic diversity of the nation as we have been

      mentioning repeatedly. According to Granville Austin, the

      Constituent Assembly had almost come to a breaking point

      while resolving the question of language or what should be the

      national language1. Finally, the members of the Constituent

      Assembly agreed on ‘Hindi’ to be the “Rajbhasha” i.e. the

      official language of the Union of India with English to be used

      for a period of 15 years from commencement of the

      Constitution, though Parliament was given the powers to

      extend this period.
22.   Part XVII of our Constitution is on the official language.
Article

      351
emphasizes on the spread of Hindi language and to

      develop the language, inter alia, by assimilating the forms and

      style and expressions used in “Hindustani” and other

      languages of the VIIIth Schedule and wherever necessary or




 1 See GRANVILLE AUSTIN, Language and the Constitution-the half-hearted compromise, THE
 INDIAN CONSTITUTION: CORNERSTONE OF A NATION, Oxford University Press (2000) at pp. 265-
307.
15
desirable, by drawing vocabulary, primarily from Sanskrit but

      also secondarily from other languages.
23.   We must now refer to
Article 345
which relates to the Official

      language of a State:
“345. Official language or languages of a
             State:
Subject to the provisions of
articles 346
and
347
,
             the Legislature of a State may by law adopt any
             one or more of the languages in use in the State
             or Hindi as the language or languages to be used
             for all or any of the official purposes of that State:
             Provided that, until the Legislature of the State
             otherwise provides by law, the English language
             shall continue to be used for those official
             purposes within the State for which it was being
             used immediately before the commencement of
             this Constitution.”

      This Article empowers State legislatures to adopt Hindi or any

      other language in use in that State as the official language of

      that State.
24.   A five-judge Bench of this Court in Uttar Pradesh Hindi

      Sahitya Sammelan v. State of Uttar Pradesh (2014) 9 SCC

      716, had an occasion to consider the Constitutional provisions

      relating to official languages of the State, when Urdu was

      adopted as the second language in the State of Uttar Pradesh.
The Uttar Pradesh Official Languages Act
was enacted in the

      year 1951, and it made Hindi the official language in the State.
16
In 1989, an amendment was introduced in the Act by which

      Urdu was made the second official language “for such purposes

      as may be notified by the State Government from time to time.”

      In pursuance of powers conferred under the 1989 amendment

      to the 1951 Act, the State government issued a notification on

      07.10.1989 notifying the use of Urdu as a second language for

      certain purposes. The Appellant therein challenged the

      Constitutional validity of the 1989 amendment to the 1951 Act

      before the Allahabad High Court. The Division Bench which

      heard the matter delivered a split verdict. As a result, the

      matter was referred to a third judge, who held that the 1989

      Amendment to the 1951 Act did not suffer from any infirmity

      and was not unconstitutional. The appellant then filed an SLP

      before this Court, against the decision of the High Court,

      where the matter was ultimately referred to a Constitution

      Bench of Five Judges, which upheld the Constitutional validity

      of the 1989 Amendment, and the addition of Urdu as a second

      language was held to be valid.
25.   According to the appellant therein,
Article 345
gives two

      options to the States: adoption of any one or more of the

      languages in use in the State, or, adoption of Hindi as official
17
language. Therefore, if the State of Uttar Pradesh has already

adopted Hindi as its official language by the 1951 Act, it

cannot adopt any other language as its official language. In

other words, once Hindi is adopted as an official language no

other language can be added as another official language. This

is how, according to the appellant,
Article 345
ought to be

read. This Court did not accept this argument and held that

mere adoption of Hindi by the State as its official language

does not bar the State legislature from adopting other

languages as its official language under
Article 345
of the

Constitution. It was thus observed:
“23. Part XVII of the Constitution as its
        scheme suggests is accommodative. After all,
        language policies are constructs and they
        change over time.
24.The plain language of
Article 345
which empowers the State Legislature to make
        law for adoption of one or more of the
        languages in use in the State leaves no manner
        of doubt that such power may be exercised by
        the State Legislature from time to time. A
        different intention does not appear from the
        plain language of
Article 345.
We do not find
        any indication that the power can be exercised
        by the State Legislature only once and that
        power gets exhausted if the State Legislature
        adopts Hindi as the official language of the
        State. In our view, the State Legislature is at
        liberty to exercise its discretion under
Article
        345
from time to time for specified purpose. It
        does not appear to us that Hindi once adopted
18
as official language of the State in exercise of
                 its power by the State Legislature under
Article
                 345
, the State Legislature ceases to have any
                 law-making power under Article 345…”


             It was held that adoption of a particular language, say

      Hindi, as the official language by a State legislature does not

      bar that legislature from again invoking powers under
Article

      345
to designate yet another language(s) as the official

      language(s) if it is required. The argument of the appellant was

      that when more than one language is in use in a State, then

      the legislature of that State can adopt one or more than one of

      such languages or just Hindi as its language. All the same, this

      Court did not accept this interpretation of
Article 345.
26.   Considering the practical necessity, various States have

      responded to the demand for the inclusion of another language

      as its official language. Following are the States and Union

      Territories in India which have more than one official

      language, or permit the use of more than language for certain

      official purposes2:
2 Data taken from Official Languages Acts passed by State Legislatures as well as other
 Government sources for some Union Territories. However, there might be subsequent
 repeals/amendments in the above-mentioned legislations which might have been
 inadvertently missed by the author of this judgment.
19
S.No.   State/Union    Official    Other             official
        Territory      Language(s) language(s)/language(s)
                                   permitted to be used
                                   for official purposes
1.     Andhra         Telugu      Urdu, English
        Pradesh
2.     Assam          Assamese      Bengali, Bodo, English
3.     Bihar          Hindi         Urdu
4.     Chhattisgarh   Hindi         Chattissgarhi
5.     Goa            Konkani       Marathi, English
6.     Gujarat        Gujarati,
                       Hindi
7.     Haryana        Hindi         Punjabi, English
8.     Himachal       Hindi         Sanskrit
        Pradesh
9.     Jharkhand      Hindi         Magahi,        Bhojpuri,
                                     Maithili,        Angika,
                                     Bhumij, Urdu, Santhali,
                                     Mundari, Ho, Khadiya,
                                     Kurukh,         Kurmali,
                                     Khortha,        Nagpuri,
                                     Panchparganiya,
                                     Bengali, Odia
10.    Karnataka      Kannada       English
11.    Kerala         Malayalam     English, Tamil, Kannada
12.    Maharashtra    Marathi       English
13.    Manipur        Manipuri      English
                       (Meiteilon)
14.    Meghalaya      English       Khasi, Garo
15.    Mizoram        Mizo          English
16.    Odisha         Odia          English
17.    Punjab         Punjabi       English
18.    Rajasthan      Hindi         English
19.    Sikkim         English,      Limbu,        Sunuwar,
                       Nepali,       Tamang, Bhujel, Newari,
                       Bhutia,       Rai, Gurung, Mangar,
                       Lepcha        Sherpa
20.    Tamil Nadu     Tamil         English
21.    Telangana      Telugu        Urdu, English
22.    Tripura        Bengali,      English
                       Kokborok
20
23.   Uttar Pradesh     Hindi          Urdu
24.   Uttarakhand       Hindi          Sanskrit
25.   West Bengal       Bengali        Urdu,    Hindi,    Odia,
                                             Punjabi,       Santhali,
                                             Nepali,         Kurukh,
                                             Kamtapuri, Rajbanshi,
                                             Kurmali,         Telugu,
                                             English
26.   Andaman and       Hindi          English
            Nicobar Islands
27.   Dadra       and   Hindi,         Gujarati
            Nagar    Haveli   English
            and     Daman
            and Diu
28.   Delhi             Hindi          Urdu, Punjabi, English
29.   Jammu       and   Kashmiri,
            Kashmir           Dogri,
                              Hindi,
                              Urdu,
                              English
30.   Ladakh            Hindi          English
31.   Puducherry        Tamil          Telugu,      Malayalam,
                                             English
27.    The prejudice against Urdu stems from the misconception that

       Urdu is alien to India. This opinion, we are afraid, is incorrect

       as Urdu, like Marathi and Hindi, is an Indo-Aryan language. It

       is a language which was born in this land. Urdu developed and

       flourished in India due to the need for people belonging to

       different cultural milieus who wanted to exchange ideas and

       communicate amongst themselves. Over the centuries, it

       attained ever greater refinement and became the language of

       choice for many acclaimed poets.
21
28.   The debate surrounding languages is not new. In fact, it

      started even before independence, and the need for greater use

      of   Indian         languages     was     also    recognized       during      the

      independence movement. It was accepted by a large number

      of Indians that the language which is a product of

      amalgamation of various Indian languages such as Hindi,

      Urdu and Punjabi, is what is known as ‘Hindustani’, which a

      large mass of this country speaks. In its Cocanada (Kakinada)

      Session of 1923, the Indian National Congress recognized

      amendments to its Constitution to the effect that the Congress

      would use Hindustani, English or provincial languages in its

      proceedings. The relevant portion of the resolution reads as

      follows:
“Article XXXIII
                 The proceedings of the Congress shall be
                 conducted, as far as possible, in Hindustani,
                 English or the language of the province may
                 also be used.”3
29.   In the same Session, it was recognized that the lack of

      cooperation between different communities due to mutual

      suspicion about each other’s aims and intentions is one of the

      obstacles to attainment of Swaraj in India. To overcome these


 3 A.M ZAIDI, THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS-VOL-8: 1921-1924: INDIA AT THE

 CROSS-ROADS at p. 635.
22
difficulties,        different     communities,   through      their

      representatives, signed the Indian National Pact resolving that

      Swaraj is the aim of all the communities. This Pact recognized

      Hindustani as the national language of India. The relevant

      portion of the said Pact reads as under:
“(3) Hindustani shall be the national language
                  of India. It shall be permissible to write it in
                  either script, Urdu or Deonagari.”4
30.   The Congress Constitution of 1934 contained a provision

      which said that all proceedings of the Congress shall be in

      Hindustani and much like the present Indian Constitution, the

      Congress Constitution also carved out a proviso which

      provided for the use of English or any provincial language, in

      case a speaker is unable to speak in Hindustani or the

      Congress President permits him/her to do so. Article XVII of

      this Congress Constitution thus came to read as under:
“Article XVII       LANGUAGE
(a) The proceedings of the Congress, the All-India
                    Congress Committee and the Working
                    Committee shall ordinarily be conducted in
                    Hindustani; the English language or any
                    provincial language may be used if the
                    speaker is unable to speak in Hindustani or
                    whenever permitted by the President.
4 THE INDIAN NATIONAL PACT, CLAUSE 3.
23
(b) The proceedings of the Provincial Congress
                   Committees shall ordinarily be conducted in
                   the language of the province concerned.
                   Hindustani may also be used.”5
31.   This resolve is also reflected in an essay authored by the first

      Prime Minister of the country, Jawaharlal Nehru, where he

      wrote as follows:
“Language is alleged to divide India into
                  innumerable compartments; we are told by the
                  census that there are 222 languages or
                  dialects in India. I suppose the census of the
                  United States mentions a very large number of
                  languages; the German census, I think,
                  mentions over sixty. But most of these
                  languages are spoken by small groups of
                  people, or are dialects. In India, the absence of
                  mass education has fostered the growth of
                  dialects. As a matter of fact, India is a
                  singularly unified area so far as languages are
                  concerned. Altogether in the vast area of India,
                  there are a dozen languages and these are
                  closely allied to each other. They fall into two
                  groups— the Indo-Aryan languages of the
                  north and center and west, and the Dravidian
                  languages of the east and south. The Indo-
                  Aryan languages derived from Sanskrit and
                  anyone who knows one of them finds it easy to
                  learn another. The Dravidian languages are
                  different, but each one of them contains fifty
                  per cent, or more words from the Sanskrit. The
                  dominant        language       in    India    is:
Hindustani (Hindi or Urdu) which is
                  already spoken by a huge block of a
                  hundred and twenty million people and is
                  partly understood by scores of millions of
                  others. This language is bound to become
 5 A.M ZAIDI, THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS-VOL-10: 1930-1935: THE BATTLE

 FOR SWARAJ at p. 442.
24
the all-India medium of communication,
                 not displacing the great provincial
                 languages, but as a compulsory second
                 language. With mass education on behalf of
                 the state this will not be difficult. Already due
                 to talkies and the radio, the range of
                 Hindustani is spreading fast. The writer of this
                 article has had occasion to address great mass
                 audiences all over India and almost always,
                 except in the south, he has used Hindustani
                 and been understood. However numerous the
                 difficult problems which India has to solve, the
                 language problem clearly is not one of them. It
                 already is well on the way to solution.”6
                                                       (Emphasis provided)



      Nehru acknowledged that Hindustani is bound to become the

      all-India medium of communication, since it is spoken by a

      large number of people in the country. At the same time, he

      recognized       the     importance        of   provincial       languages       by

      emphasizing that the intention was not to replace provincial

      languages with Hindustani. Thus, he put forward the idea of

      Hindustani as a compulsory second language.
32.   Based on the developments recounted above, it is clear that

      the country was moving forward to accept Hindustani as its

      National language during our struggle for independence. Even

      the Constituent Assembly’s Rules of Procedure laid down that


 6 Jawaharlal Nehru, The Unity of India, Foreign Affairs, Volume 16, No. 2 (Jan. 1938), pp.

 231-243.
25
the business of the Assembly would be transacted in

      Hindustani, or English. Again, a proviso similar to the one

      contained in our present Constitution7 was incorporated,

      stating that in cases where a member is unable to express

      himself/herself in Hindustani or English, he/she may, with

      the permission of the President, speak in their mother tongue8.
33.   Why was it then that Hindustani was not recognized as an

      official language of the Union? It is now clear that the main

      reason behind this was the partition of the nation in 1947 and

      adoption of Urdu by Pakistan as its National language. The

      ultimate victim was Hindustani.
34.   Granville Austin explains in detail the discussions on the

      language issue in India before the Constituent Assembly in

      particular, and in the country in general, before and after

      partition. It is Chapter 12 of his first book9 which throws

      considerable light on this contentious and delicate national

      issue. It was a pragmatic hope nurtured by our national

      leaders in post-independent India and by the majority of the

      members of the Constituent Assembly that Hindustani had a

 7 See
Articles 120
and
210
of the Constitution of India
8
GRANVILLE AUSTIN, THE INDIAN CONSTITUTION: CORNERSTONE OF A NATION, Oxford University
 Press (New Delhi; 2000) at p. 274.
9
GRANVILLE AUSTIN, THE INDIAN CONSTITUTION: CORNERSTONE OF A NATION, Oxford University
 Press (New Delhi; 2000).
26
very bright prospect of becoming the national language. The

early debates in the Constituent Assembly indicated a

compromise on this issue between the hardliners from both

sides i.e. between supporters of Sanskritized Hindi and

proponents of liberal mixture of Urdu and Hindi known as

‘Hindustani’. But then comes a strong rupture in the form of

the partition of India, and amongst its several fallouts, one

vital blow was given to Urdu and Hindustani both. This is what

Granville Austin has to say here:
“…Partition killed Hindustani and endangered
        the position of English and the provincial
        languages in the Constitution. ‘If there had
        been no Partition, Hindustani would without
        doubt have been the national language,’ K.
        Santhanam believed, ‘but the anger against
        the Muslims turned against Urdu. Assembly
        members ‘felt that the Muslims having caused
        the division of the country, the whole issue of
        national language must be reviewed afresh’,
        said an article in The Hindustan Times. Having
        seen the dream of unity shattered by Partition,
        by the ‘treachery’ of the Urdu (Hindustani)
        speakers, the Hindi extremists became even
        more firmly committed to Hindi and to
        achieving national unity through it. Speakers of
        the provincial languages must learn Hindi and
        the regional languages must take second
        place, the Hindi-wallahs believed. And as to
27
English, it should go as Urdu had gone. Were
                 not both un-Indian?”10
35.   Be that as it may, it is a fact now that Hindustani is not the

      official language under the Constitution. Under
Article 343
of

      the Constitution, Hindi is the official language, while the use

      of English was made permissible for official purposes for a

      period of fifteen years. But this does not mean that Hindustan

      and Urdu have become extinct. This was never the intention

      of the framers of the Constitution. In a speech to the

      Constituent Assembly on the language issue, Jawaharlal

      Nehru emphasized that the official language i.e. Hindi shall be

      enriched by borrowing the vocabulary from Urdu. His exact

      words were:
“…We find that in a particular subject or type
                 of subjects we speak better in Hindi than in
                 Urdu and in another type of subjects Urdu suits
                 us better; it suits the genius of that subject a
                 little better. My point is that I was both these
                 instruments which strengthen Hindi that is
                 going to be developed as our official and
                 National language of the country. Let us keep
                 in touch with the people…”11



 10 GRANVILLE AUSTIN, THE INDIAN CONSTITUTION: CORNERSTONE OF A NATION, Oxford University
 Press (New Delhi; 2000) at pp. 277-278.
 11 Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol IX at p. 1415.
28
This spirit is embodied in
Article 351
of the Constitution,

      which reads as follows:
“351. Directive for development of the
              Hindi language
              It shall be the duty of the Union to promote the
              spread of the Hindi language, to develop it so
              that it may serve as a medium of expression for
              all the elements of the composite culture of
              India and to secure its enrichment by
              assimilating without interfering with its genius,
              the forms, style and expressions used in
              Hindustani and in the other languages of India
              specified in the Eighth Schedule, and by
              drawing, wherever necessary or desirable, for
              its vocabulary, primarily on Sanskrit and
              secondarily on other languages.”
36.   Both Gandhi and Nehru were great proponents of Hindustani.
Only a few months before his death Gandhi wrote:
“This Hindustani (Gandhi wrote) should be
              neither Sanskritized Hindi nor Persianised
              Urdu but a happy combination of both. It
              should also freely admit words wherever
              necessary from the different regional
              languages and also assimilate words from
              foreign languages, provided that they can mix
              well and easily with our national language.
              Thus our national language must develop into
              a rich and powerful instrument capable of
              expressing the whole gamut of human
              thoughts and feelings. To confine oneself
              exclusively to Hindi or Urdu would be a crime
29
against intelligence            and      the    spirit     of
                 patriotism.”12
37.   Even today, the language used by the common people of the

      country is replete with words of the Urdu language, even if one

      is not aware of it. It would not be incorrect to say that one

      cannot have a day-to-day conversation in Hindi without using

      words of Urdu or words derived from Urdu. The word ‘Hindi’

      itself comes from the Persian word ‘Hindavi’! This exchange of

      vocabulary flows both ways because Urdu also has many

      words borrowed from other Indian languages, including

      Sanskrit.
38.   Interestingly, Urdu words have a heavy influence on Court

      parlance, both in criminal and civil law. From Adalat13 to

      halafnama14 to peshi15, the influence of Urdu is writ large in

      the language of the Indian Courts. For that matter, even

      though the official language of the Supreme Court and the

      High Courts as per
Article 348
of the Constitution is English,

      yet many Urdu words continue to be used in this Court till

      date. These include vakalatnama, dasti, etc.
12
GRANVILLE AUSTIN, THE INDIAN CONSTITUTION: CORNERSTONE OF A NATION, Oxford University
 Press (New Delhi; 2000) at p. 272.
13 Adalat means ‘Court’.
14 Halafnama means ‘affidavit’.
15 Peshi means ‘appearance’ or ‘presence’.
30
39.    Viewed from another perspective, the Urdu language has come

       to be adopted by many States and Union Territories in India

       as the second official language in exercise of powers conferred

       by
Article 345
of the Constitution16. The States which have

       Urdu as one of the official languages are Andhra Pradesh,

       Bihar, Jharkhand, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, and West

       Bengal, while the Union Territories which follow this practice

       are Delhi and Jammu and Kashmir.
40.    Even from a Constitutional perspective, the use of language

       for official purposes is not according to any rigid formula. For

       example,
Article 120
of the Constitution prescribes Hindi or

       English as the official language of Parliament, but the proviso

       to the said Article empowers the Presiding Officer of the House

       to allow a member to express themselves in their mother

       tongue, if they do not know Hindi or English. The same

       principle applies to State legislatures vide
Article 210
of the

       Constitution.
41.    It may also be of same interest to know that when we criticize

       Urdu, we are in a way also criticizing Hindi, as according to

       linguists and literary scholars, Urdu and Hindi are not two


 16 Please refer to the previous paragraphs of this judgment.
31
languages, but it is one language. True, Urdu is mainly written

      in Nastaliq17 and Hindi in Devnagri; but then scripts do not

      make a language. What makes languages distinct is their

      syntax, their grammar and their phonology. Urdu and Hindi

      have broad similarities in all these counts. The noted Urdu

      scholar Gyan Chand Jain, in Urdu, Hindi ya Hindustani

      published in magazine Hindustani Zaban (Jan-April 1974),

      writes:
“It is absolutely clear that Urdu and Hindi are
                    not two separate languages. To call them two
                    languages is to belie all principles of linguistics
                    and to deceive oneself and others….Even
                    though Urdu literature and Hindi literature are
                    two different and independent literatures,
                    Urdu and Hindi are not two different
                    languages…Enumerating Urdu and Hindi as
                    two languages, in the Indian Constitution, is
                    political expediency, not a linguistic reality”18

       Professor Gyan Chand Jain does take into consideration the

       fact that in our Constitution, Urdu and Hindi are mentioned

       as two different languages, but that the author says, “is

       political expediency, not a linguistic reality.”                        According to

       Amrit Rai, “…their recognition as two separate languages




17 Urdu written in Perso-Arabic script in calligraphic style is called ‘Nastaliq’.
18 Our source for this extract is AMRIT RAI, A HOUSE DIVIDED: THE ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF

HINDI/HINDAVI, Oxford University Press (1984) at p. 3.
32
under      the Constitution          need not deter            linguists     from

        questioning the scientific validity of their separation”19.
42.   The noted Hindi scholar Ram Vilas Sharma, who is a strong

      supporter of Hindi as a national language, in his book Bharat

      ki Bhasha Samasya writes:
“Hindi-Urdu are not two separate languages;
                   they are basically one and the same. Their
                   pronouns, verbs, and basic vocabulary are the
                   same. There are no two other languages in the
                   world whose pronouns and verbs are one
                   hundred per cent the same. Russian and
                   Ukrainian are much akin to each other but even
                   they are not so closely alike.”20
43.   Another outstanding Urdu scholar, and a leader of the Urdu

      movement, Abdul Haq, in his book Qadim Urdu says:
“It is a clear fact and needs no further
                   adumbration that the language we speak and
                   write and call by the name ‘Urdu’ today is
                   derived from Hindi and constituted of Hindi”21
44.   If there are dissimilarities, there are plenty between Hindi and

      high Hindi, like there are between Urdu and high Urdu. But

      close similarities exist between Hindi and Urdu, when these
19
AMRIT RAI, A HOUSE DIVIDED: THE ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF HINDI/HINDAVI, Oxford
 University Press (1984) at p. 3.
20 Our source for this extract is AMRIT RAI, A HOUSE DIVIDED: THE ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF

 HINDI/HINDAVI, Oxford University Press (1984) at p. 6.
 21 Our source for this extract is AMRIT RAI, A HOUSE DIVIDED: THE ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF

 HINDI/HINDAVI, Oxford University Press (1984) at p. 6.
33
are spoken day-to-day. We fall back again on Gyan Chand

      Jain, who writes:
“…It is a fact that the difference between
                   average Urdu writing and average Hindi
                   writing is not as great as the difference
                   between average Urdu and difficult Urdu, or
                   that between average Hindi and difficult Hindi.
                   In the literature of every language, be it Urdu
                   or Hindi or English, one finds different levels of
                   language according to the stock of words used-
                   on the one hand, the altogether simple
                   language of everyday speech, and on the other
                   a language difficult to comprehend, weighed
                   down by words from the classical language or
                   from an alien language…”22
45.   This is not an occasion to have an elaborate discussion on the

      rise and fall of Urdu, but this much can be stated that this

      fusion of the two languages Hindi and Urdu met a roadblock

      in the form of the puritans on both sides and Hindi became

      more Sanskritized and Urdu more Persian. A schism exploited

      by the colonial powers in dividing the two languages on

      religion. Hindi was now understood to be the language of

      Hindus and Urdu of the Muslims,23 which is such a pitiable
22 Gyan Chand Jain, Urdu Hindi ya Hindustani, Hindustani Zaban (Jan-April, 1974). However,

 our source for the extract is AMRIT RAI, A HOUSE DIVIDED: THE ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF
 HINDI/HINDAVI, Oxford University Press (1984) at p. 4.
 23 See AMRIT RAI, A HOUSE DIVIDED: THE ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF HINDI/HINDAVI, Oxford

 University Press (1984) at pp. 8-13 and 285-289.
34
digression from reality; from unity in diversity; and the

      concept of universal brotherhood.
46.   Coming to the present case, it must be stated that a Municipal

      Council is there to provide services to the local community of

      the area and cater to their immediate day-to-day needs. If

      people or a group of people, residing within the area covered

      by the Municipal Council are familiar with Urdu, then there

      should not be any objection if Urdu is used in addition to the

      official language i.e. Marathi, at least on the signboard of the

      Municipal Council. Language is a medium for exchange of

      ideas that brings people holding diverse views and beliefs

      closer and it should not become a cause of their division.
47.   And these are the words of our former Chief Justice of India,

      M. N. Venkatachaliah, who makes a fervent plea for the

      preservation of Urdu, while speaking in a seminar in Delhi:
“The Urdu language has a special place in
              India. The Urdu language conjures up and
              inspires deeply emotive sentiments and
              thoughts from the sublimity of the mystic to
              the romantic and the earthy, of perfumes of
              camaraderie, of music and life’s wistfulness
              and a whole range of human relationships.
              Its rich literature and lore is a treasure house
              of the noblest thoughts on life’s mysteries.
              Urdu is not simply one of the languages of
              this country. It is a culture and civilisation in
              itself…But today this great culture needs
35
urgent measures for its very survival…The
                 richness of Urdu culture needs to be restored
                 to its pristine glory.”24
48.   Our misconceptions, perhaps even our prejudices against a

      language have to be courageously and truthfully tested against

      the reality, which is this great diversity of our nation: Our

      strength can never be our weakness. Let us make friends with

      Urdu and every language. If Urdu was to speak for herself, she

      would say:
“urdu hai mirā naam maiñ 'Khusrav' kī pahelī
                 kyuuñ mujh ko banāte ho ta.assub kā nishāna
               maiñ ne to kabhī ḳhud ko musalmāñ nahīñ maanā
              dekhā thā kabhī maiñ ne bhī ḳhushiyoñ kā zamāna
                     apne hī vatan meñ huuñ magar aaj akelī

                 urdu hai mirā naam maiñ 'Khusrav' kī pahelī”25


                 Urdu is my name, I am the riddle of 'Khusrav'
                         Do not hold me for your prejudices
                        I never considered myself a Muslim
                             I too have seen happier times
                   I feel like an outsider in my homeland today
                 Urdu is my name, I am the riddle of 'Khusrav'




 24 See Danial Latifi, Urdu in UP, Economic and Political Weekly, Vol. 36, No.7 (Feb 17-23,

 2001), pp. 533-535 at p. 535.
25 Extract from a Nazm by poet Iqbal Ashhar
36
49.   The display of an additional language cannot, by itself, be said

      to be in violation of the provisions of the 2022 Act. The High

      Court while reaching the above findings had considered the

      relevant provisions of law. We completely agree with the

      reasoning given by the High Court that there is no prohibition

      on the use of Urdu under the 2022 Act or in any provision of

      law. The entire case of the appellant to our mind is based on

      a misconception of law. We see no reason therefore to interfere

      in the present case. These appeals are liable to be dismissed,

      and are hereby dismissed.
50.   Pending application(s), if any, stand(s) disposed of.
….…...……………………………J.
                                    (SUDHANSHU DHULIA)




                                     ……....……………………………J.
                                    (K. VINOD CHANDRAN)

 New Delhi
 April 15, 2025