[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Manjunath Tirakappa Malagi vs Gurusiddappa Tirakappa Malagi (Dead) ... on 21 April, 2025
Author:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
2025 INSC 517                                                           REPORTABLE

                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                          CIVIL APPEAL NO(S)._______________ OF 2025
                    [@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO(S). 4812 OF 2023]

       MANJUNATH TIRAKAPPA MALAGI AND ANR                        …APPELLANT(S)

                                              Versus

       GURUSIDDAPPA TIRAKAPPA MALAGI (DEAD
       THROUGH LRS)                                             …RESPONDENT(S)



                                         JUDGMENT
SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J.
1.        Leave granted.
2.        The present appeal arises out of pure civil proceedings initiated

                   at the hands of the present appellants in the year 2003. The

                   appellants filed a suit for declaring a compromise decree

                   entered into between the respondents (defendants) as null and

                   void, and not binding on the appellants. Additionally, the

                   appellants also sought partition of a certain share in the
Signature Not Verified
ancestral property, which was in the possession of the
Digitally signed by
Jayant Kumar Arora
Date: 2025.04.21
17:11:46 IST
Reason:
defendants. The trial court dismissed the suit of the appellants
1
vide order dated 02.03.2007. Thereafter, the appellants filed

       the first appeal before the High Court, which has also been

       dismissed by the impugned order dated 23.09.2022.
3.   Since the present matter concerns various suits, we would like to

       state the facts of the matter in short and the same are as

       follows:
(a) In 1974, a family partition takes place between brothers

             and their father, i.e. appellants’ father, his five brothers

             and appellants’ grandfather, and the family property was

             partitioned which was registered.
(b) Thereafter, in the year 1998, the appellants filed a suit

             (O.S No.219/1998) against their father and mother

             seeking partition and division of ancestral property by

             metes and bounds. However, during the pendency of this

             suit, the grandfather of the appellants filed a different

             suit (O.S No.58/1999) for partition in which his six sons,

             including appellants’ father, were a party. In that, it was

             stated that a part of the joint family property (7 acres of

             land) was mistakenly left out of the 1974 partition. Vide

             order dated 18.01.2000, Trial Court passed a decree

             based on a compromise between the defendants under
2
which that 7 acres of land was equally divided amongst

   the appellants’ father, his five brothers and appellants’

   grandfather. Consequently, 1 acre out of the 7 acres fell

   to the share of the appellants’ father.
(c) Taking into consideration the compromise decree dated

   18.01.2000,    the    Trial   Court,      vide    order   dated

   02.08.2002, decreed the appellants’ partition suit (O.S

   No.219/1998), and the appellants together received half

   of the share of their father’s property.         Consequently,

   both cases were decided. The 1999 suit was decided on

   18.01.2000 by a decree of compromise and later the

   1998 suit was decided on 02.08.2002 based on the

   decree of compromise passed in 1999 suit.
(d) From here, the main dispute arises. In 2003, the

   appellants filed the present suit (No.1/2003) seeking a

   declaration    that   the     compromise         decree   dated

   18.01.2000 is null and void as, according to the

   appellants, the 7 acres of land was their father’s property

   and not the ancestral property. Thus, the appellants’

   claim that they are entitled to half of the 7 acres of land

   (hereinafter referred to as ‘suit property’). This is the suit
3
with which we are dealing in the present appeal. This

                suit of the appellants was dismissed by the Trial Court,

                and then the first appeal filed by the appellants has also

                been dismissed by the High Court vide the impugned

                order dated 23.09.2022. Now, appellants are before us.
4.   It is the case of the appellants that they are the sons of

       Tirakappa Gurusiddappa Malagi, who had colluded with his

       father    (appellants’   grandfather)   and   brothers   (appellants’

       uncles) to deprive the appellants of their rights. Appellants

       contend that the suit property (7 acres of land) was purchased

       by their grandmother in the name of their father when he was

       a minor and thus, suit property was rightly not included in the

       1974 partition. However, according to the appellants, their

       father, in collusion with his father and brothers, got the suit

       property partitioned by a compromise decree, and this has led

       to the reduction of the appellants’ share in the suit property.

       They further argue that the compromise decree should be set

       aside as they were never made a party to that suit in which the

       compromise decree was passed.
5.   On the contrary, the other side would argue that the appellants’

       interest was represented by their father in the suit in which the
4
compromise decree was passed. It has also been argued that

       the Trial Court and High Court were correct in holding that the

       appellants’ suit was barred by principles of res judicata as well

       as under Order 2 Rule 2 and
Order 23 Rule 3A of the Code of

       Civil Procedure
, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as ‘
CPC
’).
6.   We have heard both sides and perused the material before us.
7.   There are concurrent findings of the Courts below against the

       appellants. The appellants vehemently argue that since the suit

       property is not an ancestral property, it cannot be partitioned

       amongst their    father, grandfather     and father’s brothers.

       However, the appellants miserably failed to prove that the suit

       property is not a part of the ancestral property. After going

       through the records, we are of the considered view that the

       Trial Court correctly concluded that although the suit property

       was purchased in the name of the appellants’ father, it was

       purchased from the family funds and, thus, it is a joint family

       property.
8.   Since the suit property was not taken into consideration during

       the partition in the year 1974, the grandfather of the

       appellants filed a suit seeking partition in which the suit

       property was equally divided amongst the appellants’ father, his
5
brothers and appellants’ grandfather. The appellants’ interest

      was   represented   by   their   father,   and   pursuant    to   the

      compromise decree, the appellants’ father received his part of

      the share. Subsequently, as per the decree dated 02.08.2002

      passed in Suit no.219/1998 filed by the appellants, the

      appellants have also been held jointly entitled to a half share of

      their father’s share of the suit property. In other words,

      appellants were jointly held entitled to 0.5 acres of land. We are

      unable to understand how the appellants can claim it to be an

      act of fraud.
9.   Through   the    decree   dated    02.08.2002     passed     in    suit

      (No.219/1998) filed by the appellants, the entire share of the

      appellants’ father, which he had received in the 1974 partition

      and by compromise decree, was further partitioned amongst

      the appellants and their father. This decree was never

      challenged by the appellants. Nevertheless, they filed a fresh

      suit in the year 2003 seeking cancellation of the compromise

      decree and further seeking partition of the suit property. The

      appellants’ ground for challenging the said compromise decree

      is that the appellants’ father was coerced by his brothers and

      father to enter into the said compromise.
6
10. Let us discuss the law governing a consent decree.
Order 23 Rule

      3 of CPC
, which deals with compromise decree, reads as

      follows:
“3. Compromise of suit.— Where it is proved to the
            satisfaction of the Court that a suit has been adjusted
            wholly or in part by any lawful agreement or
            compromise, in writing and signed by the parties or
            where the defendant satisfies the plaintiff in respect of
            the whole or any part of the subject-matter of the suit,
            the Court shall order such agreement, compromise or
            satisfaction to be recorded, and shall pass a decree in
            accordance therewith so far as it relates to the parties
            to the suit, whether or not the subject-matter of the
            agreement, compromise or satisfaction is the same as
            the subject-matter of the suit:
Provided that where it is alleged by one party and
            denied by the other that an adjustment or satisfaction
            has been arrived at, the Court shall decide the
            question; but no adjournment shall be granted for the
            purpose of deciding the question, unless the Court, for
            reasons to be recorded, thinks fit to grant such
            adjournment.
Explanation.—An agreement or compromise which is
            void or voidable under the
Indian Contract Act, 1872
(9 of 1872), shall not be deemed to be lawful within
            the meaning of this rule”



      Thus, a reading of the above provision makes it clear that

      before passing a decree on the basis of a compromise, the

      Court has to satisfy itself that the suit has been adjusted by a
7
lawful compromise. Once the Court passes a compromise

      decree after such a satisfaction, the decree cannot be

      challenged in an appeal as no appeal lies against a compromise

      decree1.
11. Also, a compromise decree cannot be challenged by filing a fresh

      suit as there is a bar on filing a fresh suit challenging the

      consent decree on the ground of the legality of the compromise

      under
Order 23 Rule 3A of CPC
, which reads as follows:
“3-A. Bar to suit.— No suit shall lie to set aside a
             decree on the ground that the compromise on which
             the decree is based was not lawful.”
12. The only remedy against a compromise decree is to file a recall

      application. This Court in
Pushpa Devi Bhagat v. Rajinder

      Singh
, (2006) 5 SCC 566 summed up the position of law as

      follows:
“17. The position that emerges from the amended
             provisions of Order 23 can be summed up thus:
(i) No appeal is maintainable against a consent decree
             having regard to the specific bar contained in
Section
             96(3)
CPC.
(ii) No appeal is maintainable against the order of the
             court recording the compromise (or refusing to record a


    1
Section 96(3)
of CPC: No appeal shall lie from a decree passed by the
    Court with the consent of parties.
8
compromise) in view of the deletion of clause (m) of
      Rule 1 Order 43.
(iii) No independent suit can be filed for setting aside
      a compromise decree on the ground that the
      compromise was not lawful in view of the bar
      contained in Rule 3-A.
(iv) A consent decree operates as an estoppel and is
      valid and binding unless it is set aside by the court
      which passed the consent decree, by an order on an
      application under the proviso to Rule 3 Order 23.

      Therefore, the only remedy available to a party to a
      consent decree to avoid such consent decree, is to
      approach the court which recorded the compromise
      and made a decree in terms of it, and establish that
      there was no compromise. In that event, the court
      which recorded the compromise will itself consider and
      decide the question as to whether there was a valid
      compromise or not. This is so because a consent
      decree is nothing but contract between parties
      superimposed with the seal of approval of the court.
      The validity of a consent decree depends wholly on
      the validity of the agreement or compromise on which
      it is made…”

                                         (Emphasis Provided)


Thus, even if we accept the contention of the appellants that

their father was coerced by his brothers and father (appellants’

grandfather) to enter into a compromise, which led to the

passing of the consent decree, a fresh suit is still not a valid

remedy. In that situation, the appellants’ father should have
9
filed a recall application before the Court that had passed the

      decree. The appellants’ father has never done so! Moreover, he

      had admitted the consent decree and never questioned its

      validity.
13. Additionally, the appellants' argument that the suit property is

      not a joint family property but was purchased by their

      grandmother in the name of the appellants’ father and that he

      is now trying to deprive the appellants from the suit property

      as their relations have turned sour, is of no help to them. This

      is because if the appellants’ grandmother had purchased the

      suit property in the name of the appellants’ father, and it is not

      a part of the ancestral property then
in that case
it would be

      the property of the appellants’ father as of now, since he is

      alive, and he is at full liberty to dispose of the same as per his

      wishes. Be that as it may, if the father of the appellants has no

      grievance against the consent decree, then we are unable to

      understand how the appellants can be allowed to challenge it.
14. In any case, the appellants’ case has no merits. The appellants’

      suit is also barred under
Order 2 Rule 2 of CPC
as it did not

      include all the properties which were part of their earlier suit.

      The present suit is also hit by the principles of res judicata or
10
by constructive res judicata as the appellants cannot re-agitate

      their claim regarding the partition of the suit property, which

      has already been partitioned as a result of previous litigations.

      The Trial Court and High Court have dealt with these issues in

      detail. We are not required to go into the same as we have

      already given our reasons above for holding that the appellants’

      suit is bereft of any merits.
15. In view of the above, we see no reason to interfere with the

      impugned order dated 23.09.2022 passed by the High Court.

      Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.
16. Interim order(s), if any, stand(s) vacated.
17. Pending application(s), if any, stand(s) disposed of.
………………………………, J.
[SUDHANSHU DHULIA]




                                            ………………………………, J.
[AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]

         NEW DELHI;
APRIL 21, 2025.
11
12