[Cites
20
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The Superintendent Of Prison vs Venkatesan @ Senu @ Srinivasan @ ... on 22 April, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
2025 INSC 541                                                               NON-REPORTABLE
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1371 OF 2025


             THE SUPERINTENDENT OF PRISON & ANR.                              … APPELLANTS

                                                         VS.

             VENKATESAN @ SENU @ SRINIVASAN @
             BASKARAN @ RADIO @ PRAKASAM                                       … RESPONDENT

                                                        WITH

                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1372 OF 2025


             THE SUPERINTENDENT OF PRISON & ANR.                               … APPELLANTS

                                                         VS.

             RAVICHANDRAN @ KALAI @ RAVI                                       … RESPONDENT


                                                   JUDGMENT
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1371 OF 2025
1.         The Superintendent of Prison, Central Prison – 1, Puzhal, Chennai,

                            Tamil Nadu and the Inspector of Police, Q Branch, CID Police Station,

                            Perambalur District, Tamil Nadu1 are in appeal against the judgment

                            and order dated 11.09.2020 of a learned Judge of the High Court of

                            Judicature at Madras. By reason of the impugned order, a petition of

                            the respondent2 under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
JATINDER KAUR
Date: 2025.04.22
18:13:15 IST
Reason:
1
appellants
2
Venkatesan
1
19733 succeeded. In such petition, Venkatesan had sought that the

         remand period from (i) 24.03.2005 to 28.02.2006; (ii) 22.04.2008 to

         22.04.2009 and (iii) 21.04.2014 to 23.12.2014 as undertrial prisoner

         produced under P.T. (Prisoner Transit) warrant in S.C. No.2 of 2002,

         under
Section 428
of the Cr. PC., be set-off.
2.   Venkatesan belongs to Tamil Nadu Liberation Army, an organisation

         banned by the Government of Tamil Nadu. With the objective of

         liberating Tamil Nadu from the Union of India, Venkatesan resorted

         to violent activities and through armed struggle has been involved in

         several incidents of crime. Upon full-fledged trial, Venkatesan has

         been found guilty in Crime No.346 of 1993, S.C. No.12 of 2001 and

         DS.C. No.2 of 2002.
3.   The question of law that we are tasked to decide is, whether on facts

         and in the circumstances, Venkatesan was entitled to the set-off for

         the three periods granted by the High Court in terms of
Section 428
,

         Cr. PC.
4.   Both
Section 427
and
Section 428
, Cr. PC, appear under Chapter

         XXXII of the Cr. PC titled “EXECUTION, SUSPENSION, REMISSION AND

         COMMUTATION OF SENTENCES”.
Section 428
envisages, upon a conviction

         being recorded in a particular case followed by a sentence to

         imprisonment for a term, set-off of pre-sentence detention period

         during the investigation, enquiry or trial of the same case. However,
Section 427(1)
, Cr. PC, ordains that when a person already
3
Cr. PC
2
undergoing a sentence of imprisonment is sentenced on a subsequent

     conviction   to   imprisonment       or   imprisonment   for   life,   such

     imprisonment or imprisonment for life shall commence at the

     expiration of the imprisonment to which he has been previously

     sentenced, unless the Court directs that the subsequent sentence

     shall run concurrently with such previous sentence.
5.   Venkatesan was arrested and remanded to judicial custody on

     08.03.1998 in Crime No.234 of 1997 registered at Andimadam Police

     Station. After completion of investigation, police report under
Section

     173(2)
, Cr. PC was filed. Besides Crime No.234 of 1997, Venkatesan

     was arraigned as A-2 in S.C. No.2 of 2002. Cognizance was taken in

     S.C. No.2 of 2002 on the file of the Sessions Court for Exclusive Trial

     of Bomb Blast Cases, Poonamallee, Chennai. Venkatesan was

     released on bail in S.C. No.2 of 2002 on 24.3.2005. Though released

     on bail, Venkatesan was not released from custody since he was

     involved in other crime cases. Therefore, Venkatesan was again

     produced on PT warrant before the trial court and his remand

     extended till 28.02.2006. Venkatesan was convicted on 22.04.2008

     in Crime No.346 of 1993 registered at Kullanchavadi Police Station;

     as such, he was produced under PT warrant in S.C. No.2 of 2002 and

     remanded in custody till 22.04.2009. On 24.03.2014, Venkatesan

     was convicted in S.C. No.12 of 2001, and during his detention period,

     he was produced under PT warrant from 21.04.2014 to 23.12.2014

     in S.C.No.2 of 2002. Thereafter, he was convicted on 29.11.2019 in
3
S.C. No.2 of 2002 for the offences punishable under Sections 120-B,
148
,
450
,
395
r/w 397, 307 and 332 of
IPC
and sentenced to rigorous

     imprisonment varying from 3 years to 10 years and fined. The trial

     court rejected Venkatesan’s plea for setting off his remand period

     produced under PT warrant under
Section 428
, Cr. P.C reasoning that

     according to
Section 428
, Cr. PC, there is no mention of inclusion of

     the period during which the accused is produced on the strength of

     P.T. warrant while undergoing imprisonment in a different case.
6.   The judgment of conviction and order on sentence passed by the

     sessions court in S.C. No.2 of 2002 were not challenged by

     Venkatesan. Hence, refusal of the sessions court to grant Venkatesan

     set-off under
Section 428
, Cr. PC went unchallenged. The decision of

     the sessions court in S.C. No.2 of 2002, thus, attained finality.
7.   Before the High Court, the learned Additional Public Prosecutor raised

     an objection to the maintainability of the petition under
Section 482
,

     Cr. PC filed by Venkatesan on the ground that the remedy lies in an

     appeal under
Section 374(2)
, Cr. PC; and since a remedy was

     available in law, the petition under
Section 482
, Cr. PC was not

     maintainable. Any prayer for set-off could be and had to be made

     before the High Court in appeal and not otherwise.
8.   We have noticed with a sense of surprise that the learned Judge of

     the High Court after recording the aforesaid objection proceeded to

     decide the question of set-off claimed by Venkatesan, while relying
4
on the decision of this Court in
State of Maharashtra v. Najakat

         Alia Mubarak Ali4
, by a short order.
9.   A remedy of appeal having been provided by the Cr. PC, we are of

         the firm view that the High Court erred in law in entertaining the

         petition under
Section 482
, Cr. PC filed by Venkatesan. We accept the

         submission of Mr. V. Krishnamurthy, learned Senior Additional

         Advocate General for the appellants that on this short ground this

         appeal deserves to be allowed.
10.      However, we do not wish to allow the appeal only on the above

         ground. This appeal involves a serious question as to proper

         interpretation of
Section 428
, Cr. PC, notwithstanding that there are

         at least half a dozen decisions on such provision. As the narrative

         hereafter would unfold, interpretation of
Section 428
, Cr. PC is not

         found to be consistent and an authoritative decision seems to be the

         need of the hour.
11.
Section 428
of the Cr. PC reads as under:
“428. Period of detention undergone by the accused to be set off
            against the sentence of imprisonment.—Where an accused person
            has, on conviction, been sentenced to imprisonment for a term, not
            being imprisonment in default of payment of fine, the period of
            detention, if any, undergone by him during the investigation,
            enquiry or trial of the same case and before the date of such
            conviction, shall be set off against the term of imprisonment
            imposed on him on such conviction, and the liability of such person
            to undergo imprisonment on such conviction shall be restricted to
            the remainder, if any, of the term of imprisonment imposed on
            him.”
4
(2001) 6 SCC 311
5
12.      A coordinate Bench of this Court while disposing of a special leave

         petition in
Maliyakkal Abdul Azeez v. Collector5
was called upon

         to consider a plea to set-off a period of detention from the term

         imprisonment of three years imposed for an offence under the
Customs Act, 1962
not in course of an investigation or inquiry or trial

         of that particular case but in terms of an order for preventive

         detention passed under the
Conservation of Foreign Exchange and

         Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act, 1974
. This Court noticed the

         two requisites postulated in Section 428 as follows:
“8. …
             (1) During the stage of investigation, enquiry or trial of a particular
             case the prisoner should have been in jail at least for a certain
             period.
(2) He should have been sentenced to a term of imprisonment
in
             that case
.
If the above two conditions are satisfied then the operative part of
             the provision comes into play i.e. if the sentence of imprisonment
             awarded is longer than the period of detention undergone by him
             during the stages of investigation, enquiry or trial, the convicted
             person need undergo only the balance period of imprisonment after
             deducting the earlier period from the total period of imprisonment
             awarded.”
13.      The aforesaid extract neatly sums up the legal position on the object,

         intent and import of Section 428, Cr. PC.
14.
However, Najakat Alia Mubarak Ali
(supra) is a decision of a three-
Judge Bench of this Court. This decision the High Court relied on, to

         grant set-off to Venkatesan not confined to the period of custody in

         S.C. No.2 of 2002. It is interesting to read and understand what each
5
(2003) 2 SCC 439
6
of the member Judges on the Bench had said with regard to the object

      and scope of Section 428, Cr. PC.
15.   Hon’ble K.T. Thomas, J., presiding over the Bench, observed:
“18. Reading Section 428 of the Code in the above perspective, the
         words ‘of the same case’ are not to be understood as suggesting
         that the set-off is allowable only if the earlier jail life was undergone
         by him exclusively for the case in which the sentence is imposed.
         The period during which the accused was in prison
         subsequent to the inception of a particular case, should be
         credited towards the period of imprisonment awarded as
         sentence in that particular case. It is immaterial that the
         prisoner was undergoing sentence of imprisonment in another case
         also during the said period. The words ‘of the same case’ were used
         to refer to the pre-sentence period of detention undergone by him.
         Nothing more can be made out of the collocation of those words.”
16.   Dissenting with the aforesaid view, Hon’ble R.P. Sethi, J. expressed:
“29. A perusal of the section unambiguously indicates that only
         such accused is entitled to the benefit of that period of detention
         which he has undergone during the investigation, enquiry or trial
         of the same case. It does not contemplate the benefit of set-
         off of the period of detention during investigation, enquiry
         or trial in any other case. The purpose and object of the section,
         as pointed out by brother Thomas, J., is aimed at providing
         amelioration to a prisoner in a case where he has been in detention
         for no fault of his. The section, however, does not intend to give
         any benefit or bonus to an accused guilty of commission of more
         than one crime by treating the period of detention during
         investigation, enquiry and trial in one case as that period in the
         other cases also for the purposes of set-off in the sentence. Such
         an entitlement requires judicial determination which can be
         adjudicated by a court awarding the sentence in exercise of its
         powers under Section 427 of the Code. The words ‘period of
         detention, if any, undergone by him during the
         investigation, enquiry or trial of the same case’ are
         important to indicate the paramount concern and intention
         of the legislature to protect the interests of undertrial
         prisoners by giving them the set-off of that period in ‘that
         case’, at the conclusion of the trial. The section makes it
         clear that the period of detention which it allows to be set
         off against the term of imprisonment imposed on the
         accused, on conviction, must be during the investigation,
7
enquiry or trial in connection with the same case in which
         he has been convicted.”
17.   Faced with such conflicting opinions of the two senior members of the

      Bench, the third Judge, Hon’ble S.N. Phukan, J., penned a short

      opinion. The same is quoted hereunder:
“43. I had the advantage of going through the reasoned judgments
         of both my learned Brother Judges but with respect I am unable to
         accept the views expressed by my learned Brother Mr Justice R.P.
         Sethi. In addition to the views expressed by my learned Brother Mr
         Thomas, I would like to add a para on the language of
Section 428
of the Code of Criminal Procedure:
44. The only question which according to me needs consideration
         is the true effect of the expression ‘same case’ as appearing in
Section 428
of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The provision is
         couched in clear and unambiguous language and states that
         the period of detention which it allows to be set off against
         the term of imprisonment imposed on the accused on
         conviction must be one undergone by him during
         investigation, enquiry or trial in connection with the ‘same
         case’ in which he has been convicted. Any other period
         which is not connected with the said case cannot be said to
         be reckonable for set-off. The view of learned Brother Mr Justice
         Thomas according to me accords the legislative intent. Acceptance
         of any other view would mean necessary (sic necessarily) either
         adding or subtracting words to the existing provision, which would
         not be a proper procedure to be adopted while interpreting the
         provision in question.
45. I am, therefore, in respectful agreement with the views
         expressed by my learned Brother Mr Justice Thomas.”
                                                      (emphasis supplied)
18.   Although in paragraph 45 (supra) the view of Hon’ble K.T. Thomas, J.
did have the concurrence of Hon’ble S.N. Phukan, J., bare reading of

      the view expressed by His Lordship in paragraph 44 (supra) as

      highlighted by us, to our mind, accords with the dissenting view of

      Hon’ble R.P. Sethi, J.
8
19.   Faced with such a conundrum where the Hon’ble Judges have spoken

      in different voices, we attempted a reconciliation of the conflicting

      views. However, we are afraid, it has proved abortive. How far and to

      what extent the efficacy of the decision in
Najakat Alia Mubarak

      Ali
(supra) as a precedent would bind subsequent Benches of this

      Court remains debatable      in    view    of the   aforesaid    apparent

      irreconcilable conflict.
20.
Najakat Alia Mubarak Ali
(supra), with all its shortcomings, is still

      a decision of a three-Judge Bench and, therefore, would obviously

      bind us as a precedent.
21.   We, however, find that such decision fell for consideration in
Atul

      Manubhai Parekh v. CBI6
. The latter decision considered the earlier

      decisions on the point, viz.
State of Andhra Pradesh v. Anne

      Venkatesware7
,        Champalal      Punaji    Shah      v.     State    of

      Maharashtra8,
Raghbir   Singh    v.    State   of   Haryana9
and
Maliyakkal Abdul Azeez v. Collector10
.
True it is,
Raghbir Singh
(supra) stands overruled in view of
Najakat Alia Mubarak Ali
(supra); but the first reported decision on Section 428, which was

      inserted in the Cr. PC in 1973, does have a material bearing and

      makes interesting reading.
6
(2010) 1 SCC 603
7
(1977) 3 SCC 298
8
(1982) 1 SCC 507
9
(1984) 4 SCC 348
10
(2003) 2 SCC 439
9
22.   Upon considering Section 428, Cr. PC, this is what the coordinate

      Bench speaking through Hon’ble A.C. Gupta, J.
laid down in
Anne

      Venkatesware
(supra):
“7. … The claim in both these appeals is that the period of detention
         undergone by each appellant under the preventive detention law
         should be set off under
Section 428
of the Code of Criminal
         Procedure against the term of imprisonment imposed on them on
         their conviction in the aforesaid sessions cases. The argument is
         that the expression ‘period of detention’ in Section 428 includes
         detention under the
Preventive Detention Act
or the
Maintenance
         of Internal Security Act
. It is true that the section speaks of the
         ‘period of detention’ undergone by an accused person, but it
         expressly says that the detention mentioned refers to the detention
         during the investigation, enquiry or trial of the case in which the
         accused person has been convicted. The section makes it clear that
         the period of detention which it allows to be set off against the term
         of imprisonment imposed on the accused on conviction must be
         during the investigation, enquiry or trial in connection with the
         ‘same case’ in which he has been convicted. We therefore agree
         with the High Court that the period during which the writ petitioners
         were in preventive detention cannot be set off under Section 428
         against the term of imprisonment imposed on them.”
23.   We have noted that a three-Judge Bench in Champalal Punaji Shah

      (supra) had the occasion to consider
Anne Venkatesware
(supra),

      which was cited in support of relief claimed by the review petitioner;

      the Bench, however, appears to have distinguished the decision on

      facts and disallowed the prayer finding the aforesaid reasoning to

      stand in the way of grant of relief.
24.
Turning to Atul Manubhai Parekh
(supra), we find the question

      arising for decision in paragraph 3 and the answer thereto of the

      coordinate Bench, speaking through Hon’ble Altamas Kabir, J., in

      paragraphs 14 and 15. Relevant paragraphs from such decision read

      as follows:
10
“3. The short point involved in this application is whether a person,
         who has been convicted in several cases and has suffered detention
         or imprisonment in connection therewith, would be entitled to the
         benefit of set-off in a separate case for the period of detention or
         imprisonment undergone by him in the other cases.
            ***
14. The wording of Section 428 is, in our view, clear and
         unambiguous. The heading of the section itself indicates that the
         period of detention undergone by the accused is to be set off
         against the sentence of imprisonment. The section makes it clear
         that the period of sentence on conviction is to be reduced by the
         extent of detention already undergone by the convict during
         investigation, enquiry or trial of the same case. It is quite clear that
         the period to be set off relates only to pre-conviction detention and
         not to imprisonment on conviction.
15. Let us test the proposition by a concrete example. A habitual
         offender may be convicted and sentenced to imprisonment at
         frequent intervals. If the period of pre-trial detention in various
         cases is counted for set-off in respect of a subsequent conviction
         where the period of detention is greater than the sentence in the
         subsequent case, the accused will not have to undergo
         imprisonment at all in connection with the latter case, which could
         not have been the intention of the legislature while introducing
         Section 428 in the Code in 1973.”
                                                             (italics in original)
25.
Najakat Alia Mubarak Ali
(supra) was distinguished in such

      decision in the following words:
“20. The facts on which the decision was rendered in
Najakat Alia
         Mubarak Ali
case are distinguishable from the facts of this case. In
         the said case, the convict was undergoing imprisonment in two
         cases in which he had been convicted and he claimed that he was
         entitled to a set-off in respect of both the cases. This Court drawing
         inspiration from Section 427 on the concurrent running of
         sentences, held that the petitioner was entitled to set-off in both
         cases in view of the doctrine of merger of sentences when directed
         to run concurrently in a particular case where conviction is on many
         counts.”
26.   As held in paragraph 20 of
Atul Manubhai Parekh
(supra),
Najakat

      Alia Mubarak Ali
(supra) would have to be read as a decision

      confined   to   the   facts   before    the    three-Judge      Bench    where

      interpretation of Section 427, Cr. PC was also involved.
11
27.   We respectfully agree with the reasoning in paragraphs 14 and 15 of

      the decision in
Atul Manubhai Parekh
(supra) on how Section 428,

      Cr. PC should be read and why
Najakat Alia Mubarak Ali
(supra) is

      distinguishable on facts.
28.   It has been urged on behalf of Venkatesan that paragraph 18 of the

      opinion penned by Hon’ble K.T. Thomas, J. in
Najakat Alia Mubarak

      Ali
(supra) constitutes its ratio decidendi and that Benches of lesser

      strength are bound thereby. Sitting in a combination such as the

      present, propriety, discipline and decorum would demand that we

      show deference to what has been held therein and not act in

      derogation of
Article 141
of the Constitution of India, which binds us

      too.
But we wish to make the position absolutely clear that the

      irreconcilability of the views expressed in
Najakat Alia Mubarak Ali
(supra) posits that the same be reconsidered for declaring the law

      without any room for confusion.
29.   Consistency, certainty, predictability and finality of judicial decisions

      are the hallmarks of a sound justice delivery system. The relevance

      and significance of the principle of stare decisis have to be borne in

      mind. In situations such as this, the Court has to satisfy itself that for

      the public good or for any other compelling reason an endeavour

      needs to be made so that certainty and continuity in interpretation of

      law are maintained.
Najakat Alia Mubarak Ali
(supra) was

      considered in
Maliyakkal Abdul Azeez
(supra) and
Atul Manubhai

      Parekh
(supra).
The coordinate Benches have not followed the
12
majority view in
Najakat Alia Mubarak Ali
(supra).
In view of our

      inability to reconcile the divergent views expressed in
Najakat Alia

      Mubarak Ali
(supra) itself and though such decision has been held

      in
Atul Manubhai Parekh
(supra) to be confined to its facts, under

      compelling circumstances, we feel it prudent to refer the matter to

      the Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India to consider the desirability of

      constituting a Bench of appropriate strength for proper interpretation

      of Section 428, Cr. PC. Ordered accordingly.
30.   The direction for set-off in the impugned order shall remain stayed

      until further orders; however, if Venkatesan has been released, he

      may not be taken back in custody.
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1372 OF 2025
31.   This appeal is also directed against a similar order passed by the High

      Court granting the benefit of set-off to the respondent, Ravichandran.
32.   The same directions as given in the lead appeal shall apply in this

      case.
…………………………J.
                                                     (DIPANKAR DATTA)



                                                     …………………………J.
                                                        (MANMOHAN)
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 22, 2025.
13