[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sheela Devi vs Oriental Insurance Company Limited on 17 April, 2025
Author:
J.K. Maheshwari
Bench:
Aravind Kumar
,
J.K. Maheshwari
NON-REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 516
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NOS.         OF 2025
                                 (@ SLP(C) NOS. 21558-21559 OF 2018)


             SHEELA DEVI & ANR.                                 APPELLANT(S)

                                                VERSUS

             ORIENTAL INSURANCE COMPANY
             LIMITED & ANR.                                     RESPONDENT(S)

                                             J U D G M E N T
J.K. MAHESHWARI, J.
1)             Leave granted.


             2)             Assailing the impugned orders dated 26.12.2017
& 28.03.2018 of the High Court of Himachal Pradesh

             at Shimla in F.A.O. No. 516 of 2017 & C.R.P. No. 13

             of 2018 the present appeals have been filed by the

             Claimants.
3)             In an employees’ compensation claim filed by the

             parents of the deceased employee because of untimely
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NIDHI AHUJA
death of their 24-year-old son due to motor accident
   Date: 2025.04.21
   17:10:09 IST
   Reason:
during the course of employment with Respondent No.
1
2     –     Employer,        the      Employees         Compensation

Commissioner, vide its order dated 05.08.2016 had

awarded compensation of Rs. 6,55,410/- along with

interest @ 12% p.a. from the date of filing of the

claim      petition   till    realization        and    in   addition

statutory      penalty   under      Section      4A(3)(b)     of    the

Employees’
Compensation Act, 1923
(for short “Act”)

amounting to 50% of the award (Rs. 3,27,705/-). The

Commissioner fixed the liability to pay the entire

amount upon the Respondent No. 1 – Insurer.
4)    Challenging     the     order      dated   05.08.2016,        the

Respondent No. 1 – Insurer filed F.A.O. No. 516/2017.

By passing the impugned order, the High Court has

reduced the compensation amount to Rs. 4,36,940/-

along with interest @ 12% p.a. from the date of

elapsing of one month from the accident and reduced

the statutory penalty to Rs. 30,000/-. Additionally,

the   High    Court   fixed        the   liability      to   pay    the

statutory penalty amount solely upon the Respondent

No. 2 – Employer.
5)    In    the   present     appeals,       the       Appellants     –
2
Claimants are not challenging the reduction of the

compensation amount, rather they are aggrieved by

the reduction of the penalty from 50% of the award

to a fixed amount of Rs. 30,000/-.
6)     The Appellants have submitted that the entire

amount as awarded by the Commissioner had already

been    paid,    and    the    award      had    been   executed     to

finality by the Respondent No. 2 – Insurer, which

had paid the amount to the Appellants prior to filing

of the appeal before the High Court. As such, it is

submitted       that    at    this   stage,       recovery     of    the

difference between the amount as awarded by the

Commissioner and the reduced amount awarded by the

High    Court     should       not       be   directed       from    the

Appellants. It is also argued that the first appeal

was    disposed    of    by    the   High       Court   at   the    pre-

admission stage without granting an opportunity to

the Appellants to file a counter affidavit.
7)     Respondent No. 1 – Insurer has submitted that

the statutory penalty amount under
Section 4A
of the

Act is discretionary in nature and therefore the

reduction of the amount of penalty by the High Court
3
requires no interference from this Court. Relying

upon the judgement of this Court in
Ved Prakash Garg

Vs. Premi Devi and Ors.
(1997) 8 SCC 1, it has been

argued by the Insurer that the liability for payment

of penalty amount has rightly been fixed by the High

Court on the Respondent No. 2 – Employer.
8)    Similarly, Respondent No. 2 – Employer has also

argued    that   the    statutory     penalty   amount   is

discretionary in nature, and its reduction by the

High Court in exercise of discretion warrants no

interference by this Court.
9)    Heard the learned counsel for the parties and

perused the material available on record.
10)   It is a settled law that the statutory penalty

which is imposed upon the employer under
Section

4A(3)(b)
of the Act is not to be indemnified by the

Insurer.
In
Ved Prakash Garg
(Supra), this Court has

held that the Insurance Company shall compensate the

Insured-Employer       for   the    principal   amount   of

compensation as well as interest thereon, however,

in case any additional amount of compensation is
4
awarded by the Commissioner by way of penalty, the

same would be the liability of the insured-employer

alone and not of the insurance company.
The decision

in
Ved Prakash Garg
(Supra) has been followed in
L.R.

Ferro Alloys Ltd. v. Mahavir Mahto
, (2002) 9 SCC 450

holding that the Insurer is liable to indemnify the

owner only for the compensation along with interest

thereon and not the penalty imposed on the employer

for default in payment of amount within one month

from the date of incident. In view of the above, the

direction of the High Court, fixing the liability to

pay statutory penalty on the Employer only, requires

no interference from this Court.
11)   The   only   question   which   remains   for   our

consideration, therefore, is whether the High Court

was justified in interfering with the penalty amount

directed by the Commissioner to be 50% of the award

amount under
Section 4A(3)(b)
of the Act and reducing

it to a fixed amount of Rs. 30,000/-.
12) For us in order to answer this question,
Section

4A
of the Act is relevant and is reproduced hereunder
5
for ready referral:
“4A. Compensation to be paid when due
           and penalty for default. –
     (1)  Compensation under
section 4
shall be
          paid as soon as it falls due.
(2) In cases where the employer does not
          accept the liability for compensation
          to the extent claimed, he shall be bound
          to make provisional payment based on
          the extent of liability which he
          accepts, and, such payment shall be
          deposited with the Commissioner or made
          to the employee, as the case may be,
          without prejudice to the right of
          the employee to make any further claim.
     (3) Where any employer is in default in
          paying the compensation due under this
          Act within one month from the date it
          fell due, the Commissioner shall-
a. direct that the employer shall, in
          addition to the amount of the arrears,
          pay simple interest thereon at the rate
          of twelve per cent. per annum or at such
          higher, rate not exceeding the maximum
          of the lending rates of any scheduled
          bank as may be specified by the Central
          Government by notification in the
          Official Gazette, on the amount due;
          and
       b. if, in his opinion, there is no
          justification for the delay, direct
          that the employer shall, in addition to
          the amount of the arrears and interest
          thereon,   pay   a   further   sum   not
          exceeding fifty per cent. of such
          amount by way of penalty:
Provided that an order for the payment
          of penalty shall not be passed under
          clause (b) without giving a reasonable
          opportunity to the employer to show
          cause why it should not be passed.
          Explanation. - For the purposes of this
          sub-section, "scheduled bank" means a
          bank for the time being included in the
Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of
          India Act, 1934
.
(3A) The interest and the penalty payable
          under sub-section (3) shall be paid to
          the employee or his dependant, as the
          case may be.”
6
13) It is clear from reading
Section 4A(3)(b)
that

in case where the Employer has defaulted in payment

of compensation due under the Act within one month

from the date it fell due and the Commissioner is of

the opinion that there is no justification for the

delay,    the      employer   shall     be    directed     to    pay   a

further sum to the maximum of 50% of the award

amount, by way of penalty. Therefore, the necessary

pre-requisite        for   imposing     the    statutory        penalty

under
Section 4A(3)(b)
is that the employer must

default       in   payment    of   compensation      due    and     the

Commissioner must reach the conclusion that the non-
payment is not justifiable.
14) From a bare perusal of the impugned order, it

can be observed that the High Court has not given

any reason as to why the penalty amount as directed

by the Commissioner was directed to be reduced to a

lumpsum amount of Rs. 30,000/-. The Commissioner had

come     to    a   specific    finding        of   fact    that     the

Respondent No. 2 – Employer had not paid any amount

to the Claimants at the time of injury nor had paid

anything when the claim was filed by the Appellants.
7
Such a finding of fact by the Commissioner could not

have been interfered with by the High Court in the

First Appeal without a finding to the contrary that

the Respondent No. 2 – Employer had indeed paid at

least some amount due to the family of the deceased

employee within a period of one month from the date

of accident.
15) In view of the above, and in the peculiar facts

and circumstances of this case, in order to meet the

ends of justice, we direct that the statutory penalty

under
Section 4A(3)(b)
of the Act shall be fixed at

30% of the compensation amount. The order of the High

Court is modified to that extent without disturbing

the finding of the High Court on the compensation

and interest thereon awarded under
Section 4A(3)(a)
of the Act as well as the fixation of liability to

pay the penalty amount on the Respondent No. 2 –

Employer. In the present case, since the compensation

amount   as   per   the   Commissioner’s   award   of   Rs.

6,55,410/- has been reduced to Rs. 4,36,940/- by the

High Court, 30% penalty thereon shall amount to Rs.

1,31,082/- for which the Respondent No. 2 - Employer
8
alone shall be liable to pay.
16) In the interest of justice, the entire amount

receivable by the Appellants shall be paid by the

Respondent No. 1 – Insurer who shall recover the

penalty amount of Rs. 1,31,082 from the Respondent

No. 2 – Employer.
17) Since the quantification of the award passed by

the   High    Court    has   not       been    assailed     by    the

appellants and the award passed by the Commissioner

has been satisfied including the amount of penalty

of 50% by the insurer, therefore, the excess amount

of award as well as the penalty is required to be

repaid by the appellants also.
18) In view of the discussions made in para 16 & 17

above, these appeals are allowed in part and disposed

of with the following directions: -
(i)    In    terms   of    para      16,    the   Insurer      shall

         recover Rs. 1,31,082/- from the Respondent

         No. 2 – Employer;
(ii)   In    terms   of    para      17,    the   Insurer      shall

         recover       Rs.    4,15,093/-            being     excess
9
compensation    and    penalty   from     the

        Appellants;
(iii) The Respondent No. 1 – Insurer is at liberty

        to take recourse of law as permissible.
19) Pending applications, if any, shall be disposed

of.
…………………………………………………,J.
[J.K. MAHESHWARI]



                                 …………………………………………………,J.
[ARAVIND KUMAR]
 New Delhi;
April 17, 2025.
10