[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S J N Real Estate vs Shailendra Pradhan on 22 April, 2025
REPORTABLE

                                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
2025 INSC 611
                                              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 5405-5406 OF 2025
                            (@ Special Leave Petition (C) Nos.12205-12206/2024)


        M/S J N REAL ESTATE                                                              ...Appellant(s)

                                                               VERSUS

        SHAILENDRA PRADHAN & ORS.                                                        ...Respondent(s)


                                                             O R D E R
J.B. PARDIWALA, J. :
1. Leave granted.
2. These appeals arise from the orders passed by the High Court of

                  Madhya          Pradesh     at    Jabalpur     dated      12.12.2023    and     12.06.2023

                  respectively,              in     Review     Petition      No.   717     of     2023     and

                  Miscellaneous Petition No.5567/2018 respectively, by which the

                  petition filed by the respondent No.1 herein (original defendant

                  no. 4) came to be allowed and thereby the order dated 14.03.2018

                  passed by the Trial Court impleading the present appellant as one

                  of the defendants in the suit came to be quashed and set aside.
3. For              the    sake     of     convenience,       the   appellant    herein    shall   be

                  referred         to   as    the    original        defendant   No.8,   respondent      No.1

                  herein shall be referred to as the original defendant No.4 and
Signature Not Verified
Deepak Guglani the respondent No.2 herein as the original plaintiff.
Digitally signed by
Date: 2025.05.01
13:28:52 IST
Reason:
1
4.    It is the case of the defendant no. 8 that one (Late) Mr.

     Indramohan Pradhan executed a will dated 03.02.2001 pertaining to

     the   suit    property          in   favour      of     one      (Late)    Mr.   Sameer     Ghosh

     (original defendant no. 3) who took care of him during his old

     age and ailing health. The original defendant no. 3 had applied

     for obtaining a probate on the basis of the said Will in the

     Court   of     the       9th    Additional           District      Judge,    Bhopal,      Madhya

     Pradesh and the same was allowed vide order dated 28.04.2005. A

     probate certificate dated 13.05.2005 with respect to the Will

     dated   03.02.2001             was   also   granted         to    the     original    defendant

     no.3.
5. Thereafter,           it    is    stated      that      the     original      defendant     no.   3

     entered      into    an    agreement        to       sell   with    respect      to   the   same

     property in favour of the original defendant no. 8 for a sum of

     Rs. 78 Lakh, which was paid in two installments of Rs. 59 Lakh

     and Rs. 19 Lakh respectively. It is argued that a sale deed dated

     30.05.2009 was also executed to that effect. However, the same

     came to be registered only on 29.03.2014. In such circumstances,

     the original defendant no. 8 contends that by virtue of the

     aforesaid sale deed, the title, interests and rights associated

     with the suit property were transferred its favour.
6. On the other hand, it is the case of the original plaintiff that

     the testator i.e., Mr. Indramohan Pradhan executed a different

     Will dated 07.07.2001 in favour of his two sons i.e., original

     defendant nos. 1 and 2, whereby the suit property was bequeathed

     to them. Thereafter, the original defendant nos. 1 and 2 entered
2
into an agreement to sell dated 05.11.2006 with the original

  plaintiff, through which he obtained all rights with respect to

  the suit property.
7. Although the original defendant no. 4, who is the brother of the

  testator, agrees with the original plaintiff that the sons of the

  testator, i.e., original defendant nos. 1 and 2 respectively,

  acquired rights with respect to the suit property through the

  will dated 07.07.2001, yet it is his case that the sons had

  subsequently, entered into an agreement to sell dated 18.05.2007

  with respect to the same suit property in his favour instead.
8. Therefore,     we    have   three    different    parties      asserting   their

  individual title over the suit property.
9. It appears from the materials on record that, on 01.10.2007, the

  original       plaintiff,    namely    Adarsh     Malhotra,     has    instituted

  Regular Civil Suit No. 360-A/2007 in the Court of 8 th District

  Judge, District-Bhopal for specific performance of the agreement

  to    sell    dated   05.11.2006      in   his   favour   and    for   permanent

  injunction. In the said suit, he has prayed for the following

  reliefs:
“(a) It be declared that the Will dated 03.02.2001 is a
             fake and the probate order dated 28.4.2005 based
             on it and the probate given on 13.5.2005 are void.
(b)      That on the basis of the agreement dated
               05.11.2006, for specific performance of the
               contract in favor of the plaintiff, a decree
               should be granted against defendants No. 1 and 2
               that they should execute the sale deed in favor of
               the plaintiff and if the sale is not executed
               within a certain period, the Honorable Court
3
should execute the sale deed   in   favor   of   the
             plaintiff on their behalf.
(c)   That a permanent injunction should be granted
             against the defendants to the effect that the
             defendants should not transfer the land under
             dispute in any way or enter into an agreement for
             transfer.
(d)   That the litigation expenses and other relief
             which the Honorable Court deems appropriate and
             necessary should be awarded to the plaintiff.
(e) That the sale deed dated 30/05/2009 executed by
           defendant number 3 in favor of defendant number 8,
           which is recorded in the Sub Registrar's office in
           Book No. A-1, Volume 2296, Page 85-93, Serial
           3/1920 dated 29/03/2014 (whereas the defendant is
           stating the date as 30/05/2009) should be declared
           void.”
10.   The materials on record also indicate that two separate suits

  were filed by the original defendant no. 4 (respondent no. 1

  herein) pertaining to the same controversy. They are:- MJC No.

  66/2008, seeking cancellation of the probate certificate dated

  13.05.2005 issued in favour of the original defendant no. 3 and,

  Regular Civil Suit No. 401-A/2010 for specific performance of

  agreement to sell dated 18.05.2007 in his favour, declaration and

  permanent injunction.
11.   In all the aforesaid three suits, the original defendant no. 8

  preferred an application under Order 1 Rule 10 of the Civil

  Procedure Code, 1908 (for short “
the C.P.C
.”) seeking to be

  impleaded as one of the defendants. However, in the present

  appeals, we are only concerned with the impleadment application

  made by the original defendant no. 8 in the suit instituted by

  the original plaintiff for specific performance and injunction
4
i.e., Regular Civil Suit No. 360-A/2007.
12.    Having regard to the peculiar facts of the present litigation,

  we    deem   it   necessary   to   reproduce   the   entire   application

  preferred by the appellant herein. The same reads thus:
“1.    That the applicant is the owner of agricultural
      land Khasra No. 54/2, 72/2, 73, 87-88/2/3, 91, total 2.67
      hectares i.e. 6.44 acres, situated in Village Ahmed Kalan
      Patwari Halka Number-20, R.N.M.2 Development Block- Phanda
      Tehsil Huzur District Bhopal.
2.That in this case it is not disputed that the land
      originally belonged to Indramohan Pradhan. The land was
      given to Sameer Ghosh by Indramohan Pradhan through his
      last will/ testament dated 03.02.2001. Sameer Ghosh became
      the owner of the land after his death as per the will of
      Indramohan.
3. That the Probate certificate dated 13.05.2005 was
      issued by the Court-Ninth Additional District Judge,
      Bhopal in the name of Sameer Ghosh on the basis of the
      last will of Late Indramohan Pradhan. After that, Akshat
      Pradhan, Anant Pradhan and Shelendra Pradhan no longer had
      the right to take any action regarding the disputed land.
Akshat, Anant Pradhan no longer had any right to enter
      into any contract regarding the disputed land. The
      plaintiff has filed this suit on 04.10.2007, seeking the
      relief of specific performance of the contract dated
      05.11.2006. After the issue of probate certificate dated
      13.05.2005, if any agreement made by Akshat Pradhan, Anant
      Pradhan or anyone else in relation to the disputed land is
      void and ineffective.
4.That the said property has been purchased by the
      applicant through registered sale deed dated 30-05-2009
      and since then the applicant firm is the sole owner of the
      said property. The property owned by the applicant has
      been purchased by the applicant by paying an amount of Rs
      78,00,000/- (Rupees seventy eight lakhs). The applicant
      firm is the owner of the land and no other person other
      than the applicant has any right on the land.
5. That the applicant had appeared in the court to
      contact his advocate in some other case and then he came
      to know that the case related to his land was pending in
      the Honorable Court. This application is being filed
      without any delay as soon as the information is received.
5
6.That the applicant has a substantial interest in the
      property of 6.44 acres that the applicant has purchased
      through a registered sale deed. The actual owner of the
      land is the applicant, hence if the proceedings in the
      said case are conducted without impleading the applicant
      to the case, then the applicant will suffer serious loss.
      In such a situation, for the resolution of the case, it
      would be necessary in the interest of justice that an
      order be passed to implead the applicant in order to give
      him an opportunity to protect his interest in the case.
7.That if any action of any kind is taken against the
      applicant by Akshat, Anant and Shelendra Pradhan in
      connivance, the applicant will suffer serious loss. There
      is serious interest in the applicant's case. The applicant
      has paid the entire amount and got the sale deed of the
      disputed land executed in his name. The applicant is a
      bona fide and genuine buyer, information about which is
      known to the plaintiff and defendants. In such a
      situation, an order should be passed to implead the
      applicant, which will be in the interest of justice.

          Therefore, it is requested to the Honorable Court that
      the applicant has serious interests in this case. The
      applicant has paid the entire amount and got the sale deed
      of the disputed land executed in its name. The applicant
      is a bona fide and genuine buyer, information about which
      is known to the plaintiff and defendants. In such a
      situation, an order should be passed to implead the
      applicant, which will be in the interest of justice.”
13.    It is not in dispute that the original plaintiff thought fit

  not    to   oppose   the   impleadment   application   preferred   by   the

  original defendant no.8, referred to above.
14.    The Trial Court adjudicated the application and allowed the

  same    vide   order   dated    14.03.2018.   The   order   allowing    the

  application seeking impleadment reads thus:
“Application under Order 01 Rule-10
CPC
The gist of the application filed by the applicant M/s
      JN Real Estate, through partner Jaimohan is that the
      applicant is the owner of agricultural land Khasra No.
      54/2, 72/2, 73, 87-88/2/3,91, total 2.67 hectares i.e. 6.44
      acres, situated in Village Ahmed Kalan Patwari Halka
6
Number-20, R.N.M.2, Development Block- Phanda Tehsil Huzur
District Bhopal. Probate certificate dated 13.05.2005 was
issued by the Court-Ninth Additional District Judge, Bhopal
in the name of Sameer Ghosh on the basis of the last will
of Late Indramohan Pradhan. After that, defendants Akshat
Pradhan, Anant Pradhan and Shailendra Pradhan no longer had
the right to take any action or enter into any contract
with respect to the land under dispute. The plaintiff has
filed a claim in the year 2007, seeking the relief of
specific performance of the contract dated 05.11.2006.
After the probate certificate was issued on 13-05-2005, if
any agreement has been made by the defendants or anyone
else in relation to the land in dispute, then that
agreement is void and ineffective. The said property has
been purchased by the applicant through registered sale
deed dated 30-05-2009 and since then the applicant is the
sole owner of the said property. When the applicant
appeared in another case, he came to know that the case
regarding the said land was pending in the court. The
applicant has substantial interest in the said case.
Therefore, it is necessary to implead the applicant in the
case. Therefore, it has been submitted through this
application that the applicant has serious interests in
this matter and the applicant has paid the entire amount
and got the sale deed of the disputed land executed in his
name. The applicant is a bona fide and genuine buyer,
information about which is known to the plaintiff and
defendants. Therefore, a prayer has been made to pass
orders to implead the applicant in the said case.
While submitting the written reply to the said
application on behalf of the plaintiff, it has been
expressed that on 12-02-2008, the defendant numbers 01 and
02 are trying to sell the land under dispute to the
applicant. An application was filed in the case under
Order-01, Rule-01
CPC
to implead the applicant in the case,
a copy of which was sent to the applicant by the court,
which the applicant did not receive. Then on the orders of
the court, service was done through publication on
11.04.2011, but even after that the applicant did not
appear in the court and present his case. The said
application filed by the plaintiff at that time was also
opposed by defendant no. 03, on the basis of which the
applicant was not impleaded as a party as per the court
order dated 06-08-2013. The plaintiff has been ready from
the very beginning to implead the applicant to the suit,
because the sale deed of the disputed land has been
executed by defendant number 03 in favor of the applicant.
Therefore, the plaintiff has no objection in allowing the
application and impleading the applicant in this suit.

    On behalf of defendant no. 04, it has been expressed
in detail in written reply to the above application filed
7
by the applicant that the applicant is neither a necessary
party to the suit filed by the plaintiff nor can he be made
a party to the suit. This application has been filed on the
basis of the sale deed dated 30-05-2009, which was
registered on 29.03.2014, the same has been executed and
registered by the Honorable High Court in violation of the
writ petition no. 8902/2008 dated 01.08.2008, whereas in
the said case the Honorable High Court had passed orders to
maintain the status quo. The applicant has not come before
the court with clean hands, because he has maliciously got
the sale deed registered in his favor and has not respected
the order of the Honorable High Court and has disobeyed the
said order, on the basis of which, contempt of the order of
the Honorable High Court cannot be permitted by allowing
this application. Apart from this, a prayer has been made
on behalf of defendant no. 04 to dismiss this application
filed by the applicant on various grounds.

    Arguments were heard on the applications of both the
parties. The entire suit was reviewed.
Considered. According to the applicant, he had
purchased the disputed property for Rs. 78,00,000/- through
a registered sale deed dated 30.05.2009. In such a
situation, if any decision is passed regarding the
property, its effect will be on the applicant.

    In reply, the plaintiff has expressed that he had
already come to know that an attempt was being made to sell
the property to the applicant, then the plaintiff had tried
to implead the applicant and for this, a copy of
application under
Order 01, Rule 10 CPC
was sent to the
applicant, which was not taken by the applicant even after
being sent repeatedly by the court and then it was also
published in the daily newspaper by the court, still the
applicant did not appear. The applicant did not give any
proper reply to the above reply given by the plaintiff. In
such a situation, the application filed by the applicant
under
Order 01, Rule 10 CPC
is allowed at a cost of Rs
1000/-.
The name of the applicant should be added to the memo
of parties as defendant number 08. Necessary action should
be taken in this regard.
From the observation of the case, it is also found
that although the Issues were framed twice, there are still
many Issues that need to be framed, in respect of which
pleadings already exist. Therefore, today additional issues
were framed and read to both the parties. Additional Issue
Nos.11 to 15 were framed. Issue No.14 will be resolved as a
primary issue.
8
The case is fixed for argument on the primary issue
      and for legally incorporating the name of the proposed
      party.
Put up the case on 21.03.2018.”
15.    Similarly, the Trial Court had also allowed the applications

  of the original defendant no. 8 seeking impleadment in MJC No.

  66/2008 and Regular Civil Suit No. 401-A/2010 on 12.02.2018 and

  07.08.2018, respectively, i.e. in the two other suits wherein the

  original     defendant       no.   4   was    the   plaintiff.    Aggrieved,    the

  original defendant no. 4 challenged all the three orders of the

  Trial Court before the High Court via separate petitions.
16.    In so far as the suit filed by the original plaintiff which is

  the    subject      matter    of   the   present     appeals   is     concerned,   a

  noteworthy aspect is that it is the defendant No.4 and not the

  original plaintiff who thought fit to question the legality and

  validity of the order passed by the Trial Court permitting the

  original defendant no. 8 (appellant herein) to be impleaded as

  one of the defendants.
17.    The High Court, in exercise of its supervisory jurisdiction

  under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India, 1950 thought fit

  to    look   into    the     challenge   at   the   instance     of   the   original

  defendant No.4 and set aside the order passed by the Trial Court

  impleading the original defendant no. 8 as one of the defendants

  in the suit instituted by the original plaintiff i.e., Regular

  Civil Suit No. 360-A/2007. As a consequence, the High Court also

  allowed the petitions of the original defendant no. 4 as regards

  the two other suits wherein he is the plaintiff and set aside the
9
orders of the Trial Court.
18.    At this stage, we should also reproduce the entire impugned

  order passed by the High Court which reads thus:
“This miscellaneous petition has been filed by the
      petitioner/ defendant No.4 under
Article 227
of the
      Constitution of India being aggrieved with the order dated
      14.03.2018 passed by learned District Judge Bhopal
      (Shailendra Shukla) in RCS No. 360 - A/2007 allowing an
      application under
Order 1 Rule 10 of the CPC
and
      permitting the respondent 8 to be added a party to the
      lis.
Shri Zargar submits that the suit is filed by the
      plaintiff / respondent No.1 for cancellation of Will and
      consequential action in favour of the respondent No.4. The
      present petitioner has filed another suit RCS No.401-
      A/2007 seeking similar reliefs. It is submitted that
      application under
Order 1 Rule 10 CPC
has been allowed on
      the strength that there is a registered sale deed in
      favour of the newly added respondent executed by one Mr.
      Sameer Ghosh who claims to have obtained the suit property
      on the strength of the Will of late Indra Mohan Pradhan.
Respondent No.8 has though filed a reply and in
      paragraph 9 of the reply has taken a specific plea that he
      had entered into an agreement to sale with respondent No.4
      Sameer Ghosh and paid a sum of Rs.59 Lacs in November 2007
      itself and balance amount was paid on 29.05.2009 and
      30.05.2009 and thereafter a registered sale deed was
      executed by the present respondent No.4 in favour of the
      present respondent No.8 on 30.05.2009. But the fact of the
      matter is that the document Annexure R-5 relied upon by
      Shri Pancholi in support of his contention, is not a
      registered sale deed. Shri Pancholi submitted that the
      agreement was executed in the year 2007 and registered
      sale deed was executed subsequently in the year 2014 but
      this fact is not made out from the documents available on
      record. Shri Pancholi has relied on a receipt affixed from
      the office of the Sub-Registrar dated 18.9.2014 but that
      receipt does not contain any detail in regard to having
      any relation of sale deed enclosed as Annexure R-5. In
      view of such fact that there is no iota of evidence in
      favour of the respondent No.8 that he had purchased the
      suit property through a valid document and he is in
      possession of the same on the strength of legal
      transaction, I am of the opinion that learned District
      Judge, Bhopal erred in not appreciating the fact in
      correct perspective and has passed the impugned order
10
without analysing the fact situation and arbitrary and
      illegal manner. Such order cannot be given stamp of
      approval in supervisory jurisdiction of this Court.
At this stage, Shri Pancholi has vehemently argued
      that there is an agreement for sale but he has not brought
      so called agreement to sell on record. He has relied on
      the decision in the case of
Tilak Sahakari Grah Nirman
      Maryadit v. Aqeel Ahmed
2020 (1) MPLJ 332 but fact of the
      matter remains that the respondent No.8 has not bothered
      to place on record a copy of the said agreement to sell.
      Therefore, merely on the basis of oral submission of the
      counsel no indulgence can be shown and, therefore, in the
      absence of agreement to sell on record, it cannot be said
      or presumed that any agreement to sell exists in favour of
      the respondent No.8.
Taking all these facts into consideration, the
      petition is allowed and the impugned order is set aside.
      This order will also cover disposal of similar controversy
      raised in MP No.5572 of 2018 and MP No.2166 of 2018.”
19.    Thereafter,   three   Review   Petitions   had   been   filed   by   the

  original defendant no. 8. The High Court by a common impugned

  order dated 12.12.2023 rejected all the Review Petitions. The

  order reads thus:
“These   review   petitions  have   been  filed   being
      aggrieved by a party who was defendant No.8 of MP No.5567
      of 2018 on the ground that this Court committed an error on
      face of record in setting aside the orders of the trial
      Court entertaining an application under
Order I Rule 10 of
      the CPC
. It is submitted that he is a purchaser lis pendens
      and therefore, he is a necessary party to the lis.
Shri Zargar, in his tum, submits that the High Court
      vide order dated 01.08.2008 passed in WP No.8902/2008,
      where transferor Sameer Ghosh was a party, at the instance
      of one of the parties – Shailendra Pradhan directed the
      parties to maintain the status quo. Therefore, position of
      the transferee steps into shoes of the transferor and that
      he has to follow the rights and liabilities of the
      transferee. Reliance is placed on the judgment of the
      Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the case of
Sunil Gupta v.
      Kiran Girhotra and Others
, (2007) 8 SCC 506 wherein it is
      held that in probate proceedings, in transfer of property
      concerned during probate proceedings, impleadment of said
      transferee to probate proceeding, is not necessary.
11
Shri   Pancholi   vehemently   submits   that   in   WP
      No.5567/2018, in fact, the petitioner Shaielndra Pradhan is
      a defendant. The suit is filed by another person seeking
      specific performance of agreement. Therefore, the present
      applicant is a necessary party.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and
      going through record, as far as MP No. 2166/2018 is
      concerned it is filed by one Shailendra Pradhan who had
      filed an application under
Section 263
of the Indian
      Succession Act which was registered as MJC 66/2008 seeking
      a relief for cancellation of probate issued in favour of
      the defendant No.1 Sameer Ghosh. Thus, submission made by
      Shri Pancholi that this case has nothing to do with probate
      and thus ratio of law
laid down by
Supreme Court in the
      case of
Sunil Gupta
(supra) has no application, is not made
      out. Since the suit is in regard to cancellation of probate
      as was issued by the trial Court in favour of Sameer Ghoash
      and admittedly the review petitioner claims that he
      purchased the property in question from said Shri Sameer
      Ghosh, therefore, his rights and liabilities will be
      governed by rights and liabilities of Sameer Gosh, as may
      be decided from time to time.
Thus
,
ratio
laid down in
case
      of
Sunil Gupta
(supra) has application in full force and,
      therefore, the submission made by Shri Pancholi is not
      acceptable. Thus, review petition No.718/2023 deserves to
      and is dismissed.
As far as other two review petitions, namely, RP
      No.7l4/2023 and RP No.717/2023 are concerned, in view of
      the aforesaid discussion, and as there is no material
      brought on record to show error apparent on the face of the
      record, no indulgence can be shown. Therefore, these review
      petitions also fail and are dismissed.”
20.    Being dissatisfied with both the order dated 12.06.2023 in

  Miscellaneous Petition No. 5567/2018 and the common order in

  review dated 12.12.2023 respectively, passed by the High Court,

  which set aside the order impleading him in Regular Civil Suit

  No. 360-A/2007, the original defendant no. 8 is here before this

  Court with the present appeals.
21.    We heard Mr. C.U. Singh, the learned Senior Counsel appearing

  for the original defendant no. 8, Mr. Navin Pahwa, the learned
12
Senior Counsel appearing for the original defendant No.4 and Mr.

  Atharva Gaur, the learned counsel appearing for the original

  plaintiff.
22.    This Court in
Mumbai International Airport (P) Ltd. v. Regency

  Convention Centre & Hotels (P) Ltd.
, reported in (2010) 7 SCC

  417, explained the scope of Order I Rule 10(2)
of the CPC
. In the

  unique    facts which existed therein, there was a likelihood that

  the appellant would secure a right/interest in the suit property

  if the suit for specific performance instituted by the respondent

  against the Airport Authority of India was dismissed. It was

  held, that in such a factual circumstance and such being the

  right asserted by the appellant, it cannot be made a party to the

  suit for specific performance. While holding so, it was observed

  that although the general rule is that the plaintiff, being

  dominus litis, may choose the persons against whom he wishes to

  litigate and seek relief, yet this rule of impleadment would be

  subject to the provisions of Order I Rule 10(2) wherein courts

  are vested with the discretion to strike out or add parties to a

  suit depending on whether their impleadment is deemed necessary

  or    proper.   It    was     held    that,    even   in   suits      for   specific

  performance,    a     court    may,    at    any   stage   of   the   proceedings,

  implead a person who is found to be a necessary party or proper

  party.
23.
In
Mumbai International Airport
(supra), this Court explained

      the import of the expressions “necessary party” and “proper

      party” as thus:
13
“14. The said provision makes it clear that a court
         may, at any stage of the proceedings (including
         suits for specific performance), either upon or
         even without any application, and on such terms as
         may appear to it to be just, direct that any of the
         following persons may be added as a party: (a) any
         person who ought to have been joined as plaintiff
         or defendant, but not added; or (b) any person
         whose presence before the court may be necessary in
         order to enable the court to effectively and
         completely adjudicate upon and settle the questions
         involved in the suit. In short, the court is given
         the discretion to add as a party, any person who is
         found to be a necessary party or proper party.
15. A “necessary party” is a person who ought to
         have been joined as a party and in whose absence no
         effective decree could be passed at all by the
         court. If a “necessary party” is not impleaded, the
         suit itself is liable to be dismissed. A “proper
         party” is a party who, though not a necessary
         party, is a person whose presence would enable the
         court to completely, effectively and adequately
         adjudicate upon all matters in dispute in the suit,
         though he need not be a person in favour of or
         against whom the decree is to be made. If a person
         is not found to be a proper or necessary party, the
         court has no jurisdiction to implead him, against
         the wishes of the plaintiff. The fact that a person
         is likely to secure a right/interest in a suit
         property, after the suit is decided against the
         plaintiff, will not make such person a necessary
         party or a proper party to the suit for specific
         performance.”
                                         (Emphasis supplied)
24. It is limpid in the aforesaid observation that if a party is

   found to either a necessary or proper party, the court would

   have the jurisdiction to implead him, even against the wishes

   of the plaintiff concerned.
In
Mumbai International Airport
(supra) another pertinent question that arose was whether there

   existed any conflict between the three-judge bench decision of
14
this Court in Kasturi v. Iyyamperumal, reported in (2005) 6 SCC

   733 and the decision of a two-judge bench in Sumtibai v. Paras

   Finance Co. Regd. Partnership Firm Beawer (Raj.), reported in

   (2007) 10 SCC 82.
25. In   Kasturi    (supra),       the     respondent       nos.    1        and   4        to     11

   respectively therein, based their claim to be added as party

   defendants      on     an    independent       title    and     possession           of        the

   contracted property. In such a backdrop, while rejecting the

   applications         for    impleadment,      this     Court    had       expounded            the

   scope of Order I Rule 10(2)
CPC
and laid down certain tests for

   determining whether a person is a ‘necessary party’ for the

   purpose of impleadment in a suit for specific performance as

   follows:
(i) First, that a bare reading of Order I Rule 10(2) clearly

         indicates        that    the    necessary        parties       in     a   suit           for

         specific        performance       of    a   contract       for       sale      or         an

         agreement to sell, are the parties to the contract or, if

         they   are       dead,    their     legal      representatives,               as        also

         persons who had purchased the contracted property from the

         vendor. A subsequent purchaser would be a necessary party

         since his rights would be affected irrespective of whether

         he had purchased the contracted property, with or without

         notice of the contract. However, it was clarified that a

         person whose claim is adverse to the claim of a vendor, is

         not a ‘necessary party’. Therefore, two tests were laid

         down      by     this    Court,        which     must     be     satisfied               for

         determining the question as to who is a necessary party —
15
(1) there must be a right to some relief against such

    party    in   respect   of   the    controversies    involved     in   the

    proceedings; (2) no effective decree can be passed in the

    absence of such party. The relevant observations read as

    under:
“7. In   our   view,  a   bare   reading  of   this
       provision, namely, second part of Order 1 Rule 10
       sub-rule (2)
CPC
would clearly show that the
       necessary    parties  in   a   suit  for   specific
       performance of a contract for sale are the
       parties to the contract or if they are dead,
       their legal representatives as also a person who
       had purchased the contracted property from the
       vendor. In equity as well as in law, the contract
       constitutes    rights  and   also   regulates   the
       liabilities of the parties. A purchaser is a
       necessary party as he would be affected if he had
       purchased with or without notice of the contract,
       but a person who claims adversely to the claim of
       a vendor is, however, not a necessary party. From
       the above, it is now clear that two tests are to
       be satisfied for determining the question who is
       a necessary party. Tests are — (1) there must be
       a right to some relief against such party in
       respect of the controversies involved in the
       proceedings; (2) no effective decree can be
       passed in the absence of such party.”
                                       (Emphasis supplied)
(ii) Secondly, as regards the meaning of “proper party”, it was

    observed that in case of a suit for specific performance,

    the guiding principle for deciding who is a proper party

    is that the presence of such a party is necessary to

    adjudicate      the   controversies      involved    in   the   suit   for

    specific      performance    of    the   agreement   to   sell.   Such   a

    question has to be decided while keeping in mind the scope
16
of the suit for specific performance. If the addition of

that   party   enlarges     the   scope    of    such   suit   so   as    to

convert it into a suit for title, then the presence of

such   a   party   cannot   be    said    to    be   necessary   for     the

effective adjudication of the controversies involved in

the suit. The relevant observations read as under:
“11. As   noted   hereinearlier,    two   tests   are
  required to be satisfied to determine the
  question who is a necessary party, let us now
  consider who is a proper party in a suit for
  specific performance of a contract for sale. For
  deciding the question who is a proper party in a
  suit   for   specific   performance     the   guiding
  principle is that the presence of such a party is
  necessary    to   adjudicate    the     controversies
  involved in the suit for specific performance of
  the contract for sale. Thus, the question is to
  be decided keeping in mind the scope of the suit.
  The question that is to be decided in a suit for
  specific performance of the contract for sale is
  to the enforceability of the contract entered
  into between the parties to the contract. If the
  person seeking addition is added in such a suit,
  the scope of the suit for specific performance
  would be enlarged and it would be practically
  converted into a suit for title. Therefore, for
  effective   adjudication   of    the    controversies
  involved in the suit, presence of such parties
  cannot be said to be necessary at all. Lord
  Chancellor Cottenham in Tasker v. Small [(1834)
  40 ER 848 : 3 My & Cr 63] made the following
  observations: (ER pp. 850-51)
    ‘It is not disputed that, generally, to a
    bill for a specific performance of a contract
    of sale, the parties to the contract only are
    the proper parties; and, when the ground of the
    jurisdiction of Courts of Equity in suits of
    that kind is considered it could not properly
    be otherwise. The Court assumes jurisdiction in
    such cases, because a court of law, giving
    damages only for the non-performance of the
17
contract, in many cases does not afford an
  adequate remedy. But, in equity, as well as at
  law, the contract constitutes the right, and
  regulates the liabilities of the parties; and
  the object of both proceedings is to place the
  party complaining as nearly as possible in the
  same situation as the defendant had agreed that
  he should be placed in. It is obvious that
  persons,   strangers  to  the   contract,  and,
  therefore, neither entitled to the right, nor
  subject to the liabilities which arise out of
  it, are as much strangers to a proceeding to
  enforce the execution of it as they are to a
  proceeding to recover damages for the breach of
  it.’
---xxx---
13. From the aforesaid discussion, it is pellucid
that necessary parties are those persons in whose
absence no decree can be passed by the court or
that there must be a right to some relief against
some party in respect of the controversy involved
in the proceedings and proper parties are those
whose   presence  before    the   court  would   be
necessary   in   order   to    enable   the   court
effectually and completely to adjudicate upon and
settle all the questions involved in the suit
although no relief in the suit was claimed
against such person.”
---xxx---
15. […] In the case of
Vijay Pratap v. Sambhu
Saran Sinha
[(1996) 10 SCC 53] this Court had
taken the same view which is being taken by us in
this judgment as discussed above. This Court in
that decision clearly held that to decide the
right, title and interest in the suit property of
the stranger to the contract is beyond the scope
of the suit for specific performance of the
contract and the same cannot be turned into a
regular title suit. Therefore, in our view, a
third party or a stranger to the contract cannot
be added so as to convert a suit of one character
into a suit of different character. […]”
18
(Emphasis supplied)
(iii) Thirdly, an intervenor seeking to be impleaded must be

           directly    and   legally   interested     in     the   answers    to   the

           controversies      involved        in   the      suit    for      specific

           performance of the agreement to sell. It was held that a

           person   is   considered    to     be   legally    interested      in   the

           answers to the controversy, only if he can satisfy the

           court that it may lead to a result that would legally

           affect him. The relevant observations read as under:
---xxx---
“17. […] Apart from that, the intervener must be
             directly and legally interested in the answers to
             the controversies involved in the suit for
             specific performance of the contract for sale.
             In Amon v. Raphael Tuck and Sons Ltd. [(1956) 1
             All ER 273 : (1956) 1 QB 357 : (1956) 2 WLR 372]
             it has been held that a person is legally
             interested in the answers to the controversies
             only if he can satisfy the court that it may lead
             to a result that will affect him legally.”
                                                     (Emphasis supplied)
26.   However, this Court, in its subsequent decision in Sumtibai

  (supra), was faced with a factual scenario wherein the sons of

  the original defendant were also prima facie found to be co-

  owners    of   the     contracted    property.      The    sons    were    already

  impleaded in their capacity of being legal representatives to the

  deceased defendant who had entered into an agreement to sell in

  favour of the plaintiff therein. In this background, it was

  observed that it cannot be laid down as an absolute proposition

  that in a suit for specific performance, a third party can never
19
be impleaded. It was opined that the decision of this court in

  Kasturi (supra) must be seen in the context in which it was

  delivered.    Furthermore,          some     circumstantial      flexibility      is

  necessary    to    be    taken   into      account   in   each   case,   since   an

  additional    or        different    fact      may    materially     change      the

  conclusion. Therefore, the sons of the original defendant were

  allowed to file an additional written statement and take the

  defence of co-ownership which was available to them.
27. While distinguishing Kasturi (supra), it was held in Sumtibai

   (supra) that if a third party can show a fair semblance of

   title or interest, he can file an application for impleadment

   in the suit for specific performance. The relevant observations

   read thus:
“13. As     held    in Bharat      Petroleum      Corpn.
Ltd. v. N.R. Vairamani
[(2004) 8 SCC 579 : AIR 2004
         SC 4778] a decision cannot be relied on without
         disclosing the factual situation. In the same
         judgment this Court also observed : (SCC pp. 584-
85, paras 9-12)
            ‘9.   Courts   should    not   place   reliance    on
decisions without discussing as to how the
            factual   situation    fits   in   with   the    fact
            situation of the decision on which reliance is
            placed. Observations of courts are neither to be
            read as Euclid's theorems nor as provisions of a
            statute and that too taken out of their context.
            These observations must be read in the context
            in which they appear to have been stated.
Judgments of courts are not to be construed as
            statutes.   To   interpret    words,   phrases    and
            provisions of a statute, it may become necessary
            for judges to embark into lengthy discussions
            but the discussion is meant to explain and not
            to define. Judges interpret statutes, they do
            not interpret judgments. They interpret words of
            statutes; their words are not to be interpreted
            as   statutes.    In London    Graving    Dock    Co.
Ltd. v. Horton [1951 AC 737 (HL)] (AC at p. 761)
            Lord MacDermott observed : (All ER p. 14 C-D)
            […]’
---xxx---
20
14. In view of the aforesaid decisions we are of
           the opinion that Kasturi case [(2005) 6 SCC 733] is
           clearly distinguishable. In our opinion it cannot
           be laid down as an absolute proposition that
           whenever a suit for specific performance is filed
           by A against B,   a  third   party C can  never   be
           impleaded in that suit. In our opinion, if C can
           show a fair semblance of title or interest he can
           certainly file an application for impleadment. To
           take a contrary view would lead to multiplicity of
           proceedings because then C will have to wait until
           a decree is passed against B, and then file a suit
           for cancellation of the decree on the ground
           that A had no title in the property in dispute.
           Clearly, such a view cannot be countenanced.”
                                            (Emphasis supplied)
28. This Court in
Mumbai International Airport
(supra) was also of

   the view that different situations require the application of

   different facets of Order I Rule 10(2) and consequently, held

   that there was no conflict between the decisions of this Court

   in Kasturi (supra) and Sumtibai (supra). It was reiterated that

   that Order I Rule 10(2)
CPC
did not pertain to the ‘right’ of a

   non-party     to   be   impleaded    as   a   party   but   deals   with    the

   ‘judicial discretion’ of the court to strike out or add parties

   at any stage of the proceeding. In exercising this judicial

   discretion, courts must act according to reason and fair play

   and not according to whims and caprice.
29. It   was   observed    that   the   court    may   exercise   discretion    in

   impleading a person who is a ‘proper party’ upon an application

   by a non-party to the suit for specific performance. If the

   court is of the view that the impleadment of such a proper

   party will alter the nature of the suit or introduce a new

   cause of action, it may either refuse to implead such person or

   order for his impleadment on certain conditions. However, even
21
otherwise, the court would not be precluded from impleading a

‘proper party’ unconditionally in its discretion. The relevant

observations rendered in
Mumbai International Airport
(supra)

read thus:
“24.4 If an application is made by a plaintiff for
     impleading someone as a proper party, subject to
     limitation, bona fides, etc., the court will
     normally implead him, if he is found to be a proper
     party. On the other hand, if a non-party makes an
     application seeking impleadment as a proper party
     and the court finds him to be a proper party, the
     court may direct his addition as a defendant; but
     if the court finds that his addition will alter the
     nature of the suit or introduce a new cause of
     action, it may dismiss the application even if he
     is found to be a proper party, if it does not want
     to widen the scope of the specific performance
     suit; or the court may direct such applicant to be
     impleaded as a proper party, either unconditionally
     or subject to terms. For example, if D claiming to
     be a co-owner of a suit property, enters into an
     agreement   for   sale   of   his    share    in   favour
     of P representing that he is the co-owner with
     half-share,   and P files    a    suit    for    specific
     performance of the said agreement of sale in
     respect of the undivided half-share, the court may
     permit the other co-owner who contends that D has
     only one-fourth share, to be impleaded as an
     additional defendant as a proper party, and may
     examine the issue whether the plaintiff is entitled
     to specific performance of the agreement in respect
     of   half   a   share  or   only    one-fourth     share;
     alternatively the court may refuse to implead the
     other co-owner and leave open the question in
     regard to the extent of share of the defendant
     vendor to be decided in an independent proceeding
     by   the   other    co-owner,    or    the     plaintiff;
     alternatively the court may implead him but subject
     to the term that the dispute, if any, between the
     impleaded co-owner and the original defendant in
     regard to the extent of the share will not be the
     subject-matter     of   the     suit     for     specific
22
performance, and that it will decide in the suit
           only the issues relating to specific performance,
           that is, whether the defendant executed the
           agreement/contract and whether such contract should
           be specifically enforced.
25. In other words, the court has the discretion to
           either to allow or reject an application of a
           person claiming to be a proper party, depending
           upon the facts and circumstances and no person has
           a right to insist that he should be impleaded as a
           party, merely because he is a proper party.”
                                                            (Emphasis supplied)
30.   Having discussed the aforesaid position of law, it would be

  apposite to look into the reasoning which was adopted by the High

  Court in its impugned decisions. It appears from the line of

  reasoning that the High Court entertained a serious doubt on the

  genuineness of the entire transaction between one (Late) Mr.

  Sameer Ghosh i.e., original defendant no. 3 and the appellant

  herein i.e., original defendant No.8. (Late) Mr. Sameer Ghosh is

  said to have obtained a probate on the strength of one particular

  will and on the strength of that probate he is said to have

  executed first, an agreement of sale in favour of the original

  defendant no. 8 and thereafter, a sale deed with respect to the

  suit property. According to the High Court, this transaction is

  doubtful.       The   High    Court   has     gone    further      to    say     that   the

  documents       i.e.,   the    agreement       and    the    sale       deed    are     also

  doubtful.
31.   In   such    circumstances
referred       to   above
,    the        High   Court

  thought fit to take the view that the appellant herein is neither
23
a necessary party nor a proper party.
32.   Having regard to the material on record, we are of the view

  that the High Court should not have interfered with the order

  passed by the Trial Court impleading the original defendant no. 8

  (appellant herein) as one of the defendants in exercise of its

  supervisory jurisdiction under
Article 227
of the Constitution of

  India,   1950.   We   say   so   because   the   genuineness   of   the

  transaction, if any, including the genuineness of the documents

  is to be looked into in the course of the trial. A party who is

  seeking impleadment may not be a necessary party but still, could

  be termed as a proper party. There is a fine distinction between

  a necessary party and a proper party. A necessary party is a

  person in whose absence no effective decree could be passed at

  all by the court. Whereas a proper party is one who though not a

  necessary party is a person whose presence would enable the court

  to effectively and adequately adjudicate upon all matters in

  dispute in the suit.
33.   We need not say anything further in the matter. We may only

  say that insofar as the transaction between (Late) Mr. Sameer

  Ghosh and the original defendant no. 8 (appellant herein) is

  concerned, the same shall be a subject matter of trial. We do not

  express any opinion in this regard at this point of time. We may

  only say that the presence of the appellant in the suit is

  required for proper and effective adjudication of the dispute in

  the suit. We say so while giving additional regard to the fact

  that the original plaintiff has not opposed the impleadment of
24
the original defendant no. 8 in his suit. We keep all contentions

  open for all the parties concerned to be canvassed before the

  Trial Court.
34.   In the result, these appeals succeed and are hereby allowed.

  The impugned orders dated 12.12.2023 and 12.06.2023 respectively

  in Review Petition No. 717 of 2023 and Miscellaneous Petition

  No.5567/2018 respectively passed by the High Court are set aside

  and that of the Trial Court is restored. Accordingly, the appeals

  stand allowed in the aforesaid terms.
35.   Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
....................,J.
(J.B. PARDIWALA)




                                             ....................,J.
(R. MAHADEVAN)


NEW DELHI;
APRIL 22, 2025.
25