[Cites
24
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Maharana Pratap Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 23 April, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
,
Dipankar Datta
2025 INSC 554                                                                 REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.5497 OF 2025
                               [ARISING OUT OF SLP(C) NO. 9818/2017]



            MAHARANA PRATAP SINGH                                            …APPELLANT

                                                   VERSUS

            THE STATE OF BIHAR & ORS.                                     …RESPONDENTS




                                              JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
1.             Leave granted.
THE APPEAL
2.             This civil appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 16 th

                     November 20161 of a Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature at

                     Patna2 allowing the respondents’ intra-court appeal3 arising from a writ

                     petition4 presented before the High Court by Maharana Pratap Singh5.

                     The judgment and order of the Single Judge dated 16 th July, 2013 was

                     set aside and resultantly, the writ petition of the appellant stood
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
impugned order
              1 pant
   rashmi dhyani
   Date: 2025.04.23
   17:40:10 IST
   Reason: 2  High Court
3
L.P.A. No. 516 of 2015
4
C.W.J.C. No. 471 of 2004
5
appellant
Page 1 of 30
dismissed. The Single Judge had quashed the order dismissing the

         appellant from service and directed that he be reinstated in service with

         all consequential benefits from the date of the dismissal.

         FACTS
3.       The appellant was appointed as a Constable in the Dog Squad of the

         Crime Investigation Department6 in 1973. He proceeded on earned leave

         for two days, with the intention of resuming his duties on 8 th August,

         1988. Incidentally, on 7th August 1988, a First Information Report7 was

         registered on the complaint of one Prem Kumar Singh8 against unknown

         persons, giving rise to Kotwali P.S. Case No. 882 of 1988 for offences

         under Sections 392, 387, 420, 342, 419 read with
Section 34
of the

         Indian Penal Code, 18609. The FIR included a request for the formation

         of a raiding party to apprehend those who had extorted money from the

         informant by blackmailing him. A raiding party was formed, which

         proceeded to raid the Rajasthan Hotel in Patna on 8th August, 1988. The

         accused was expected to arrive there to collect ₹40,000/- (Rupees forty

         thousand) from the informant. Meanwhile, the appellant was on his way

         to the office to resume his duties after completing his earned leave when

         the informant handed over the briefcase to the appellant. Subsequently,

         the appellant was arrested and was brought to Kotwali Police Station.
6
CID
7
FIR
8
informant
9
IPC
Page 2 of 30
On the same date, i.e., 08th August, 1988, the appellant was placed

           under suspension by his superior authority.
4.         On 14th June, 1989, disciplinary proceedings10 were initiated against the

           appellant by drawing up a memorandum of charges. The memorandum,

           duly served on the appellant, levelled 4 (four) charges as detailed under:
i.     Based on the written complaint of the informant, a case was

                  registered under
Sections 392
,
387
,
420
,
342
,
419
, and
34
of the

                  IPC. In connection with this case, the appellant was arrested while

                  receiving ₹40,000/- (Rupees forty thousand) from the informant,

                  in furtherance of an alleged act of cheating by impersonation and

                  extortion under duress, at gunpoint.
ii.    On 30th June 1976, a case was registered against the appellant

                  for cheating the Manager of Elphinstone Cinema Hall by falsely

                  representing himself as a Sub-Inspector of the CID. The appellant

                  was found guilty of the offence and subsequently punished.

           iii.   After availing earned leave, the appellant failed to resume his duty

                  on   08th   August,   1988    without   any   information   although

                  subsequently, he was arrested by personnel of Kotwali Police

                  Station on the same day.
iv.    The appellant failed to inform the CID Headquarters about his

                  arrest on 8th August, 1988.
5.         In response to the memorandum, the appellant submitted a prayer

           dated 15th March, 1990 requesting that the departmental proceedings
10
Proceeding No. 9 of 1989
Page 3 of 30
be conducted only after the conclusion of the criminal proceedings. The

           appellant expressed concern that if the departmental proceedings were

           held first and should the appellant cross-examine the witnesses during

           the departmental inquiry, his defence is bound to be disclosed; and this

           would     gravely   prejudice    him     in    the   criminal   proceedings.

           Notwithstanding the appellant’s prayer, an inquiry ensued culminating in

           the Inquiry Officer submitting his report on 3rd May, 199511, finding the

           appellant guilty of the charges levelled against him.
6.         Later, the appellant was served with a second show cause notice by the

           Superintendent of Police, CID12 on 23rd June, 1995 calling upon him to

           show cause why he should not be dismissed from service. Copy of the

           report of the Inquiry Officer was furnished. The appellant replied to the

           second show cause notice on 11th March, 1996 seeking to point out the

           illegalities committed by the Inquiry Officer in course of the inquiry

           thereby vitiating the same. Nevertheless, the respondent no. 5 accepted

           the Inquiry Report and, by order dated 14th June, 1996 contained in

           Memo No. 1833 dated 21st June, 1996, dismissed the appellant from

           service, with the additional direction that the appellant would not be

           entitled to any payment for the period of suspension, except for the

           amounts already disbursed to him.
7.         Meanwhile, the appellant along with the co-accused was tried and

           convicted by the trial court on 26th April, 1994. The appellant was found
11
Inquiry Report
12
respondent no. 5
Page 4 of 30
guilty of offences under
Sections 384
and
411
of the IPC and was

           sentenced to undergo simple imprisonment for a period of one year.

           However, he was acquitted of the charges under
Sections 392
and
419
of the IPC.
8.        The judgment of conviction and order on sentence having been carried

           in an appeal13 by the appellant, the Additional Sessions Judge-XI,

           Patna14, on 16th February, 1996, set aside the judgment and order under

           challenge. The appellant was acquitted of the charges, with the appellate

           court holding that the prosecution had failed to prove its case.
9.        The appellant, aggrieved by the dismissal order dated 21 st June, 1996

           passed by the respondent no. 5, filed an appeal before the Deputy

           Inspector General of Police15. However, by an order dated 14th July,

           1997, the respondent no. 4 dismissed the appeal and upheld the

           dismissal order passed by the respondent no. 5 dated 21 st June, 1996,

           based on the report and the findings of the Inquiry Officer.
10.        Subsequently, the appellant filed a revision before the Director General-
cum-Inspector General of Police, C.I.D.16 on 24th September, 1997,

           seeking to challenge the appellate order. However, as the revision

           remained undecided, the appellant filed a writ petition17 before the High

           Court. The said writ petition was disposed of on 13 th May, 2002 with a

           direction to the respondent no. 2 to decide the appellant's revision within
13
Criminal Appeal No. 108 of 1994
14
sessions judge
15
respondent no. 4
16
respondent no. 2
17
C.W.J.C. No. 5946 of 2002
Page 5 of 30
two months from the date of the order. In compliance with the said

           direction, the respondent no. 5 on 06th August, 2003 dismissed the

           revision, with the result that the dismissal order stood reaffirmed.

           PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE SINGLE JUDGE
11.        Thoroughly dissatisfied with the outcome of the revision, the appellant

           laid a challenge to the revisional order (in which the appellate order and

           the original order of dismissal had merged) in the writ petition out of

           which this civil appeal arises. The appellant inter alia raised the following

           objections: (i) the Officer-in-Charge18 was neither examined in the

           appellant's presence nor permitted to be cross-examined, rendering the

           disciplinary proceedings vitiated; (ii) both the departmental and criminal

           proceedings having stemmed from the same facts based on the

           informant’s written complaint and identical charges being involved, after

           the appellant’s exoneration in the criminal proceedings, rendered the

           disciplinary proceedings untenable and should have been dropped; (iii)

           the order of dismissal violated principles of natural justice; (iv) the

           respondent no. 4 upheld the order of dismissal without affording the

           appellant an opportunity to be heard; and (v) the respondent no.2

           having a duty to set right the wrong, failed to discharge such duty.

           Issuance of a writ of certiorari was sought by the appellant to quash the

           impugned orders. Additionally, the appellant sought the issuance of a

           writ of mandamus directing the respondents to grant him all

           consequential benefits as if he had never been dismissed from service.
18
PW-1
Page 6 of 30
12.        The Single Judge observed, upon an examination of the allegations

           made by the informant — who had also submitted a written statement

           against the appellant in the department — that the narrative presented

           by     the   informant   lacked    credibility   due   to   several   apparent

           inconsistencies. Notably, the question that seemed to trouble the Single

           Judge was why a person would enter a hotel room solely for the purpose

           of having tea, and why an acquaintance would escort both the informant

           and Devnath Pathak19 to the hotel room while leaving a young girl in the

           attached toilet. The Single Judge opined that the Inquiry Officer's

           reliance on the testimony of PW-1, who was not allowed to be cross-

           examined, raised concerns of undue influence. PW-1 had a matrimonial

           connection with the family of Virendra Singh, who allegedly had a

           strained relationship with the appellant's family, suggesting a personal

           motive to act against the appellant. However, the Inquiry Officer failed

           to examine or address the appellant’s contention regarding this potential

           conflict of interest. The Single Judge further observed that the

           respondents' claim, asserting the absence of a written request from the

           appellant to the Inquiry Officer for permission to cross-examine PW-1,

           was neither legally valid nor proper. The appellant was not required to

           submit such a request; rather, it was the duty of the Inquiry Officer to

           ensure that the appellant was given the opportunity to cross-examine

           the witness. As a result, testimony of PW-1 could not be relied upon in

           the absence of such an opportunity being provided to the appellant.
19
PW-2
Page 7 of 30
13.         The decision in
Sawai Singh v. State of Rajasthan20
was relied on by

            the Single Judge to hold that the charges were vague, indefinite and

            lacking in material particulars.
14.         The Single Judge further noted that the charges in the criminal

            proceedings against the appellant and the evidence presented by the

            prosecution to substantiate the same were largely identical to those in

            the departmental proceedings. Placing reliance on the decision in
G.M.

            Tank v. State of Gujarat & Anr.21
, the Single Judge concluded that

            charge no. 1 could not have been held to be proved by the disciplinary

            authority since the respondents 5, 4, and 2 failed to provide reasoning

            distinct from that of the relevant sessions judge who had acquitted the

            appellant of the charges. The Single Judge further observed that it was

            not open to the respondents to reopen charge no. 2 in subsequent

            departmental proceedings, as the matter had already been concluded in

            1976 and the appellant visited with punishment. Regarding charges 3

            and 4, the Single Judge found them self-explanatory, noting that the

            appellant's arrest on 8th August, 1988 and subsequent detention in the

            police lock-up prevented him from resuming his duties and notifying the

            CID, Headquarters, about his arrest.
15.         In light of the aforementioned findings and conclusions, the Single Judge

            found the charges against the appellant to be frivolous and unfounded,

            with the Inquiry Officer failing to adhere to due process. Consequently,
20
AIR 1986 SC 995
21
AIR 2006 SC 2129
Page 8 of 30
by judgment and order dated 16th July 2013, the Single Judge quashed

            the dismissal order dated 21st June 1996 (upheld by the respondents 4

            and 2 on 14th July 1997 and 6th August 2003, respectively), and directed

            the respondents to grant the appellant all consequential benefits from

            the date of dismissal.
PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE DIVISION BENCH
16.         The respondents, aggrieved by the judgment and order of the Single

            Judge, appealed to the Division Bench of the High Court.
17.         The Division Bench, relying on a series of precedents and quoting

            therefrom extensively, observed that exercise of jurisdiction by the

            Single Judge evinced exercise of appellate jurisdiction over the decision

            of the departmental authorities, whereas judicial review of departmental

            orders should focus solely on the decision-making process and not on

            the merits or demerits of the findings. The Division Bench, relying on
Union of India v. P. Gunasekaran22
, held that the Single Judge's re-

            appreciation of evidence, which led to the conclusion of the appellant’s

            innocence, was unsustainable due to the lack of a justifiable basis for

            such an approach.
It also emphasized that the strict rules of evidence

            do not apply to departmental proceedings, as declared in
T.N.C.S.

            Corporation Ltd. v. K. Meerabai23
.
The Division Bench further

            distinguished the decision in
Sawai Singh
(supra) relied on by the

            Single Judge, based on differing factual circumstances. It concluded that
22
(2015) 2 SCC 610
23
(2006) 2 SCC 255
Page 9 of 30
the charges against the appellant were specific, and the procedural

           requirements during the inquiry had been properly followed, with

           sufficient opportunities provided to the appellant.
18.        The Division Bench also referred to several decisions of this Court

           regarding legal principles, including the admissibility of hearsay

           evidence in departmental proceedings, rules of natural justice, the right

           to cross-examine, opportunities to lead evidence, and the scope of

           natural justice in disciplinary proceedings. Also, upon reviewing the

           proceedings file maintained by the department24, the Division Bench

           found the respondents' claims to be substantiated. It was concluded that

           there was no procedural error or breach of natural justice during the

           inquiry. Consequently, the Single Judge's interference with the order of

           dismissal was not warranted.
19.        Resting on such conclusions, the Division Bench set aside the judgment

           and order of the Single Judge and dismissed the writ petition.

           CONTENTIONS
20.        Learned senior counsel for the appellant, while assailing the impugned

           judgment, submitted that the following points merit consideration by

           this Court:
A. First, in light of the decision in
G. M. Tank
(supra), the Division

               Bench erred in failing to recognize that both the criminal and

               disciplinary proceedings were based on the same allegations, the

               same facts, the same evidence and the same witnesses. The
24
departmental file
Page 10 of 30
appellant was acquitted by the sessions judge on merits, and as such

   he could not have been found guilty in the disciplinary proceedings.

B. Secondly, the appellant was acquitted by the sessions judge based

   on a merits-based evaluation and not on technical grounds. This is

   further substantiated by the informant’s failure to identify the

   appellant in the criminal proceedings, who had not been made a

   witness in the inquiry. Additionally, PW-2 denied the appellant's

   involvement in both the inquiry and the criminal case, refusing to

   identify him.
C. Thirdly, the findings in the Inquiry Report holding the appellant guilty

   and which were upheld by the respondents 5, 4, and 2, lack

   credibility. Consequently, these findings are not only perverse but

   also influenced by extraneous factors and mala fide intentions.

D. Fourthly, PW-1 harboured a personal vendetta against the appellant,

   a fact brought to the attention of the respondents. However, this

   issue was neither examined nor considered by them, although the

   same did deserve thorough examination and proper consideration

   being fact finding authorities.
E. Fifthly, regarding charge no. 2, the appellant had already faced

   disciplinary proceedings and been penalized; hence, proceeding

   against him again for the same misconduct was barred on the ground

   of double jeopardy. Furthermore, a review of the Inquiry Report

   reveals a complete lack of evidence substantiating the said charge.
Page 11 of 30
F. Sixthly, charges 3 and 4 are derived from charge no. 1 and are driven

         by extraneous motives. Following his arrest on 8th August 1988, the

         appellant’s repeated requests to the Officer-in-Charge to inform the

         CID authorities were deliberately ignored. The Inquiry Report itself

         acknowledges the lack of evidence for charge no. 4. Moreover, the

         appellant could only have been suspended on 8th August 1988 if the

         authorities had not been informed of his arrest.

      G. Seventhly, the procedure followed in the inquiry was neither fair nor

         proper, as an interested witness (PW-1) was examined in the

         appellant's absence, despite this being brought to the attention of

         the Inquiry Officer and the respondents. Moreover, the appellant was

         denied the opportunity to cross-examine the said witness.

      H. Eighthly, the charges framed against the appellant were utterly

         vague and lacking in material particulars; hence, reliance was

         correctly placed by the Single Judge on the decision in
Sawai Singh
(supra).
I. Finally, the Inquiry Officer and the respondents erred in law by

         recording findings against the appellant without any admissible

         evidence, leading to a manifest miscarriage of justice. Therefore, the

         dismissal from service and denial of consequential benefits are

         clearly erroneous and perverse.
21.   Per contra, Mr. Khan, learned counsel appearing for the respondents,

      contented that the impugned judgment of the Division Bench suffers
Page 12 of 30
from no error or infirmity either of law or on facts, far less manifest error

      or infirmity, and hence does not call for any interference. He sought

      upholding of the impugned judgment asserting that there were no

      procedural irregularities or violations of natural justice in the process of

      inquiry.
22.   The arguments of the appellant were sought to be strongly rebutted by

      advancing the further following points:
A. First, PW-1 was examined in the appellant's presence, and despite

         being given the opportunity to cross-examine the witness, the

         appellant knowingly chose not to do so. The Inquiry Officer's

         inference that PW-2, who refused to identify the appellant during

         cross-examination, was likely to have been influenced by the

         appellant because of the lapse of time since he was examined-in-

         chief and cross-examined, and such inference being accurate did not

         call for any interference.
B. Secondly, the charges in the disciplinary proceedings are distinct

         from those in the criminal case. Charges 1 and 2 were sufficiently

         substantiated, while charges 3 and 4 were not contested by the

         appellant. Additionally, charge no. 2 does not constitute double

         jeopardy, as it pertains to the appellant's prior conduct rather than

         a separate offence.
C. Thirdly, the standards for establishing evidence of guilt in disciplinary

         proceedings differ from those applied in criminal proceedings and
Page 13 of 30
that decisions are legion declaring the law that mere acquittal in

         criminal proceedings does not result in automatic reversal of the

         departmental decision of taking disciplinary action for proved

         misconduct.
D. Fourthly, the Division Bench was absolutely right in observing that

         the Single Judge had exceeded its writ jurisdiction as if it were sitting

         in appeal on the administrative decisions of the respondents.

      E. Fifthly, the appellant being the member of a disciplined force was

         found to have conducted himself in a manner unbecoming of a police

         officer and, therefore, the Division Bench was right in interfering with

         the injudicious exercise of discretion by the Single Judge.
23.   Mr. Khan, therefore, urged that the impugned order of the Division Bench

      deserves affirmation and dismissal of the appeal ought to be ordered.

      ANALYSIS AND REASONS
24.   We have heard learned senior counsel/counsel for the parties at length

      and examined the materials on record.
25.   The issues for determination that emerge for decision are:
(i)      Whether due process was followed in dismissing the

                 appellant from service and whether his dismissal from service

                 is justified, on facts and in the circumstances, that have

                 unfolded before us?
(ii)     Whether, in light of the facts, evidence, witnesses, and

                 circumstances of the case, the charges in the criminal

                 proceedings are substantially identical to those in the
Page 14 of 30
departmental proceedings, such that an acquittal in the

                       criminal case would render the findings in the disciplinary

                       proceedings vulnerable?
(iii)    Whether the impugned judgment, which allowed the appeal

                       of the respondents and dismissed the writ petition of the

                       appellant, deserves to be upheld?
(iv)     Whether the appellant is entitled to any relief, should the

                       aforesaid questions be answered in his favour?
26.         At the outset, it is pertinent to note that considering the nature of

            arguments advanced which required ascertaining facts by looking into

            the records of inquiry, which are not on record, we had required the

            respondent-State of Bihar vide order dated 17th December, 2024 to

            submit scanned copy of the complete departmental file by 10th January,

            2025.
27.         Under
Section 114(g)
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, if a party fails

            to produce evidence that is within its control, it is presumed that the

            withheld evidence would be unfavourable to it. Though reference to any

            authority is not required, we may profitably refer to the decision in
State

            (Inspector of Police) v. Surya Sankaram Karri25
in this behalf.
28.         We regretfully record that neither has the departmental file been

            submitted for our perusal nor has the respondent-State of Bihar prayed

            for any extension of time. The consequence of non-compliance of such

            order is fatal, as would appear from our discussion hereafter.
25
(2006) 7 SCC 172
Page 15 of 30
29.         The issues arising for decision are now taken up for consideration.
ISSUE NO. 1
30.         The specific statutory rule in terms whereof the chargesheet against the

            appellant was drawn up or the inquiry conducted, cannot be ascertained

            as copy of the chargesheet in its entirety is not part of the paper book.

            This is precisely the reason why we called for the departmental file

            concerning the disciplinary proceedings which, unfortunately, has not

            been provided to us. Nonetheless, and given the circumstance that the

            appellant was dismissed from service on 21st June, 1996, it is reasonable

            to infer that the relevant rules in this case would likely be the Bihar and

            Orissa Subordinate Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 193526

            and/or the Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules,

            193027. These were adopted through Notification No. III/63-8051-A

            dated 3rd July, 1963, and were subsequently repealed by the Bihar

            Government Servants (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 2005.
31.         Our abovesaid inference is bolstered by Rule 824A (e) of the Bihar Police

            Manual, 1978, which stipulates that for experts and other ranks officials

            — i.e., barring members of the Indian Police Services, Deputy

            Superintendents and their equivalent ranks, ministerial officers and

            members of the Bihar Sashastra Police—the Rules of 1935 would be

            applicable if the official is non-gazetted and the Rules of 1930 would be

            applicable if gazetted. It is noteworthy that the post of Constable in the
26
Rules of 1935.
27
Rules of 1930.
Page 16 of 30
CID is a non-gazetted post and, hence, the Rules of 1935 provided the

      source of power to initiate disciplinary proceedings against the appellant

      by drawing a chargesheet.
32.   Note 1 attached to Rule 2 of the Rules of 1935 underlines that the

      procedure stipulated in Rule 55 of the Rules of 1930 must be followed

      prior to the issuance of a dismissal order against the charged official.

      Rule 55 of the Rules of 1930 stipulates that the grounds for the proposed

      disciplinary action must be clearly articulated in the form of specific

      charges, accompanied by a detailed statement outlining the allegations

      supporting each charge.
33.   On perusal of whatever is available on record, it is found that allegations

      had been levelled against the appellant under 4 (four) distinct charges.

      A specific objection having been taken on behalf of the appellant that

      the charges were vague, indefinite, not specific and lacking in material

      particulars, we felt it all the more necessary to have a look at the nature

      and wording of the chargesheet from the departmental file. However, in

      view of withholding of the departmental file, the presumption that can

      legitimately and validly be drawn and which we do hereby draw is that

      the respondents did not deliberately produce the departmental file lest

      the illegality in proceeding against the appellant from the inception is

      exposed.
34.   Based on the foregoing discussion, the version of the appellant that the

      charges drawn up against him were vague, indefinite, unspecific and

      lacked essential particulars has to be accepted. The decision of this Court
Page 17 of 30
in
Sawai Singh
(supra), thus, does apply on all fours in this case. This,

            in turn, reinforces the finding that the chargesheet contravened Rule 55

            of the Rules of 1930, as made applicable by Note 1 of Rule 2 of the Rules

            of 1935.
35.         If there is a flaw from the inception of the disciplinary proceedings, i.e.,

            the charge-sheet is not issued conforming to the relevant rules and the

            charged officer finds it difficult to meet the charges because it is vague,

            indefinite, not specific and lacking in material particulars, the charge-

            sheet itself becomes susceptible to vulnerability. We are reminded of the

            decision of this Court in
Surath Chandra Chakrabarty v. State of

            West Bengal28
where this Court ruled that:
6. Now in the present case each charge was so bare that it was not
               capable of being intelligently understood and was not sufficiently
               definite to furnish materials to the appellant to defend himself. It is
               precisely for this reason that Fundamental Rule 55 provides, as stated
               before, that the charge should be accompanied by a statement of
               allegations. The whole object of furnishing the statement of
               allegations is to give all the necessary particulars and details which
               would satisfy the requirement of giving a reasonable opportunity to
               put up defence. … The entire proceedings show a complete disregard
               of Fundamental Rule 55 insofar as it lays down in almost mandatory
               terms that the charges must be accompanied by a statement of
               allegations. We have no manner of doubt that the appellant was
               denied a proper and reasonable opportunity of defending himself by
               reason of the charges being altogether vague and indefinite and the
               statement of allegations containing the material facts and particulars
               not having been supplied to him. In this situation, for the above
               reason alone, the Trial Judge was fully justified in decreeing the suit.
(emphasis supplied)
28
(1970) 3 SCC 548
Page 18 of 30
36.   Moving further, the appellant had raised an allegation that PW-1 was not

      allowed to be cross-examined. Rule 55 of the Rules of 1930 provides

      that the witnesses may be cross-examined by the charged individual.

      Had the departmental file been placed on record, it would have

      facilitated a more thorough analysis of this sub-issue. Nevertheless,

      based on the available material, the question remains whether it can be

      determined if the appellant was provided with a sufficient opportunity to

      cross-examine PW-1, or if the appellant chose not to exercise that

      opportunity.
37.   The respondents' counsel contended before this Court that the appellant

      deliberately chose not to cross-examine PW-1 and it is not their

      contention that opportunity of cross-examination could not have been

      given, particularly in light of the fact that PW-2 was made available for

      cross-examination by the appellant. However, the Single Judge’s

      observations reveal that the respondents claimed there was no record

      of any request or indication from the appellant expressing an intent to

      cross-examine the said witness. This demonstrates that the respondents

      have altered their position on the issue of cross-examination of PW-1,

      as reflected in their submissions both before the Single Judge and this

      Court.
38.   Furthermore,   on   perusal    of   the   materials   before   this   Court,

      preponderance of probability favours the appellant for a finding to be

      returned that he was denied his right to cross-examine PW-1. The

      respondents' assertion that the appellant deliberately refrained from
Page 19 of 30
cross-examining PW-1, given his request to cross-examine PW-2, is

      untenable for three reasons: first, the respondents have changed their

      position on this issue; second, no reasonable person would voluntarily

      forgo a right of cross-examination, particularly when PW-1 was one of

      only two witnesses who testified from a list of seven, and there were

      allegations of a personal vendetta against him; and third, the

      respondents have never claimed that cross-examination was not part of

      the prescribed inquiry procedure or that it was optional, or that the

      appellant abandoned the enquiry or failed to appear on the relevant

      date.
39.   Next, the Inquiry Officer expressed disbelief at the version of PW-2 in

      course of cross-examination when he unequivocally denied the

      appellant's involvement in the alleged offences and failed to recall

      whether the seizure list relating to ₹ 40,000/- (Rupees forty thousand)

      had been prepared in his presence. The Inquiry Officer suggested that

      PW-2 might have been unduly influenced or persuaded by the appellant,

      noting that the cross-examination occurred after a substantial delay of

      nine (9) months from the date of PW-2's testimony in-chief, which had

      previously affirmed hinted at the involvement of the appellant.
40.   Before delving further into this sub-issue, it is once again essential to

      fall back on withholding of the departmental file pertaining to the

      disciplinary proceedings, thereby preventing an ascertainment of the

      cause of the delay in production by the prosecution of PW-2 for cross-

      examination by the appellant. In any event, can the appellant be held
Page 20 of 30
liable for such a prolonged gap? Likely not, as it is the responsibility of

           the prosecution to produce the witness. Moreover, in the absence of the

           departmental file, we cannot conclusively attribute the delay to the

           appellant either. Consequently, the lapse, without anything more before

           us, has to be attributed to the prosecution.
41.        Nonetheless, we are of the view that dismissing PW-2’s cross-
examination as incredible, solely due to the delay in its conduct, would

           not be a reasonable conclusion. PW-2 had also denied the appellant’s

           involvement in the criminal proceedings and, during his cross-

           examination in the inquiry, he explained that he had previously disclosed

           the appellant’s name based on hearsay from individuals within the

           department.
42.        We do not consider that the Inquiry Officer was justified in the approach

           he adopted while conducting the inquiry. Findings had to be returned by

           him neither on his ipse dixit nor surmises and conjectures but on the

           basis of legal evidence. A Constitution Bench of this Court, speaking

           through Hon’ble P.B. Gajendragadkar, J., in
Union of India v. H.C.

           Goel29
pointed out that in carrying out the purpose of rooting out

           corruption, mere suspicion should not be allowed to take the place of

           proof even in domestic enquiries. Although technical rules which govern

           criminal trials in courts may not necessarily apply to disciplinary

           proceedings, nevertheless, the principle that in punishing the guilty

           scrupulous care should be taken to see that the innocent is not punished,
29
AIR 1964 SC 364
Page 21 of 30
applies as much to regular criminal trials as to disciplinary enquiries held

            under statutory rules. This has, thus, been the well-settled position of

            law for decades and bearing such law in mind, we have no hesitation to

            hold that the reason for which the Inquiry Officer doubted the version of

            PW-2 in his cross-examination was not available to be assigned without

            first returning a finding attributing the fault for the delay to the

            appellant.
43.         At this juncture, it is imperative to further underline that the chargesheet

            against the appellant was issued based on the written complaint of the

            informant. Law is again clear to the effect that mere production of a

            document does not constitute proof. If chargesheet is issued on the basis

            of a written complaint, the author/complainant has to be produced. The

            decision of this Court in
Bareilly Electricity Supply Co. Ltd. vs.

            Workmen & Ors.30
is an authority for this proposition. Notably, in the

            instant case, the informant/complainant had not been examined. This,

            we hold is one other glaring error in the decision-making process.
44.         Upon reviewing the materials at our disposal and considering the

            aforementioned anomalies in the issuance of the chargesheet and the

            procedural lapses, none of which can be attributed to the appellant, and

            in light of the absence of the departmental file pertaining to the

            disciplinary proceedings, we are compelled to conclude beyond any cavil

            of doubt that due process was not followed in dismissing the appellant

            from service, rendering the dismissal unjustified.
30
(1971) 2 SCC 617
Page 22 of 30
45.         While we agree with the Division Bench that the Single Judge, to a large

            extent, exercised appellate jurisdiction, on its part, the Division Bench

            failed to take into account the aforementioned vices that infected the

            decision-making process. One could call it an inadvertent slip or

            oversight; but, whatever be it, in our opinion, such slip or oversight

            resulted in a failure of justice.
ISSUE NO. 2
46.         The aforesaid discussion on the first issue seals the fate of the

            respondents. However, since arguments were advanced in respect of this

            issue too, we propose to briefly answer the same.
47.         While an acquittal in a criminal case does not automatically entitle the

            accused to have an order of setting aside of his dismissal from public

            service following disciplinary proceedings, it is well-established that

            when the charges, evidence, witnesses, and circumstances in both the

            departmental inquiry and the criminal proceedings are identical or

            substantially similar, the situation assumes a different context. In such

            cases, upholding the findings in the disciplinary proceedings would be

            unjust, unfair, and oppressive. This is a position settled by the decision

            in
G. M. Tank
(supra), since reinforced by a decision of recent origin in
Ram Lal v. State of Rajasthan31
.
48.         To assess the degree of similarity between the charges, evidence,

            witnesses,    and   circumstances     in   the   disciplinary   and   criminal

            proceedings, it is indeed crucial to review the materials placed before
31
(2024) 1 SCC 175
Page 23 of 30
the Court where such an issue arises. However, we regret, absence of

      the departmental file has disabled us from looking into the same.
49.   Notwithstanding the above, a plain reading of the materials available on

      record only reveals that charge no.1 in the disciplinary closely resembled

      the allegations in the criminal proceedings. In fact, the disciplinary

      proceedings were initiated based on the written complaint of the

      informant.
50.   The judgment acquitting the appellant reveals that the prosecution

      "miserably failed to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt" as both the

      informant and PW-2 refused to identify the appellant in court. This

      discussion confirms that the appellant's acquittal was based not on mere

      technicalities.
In
Ram Lal
(supra), this Court held that terms like

      "benefit of doubt" or "honourably acquitted" should not be treated as

      formalities. The Court's duty is to focus on the substance of the

      judgment, rather than the terminology used.
51.   That apart, it is noteworthy that in course of the inquiry PW-2 had also

      declined to identify the appellant during cross-examination, and the

      informant was not called as a witness in the disciplinary proceedings.

      This sort of creates a parallel between the circumstances in both the

      criminal and disciplinary proceedings.
52.   Besides, the appellant's case is strengthened by the principle of adverse

      inference.   It   can   be   reasonably    inferred   that   the   respondents

      deliberately withheld the scanned copy of the departmental file, which

      was essential for us to assess whether the charges, witnesses, evidence,
Page 24 of 30
and circumstances in both the criminal and departmental proceedings

      were substantially similar or identical, likely due to concerns over the

      potential adverse consequences.
53.   In light of the preceding discussion and the adverse presumption that is

      available to be drawn, we hold that the finding of the appellant being

      guilty of charge no.1 cannot be sustained following his acquittal in the

      criminal proceedings, which seem to have involved substantially similar

      or identical charges, evidence, witnesses, and circumstances.
ISSUE NO. 3
54.   The Division Bench and the Single Judge differed in their views on the

      appellant's dismissal following disciplinary proceedings. Whereas the

      Single Judge found the inquiry report flawed due to unlawful procedures

      and untenable findings, the Division Bench, upon reviewing the "original

      file of the departmental proceedings," concluded that there was no

      procedural irregularity or breach of natural justice; and, therefore, held

      that the Single Judge's interference with the inquiry officer's findings—

      particularly by evaluating the merits of those findings in its writ

      jurisdiction—was unwarranted.
55.   Law is trite that while exercising its powers under
Articles 226
and
227
of the Constitution, the High Court does not exercise powers that are

      available to an appellate court. It is the decision-making process that

      falls for scrutiny. Be that as it may, the High Courts can rectify errors of

      law or procedural irregularities, if any, that lead to a manifest

      miscarriage of justice or breach of the principles of natural justice. Law
Page 25 of 30
is also well-established that the standards for establishing a guilt in

            disciplinary proceedings differ from those applicable to criminal

            proceedings. However, it is equally true that departmental authorities

            are obligated to provide a fair opportunity to the parties involved, and

            what constitutes a fair opportunity must be determined based on the

            facts and circumstances of each case, as has been
laid down in
State

            of Mysore v. Shivabasappa Shivappa Makarpur32.
56.         It is well-established that any action resulting in penal or adverse

            consequences must be consistent with the principles of natural justice.

            To sustain a complaint of natural justice violation, based on lack of

            opportunity for cross-examination, the party alleging the violation must

            show that prejudice was caused, as affirmed by this Court in
L.K.

            Tripathi v. State Bank of India33
.
57.         Upon perusal of the decisions of this Court in the preceding paragraphs,

            it is evident that the denial of the right to cross-examine PW-1 caused

            prejudice to the appellant, who should have been afforded the

            opportunity for cross-examination for three reasons: first, had PW-1

            been cross-examined, particularly regarding the appellant’s claim of

            personal animosity, it is plausible that such examination could have

            influenced the Inquiry Officer’s findings, potentially leading to a different

            conclusion; second, the Inquiry Officer placed significant reliance on

            PW1's testimony to substantiate proof of the charges against the
32
AIR 1963 SC 375
33
AIR 1984 SC 273
Page 26 of 30
appellant which could have been demolished had a chance of cross-
examination been extended; and third, PW-2, the only other witness,

            refused to identify the appellant during cross-examination.
58.         Further, we observe that the Inquiry Officer and the respondents 5, 4,

            and 2 have compromised their ability to reach a fair conclusion by

            considering factors extraneous to the evidence and merits of the case,

            viz., the fact that charge 2 was made part of the charge-sheet although

            the appellant had been punished therefor previously.
59.         Also, the Inquiry Officer and the respondents 5, 4, and 2 have

            disregarded      that   the   informant,   whose   complaint   initiated   the

            disciplinary proceedings, was not made a witness. The testimonies of

            PW-1 and PW-2 reflect a failed attempt to establish the contents of the

            informant’s written complaint, as the former was not cross-examined,

            and the latter failed to identify the appellant during cross-examination.

            Additionally, the potential bias of PW-1 as an interested witness, was not

            given proper consideration or weight.
60.         Regarding charge no. 2, while a previous finding in respect of a guilt can

            form part of a subsequent charge-sheet to award enhanced punishment,

            the law requires the disciplinary authority to give sufficient notice to the

            charged employee of such intention to take the same into consideration

            for deciding the question of punishment. Useful reference could be made

            to the decisions in
State of Mysore v. K. Manche Gowda34
and
34
AIR 1964 SC 506
Page 27 of 30
Nicholas Piramal India Limited v. Harisingh35
. The argument of the

            appellant to the contrary is overruled. Since, however, the disciplinary

            proceedings have been found to be suffering from incurable defects,

            assessment of the appellant’s conduct for deciding on the punishment

            does not really survive.
61.         Concerning charge no. 3, the charge explicitly states that the appellant

            was arrested on 8th August, 1988. Consequently, it is implausible that

            the appellant could have resumed his duties on the same date, after his

            earned leave had expired, especially since the respondents have not

            raised any objection regarding the date of the appellant's arrest.
62.         Finally, what remains is charge no. 4. Having been arrested, the

            appellant could not have reasonably been expected to inform the fact of

            his arrest till such time he was granted bail. The appellant claimed that

            he requested PW-1 to notify the CID authorities of his arrest, but PW-1

            failed to do so due to personal animosity. This appears to be probable,

            in the absence of any contra-material on record.
63.         Accordingly, this Court concludes based on the materials available on

            record that the disciplinary proceedings had not been conducted against

            the appellant in tune with principles of fairness as well as natural justice

            which severely prejudiced his defence. The impugned order, thus, is

            unsustainable.
35
(2015) 8 SCC 272
Page 28 of 30
Issue No.4
64.   Now, we need to consider the relief that ought to be granted to the

      appellant.
65.   The impugned order of the Division Bench of the High Court dated 16th

      November, 2016 is set aside together with the orders dated 21st June,

      1996, 14th July, 1997, and 6th August, 2003, issued by the respondents

      5, 4, and 2, respectively.
66.   The order passed by the Single Judge dated 16th July, 2013 is partly

      upheld. The direction for release of full back wages is, however, set

      aside.
67.   Before granting further relief, it is pertinent to note that the date of the

      alleged incident giving rise to the charge-sheet is 7th August, 1988, and

      the appellant was dismissed from service on 21st June, 1996. Based on

      the records available, the appellant was 53 years old when he

      approached the Single Judge in 2004. Therefore, he would be

      approximately 74 years old in 2025 and around 45 years old in 1996,

      evincing that he had nearly 14/15 (fourteen/fifteen) years of service

      remaining at the time of his dismissal. The relief of reinstatement in

      service cannot be granted now. We are left to consider the quantum of

      monetary relief that would meet the ends of justice.
68.   Having bestowed serious consideration, we are of the clear opinion that

      ends of justice would be sufficiently served if we direct payment of a

      lumpsum compensation of ₹ 30 lakh (Rupees thirty lakh) to the appellant
Page 29 of 30
inclusive of all service and retiral benefits by the respondents within 3

      (three) months from date. Ordered accordingly.
CONCLUSION
69.   The appeal, accordingly, stands disposed of.
70.   The appellant shall be entitled to costs assessed at ₹ 5 lakh (Rupees five

      lakh), to be paid by the respondents within the aforesaid period.
…………………………….J.
                                                       [DIPANKAR DATTA]




                                              ………..…………………………....J.
                                              [PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA]
      NEW DELHI;
April 23, 2025.
Page 30 of 30