[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The Managing Director vs Peddi Narayana Swami on 22 April, 2025
Author:
B. R. Gavai
Bench:
B. R. Gavai
Non-Reportable
2025 INSC 527


                                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).             OF 2025
                                       [@ SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 2948 – 2949 OF 2023]


                            THE MANAGING DIRECTOR,
                            KAMINENI HOSPITALS                                          … APPELLANT

                                                                           Vs.
                            PEDDI NARAYANA SWAMI & ANR.                              … RESPONDENTS



                                                              JUDGMENT
AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH, J.
Leave granted.
2.     Appellant,           which         is     the   Hospital   being     held
                                   vicariously liable for medical negligence and foisted
                                   with a          liability of Rs. 15              lakhs with further
                                   compensation of Rs. 5 lakhs upon the doctor of the
                                   hospital totalling Rs. 20 lakhs by the National
                                   Consumers Dispute Redressal Commission, New
                                   Delhi (hereinafter referred to as the “NCDRC”) by
                                   order dated 26.08.2022 has challenged the said
                                   order along with the order dated 08.03.2011 of the
Signature Not Verified          Andhra           Pradesh            State       Consumers      Disputes
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK SINGH
Date: 2025.04.22
12:54:44 IST
Reason:
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).    OF 2025
                                 [@ SLP (CIVIL) NO. 2948 – 2949 OF 2023]                            1 of 6
       Redressal Commission (hereinafter referred to as the
       “APSCDRC”).
3.     The challenge is on the ground that the liability as
       has been imposed upon the Appellant and the
       proforma Respondent No.2 – Dr. J.V.S. Vidyasagar
       on the ground of negligence without there being any
       medical          literature         or   evidence   of   any    expert
       substantiating the said findings deserve to be set
       aside.
4.     It is asserted by the Appellant that the hospital and
       the doctors working therein who had treated the
       deceased son of Respondent no.1 - the complainant,
       had followed the due standard of care expected of a
       medical professional. Once a reasonable competent
       practitioner had taken caution and due care is
       observed, the guilt of medical negligence cannot be
       said to be made out against the doctor as well as the
       hospital.
5.     The medical literature which has been placed on
       record by the Appellant supported the procedure and
       the steps which have been taken by the doctors of
       the Appellant-hospital while providing treatment to
       the deceased. It is asserted that apart from the due
       care and caution being observed, and the required
       sanctions/permissions taken from the attendants of




     CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).    OF 2025
     [@ SLP (CIVIL) NO. 2948 – 2949 OF 2023]                          2 of 6
       the deceased no medical negligence, what to say of
       liability, can be imposed upon the Appellant.
6.     There        has        neither         been    any      negligence     nor
       incompetence at the end of the doctors or staff of the
       appellant-hospital.                 Proper      timing     and    medical
       standards have been duly adhered to in accordance
       with norms and standard practices recognized and
       followed in similar circumstances for which there can
       be no responsibility holding the Appellant hospital
       liable        and        therefore        the     liability      qua        the
       compensation as has been imposed is unsustainable.
7.     Another aspect which has been pointed out is that
       the amount as has been assessed by NCDRC that is
       Rs. 20 lakhs is on the higher side and that too
       without any evidence with supportive documents.
       This being the basis Counsel for the appellant has
       argued and put forth his submission in this regard.
8.     On the other hand, the Counsel for the Respondent
       no.1-complainant has supported the judgment and
       the order passed by the APSCDRC and the NCDRC
       as far as the liability of the appellant and Respondent
       No.2 is concerned.
9.     On the basis of the discussion as has been referred
       to including the medical evidence as also the medical
       records of the deceased patient, it is asserted by the
       Counsel for Respondent no. 1 that the findings are in


     CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).    OF 2025
     [@ SLP (CIVIL) NO. 2948 – 2949 OF 2023]                              3 of 6
     consonance             with       the     pleadings    calling    for      no
     interference by this Court. Similarly, the quantum of
     compensation               for     the    negligence    as    has    been
     assessed by the NCDRC is also supported by
     contending that the deceased was 27 years of age
     and was a B.Tech graduate. He was also working in a
     soap        factory         and,        therefore,    the    amount        of
     compensation as has been assessed by NCDRC is
     fully justified calling for no interference by this
     Court.
10. Having considered the submission made by the
     Counsel for the parties and upon going through the
     records of the case, it is apparent that there is ample
     evidences as well as records to indicate that there
     was indeed medical negligence at the end of the
     Appellant and Respondent no.2.
11. The findings thus returned by the APSCDRC and
     NCDRC in this regard cannot be invalidated and are
     affirmed.
12. The       only       question            now   which    requires     to     be
     addressed is the quantum of compensation as has
     been assessed and awarded by the NCDRC.
13. As is apparent from the pleadings, the son of the
     complainant was 27 years of age at the time of his
     death, which is the prime age when a person starts
     his career and has his whole life to look forward to.
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).    OF 2025
   [@ SLP (CIVIL) NO. 2948 – 2949 OF 2023]                             4 of 6
14. Similarly, considering that the individual was a
     B.Tech graduate and he was working in a soap
     factory, albeit drawing a modest salary. In the
     beginning,           when        youngsters   start   their   career,
     generally, humble short steps are taken. It is evident
     that he was financially supporting the family and had
     the qualification and potentiality for earning higher
     income in future. Therefore, it cannot be said that
     the compensation as has been assessed by NCDRC is
     without any basis or the quantum is on extremely
     higher side.            As a matter of fact, the NCDRC has
     fixed the compensation at Rs.5 lakhs to be paid by
     Dr. J.V.S. Vidyasagar, proforma Respondent no.2
     who has accepted the said judgment and has even
     deposited the said amount.
15. As regards the amount of Rs. 15 lakhs is concerned
     which is assessed to be paid as compensation by the
     Appellant, it would not be out of way to mention here
     that while issuing notice in the present case, this
     Court had directed the Appellant to deposit an
     amount of Rs.10 lakhs in the Registry of this Court
     to be invested in short term fixed deposit to be
     renewed from time to time. We have been informed
     that the said amount has increased with the auto
     renewal facility over a period of time. We are thus of
     the considered view that the amount of Rs.10 lakhs
     as stands deposited in this Court by the Appellant


   CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).    OF 2025
   [@ SLP (CIVIL) NO. 2948 – 2949 OF 2023]                         5 of 6
      along with the accrued interest thereon would serve
      the interest of justice and the said amount of
      compensation would suffice as far as the liability of
      the appellant hospital is concerned.
16. In view of the above, the decision of the NCDRC is
      upheld however, the amount of compensation with
      regard to the liability of the appellant – hospital
      would stand at Rs.10 lakhs along with accrued
      interest. The amount so deposited be disbursed to
      Respondent no.1 – the complainant on an application
      to be submitted to the concerned Registrar of this
      Court.
17. The appeals stand disposed of in above terms.
18. Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.
…....………………………………. J.
[ B. R. GAVAI ]



                                              .………………………………………J.
                                              [ AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH ]


      NEW DELHI;
APRIL 22, 2025




    CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).    OF 2025
    [@ SLP (CIVIL) NO. 2948 – 2949 OF 2023]                       6 of 6