[Cites
54
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
K.P. Tamilmaran vs The State Rep. By Deputy Superintendent ... on 28 April, 2025
Author:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
Bench:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
,
Sudhanshu Dhulia
1


 2025 INSC 576
                                                            REPORTABLE


                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                           CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                        CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.           OF 2025
                [@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO.1522 OF 2023]

          K. P. TAMILMARAN                                 …APPELLANT(S)


                                         Versus


          THE STATE BY DEPUTY SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE

                                                            …RESPONDENT(S)

                                         WITH


                         CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.           OF 2025
                  [@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO.123 OF 2023]

                                         WITH


                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.           OF 2025
              [@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO.11241 OF 2022]

                                         WITH


                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.           OF 2025
              [@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO.11242 OF 2022]
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
Nirmala Negi
Date: 2025.04.28
15:34:59 IST
Reason:
                                         WITH
                                                                         2


              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.           OF 2025
      [@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO.4151 OF 2023]

                                   WITH


             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.           OF 2025
      [@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO.126 OF 2023]

                                   WITH


              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.          OF 2025
     [@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 124-125 OF 2023]

                                    AND


              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.           OF 2025
      [@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO.3616 OF 2023]



                              JUDGMENT
SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J.
1.      Leave granted.
2.      The challenge before this Court in all these Appeals is to the

        decision of the Madras High Court dated 08.06.2022. Before

        proceeding to the impugned judgment, it is necessary to trace

        the trajectory of this case from the Trial Court onwards, since it

        has passed through a maze of facts.
3
3.   A total of fifteen accused had faced trial, and the Trial Court

     ultimately convicted thirteen of them. Amongst them, A-1 to A-

     3, A-5 to A-8, A-10 to A-13 were convicted primarily under

     Sections 302 read with 149 of the
Indian Penal Code
(for short

     ‘
IPC
’). They were all sentenced to life imprisonment, except A-2

     (Maruthupandiyan), who was given death sentence by the Trial

     Court. A-14 and A-15 were the police officers, who were convicted

     by the Trial Court under
Sections 217
,
218
of IPC and
Sections

     3(2)(i)
,
4
of the Scheduled Castes/
Scheduled Tribes (Prevention

     of Atrocities) Act, 1989
(for short, ‘SC/ST Act’), and both of them

     were sentenced to life imprisonment. A-4 (Ayyasamy) and A-9

     (Gunasekaran) were acquitted by the Trial Court, and no appeal

     against their acquittal was filed before the High Court.
4.   By the impugned judgment, the High Court has modified the

     conviction   and    sentence    of   A-14   (Sub-inspector    K.P.

     Tamilmaran), acquitting him for offences under
Section 3(2)(i)
of

     the SC/ST Act and
Section 218
of IPC, but maintaining his

     conviction for offences under
Section 4
of the SC/ST Act and
Section 217
of IPC, and thus reducing the sentence imposed from

     life imprisonment to two years rigorous imprisonment. The
4
conviction and sentence of another police officer (A-15, Inspector

     M. Sellamuthu) has been upheld. In the case of A-2, the

     conviction by the Trial Court has been maintained but the

     sentence was changed from death penalty to life imprisonment.

     The High Court has also acquitted two other accused, i.e. A-3

     (Rangasamy) and A-13 (Chinnadurai). The remaining appeals of

     all other co-accused were dismissed, and their conviction and

     sentence was upheld.
5.   No appeal has been filed against the acquittal of the above-
mentioned accused by the High Court. Before us, now the

     remaining eleven accused i.e. A-1, A-2, A-5 to A-8, A-10 to A-12,

     A-14, A-15, have challenged their conviction and sentence.
6.   At this stage, it is necessary to bring a few crucial aspects of this

     case, in order to have a better perspective.
7.   This is a case of a dastardly murder of a young couple,

     Murugesan and Kannagi, who were only in their early twenties,

     when they were killed. Both of them were administered poison in

     full view of a large number of villagers. The masterminds and the

     main perpetrators of this macabre act were none other than the

     father and the brother of the girl Kannagi. The reason behind the
5
murder of this young couple was that Kannagi, belonging to the

     ‘Vanniyar’ community, had dared to marry Murugesan, who was

     a ‘Dalit’ from the same village. So, at the root of this crime is the

     deeply entrenched hierarchical caste system in India, and

     ironically, this most dishonorable act goes by the name of

     honour-killing!
8.   The brief facts of the case are as follows:
i.   Kannagi and Murugesan, both residents of village

           ‘Pudukoorapettai’ in District Cuddalore, Tamil Nadu, were

           in love. Murugesan had just completed his B.E. (Chemical

           Engineering) from a college in Chidambaram, Tamil Nadu,

           and was employed in Bangalore, whereas Kannagi was

           completing her B.Com. studies from the same college.

           Knowing well that the Vanniyar community, to which

           Kannagi’s family belonged, would never allow their union,

           the two got secretly married before the Registrar of

           Marriage at Cuddalore on 05.05.2003, and got their

           marriage registered. The marriage certificate was marked

           as Exhibit P-1 before the Trial Court.
6
ii.    After performing their marriage, the two returned to their

       village and were leading a normal life with their respective

       families, but then in the first week of July, 2003, both left

       their village quietly without attracting any attention.

iii.   On 03.07.2003, A-2 (Maruthupandiyan), brother of

       Kannagi, reached the house of PW-1 Samikannu (father of

       Murugesan), with a big sickle in his hand, and ordered

       PW-1 to bring his son back to the village. The reason why

       he was looking for Murugesan, A-2 said, was that

       Murugesan had borrowed money from him which he was

       now refusing to return. Samikannu (PW-1) leaves his

       house the same day to look for Murugesan. He goes to his

       sister-in-law’s house in the village Rasapalayam where he

       met Murugesan and asked Murugesan to send Kannagi to

       her parents. Thereafter, PW-1 returned to his house that

       day. After a gap of four days, on 07.07.2003, A-2 again

       comes to the house of PW-1 and threatens him for the

       second time to bring Murugesan back to the village. On

       07.07.2003, PW-1 again goes in search of Murugesan but

       he returns only on 08.07.2003, and by that time, his son
7
and Kannagi had already been murdered. It is further on

      record that, on 07.07.2003, A-2 also threatened A-4

      (Ayyasamy),      who   was   made     an   accused     by   the

      prosecution, though he was the uncle of Murugesan. A-2

      repeats the same false story of Murugesan borrowing

      money from him, which he had refused to return and

      therefore he was on a lookout for him.
iv.   The prosecution story then proceeds to state that on

      07.07.2003, A-4 leaves his village Pudukoorapettai for the

      house of PW-15 (Tamilarasi), sister of Murugesan, in

      Vannangudikadu village, where Murugesan was hiding. A-

      4 brings Murugesan back to Pudukoorapettai village and

      presents    him     before   A-1     (Duraisamy)      and   A-2

      (Maruthupandiyan), father and brother of Kannagi,

      respectively.
v.    By the time Murugesan was brought to the village, it was

      evening    (on    07.07.2003).     Thereafter,   as   per   the

      prosecution story, A-1 to A-13 undressed Murugesan, tied

      him to a post and then he was mercilessly beaten by the

      mob including A-1 to A-13. This was done in full view of
8
many villagers who were present there, yet there was no

             attempt to stop this savage brutality. A-1 to A-13

             continued to torture Murugesan compelling him to reveal

             the whereabouts of Kannagi. After much physical torture

             and beating, when Murugesan was unable to bear it any

             longer, he finally revealed that Kannagi was in PW-23

             Saroja’s house (who was the mother-in-law of A-4).

             Immediately a Tata Sumo car was arranged by A-1, which

             was driven by PW-22 (Jayatharasan), in which A-4 to A-11

             climbed and proceeded to Moongilthuraipattu village

             where PW-23’s house was located, with the intention of

             getting Kannagi back to Pudukoorapettai village.

      vi.    Kannagi was finally brought to her village, and by this time

             it was about 5:30 AM in the morning (of 08.07.2003). Both

             Kannagi and Murugesan were then taken to a cashew

             grove near the village. Once there, A-1 gets Nuvacron1

             (insecticide/poison) in a steel tumbler and gives it to his




1 Insecticide with common name “Monocrotophos”. Considered highly toxic by all routes of
exposure. The ingestion of even 120 mg of Monocrotophos can be fatal.
9
son A-2, and orders him to administer that to his daughter

       Kannagi.
vii.   A-2 then forced Nuvacron down Kannagi’s throat which

       caused her death in minutes. The prosecution story here

       though also suggests that A-2 tried to administer the

       remaining Nuvacron to Murugesan but when Murugesan

       resisted, this task was assigned to A-4. All the same, we

       must note that this version of prosecution, that A-4

       administered or tried to administer poison to Murugesan,

       was not accepted in view of the evidence of PW-49

       (Chinnapillai, step-mother of Murugesan) who had said

       that she saw A-2 administering poison to her son

       Murugesan. Like Kannagi, Murugesan too died minutes

       after being forced to drink the poison. PW-49 is an eye-

       witness who has stuck to her deposition that it was A-2

       who had administered poison to her son Murugesan, and

       not A-4. A-4 has ultimately been acquitted by the Trial

       Court and as stated above, no appeal against his acquittal

       was filed before the High Court. We will deal with this

       aspect in greater detail at a later point in this judgment.
10
We must also point out here that PW-49 was not

      mentioned in the charge-sheet as one of the prosecution

      witnesses. It was only in the middle of the trial that an

      application was moved under
Section 311
of the Code of

      Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short ‘
CrPC
’) by the

      prosecution to bring PW-49 as a witness.
viii. Returning to the facts of the case. The two bodies were

      then burnt in different places-Kannagi in the village

      cremation ground and Murugesan at a place nearby.

ix.   Meanwhile, as per the prosecution case, A-14 and 15

      (police officers) not only knew about these events but they

      had also visited the crime scene, according to some of the

      witnesses on 08.07.2003 itself, and yet they did not lodge

      an FIR, which was their statutory duty under Section 154

      and
Section 157
CrPC. Not only this, but when PW-49 goes

      to the police station to lodge an FIR on 08.07.2003, she

      was rebuffed and abused at the police station, and

      practically thrown out of the station.
x.    It was only after a gap of nine days, when some leaders

      belonging to the Dalit community raised this issue
11
through Press and Media and a support was gathered from

the public, that a case was finally registered on

17.07.2003 as Crime No.356 of 2003 under
Sections 147
,
302
,
201
of IPC at police station Virudhachalam. The FIR,

however, was registered on the basis of the extra-judicial

confession of A-1 before PW-32 (Ashokan), who was the

Village Administrative Officer. In this FIR, eight accused

were named, four belonging to the Dalit community and

the other four belonging to the Vanniyar community. The

Dalits included PW-1 (Samikannu), who was none other

than   the   father   of   the   deceased   Murugesan; A-4

(Ayyasamy), who was the uncle of Murugesan and who

allegedly brought Murugesan back to Pudukoorapettai

village from his sister’s house; Ilayaperumal, another

uncle of Murugesan, and Kannadasan, who ultimately

became a prosecution witness as PW-33. The four

Vanniyars who were made accused were A-1, A-2 (who

were the father and brother of Kannagi, respectively), A-3

and Anbalagan, who later became a prosecution witness

as PW-29.
12
xi.    Based on this FIR, an investigation was done by the local

       police and a charge-sheet was filed on 16.09.2003 against

       all the eight above-mentioned accused under
Sections

       147
,
302
,
201
of IPC.
xii.   Meanwhile, the questionable manner in which the entire

       investigation was carried out by the local police, compelled

       the family of the deceased Murugesan to seek interference

       from the Madras High Court where a petition was filed with

       a prayer that the investigation in this case must be handed

       over to the Central Bureau of Investigation (for short ‘CBI’).

       The High Court, by its order dated 22.04.2004, allowed

       this application and directed that the investigation be

       handed over to CBI.
xiii. On 21.05.2004, the CBI again registered its FIR under
Sections   147
,
302
,
201
of   IPC   and   started   the

       investigation. A charge-sheet was filed on 14.10.2005

       against fifteen accused, which included two Dalits i.e. A-4

       (Ayyasamy) and A-9 (Gunasekaran), two police officers i.e.

       A-14 (K.P Tamilmaran) and A-15 (M. Sellamuthu). The

       remaining accused belong to the Vanniyar community. As
13
we have already stated in the beginning, A-4 and A-9 were

           acquitted by the Trial Court, while accused A-3 and A-13

           were later acquitted by the High Court in Appeal.

      xiv. There has been an inordinate delay caused in this case.
The incident is of 7th and 8th July, 2003, and the Trial was

           concluded only on 24.09.2021. The delay on account of

           the belated filing of the FIR, etc. we have already discussed

           above, but the case was only committed to Sessions on

           15.03.2010 i.e. after more than seven years. The

           proceedings again remained stalled till charges were

           ultimately framed on 14.07.2017. An additional charge

           under
Section 3
of the SC/ST Act was framed by the Trial

           Court against A-14 and A-15 in 2020.
As noticed by the High Court, the reason for this long and

           inordinate delay was because of the multiple petitions filed

           by the accused for one reason or the other primarily as a

           challenge to the proceedings itself.
9.   As mentioned in the beginning, the High Court in appeal, by the

     impugned judgment, modified the sentence of A-2 from death

     penalty to life imprisonment, while upholding his conviction. A-
14
3 and A-13 were acquitted by the High Court. A-14 was acquitted

      for offences under
Section 3
of SC/ST Act and
Section 218
of IPC.
10.   The eleven accused who stood convicted and sentenced by the

      High Court are now before us. Their defence is based primarily

      on the alleged weaknesses of the prosecution theory, the

      inconsistencies and frequent contradictions in the statements of

      key prosecution witnesses, including its star witness PW-49

      (Chinnapillai),   etc.   The    learned    senior   counsels   for   the

      appellants, Mrs. Anjana Prakash, Mr. Ratnakar Dash, Mr. M.

      Sathyanarayanan,         Mr.   Siddharth    Aggarwal    and    Mr.    S.

      Nagamuthu have tried to convince this Court that the

      testimonies of the prosecution witnesses are unreliable and there

      has been a total failure on the part of the prosecution to prove

      its case beyond reasonable doubt.
11.   The contention on behalf of A-14 and A-15 (the two police

      officers- K.P Tamilmaran and M. Sellamuthu, respectively),

      raised by learned senior counsel Mr. Siddharth Aggarwal and Mr.

      Gopal Sankaranarayanan, respectively, is that none of the

      witnesses have specifically identified them as the officers at the

      police station who refused to lodge the FIR when apprised of the
15
incident. It is the contention of A-15, additionally, that merely

      because he had filed the charge-sheet against persons belonging

      to both the Dalit and Vanniyar community, the investigation

      conducted by him cannot be said to be motivated by a desire to

      falsely implicate members of the Dalit community.
12.   We have heard learned senior counsels for the accused as well

      as the learned counsel, Mr. Rahul Shyam Bhandari, for the

      family of Murugesan and Mr. Vikramjit Banerjee, the learned

      Additional Solicitor General representing CBI.
13.   In order to appreciate the sequence of events and the role of the

      accused, it is important to look at the testimonies of PW-1

      (Samikannu-father of Murugesan), PW-2 (Velmurugan-younger

      brother of Murugesan), PW-3 (Palanivel-second younger brother

      of Murugesan), PW-15 (Tamilarasi-sister of Murugesan), and PW-

      49 (Chinnapillai-step-mother of Murugesan), who are the main

      prosecution witnesses.
14.   But before we do that, it may be necessary to say a few words

      about some essential aspects of this case, in order to set the

      context for the examination of testimonies of these key

      prosecution witnesses.
16
Delay in Trial and evidentiary value of so-called “hostile

      witness”
15.   The long and inordinate delay which has been caused in this

      case, right from the lodging of the FIR, speaks volumes about the

      gross inefficiency at the hands of the prosecution on the one

      hand and dilatory tactics employed by the defence on the other

      hand, which together led to a slow trial.
16.   The second and more crucial aspect is that many of the

      prosecution witnesses in this case have turned, what has come

      to be known as ‘hostile’; a fact which has been strongly pressed

      by the defence in their favour. The defence would also argue that

      the Trial Court and High Court have mainly relied on the

      testimonies of the family members of Murugesan, who are

      interested witnesses.
17.   In our opinion, there is no force in these arguments and as will

      be seen, there was enough material placed by the prosecution

      before the Trial Court, which was sufficient to prove the guilt of

      the accused, beyond a reasonable doubt.
18.   When a witness, produced on behalf of prosecution, deposes

      against the prosecution version and goes against his/her own
17
previously recorded statements, the prosecution can request the

      Court to declare such a witness as hostile and seek permission

      from the Court to cross-examine its own witness. This is the

      procedure followed in a Trial, as we all know. In the present case,

      there are as many as fifty-one prosecution witnesses and it is

      also a fact that many of them have turned hostile by turning

      against their earlier statements made before the police under
section 161
CrPC, and even before the Magistrate under
section

      164
CrPC, in some cases. This phenomenon is not new, in fact it

      is sadly a common occurrence in our criminal Courts today,

      much to the despair and frustration of the prosecution. This

      case, therefore, is no exception. Despite this, however, there are

      witnesses in the present case, especially PW-1, PW-2, PW-3, PW-

      15 and PW-49, whose evidence, in the form of their testimonies

      before the Court, is more than sufficient to convict the present

      appellants. A word here about the evidentiary value of a so-called

      hostile witness.
19.
The Indian Evidence Act, 1872
(hereinafter ‘
Evidence Act
’) allows

      a party, with the leave of the Court, to cross-examine its own
18
witness.
Section 154
of the Evidence Act originally read as

      follows:
“154.Question by party to his own witness
                 The Court may, in its discretion, permit the person
                 who calls a witness to put any questions to him
                 which might be put in cross-examination by the
                 adverse party.”
20.   The Calcutta High Court, in Khijiruddin Sonar v. Emperor

      1925 SCC OnLine Cal 259, while interpreting
Section 154
of

      the Evidence Act, held that “When a witness who has been called

      by the prosecution is permitted to be cross-examined on behalf of

      the prosecution under the provisions of
Section 154
of the Evidence

      Act, the result of that course being permitted is to discredit that

      witness altogether and not merely to get rid of a part of his

      testimony”.
21.   But this judgment in Khijiruddin was overruled by a five-Judge

      bench of the Calcutta High Court in Praphullakumar Sarkar

      v. Emperor 1931 SCC OnLine Cal 7. The High Court was

      answering a reference from a Division Bench regarding the

      specific question of whether the testimony of a witness, who was

      cross-examined by the party which produced him/her, should be
19
discarded totally, partially, or not discarded at all. Chief Justice

Rankin, speaking for three other Judges and himself, answered

the reference in the following terms:
“24. In my opinion, the fact that a witness is dealt
        with under
Section 154
of the Evidence Act, even
        when under that Section he is "cross-examined"
to credit, in no way warrants a direction to the
        jury that they are bound in law to place no
        reliance on his evidence, or that the party who
        called and cross-examined him can take no
        advantage from any part of his evidence. There
        is, moreover, no rule of law that if a jury thinks
        that a witness has been discredited on one point
        they may not give credit to him on another. The
        rule of law is that it is for the jury to say.
Of the seven questions stated by the Division
        Bench I propose that we should answer four,
        viz.—

        (3) whether the evidence of a witness treated as
        "hostile" must be rejected in whole or in part;
(4) whether it must be rejected so far as it is in
        favour of the party calling the witness;
(5) whether it must be rejected so far as it is in
        favour of the opposite party.
These three questions I would answer in the
        negative.
20
(6) Whether the whole of the evidence so far as it
                 affects both parties favourably or unfavourably,
                 must go to the jury for what it is worth.
25. To this question, I would be content to answer
                 "yes," …”
22.   Justice Buckland, in the above case, in his concurring opinion

      holds that there is no law which states that the evidence of a

      witness, who has been cross-examined by its party, should be

      entirely rejected. In his opinion, it is for the jury (or the Judge) to

      form an opinion regarding the value of the testimony of such a

      witness.
23.   All the same, later this Court in
Jagir Singh v. State (Delhi
)

      (1975) 3 SCC 562 held to the contrary and approved the decision

      of the Calcutta High Court in Khijiruddin. This is what was said

      in Jagir Singh by Justice Bhagwati:
“7. Now, it is apparent from the judgment of the
                 High Court that the conviction of the appellant
                 rested entirely on the evidence of Pritam Singh
                 (P.W. 10) and Sajjan Singh (P.W. 13). Swaran
                 Singh (P.W. 11) was also examined on behalf of
                 the prosecution but his evidence is of no help to
                 the prosecution because he went back on the
                 story of the prosecution and was permitted to be
                 cross-examined on behalf of the prosecution. It is
                 now well settled that when a witness, who has
21
been called by the prosecution, is permitted to be
              cross-examined on behalf of the prosecution, the
              result of that course being adopted is to discredit
              that witness altogether and not merely to get rid
              of a part of his testimony. See Khijiruddin v.
              Emperor….”
24.   However, it is to be noted that Jagir Singh does not refer to the

      five-Judge Bench decision of the Calcutta High Court in

      Praphullakumar Sarkar.
25.   But then in a subsequent decision (of which Justice Bhagwati

      was also a part) i.e.,
Sat Paul v. Delhi Administration
(1976)

      1 SCC 727, it was held differently. Justice Sarkaria, speaking

      for the Bench, clarified the earlier judgment in Jagir Singh, and

      held that what has been held in Jagir Singh would only be

      applicable where a witness through cross-examination by the

      party which calls it, is totally discredited. It is only in such a

      situation that the Court, as matter of prudence, discards his/her

      evidence in its entirety.
26.   As a general rule, the testimony of a witness who has been cross-
examined by the party which produced him/her will not stand

      totally discredited, and it is for the Court to consider what value
22
should be attached to this testimony. After referring to a series

of judgments on this point, the Court in Sat Paul held as follows:
“52. From the above conspectus, it emerges clear
        that even in a criminal prosecution when a
        witness is cross-examined and contradicted with
        the leave of the court, by the party calling him, his
        evidence cannot, as a matter of law, be treated as
        washed off the record altogether. It is for the
        Judge of fact to consider in each case whether as
        a result of such cross-examination and
        contradiction, the witness stands thoroughly
        discredited or can still be believed in regard to a
        part of his testimony. If the Judge finds that in the
        process, the credit of the witness has not been
        completely shaken, he may, after reading and
        considering the evidence of the witness, as a
        whole, with due caution and care, accept, in the
        light of the other evidence on the record, that part
        of his testimony which he finds to be creditworthy
        and act upon it. If in a given case, the whole of
        the testimony of the witness is impugned, and in
        the process, the witness stands squarely and
        totally discredited, the Judge should, as matter of
        prudence, discard his evidence in toto.
53. It was in the context of such a case, where,
        as a result of the cross-examination by the Public,
        Prosecutor, the prosecution witness concerned
        stood discredited altogether, that this Court
        in Jagir Singh v. State (Delhi Admn.) with the
        aforesaid rule of caution — which is not to be
        treated as a rule of law — in mind, said that the
        evidence of such a witness is to be rejected en
        bloc.”
23
(Emphasis Provided)
27.   An examination of the cases referred above shows that there can

      be no doubt about the fact that the evidence of a witness, who

      has been cross-examined by the side which produced him/her,

      cannot be totally discarded [Also see:
Neeraj Dutta v. State (NCT

      of Delhi
), (2023) 4 SCC 731].
28.   It may also be worthwhile to mention here that by the
Criminal

      Law Amendment Act
of 2005, sub-
section 2
was added to
section

      154
of the Evidence Act. The amended
section 154
of the

      Evidence Act now reads as under:
154. Question by party to his own witness.
— (1) The Court may, in its discretion, permit the
              person    who     calls   a witness to put    any
              questions to him which might be put in cross-
examination by the adverse party.
(2) Nothing in this section shall disentitle the
              person so permitted under sub-section (1), to rely
              on any part of the evidence of such witness.
(Emphasis Provided)
29.   By way of the above amendment, the position which had been

      reiterated by this Court has now come in the statute itself.
30.   The word ‘hostile’ or ‘hostile witness’ has not been used anywhere

      in the
Evidence Act
. The logic behind this exclusion seems to be
24
that the declaration of witness as ‘hostile witness’ carries a

specific significance under the English law, from where this term

has been derived, where liberty is only granted to a side to cross-

examine its own witness when such declaration of ‘hostility’ is

made. The position in India is different and here it is left to the

discretion of the Court to allow a party to cross-examine its own

witness, regardless of a declaration of ‘hostility’. This has been

explained by this Court in Sat Paul:
“38. To steer clear of the controversy over the
        meaning of the terms "hostile" witness, "adverse"
        witness, "unfavourable" witness which had given
        rise to considerable difficulty and conflict of
        opinion in England, the authors of the
Indian
        Evidence Act, 1872
seem to have advisedly
        avoided the use of any of those terms so that, in
        India, the grant of permission to cross-examine
        his own witness by a party is not conditional on
        the witness being declared "adverse" or "hostile".
        Whether it be the grant of permission under
Section 142
to put leading questions, or the leave
        under
Section 154
to ask questions which might
        be put in cross-examination by the adverse party,
        the
Indian Evidence Act
leaves the matter entirely
        to the discretion of the court (see the observations
        of Sir Lawrence Jenkins in Baikuntha Nath v.
        Prasannamoyi [AIR 1922 PC 409: 72IC 286]). The
        discretion conferred by
Section 154
on the court
        is unqualified and untrammelled and is apart
        from any question of "hostility". It is to be liberally
25
exercised whenever the court from the witnesses
              demeanour, temper, attitude, bearing, or the
              tenor and tendency of his answers, or from a
              perusal of his previous inconsistent statement, or
              otherwise, thinks that the grant of such
              permission is expedient to extract the truth and to
              do justice. The grant of such permission does not
              amount to an adjudication by the court as to the
              veracity of the witness. Therefore, in the order
              granting such permission, it is preferable to avoid
              the use of such expressions, such as "declared
              hostile", "declared unfavourable", the significance
              of which is still not free from the historical
              cobwebs which, in their wake bring a misleading
              legacy of confusion, and conflict that had so long
              vexed the English Courts.”
                                            (Emphasis Provided)
31.   The phrase ‘hostile witness’ is commonly used in criminal

      jurisprudence and court proceedings. We too cannot escape the

      blame of using the term ‘hostile witness’ in our judgment. We do

      it for pragmatic reasons. Some words like ‘hostile witness’ in this

      case are now a part of our legal vocabulary. There is no point in

      inventing or substituting new words or phrases, at least in the

      present case, and we leave that for the future. But what is

      necessary, however, is to explain the meaning of the term as it is

      now to be understood. The phrase ‘hostile witness’ has come to
26
be used for a witness who gives a statement contrary to the story

      of the side for which he/she is a witness. All the same, because

      a witness has supported some, though not all, aspects of a case,

      it would not automatically mean that this witness has to be

      declared ‘hostile’. A party can cross-examine its own witness

      under
Section 154
Evidence Act, even without getting a

      declaration   of   ‘hostility’.   The   only   restriction   to   cross-

      examination under
Section 154
Evidence Act is that the party,

      who seeks to cross-examine its own witness, must obtain the

      leave of the Court. Whether there is a declaration of ‘hostility’ or

      not, one thing is clear that evidence of witness, who has been

      cross-examined under
Section 154
Evidence Act by the party

      who called such witness, cannot be washed off entirely and it is

      for the Court to see what can be retrieved from such evidence.
32.   This can be understood from another aspect. We shall now refer

      to the definition of the term ‘evidence’ given under
Section 3
of

      the Evidence Act. It reads as follows:
"Evidence" - "Evidence" means and includes –
               (1) all statements which the Court permits or
                   requires to be made before it by witnesses, in
27
relation to matters of fact under inquiry; such
                   statements are called oral evidence;
(2) all documents including electronic records
                   produced for the inspection of the Court; such
                   document are called documentary evidence.”
                                              (Emphasis Provided)
33.   The statements made by a witness in Court, including in cross-
examination, either conducted by the opposite party or by the

      party who produced the witness, would come under the

      definition of ‘evidence’ under
Section 3
of the Evidence Act, since

      this evidence has come before the Court with its permission.

      Moreover, there is no specific bar under the
Evidence Act
which

      mandates that such evidence has to be discarded. Thus, it would

      form part of the entire evidence which the Court can examine

      while arriving at its decision, and it is for the Court to determine

      what value has to be given to that piece of evidence or how such

      evidence has to be used in a given case.
34.   Viewed from a different perspective, the rejection of the entire

      testimony of a prosecution witness, who has been cross-

      examined by the prosecution, would not only harm the case of

      the prosecution but perhaps also of the defence in a given case.
28
This is because as the law stands today, the benefit of the

       testimony of such witness can be taken by both the prosecution

       and the defence, allowing them to use it to build their case [See:
Paulmeli v. State of T.N.
(2014) 13 SCC 90, Ramesh Harijan

       v. State of U.P. (2012) 5 SCC 777]. In any case, ultimately, it

       will be the cause of justice that will suffer if the testimony of such

       witness is totally discarded. It is, therefore, rightly left to the

       discretion of the Court to test the evidentiary value of such a

       testimony.
35.    Here, we may also take note of
Section 155
of the Evidence Act2

       which allows a party, with permission of the Court, to impeach

       the credibility of its own witness as per the procedure laid down

       therein.
36.    It is though trite and much overstated but the maxim “falsus in

       uno, falsus in omnibus”3, is not applicable to our criminal justice

       system. It is for the Court to distinguish the wheat from the chaff


 2 155. Impeaching credit of witness: The credit of a witness may be impeached in the following

 ways by the adverse party, or, with the consent of the Court, by the party who calls him:
(1) By the evidence of persons who testify that they, from their knowledge of the
          witness, believe him to be unworthy of credit;
          (2) By proof that the witness has been bribed, or has accepted the offer of a bribe, or
          has received any other corrupt inducement to give his evidence;
          (3) By proof of former statements inconsistent with any part of his evidence which is
          liable to be contradicted…
3 false in one thing, false in everything.
29
while dealing with the depositions of a hostile witness. Courts

can rely upon that part of the deposition of a hostile witness

which is corroborated by other evidence on record. This Court in
Bhajju v. State of Madhya Pradesh
(2012) 4 SCC 327

discussed the worth of the evidence of a hostile witness in the

following words:
“36. It is settled law that the evidence of hostile
        witnesses can also be relied upon by the
        prosecution to the extent to which it supports the
        prosecution version of the incident. The evidence
        of such witnesses cannot be treated as washed
        off the records, it remains admissible in trial and
        there is no legal bar to base the conviction of the
        accused upon such testimony, if corroborated by
        other reliable evidence…”

      If part of the evidence of a hostile witness corroborates

 with other reliable evidence, then that part of the evidence is

 admissible. Once a prosecution witness has been declared

 hostile and then cross-examined by the prosecution, then it is

 for the Court to evaluate the veracity of the testimony. There

 can be several reasons for a witness to turn hostile and the

 court must also look into these factors while evaluating the

 evidence given by a hostile witness. It is an uncomfortable
30
reality in our criminal Courts for a prosecution witness to turn

       hostile. But then the purpose of a Trial Court is to go to the

       truth of the matter. Whatever evidence is there before the

       Court must be examined, tested, corroborated (whenever

       necessary), before a verdict can be finally given.
37.   One of the many reasons for witnesses turning hostile is the long

      delay usually caused in a trial. This is again unfortunate but true

      in our country. The present case is no exception. Here, the

      incident occurred in the year 2003, the case was committed to

      Sessions in the year 2010 and charges were framed as late as in

      the year 2017, and the judgment was finally pronounced by the

      Trial Court on 24.09.2021. It took eighteen years!
38.   The role played here by the accused in delaying the trial cannot

      be discounted, as already stated. The records also reveal that the

      depositions of most of the prosecution witnesses were recorded

      only towards the end of the year 2017. Moreover, CBI in this

      case had filed its charge-sheet, inter alia, against two persons

      belonging to Dalit community. Although, these two (A-4 and A-9)

      were finally acquitted by Trial Court as there was absolutely

      nothing against them, but in the process, prosecution had to
31
declare many of its witnesses belonging to the Dalit community

      as hostile simply because these witnesses did not depose against

      A-4 and A-9. It is also clear now, in any case, that these two were

      wrongly made accused by the prosecution. All the same, the

      benefit of such witnesses turning hostile cannot be given to other

      accused who were found involved in the offence, on the

      overwhelming weight of other evidence.
Related witnesses are not necessarily interested witnesses
39.   Another plea taken by the defence is that many witnesses who

      have deposed against them, such as PW-49, PW-1, PW-15, are

      interested witnesses. PW-49 for example being the step-mother

      of Murugesan, the boy who was killed. Now, so far as witnesses

      being interested witnesses is concerned, it is a settled position of

      law that the Court cannot ignore the testimonies of witnesses

      only because they are close relatives of the victim. A Three-Judge

      Bench of this Court in
Jaikam Khan v. State of U.P.
(2021) 13

      SCC 716 notes:
“28…No doubt that, merely because the
              witnesses are interested and related witnesses,
              it cannot be a ground to disbelieve their
              testimony. However, the testimony of such
32
witnesses has to be scrutinised with due care
       and caution. Upon scrutiny of the evidence of
       such witnesses, if the court is satisfied that the
       evidence is creditworthy, then there is no bar on
       the court in relying on such evidence.”

     In cases where the crime is committed at the residence or

a place near the residence of the deceased, it is the close

relatives who are likely to be a witness to the crime. They are

natural witnesses. This Court in
State of A.P. v. S. Rayappa
,

(2006) 4 SCC 512, while noting the difference between

interested witness and related witness, observed as follows:
“6…By now it is a well-established principle of
       law that testimony of a witness otherwise
       inspiring confidence cannot be discarded on the
       ground that he being a relation of the deceased is
       an interested witness. A close relative who is a
       very natural witness cannot be termed as an
       interested witness. The term interested
       postulates that the person concerned must have
       some direct interest in seeing the accused person
       being convicted somehow or the other either
       because of animosity or some other reasons.
7. On the contrary it has now almost become a
       fashion that the public is reluctant to appear and
       depose before the court especially in criminal
       case because of varied reasons. Criminal cases
       are kept dragging for years to come and the
       witnesses are harassed a lot. They are being
       threatened, intimidated and at the top of all they
       are subjected to lengthy cross-examination. In
33
such a situation, the only natural witness
             available to the prosecution would be the relative
             witness. The relative witness is not necessarily
             an interested witness. On the other hand, being a
             close relation to the deceased they will try to
             prosecute the real culprit by stating the truth.
There is no reason as to why a close relative will
             implicate and depose falsely against somebody
             and screen the real culprit to escape unpunished.
             The only requirement is that the testimony of the
             relative   witnesses    should     be   examined
             cautiously…”
40.   Keeping these principles in mind, we shall now discuss the

      testimonies of prosecution witnesses:
i.   PW-1 (Samikannu) is the father of Murugesan who was

            made an accused in the first FIR filed by the local police

            when A-15 was the I.O. PW-1 is one of the main witnesses

            of the prosecution. PW-1 states that, five days prior to the

            death of Murugesan i.e. on 03.07.2003, at around 5 PM,

            A-2 (Maruthupandiyan), armed with a big sickle, comes to

            his house and orders him to find Murugesan and bring

            him to his house as Murugesan had borrowed money from

            him which he now refuses to return. A-2 threatened PW-1

            with dire consequences, if he did not bring Murugesan. On

            03.07.2003 itself, PW-1 leaves his village for his sister-in-
34
law Dhanavalli’s house in Rasapalayam, where he found

      Murugesan with Kannagi. Murugesan informed PW-1 that

      Kannagi is A-1’s daughter. Upon hearing this, PW-1

      pleaded with him to ask Kannagi to return to her family as

      she belongs to a higher caste. On the same day, i.e.

      03.07.2003, PW-1 returns to his village. Thereafter, four

      days later, on 07.07.2003, A-2 again threatens PW-1 to

      bring back Murugesan and PW-1 yet again leaves his

      village in search of Murugesan. This time, since PW-1

      could not find Murugesan, he delays his return to his

      village, and when he reaches his village the next day (on

      08.07.2003), Murugesan and Kannagi had already been

      killed.
ii.   PW-2 (Velmurugan), is the younger brother of Murugesan.
He was seventeen years old at the time of the incident. In

      Court, PW-2 had deposed that at 11 AM on 07.07.2003, A-

      2 and his aides intercepted PW-2 near the village water

      tank      while   he was returning to   his village from

      Virudhachalam. They questioned him on the whereabouts

      of Murugesan, repeating the story of the money which was
35
lent to Murugesan. PW-2 was then forcibly taken by them

and confined in a store-room near the water tank and was

only released in the evening, after Murugesan was brought

back to the village. When PW-2 went home, his mother

PW-49 (Chinnapillai) informed him that A-4 had brought

Murugesan back to the village. PW-2 then went to the

sugarcane field of A-1, where he was joined by PW-3

(Palanivel). At the sugarcane field, PW-2 saw that A-2 and

A-7 were threatening Murugesan to disclose the location

of Kannagi. He then saw A-4 (Ayyasamy) asking A-1 (C.

Duraisamy) as to why A-1 was inquiring Murugesan

regarding Kannagi, when the only reason given to A-4 for

their search of Murugesan was the money which was to be

recovered from him. To this, A-1 then answered that he

had to weave a story of ‘loan’, in order to bring Murugesan.

Later, PW-2 and PW-3 returned home. At around 7 PM on

07.07.2003,   the   villagers   were   heard   saying   that

Murugesan was being beaten near Mariamman temple.

PW-2 proceeded to the place near Mariamman temple.

There, he saw A-1, A-2, A-4, A-5, A-6, A-7, A-9, A-10, A-
36
11, and hundred other villagers gathered. PW-2 witnessed

       Murugesan being tortured. He was hung upside down with

       his leg tied by a rope to a borewell situated near the water

       tank. PW-2 then states how Murugesan finally disclosed

       the location of Kannagi who was in the house of PW-23

       (Saroja)       at   Moongilthuraipattu.     Having         got     this

       information, A-1 asked PW-22 (Jayatharasan) to bring the

       vehicle, which was a Tata Sumo Jeep, in which A-5, A-6,

       A-7, A-8, A-9, and A-10 jumped in and also compelled A-

       4   to   sit    with   them,   and   then   they     all    left    for

       Moongilthuraipattu. Murugesan was watched by A-1, A-2

       and others. A-1 and A-2 then forced PW-2 to go back and

       PW-2 further states that he, along with his brother PW-3,

       slept in A-4’s motor shed that night, fearing they will be

       harmed in case Kannagi was not found.
iii.   PW-3 (Palanivel) is the second younger brother of

       Murugesan. In his deposition, PW-3 speaks about A-2

       threatening his father (PW-1) on 03.07.2003 to compel

       PW-1 to bring Murugesan back to Pudukoorapettai village.

       PW-3 has also testified to the fact that A-2 later threatened
37
A-4, asking him to bring Murugesan back to the village,

and that A-4 was the one who, in fact, brought Murugesan

to the village. PW-3 has also spoken about the wrongful

detention of PW-2 (Velmurugan) and his subsequent

release once Murugesan returned. PW-3 further deposed

that A-2 and his men had beaten Murugesan near the

water tank and village temple, which was witnessed by

nearly fifty villagers. PW-3 also confirmed the presence of

A-1, A-2, A-5, A-6, A-7, A-9, A-12, and A-13 at the site

where Murugesan was beaten and tortured. He recollects

seeing that A-4 (Ayyasamy) (A-4, as we know, belongs to

the Dalit community and was the uncle of Murugesan,

who was made an accused by the prosecution, but later

acquitted by the Trial Court) was also tied along with

Murugesan. PW-3 then goes on to speak about the Tata

Sumo being driven by PW-22 coming to the scene and A-

4, A-5, A-6, A-7, A-8, A-9, A-10 boarding the vehicle, which

then headed towards Moongilthuraipattu. Like PW-2, PW-

3 also speaks about returning home later, but he says that

they (PW-2 and PW-3) slept in their backyard at night. He
38
also says that when he returned to the house at around 7

      AM on 08.07.2003, his mother PW-49 (Chinnapillai), A-4,

      PW-16 (Amaravathi) informed him that Murugesan had

      been poisoned and killed.
iv.   PW-15 (Tamilarasi), who is the sister of Murugesan,

      deposed that at around 11 AM on 07.07.2003, Murugesan

      was in her house in Vannangudikadu village. Later when

      she   found   him   missing,   she   along   with   PW-16

      (Amaravathi-who also lived in Vannangudikadu village),

      proceed for Pudukoorapettai, the village of Murugesan.

      Once they reached the village she saw A-2, A-5 and A-12

      beating Murugesan, and hurling casteist abuses at him.

      PW-15 further says that there was a huge crowd of

      villagers also present at the spot. Later when Murugesan

      finally disclosed the location of Kannagi as he could not

      stand the torture, a Tata Sumo vehicle was brought to the

      spot, in which some of the accused went to bring Kannagi.

      PW-15 along with PW-2, PW-3, PW-16, and PW-49 then

      returned home. The next day i.e. 08.07.2003, PW-15 was

      told by PW-16 and PW-49 that Murugesan had been killed.
39
v.    PW-16 (Amaravathi), the aunt of Murugesan, has not fully

      confirmed the prosecution story. She only states that she

      saw Murugesan in PW-15’s house, where he told PW-16

      that he had not borrowed any money from A-2. She denies

      any knowledge of the events that took place thereafter, and

      states that she was informed of the death of Murugesan

      by other persons. This witness was also declared, what we

      call ‘hostile’.
vi.   PW-49 (Chinnapillai), the step-mother of Murugesan, is

      the star witness of the prosecution. She states that A-2

      threatened her husband, PW-1, to bring back Murugesan,

      on 03.07.2003, and then how her husband PW-1 left the

      village to find Murugesan but returns without Murugesan.

      She further deposes that how again, on 07.07.2003, A-2

      threatened PW-1 to bring back Murugesan and PW-1

      again left the village in search of Murugesan and returned

      on 08.07.2003, after the death of Murugesan and Kannagi.

      PW-49 further testified that it was A-4 who finally brought

      Murugesan to the village. She specifically identified A-2,

      A-3, A-8, A-10, A-13 as the accused who had beaten and
40
tortured her son near the temple. PW-49 also states that

            A-2, A-6, A-7, A-8, A-10, A-12 assaulted A-4 and

            compelled him to get into the Tata Sumo vehicle which was

            requisitioned to bring Kannagi. Thereafter, they forced

            PW-49 to leave the place.
41.   So far, the following facts emerge from the testimonies

      reproduced above:
i.    On 03.07.2003, A-2 (Maruthupandiyan) threatened PW-1

            (Samikannu) to bring back Murugesan. PW-1 goes to his

            sister-in-law’s house where he met Murugesan and asked

            Murugesan to send Kannagi to her parental home. On the

            same day, PW-1 returns to his village.
ii.   On 07.07.2003, A-2 again threatened PW-1 to bring

            Murugesan back to the village, and PW-1 once again

            leaves his village in search of Murugesan. But this time,

            he could not find Murugesan and fearing that A-2 would

            harm him if he returns without Murugesan, PW-1 did not

            return to his village that day.
41
iii.     On 07.07.2003, A-2 also threatened A-4 (Ayyasamy) to

                bring Murugesan back to the village and it was A-4 who

                finally brought Murugesan back to the village

       iv.      Murugesan was battered and tortured by A-1, A-2 and

                their men in order to elicit the location of Kannagi, which

                he ultimately revealed after he was unable to bear the

                torture. Many villagers were present when all this was

                happening.
v. A Tata sumo vehicle, driven by PW-22 (Jayatharasan),

                went to find Kannagi and bring her back to the village.
42.   It is from this point onwards that the case depends mainly on

      the testimony of PW-49 (Chinnapillai), who is the step-mother of

      Murugesan, and an eyewitness. She is the most important

      witness, as she has seen the macabre act of the actual poisoning

      of the two innocent lives. Although, PW-16 (Amaravathi), the

      aunt of Murugesan, was also produced by the prosecution as an

      eye-witness, but she has turned hostile and denies even being

      present on the spot.
43.   PW-49, all the same, states that after PW-2, PW-3, PW-15, PW-
16 and she were compelled to leave the place where Murugesan
42
was tortured, they returned home. At dawn on 08.07.2003, PW-

16 and PW-49 went near the temple, but did not find Murugesan

there. PW-49 heard some villagers saying that Murugesan would

be poisoned. PW-49 and PW-16 ran through the temple when

they heard a noise. They followed the sound which led them to a

place where PW-49 saw Murugesan tied to a tree in a cashew

grove. She says that A-4 was also tied to a tree. PW-49 further

states that barring A-14 and A-15, all the accused were present

there. She specifically states that A-2 poured poison down her

son’s throat. She tried to stop A-2 but was held back by the

accused. After A-2 had administered poison to Murugesan, PW-

49 fainted and it was PW-16 who sprinkled water on her face to

bring her back to consciousness. PW-49 then states that she

immediately went to the Virudhachalam police station, but no

one listened to her. On the contrary, she was given casteist slurs

and driven away. After she returned home, PW-1 also came back.

Then, A-3 and others told them that Murugesan’s body had been

set ablaze. Upon hearing this, PW-49, PW-1, PW-15 went to the

place where Murugesan’s body was being burnt. All that they

could recover was a ring that Murugesan used to wear.
43
44.   From a perusal of the evidence, it is also clear that the accused

      before us had brought Kannagi to Pudukoorapettai village, where

      she was also killed by administration of poison along with

      Murugesan.
45.   In the present case, PW-49, who is an eyewitness, was not cited

      as a witness in the charge-sheet submitted by the CBI. What she

      had said before the police during investigation under
Section 161
CrPC is what she later deposed more or less as a witness in the

      Court. There may be some discrepancies in PW-49’s deposition

      but on overall consideration of the evidence, these will be of no

      help to the defence.
46.   The prosecution, however, was not confident that this witness

      would withstand the cross-examination, considering she was

      uneducated and extremely inarticulate. It was only later during

      the trial that an application was moved on behalf of the

      prosecution under
Section 311
CrPC to summon PW-49 as an

      additional witness, which was allowed, and PW-49 was made a

      prosecution witness. This order of the Sessions Court was
44
challenged before the High Court by none other than PW-14, who

     prayed that PW-49 ought to be examined as a ‘Court witness’

     rather than a prosecution witness. PW-1 approached the High

     Court with this prayer because the apprehensions weighing in

     his mind were that if his wife (PW-49, Chinnapillai) is examined

     as a prosecution witness, she may be declared hostile, and the

     benefit thereof would ultimately be availed by the accused.

     However, the High Court dismissed PW-1’s petition and affirmed

     the decision of the Trial Court summoning Chinnapillai as a

     prosecution        witness.      The     High     Court      held   that   these

     apprehensions have to be disregarded for the reason that the

     Trial Court is empowered under
Section 165
of the Evidence Act

     to take care of any apprehensions as raised by PW-1 regarding

     PW-49 turning hostile.
Prosecution Witness and Court Witness, and
Section 311
CrPC and
Section 165
of the Evidence Act




4 PW-49 is the wife of PW-1 and step-mother of the deceased Murugesan
45
47.   Before moving further, we consider it necessary to deal with the

      law relating to
section 311
CrPC under which PW-49 was

      summoned as a witness.
Section 311
CrPC reads as follows:
“311.    Power to summon material
                  witness, or examine person present.—
                  Any Court may, at any stage of any inquiry,
                  trial or other proceeding under this Code,
                  summon any person as a witness, or
                  examine any person in attendance, though
                  not summoned as a witness, or recall and
                  re-examine any person already examined;
                  and the Court shall summon and examine
                  or recall and re-examine any such person if
                  his evidence appears to it to be essential to
                  the just decision of the case.”


       This
Section 311
of CrPC provides wide powers to a Criminal

       Court, to do the following:
i.     Summon any person as a witness, or

           ii.    Examine any person present in court, though not

                  summoned as witness, or
iii.   Recall and re-examine any person already examined

      The above powers can be exercised ‘at any stage of any inquiry,

      trial or other proceeding’ under the
CrPC
. The provision can be
46
divided into two parts. The word ‘may’ is used in the first part of

      the section which grants the Court the discretion to summon a

      witness. In contrast, the second part of the Section uses the word

      ‘shall’ which casts a duty on the Court to summon and examine

      or recall or re-examine any such person as a witness when it

      appears to the Court that it is essential to do so for a just decision

      in the case. In other words, the second part is mandatory, and

      Courts are obligated to exercise their powers under
Section 311
CrPC when the evidence of any person is essential for a just

      decision of the case. (See:
Jamatraj Kewalji Govani v. State of

      Maharashtra
1967 SCC OnLine SC 19)
48.   As is clear from the language of the provision itself, there is a

      wide discretion with the Courts under
Section 311
CrPC. These

      powers can be exercised suo moto or on an application moved by

      either side. After all, the object is that the Court must not be

      deprived of the benefit of any valuable evidence. It is absolutely

      necessary that the Court must be apprised of the best evidence

      available. Thus, Courts have been given wide powers to decide

      on their own if a witness is required to be called or recalled for

      examination or re-examination. This power under
Section 311
47
CrPC can be invoked at any stage of the trial, even after the

closing of the evidence.
Section 311
CrPC can also be read along

with
Section 165
of the Evidence Act, as the powers of the Court

under
Section 165
of the Evidence Act are complementary to
Section 311
of CrPC. As discussed above, powers under
Section

311
CrPC can either be exercised on an application moved by

either side to the case or suo moto by the Court. In case a person

is not listed as a witness in the charge-sheet but later, the

prosecution desires to bring that person as an additional

prosecution witness, then the prosecution can move an

application to bring this person as a prosecution witness. It is

then for the Court to decide whether such a person is required

as a witness or not. If the Court finds that such a person should

have been examined as a prosecution witness and he/she was

omitted from the list of witnesses due to some oversight, mistake

or for any other reason, the Court may allow the application and

such a person can be examined as a prosecution witness.

Thereafter, the normal course of examination-in-chief, cross-

examination, etc. would follow as per the procedure. On the other

hand, when the Court calls a person as a Court witness, there
48
are some restrictions regarding the cross-examination of such

      witness.
49.   In a case where neither party is interested in examining a person

      as a witness yet the Court feels that the evidence of such a person

      is necessary for a just decision, the Court though cannot compel

      either the prosecution or the defence to call a witness, but it can

      invoke its power under
Section 311
CrPC, read with
Section 165
of the Evidence Act and call such a person as a Court witness.

      Whether a person is required to be examined as a witness for a

      just decision is again a question which has to be decided by the

      Court on the basis of the facts of that particular case. (See:
Rama Paswan v. State of Jharkhand
(2007) 11 SCC 191)
50.   As far as cross-examination of a Court witness is concerned, no

      party can claim cross-examination of a Court witness as a matter

      of right. A Court witness can only be examined with the leave of

      the Court [See:
Zahira Habibullah Sheikh & Anr. v. State of

      Gujarat & Ors.
(2006) 3 SCC 374 and Jamatraj (Supra)].

      Where a Court witness says something prejudicial to any party,

      then such a party must be allowed to cross-examine that

      witness.
49
51.   Also, as discussed earlier, Court witnesses can be cross-
examined by either side but only with the leave of the Court.

      Further, the cross-examination is to be restricted only to what

      was stated by this witness in his/her reply to the questions of

      the Court, and a Court witness cannot be contradicted to his/her

      previous statements made before the police i.e. statements under
section 161
of CrPC. The proviso to
section 162(1)
5
of CrPC makes

      it very clear that only prosecution witnesses can be contradicted

      against their previous
Section 161
CrPC statements. Under the

      proviso to
Section 162(1)
of CrPC,
Section 161
CrPC statements

      of any prosecution witness can be used by the defence to

      contradict such a witness during the cross-examination. The

      prosecution may also contradict its own witness during cross-

      examination regarding the previous statements made before the


 5 162. Statements to police not to be signed: Use of statements in evidence.


 (1)No statement made by any person to a police officer in the course of an investigation under
 this Chapter, shall, if reduced to writing, be signed by the person making it; nor shall any such
 statement or any record thereof, whether in a police diary or otherwise, or any part of such
 statement of record, be used for any purpose, save as hereinafter provided, at any inquiry or trial
 in respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement was made:
Provided that when any witness is called for the prosecution in such inquiry or trial whose
 statement has been reduced into writing as aforesaid, any part of his statement, if duly proved,
 may be used by the accused, and with the permission of the Court, by the prosecution, to
 contradict such witness in the manner provided by
section 145
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872
 (1 of 1872); and when any part of such statement is so used, any part thereof may also be used
 in the re-examination of such witness, but for the purpose only of explaining any matter referred
 to in his cross-examination.
50
police, but again it can only be done with the leave of the Court.

     [See:
Mahabir Mandal & Ors. v. State of Bihar
(1972) 1 SCC

     748, Dipakbhai Jagdishchandra Patel v. State of Gujarat &

     Anr. (2019) 16 SCC 547]

          All the same, none of these restrictions apply to the Court,

     which has wide power under
Section 165
of the Evidence Act to

     ask any questions. The Courts are not barred from putting

     questions which may contradict the witness with the previous

     statements made before the police. The special powers of the

     Court under
Section 165
of the Evidence Act are not impaired or

     controlled by the provisions of
Section 162
of the CrPC.
(See:
Raghunandan v. State of U.P.
(1974) 4 SCC 186)
52. The powers of a Court under
Section 165
of the Evidence Act and

     the importance of
Section 165
in the meaningful conduct of a

     trial is brilliantly explained by Justice O. Chinnappa Reddy with

     distinctive clarity of his letters in
Ram Chander v. State of

     Haryana
(1981) 3 SCC 191:
“What is the true role of a Judge trying a
                 criminal case? Is he to assume the role of a
                 referee in a football match or an umpire in a
                 cricket match, occasionally answering, as
                 Pollock and Maitland [ Pollock and Maitland :
51
The History of English Law] point out, the
question “How is that”, or, is he to, in the
words of Lord Denning “drop the mantle of a
Judge and assume the robe of an advocate?”
[Jones v. National Coal Board, (1957) 2 All ER
155 : (1957) 2 WLR 760] Is he to be a spectator
or a participant at the trial? Is passivity or
activity to mark his attitude? If he desires to
question any of the witnesses, how far can he
go? Can he put on the gloves and ‘have a go’
at the witness who he suspects is lying or is
he to be soft and suave? These are some of
the questions which we are compelled to ask
ourselves in this appeal on account of the
manner in which the Judge who tried the case
put questions to some of the witnesses.
2. The adversary system of trial being what it
is, there is an unfortunate tendency for a
Judge presiding over a trial to assume the role
of a referee or an umpire and to allow the trial
to develop into a contest between the
prosecution and the defence with the
inevitable distortions flowing from combative
and competitive elements entering the trial
procedure. If a criminal court is to be an
effective instrument in dispensing justice, the
presiding Judge must cease to be a spectator
and a mere recording machine. He must
become a participant in the trial by evincing
intelligent active interest by putting questions
to witnesses in order to ascertain the truth. As
one of us had occasion to say in the past:
“Every criminal trial is a voyage of
     discovery in which truth is the
     quest. It is the duty of a presiding
     Judge to explore every avenue open
     to him in order to discover the truth
52
and to advance the cause of justice.
For that purpose he is expressly
                        invested by
Section 165
of the
                        Evidence Act with the right to put
                        questions to witnesses. Indeed the
                        right given to a Judge is so wide that
                        he may, ask any question he
                        pleases, in any form, at any time, of
                        any witness, or of the parties about
                        any fact, relevant or irrelevant.
Section 172(2)
of the Code of
                        Criminal Procedure enables the
                        court to send for the police-diaries in
                        a case and use them to aid it in the
                        trial. The record of the proceedings
                        of the Committing Magistrate may
                        also be perused by the Sessions
                        Judge to further aid him in the trial.”
3. With such wide powers, the court must
                   actively participate in the trial to elicit the
                   truth and to protect the weak and the
                   innocent. It must, of course, not assume the
                   role of a prosecutor in putting questions. The
                   functions of the Counsel, particularly those of
                   the Public Prosecutor, are not to be usurped by
                   the judge, by descending into the arena, as it
                   were. Any questions put by the Judge must be
                   so as not to frighten, coerce, confuse or
                   intimidate the witnesses...”
53.   Justice O. Chinnappa Reddy then goes on to say that a judge can

      “ask any question, in any form, at any time, of any witness, or of

      the parties, about any fact, relevant or irrelevant”. But then while
53
doing this the Judge must take both the prosecution and the

      defence with him.
54.   In the present case, in our opinion, the High Court was right in

      dismissing the apprehensions of PW-1 that the prosecution

      would get PW-49 declared hostile to the benefit of the accused.
These apprehensions were not well-founded. PW-49 is an

      eyewitness, she ought to have been made a prosecution witness

      in the first instance. Theoretically speaking, the Trial Court could

      have called her as a Court witness, in light of the facts of the

      present case, as her evidence was absolutely essential for the just

      decision of the case. All the same, before the Trial Court could

      have done it, the prosecution itself moved an application to

      summon her as a prosecution witness and therefore, in our

      opinion, the Trial Court rightly made her a prosecution witness

      by allowing such an application. In the present case, PW-49 did

      not support the case of prosecution on some aspects, such as

      the role of A-4 and A-9 (Dalits who were made accused), yet her

      evidence in respect of other accused was correctly relied upon by

      the Trial Court in convicting the other accused.
54
The findings of the Court on the role of A-14 & A-15 - the

      Police Officers
55.   Now coming to the role of A-14 (K.P. Tamilmaran) and A-15 (M.

      Sellamuthu), who were the Sub-Inspector and Inspector,

      respectively, of the Virudhachalam police station at the relevant

      point of time.
56.   A-14 and A-15 were convicted by the Trial Court under
Sections

      217
&
218
of IPC and
Sections 3(2)(i)
&
4
of SC/ST Act. However,

      the High Court acquitted A-14 for offences under Sections 218

      and
Section 3(2)(i)
of SC/ST Act. Whereas conviction and

      sentence under other provisions were upheld by the High Court.
57.   Before we proceed to examine their role, it is necessary to state

      that the police station, where these two officers were posted and

      which has the jurisdiction of the village, is not very far from the

      village in any case as noticed by the High Court, it was about 3

      kilometres from the village. It is very difficult to believe that a

      dastardly double murder takes place in the village, and those in-

      charge of the police station remain unaware of the crime. To the

      contrary, it has come in the evidence that the police refused to

      lodge the FIR against the accused villagers belonging to the
55
Vanniyar community, when the incident was reported by a Dalit

      (PW-49). Further, as stated above, even though the incident

      takes place on 07/08.07.2003, the police only registered the FIR

      on 17.07.2003 i.e. after a delay of nine days, after political

      pressure and the news having caught the attention of Press and

      the Media.
58.   PW-2, PW-3, PW-15, PW-49 have all spoken about going to the

      Virudhachalam police station but being driven out after being

      given casteist slurs by the policemen who were there.
59.   The fact that A-14 and A-15 had knowledge of the incident, and

      that A-15 purposely conducted a wrong and misleading

      investigation, has been disclosed in the statements of PW-38 to

      PW-44 and PW-47 to PW-49, to the CBI, though they did not

      support the prosecution on this aspect in the Court. What they

      said before the Court is as follows:
i. PW-38 (Sundarapandiyan) served as Head Constable in

         Virudhachalam police station between 2002 and 2004. He

         deposed that he had heard of A-14 having visited the scene

         of crime upon receiving information regarding the incident.
56
PW-38 further states that FIR No. 356 of 2003 was registered

       by A-14, and A-15 conducted the investigation.

ii.    PW-39 (Ramamoorthy) also served as Head Constable in

       Virudhachalam police station at the time of the incident. He

       deposed that he was the one who submitted the evidence in

       the case, and that A-14 and A-15 were in-charge of the police

       station at the relevant time.
iii.   PW-40 (Antonysamy) served as Sub-Inspector in the Special

       Branch when the incident dated 07/08.07.2003 had taken

       place. He was informed about the incident by one PW-47

       (Rajendran), Head Constable in the Special Branch. PW-40

       ordered PW-47 to visit the scene of crime. PW-47 told PW-40

       that he had visited the scene of crime, that it was not known

       whether such an occurrence had taken place, and that he

       would inquire further. PW-40 asked as to why the FIR has

       not been lodged yet, to which PW-47 responded that nobody

       has come forward to file a complaint yet.

 iv. PW-41      (Anwar    Baig)   served   as   Head   Constable   in

       Virudhachalam police station at the time of the incident. He

       denies any knowledge of the complaint being received on
57
08.07.2003 or FIR being registered on 17.07.2003, but

     admits that he prepared the Observation Mahazar, to which

     A-15 has attested his signatures.
v.   PW-44 (Dhanapaul) was Sub-Inspector of Avinankudi police

     station at the time of the incident. He deposed that the DSP,

     Virudhachalam asked him to go to Virudhachalam police

     station on 17.07.2003. When PW-44 reached there at around

     4 PM, A-14 and A-15 were on duty. A-15 asked PW-44 to

     assist A-14 with writing work. The FIR No. 356 of 2003 was

     written by PW-44, on which A-14 put his signatures.

vi. PW-47 (Rajendran) worked as Head Constable in the Special

     Branch when the incident occurred. While on duty, he

     overheard people saying that two persons had died by taking

     poison   in   Pudukoorapettai   village.   PW-47   gave   this

     information to his superior PW-40, who asked PW-47 to look

     into the matter. When PW-47 went to Pudukoorapettai village

     and inquired, he claims that nobody gave him correct

     information. When PW-47 asked at the police station, he was

     told that no complaint had been filed.
58
vii. PW-48 (Harishankar), who was a Head Constable in the

         Virudhachalam police station when the double murders took

         place, has said in his deposition that he came to know 3-4

         days after 08.07.2003 that upon receiving information about

         the incident, A-14 had gone to the spot but since nobody

         lodged a complaint, he returned and kept quiet.
60.   It is true that PW-49 has not specifically said that A-14 and A-
15 were the same police officers who refused to register the FIR

      based on her complaint, hurled casteist abuses at her, and sent

      her away on 08.07.2003. Also, though the police witnesses did

      not completely support the prosecution’s case, but from their

      evidence, it is clear that A-14 and A-15 both had knowledge of

      the incident. Considering the proximity of the police station from

      the village, it is also highly unlikely that the police officers in-

      charge of the police station would not have known about the

      incident. Besides, the investigation done by the local police itself

      was motivated and downright dishonest, where the intention was

      to show that the crime was jointly committed by the Vanniyar

      and Dalit community, which is far from the truth. It puts the

      perpetrators   and   the   victim   together   as   accused.    The
59
investigation of CBI discloses quite another story which, by and

      large, has placed the pieces together, except for a few

      discrepancies here and there. The local police had also made PW-

      1, who was none other than the father of the deceased

      Murugesan, as one of the co-accused. This was a ruse.
61.   In this regard, evidence given by PW-32 (Ashokan), who was the

      suspended Village Administrative Officer at the relevant point in

      time, assumes great significance. According to the investigation

      done by A-15, PW-32 was the person before whom A-1 had given

      an extra-judicial confession. According to the version of the local

      police, it was PW-32 who took A-1 to the police station and on

      the basis of the extra-judicial confession given before PW-32 by

      A-1, the FIR was registered by the local police on 17.07.2003.

      However, the deposition of this witness in Court will be of some

      interest.
62.   In   his    examination-in-chief,   which   was   conducted     on

      18.09.2017, PW-32 states that during the relevant time he was

      a Village Administrative Officer, but under suspension. In the

      evening of 16.07.2003, he was asked by the Tahsildar to meet

      the Deputy Superintendent of Police, who further asked PW-32
60
to meet the inspector of Virudhachalam police station i.e. A-15.

      The next day i.e. 17.07.2003, PW-32 went to the police station

      where he met A-15. PW-32 states that A-15 gave him two sheets

      of paper with something written on them already and asked PW-

      32 to write down the same contents on another sheet of paper.

      Initially, PW-32 refused to oblige by saying that he is under

      suspension but thereafter, the Revenue Officer directed PW-32

      to comply. Finally, PW-32 agreed to do what was told to him. A-

      15 gave the sheets of paper with something written on them to

      PW-32 and whatever was written on those papers was copied by

      PW-32 on another piece of paper, which PW-32 was later asked

      to sign. This was the so called ‘extra-judicial confession’ of A-1,

      on the basis of which the FIR was registered. A-1 signed the same

      papers immediately thereafter.
63.   Thus, it is clear from examination-in-chief of PW-32 that neither

      did A-1 make any extra-judicial confession before PW-32, nor

      was A-1 taken to the police station by PW-32 to make him

      surrender. Contrary to this, the version put forth by A-15 in the

      initial investigation was that, at some point in time the

      conscience of A-1 started nagging him, after he had killed his
61
own daughter and thus he made an extra judicial confession

      before a government servant, who was an officer connected with

      the functioning of his village. The reality, however, is quite

      different. It was all planned and executed to perfection, since the

      registration of FIR became a necessity due to political and media

      pressure.
64.   Immediately after his examination-in-chief, PW-32 was cross-
examined on behalf of A-14 and A-15, but PW-32 stood by

      whatever he had deposed in his examination-in-chief.

          Four years after the cross-examination was over, PW-32 was

      recalled for cross-examination on 03.03.2021 on an application

      moved by A-14 & A-15. This time, PW-32 differs from his earlier

      examination-in-chief    and   cross-examination     recorded    on

      18.09.2017, as he now states that he recorded the confession as

      made before him and gave it to the Police.
65.   Similarly, examination-in-chief of PW-34, who was the Village

      Administrative Officer of Virudhachalam, was conducted on

      18.09.2017 where he deposed that at 4:30 pm on 17.07.2003, he

      was summoned by A-15 to the police station. There, A-15 made

      PW-34 affix his signatures on several documents relating to the
62
double murders. These included Mahazar, confessions etc. which

      were shown to be signed at late night of 17.07.2003 and early

      morning of 18.07.2003 at different places.
66.   A-15 was behind this devious and dishonest investigation from

      the very beginning, and he had falsely implicated the family

      members of Murugesan, who belonged to a Schedule Caste

      community of Tamil Nadu. There is conclusive evidence in this

      regard.
67.   The purpose of an investigation, like the purpose of a trial, is to

      reach to the truth. The duty of an Investigating Officer is to

      lawfully collect evidence. In the present case, the Investigating

      Officer (A-15) not only covered evidence but fabricated his own.

      Instead of collecting evidence, he created evidence and tried to

      implicate the innocent and set the guilty loose. In order to fulfil

      his wicked design, he has deliberately and willfully violated the

      mandate of
Sections 154
and
157(1)
of CrPC as well as
Section

      23
and
24
of the Police Act, 1861.
68.
Section 154(1)
of CrPC provides that when an officer-in-charge of

      a   police   station   receives   any information regarding    the

      commission of a cognizable offence, such information shall be
63
reduced in writing and be read over to the informant. The

      relevant part of
section 154(1)
reads as follows:
“154. Information in cognizable cases.—(1)
           Every information relating to the commission of a
           cognizable offence, if given orally to an officer in
           charge of a police station, shall be reduced to
           writing by him or under his direction, and be read
           over to the informant; and every such information,
           whether given in writing or reduced to writing as
           aforesaid, shall be signed by the person giving it,
           and the substance thereof shall be entered in a
           book to be kept by such officer in such form as the
           State Government may prescribe in this behalf…”
69.   Reading of the above provision should not be misunderstood to

      mean that the police is empowered to register FIR only in cases

      where some informant comes forward and provides information

      regarding the commission of a cognizable offence to the police.
Once the police gets information regarding the commission

      of   a   cognizable   offence,   whether    it   is   through   any

      informant/complainant or otherwise, police is empowered to

      register the case and proceed with the investigation. This

      becomes clear from the bare reading of
Sections 156
and
157
of

      CrPC.
Section 156(1)
reads as under:
64
“156. Police officer’s power to investigate
    cognizable case.—(1) Any officer in charge of a
    police station may, without the order of a
    Magistrate, investigate any cognizable case which
    a Court having jurisdiction over the local area
    within the limits of such station would have power
    to inquire into or try under the provisions of Chapter
    XIII.”


Relevant portion of
Section 157(1)
reads as follows:
“157. Procedure for investigation.—(1) If, from
    information received or otherwise, an officer in
    charge of a police station has reason to suspect the
    commission of an offence which he is empowered
    under
section 156
to investigate, he shall forthwith
    send a report of the same to a Magistrate
    empowered to take cognizance of such offence upon
    a police report and shall proceed in person, or shall
    depute one of his subordinate officers not being
    below such rank as the State Government may, by
    general or special order, prescribe in this behalf, to
    proceed, to the spot, to investigate the facts and
    circumstances of the case, and, if necessary, to
    take measures for the discovery and arrest of the
    offender...”
                                    (Emphasis Supplied)


    The above provisions make it very clear that where an officer-
in-charge of a police station, from information received or

otherwise, has reason to suspect that a cognizable offence has
65
been committed, he shall forthwith send a report to a Magistrate

and shall start the investigation.
A Constitution Bench of this Court in Lalita Kumari v.
Govt. of U.P. (2014) 2 SCC 1 made it absolutely clear that an

FIR can be registered even if there is no formal informant. In fact,

it is obligatory for police to register the FIR when they receive any

information which is sufficient to suspect that some cognizable

offence has been committed. This is exactly what was said by this

Court:
“97. The Code contemplates two kinds of FIRs: the
    duly signed FIR under
Section 154(1)
is by the
    informant to the officer concerned at the police
    station. The second kind of FIR could be which is
    registered by the police itself on any information
    received or other than by way of an informant
    [
Section 157(1)
] and even this information has to be
    duly recorded and the copy should be sent to the
    Magistrate forthwith. The registration of FIR either
    on the basis of the information furnished by the
    informant under
Section 154(1)
of the Code or
    otherwise under
Section 157(1)
of the Code is
    obligatory…”

    It is not the case that Lalita Kumari (Supra) had made the

registration of FIR obligatory for the first time; it was always there

in the statute. Thus, even in the absence of a formal informant,
66
the police is duty-bound to register the case whenever they

receive any information regarding the commission of a cognizable

offence.
In the present case, as discussed earlier, there is no doubt

that A-14 and A-15 had the information regarding the death of

Murugesan and Kannagi on the day of the incident itself i.e. on

08.07.2003. However, they did not register the FIR, thereby

acting in violation of the provisions of law. Their defence that

nobody came forward to lodge a complaint for registration of FIR

cannot be accepted for two reasons. Firstly, when members from

Murugesan’s family went to the police station to register an FIR,

they were rebuffed and were given caste-based abuses. Thus,

their plea that nobody came forward to lodge a complaint is

unsustainable in light of the facts of the case. Secondly, even if

we assume for the sake of argument that nobody went to the

police station to report the double murders, it was the duty of A-
14 and A-15 to register the FIR as it cannot be doubted that they

had information regarding the crime. Hence, their defence is

unacceptable in light of the law as well as the facts of the case,

and has rightly been disbelieved by the High Court.
67
70.   When public, political, and media pressure builds up, A-15 (nine

      days after the double murders had taken place), manufactures

      an extra-judicial confession of A-1 and registers the FIR against

      four Dalits (family members of Murugesan) and four Vanniyars.

      A-15 then went further and manufactured the confessions of the

      other accused. These facts are particularly glaring in light of the

      fact that A-15 knew about the incident right from the date of its

      occurrence i.e. 08.07.2003, but still took no action and made no

      effort whatsoever to uncover the truth.
71.   We have examined the provisions of law and the facts of the case,

      particularly   the   role   of   A-15     in   detail.   Mr.   Gopal

      Sankaranarayanan, the learned Senior Counsel for A-15 would

      argue that at worst, the case of A-15 can be treated on the same

      footing as that of A-14, who has been acquitted of charges under
Section 3(2)(i)
of the SC/ST Act and
Section 218
of IPC though

      convicted under other charges. All the same, we see no reason

      how that can be done.
72.
Sections 217
and
218
of IPC read as under:
“217. Public servant disobeying direction
             of law with intent to save person from
             punishment or property from forfeiture.—
68
Whoever, being a public servant, knowingly
            disobeys any direction of the law as to the way
            in which he is to conduct himself as such public
            servant, intending thereby to save, or knowing
            it to be likely that he will thereby save, any
            person from legal punishment, or subject him to
            a less punishment than that to which he is
            liable, or with intent to save, or knowing that he
            is likely thereby to save, any property from
            forfeiture or any charge to which it is liable by
            law, shall be punished with imprisonment of
            either description for a term which may extend
            to two years, or with fine, or with both.”

            “218. Public servant framing incorrect
            record or writing with intent to save
            person from punishment or property from
            forfeiture.—Whoever, being a public servant,
            and being as such public servant, charged with
            the preparation of any record or other writing,
            frames that record or writing in a manner
            which he knows to be incorrect, with intent to
            cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will
            thereby cause, loss or injury to the public or to
            any person, or with intent thereby to save, or
            knowing it to be likely that he will thereby save,
            any person from legal punishment, or with
            intent to save, or knowing that he is likely
            thereby to save, any property from forfeiture or
            other charge to which it is liable by law, shall
            be punished with imprisonment of either
            description for a term which may extend to
            three years, or with fine, or with both.
(Emphasis provided)
73.   Here, we would also like to reproduce the provisions of SC/ST

      Act under which both the policemen (A-14 and A-15) were
69
convicted by the Trial Court. The relevant portions of
sections

3(2)(i)
and
4
of SC/ST Act are as follows:
“3.     Punishments        for    offences     of
       atrocities.—
             …..
(2) Whoever, not being a member of a
       Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe,—
(i) gives or fabricates false evidence
       intending thereby to cause, or knowing it to be
       likely that he will thereby cause, any member of
       a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe to be
       convicted of an offence which is capital by the
       law for the time being in force shall be punished
       with imprisonment for life and with fine; and if
       an innocent member of a Scheduled Caste or a
       Scheduled Tribe be convicted and executed in
       consequence of such false or fabricated
       evidence, the person who gives or fabricates
       such false evidence, shall be punished with
       death;”

       “4. Punishment for neglect of duties.—(1)
       Whoever, being a public servant but not being a
       member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled
       Tribe, wilfully neglects his duties required to be
       performed by him under this Act and the rules
       made thereunder, shall be punishable with
       imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
       than six months but which may extend to one
       year.
(2) The duties of public servant referred to in
       sub-section (1) shall include—
(a) to read out to an informant the information
       given orally, and reduced to writing by the
       officer in charge of the police station, before
       taking the signature of the informant;
70
(b) to register a complaint or a First Information
            Report under this Act and other relevant
            provisions and to register it under appropriate
            sections of this Act;
(c) to furnish a copy of the information so
            recorded forthwith to the informant;
(d) to record the statement of the victims or
            witnesses;
(e) to conduct the investigation and file charge
            sheet in the Special Court or the Exclusive
            Special Court within a period of sixty days, and
            to explain the delay if any, in writing;
(f) to correctly prepare, frame and translate any
            document or electronic record;
(g) to perform any other duty specified in this Act
            or the rules made thereunder:..”
                                          (Emphasis provided)
74.   Analyzing the above-quoted provisions of law in light of the facts

      of the case, the following position would emerge:
(a) A-14 (K.P Tamilmaran) and A-15 (M. Sellamuthu) both had

        committed the offences under
Section 217
IPC and
Section 4
of the SC/ST Act as they neglected their duties and disobeyed

        the law by not registering the FIR at the first instance with

        the intention to save the culprits.
(b) Now, coming to the role of A-15. Like A-14, A-15 too is guilty

        of offences under
section 217
of the IPC and under
section 4
of the SC/ST Act but, in addition to these wrongdoings, it is
71
also borne out from the record that it was A-15 who was the

main architect behind the FIR dated 17.07.2003, which

falsely implicated the four members of Schedule Caste

community. Further, it was A-15 who was in-charge of the

investigation which led to the filing of the chargesheet against

the innocent persons belonging to Dalit community. There is

no doubt that A-15 did this entire exercise to absolve culprits

belonging to the Vanniyar community of their complicity in

the crime, and he knowingly and deliberately falsely

implicated some of the Dalits in an offence punishable with

death. Evidence, as discussed earlier, makes it clear that A-
15 manufactured the extra-judicial confessions and evidence

and thereafter, filed the chargesheet against Dalits on the

basis of that evidence. Hence, the High Court rightly upheld

the conviction of A-15 under
Sections 217
,
218
of IPC and
Sections 4
,
3(2)(i)
of the SC/ST Act and the sentence of life

imprisonment. There is no doubt in our mind that A-15 is

guilty of the offences as held both by the Trial Court as well

as the High Court in appeal.
72
75.   We have also looked into the aspect of victim compensation in

      this case. A crime is an act against the State. But a wicked and

      odious crime, as the one we have just dealt with, is the ugly

      reality of our deeply entrenched caste structure. Honour-killing,

      as these are called, must get a strong measure of punishment.

      We are also of the opinion that victim compensation here is

      warranted. We thus award compensation of Rs. 5,00,000/-

      (Rupees Five Lakhs) to PW-1 (Samikannu-father of Murugesan)

      and PW-49 (Chinnapillai – step-mother of Murugesan) jointly, or

      to the nearest of their kins. This compensation is liable to be paid

      by the State of Tamil Nadu to the above-mentioned persons. We

      further clarify that this compensation would be in addition to the

      amount awarded or directed to be paid as compensation by the

      Sessions Court and High Court.
76.   We see no reason to interfere with the impugned judgment of the

      Madras High Court, and these appeals are, accordingly,

      dismissed.
77.   All those appellants, who are on bail, are directed to surrender

      within two weeks from today to undergo their remaining

      sentence.
73
78.   Interim   order(s),   if   any,   stand(s)   vacated.   Interlocutory

      application(s), if any, stand(s) disposed of.
……..……………………………., J.
[SUDHANSHU DHULIA]




                                         ………..…………………………., J.
[PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA]

 April 28, 2025;
New Delhi.