[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Nafees Ahmad vs Soinuddin on 16 April, 2025
1

                                                                                        REPORTBALE
2025 INSC 520
                                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                             CIVIL APPEAL NO.5213/2025
        (@Petition for Special Leave to Appeal (C) No.2511/2018)


        NAFEES AHMAD & ANR.                                                     Appellant(s)

                                                          VERSUS

        SOINUDDIN & ORS.                                                        Respondent(s)

                                                       O R D E R
1.                  Leave granted.
2.                  This appeal arises from the judgment and order passed by the

        High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench dated 4-9-2017

        in Second Appeal No.69/2008, by which the Second Appeal filed by

        the respondents – herein came to be partly allowed and the matter

        was remitted to the First Appellate Court on the ground that the

        First                Appellate   Court   failed   to   comply   with   the   provisions   of
Order 41                 Rule 31 of the Code of Civil Procedure
(
CPC
).
3.                  The High Court, while deciding the Second Appeal, formulated

        the following substantial question of law:-
“Whether it is incumbent upon the Appellate Court to
                            frame the point of determination as per the provisions
                            of
Order 41 Rule 31 CPC
while deciding the first appeal
                            or not?”
4.
Order 41 Rule 31 CPC
reads thus:
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2025.04.21
“Rule 31. Contents, date and signature of judgment.─
   18:12:07 IST
   Reason:                  The judgment of the Appellate Court shall be in writing
                            and shall state ─
(a) the points for determination;
(b) the decision thereon;
(c) the reasons for the decision; and
2
(d) where the decree appealed from is reversed
       or varied, the relief to which the appellant is
       entitled,

       and shall at the time that it is pronounced be signed
       and dated by the Judge or by the Judges concurring
       therein.”
5.     It appears that the High Court relying upon few decisions took

the view that
Order 41 Rule 31 CPC
is mandatory and the failure on

the    part   of    the     Appellate    Court   to   frame    the    points   for

determination as per the provisions of
Order 41 Rule 31 CPC
would

vitiate the entire judgment and make it wholly void.
6.     Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and

having gone through the materials on record, we are in complete

disagreement with the view taken by the High Court.
7.     We propose to follow the dictum as laid by this Court in the

case of
“G. Amalorpavam And Others v. R.C. Diocese of Madurai And

Others”
reported in (2006) 3 SCC 224, wherein this Court observed

that   whether     in   a   particular   case,   there   has   been   substantial

compliance, with the provisions of
Order 41 Rule 31 CPC
should be

determined on the nature of the judgment delivered in each case.

Non-compliance with the provisions, by itself, may not vitiate the

judgment and make it wholly void and may be ignored if there has

been a substantial compliance with it.
8.     We may elaborate the issue a little further from a different

angle.
9.     The Privy Council observed in “Mt. Fakrunisa v. Moulvi Izarus”

reported in AIR 1921 PC 55, at p. 56, as under:
3
“In every appeal it is incumbent upon the appellants
      to show reason why the judgment appealed from should
      be disturbed; there must be some balance in their
      favour when all the circumstances are considered, to
      justify the alteration of the judgment that stands.
      Their Lordships are unable to find that this duty has
      been discharged.”
10    The Privy Council decision referred to above was looked into by

a three-Judge Bench in the case of
“Thakur Sukhpal Singh v. Thakur

Kalyan Singh and Anr.”
reported in (1963) 2 SCR 733, wherein this

Court observed as under:
“With respect, we agree with this and hold that it is
      the duty of the appellant to show that the judgment
      under appeal is erroneous for certain reasons and it
      is only after the appellant has shown this that the
      appellate court would call upon the respondent to
      reply to the contention. It is only then that the
      judgment of the appellate court can fully contain all
      the various matters mentioned in Ruel 31, Order 41.”
11.   This Court observed in
“Sangram Singh v. Election Tribunal,

Kotah, Bhurey Lal Baya”
reported in (1955) 2 SCR 1, at page 8:
“Now a code of procedure must be regarded as such. It
      is procedure, something designed to facilitate justice
      and further its ends: ... Too technical construction
      of sections that leaves no room for reasonable elas-
      ticity of interpretation should therefore be guarded
      against (provided always that justice is done to both
      sides) lest the very means designed for the further-
ance of justice be used to frustrate it.”
12.   The   provisions   of   Rule   31       should   therefore   be   reasonably

construed and should be held to require the various particulars to

be mentioned in the judgment only when the appellant has actually

raised certain points for determination by the Appellate Court, and

not when no such points are raised.
4
13. We must also look into the provisions of Rule 30 of Order 41

for   the   purpose    of    fortifying    our   interpretation         of   Rule    31.
Order 41 Rule 30 CPC
reads thus:
“30. Judgment when and where pronounced.─ (1) The
        Appellate Court, after hearing the parties or their
        pleaders and referring to any part of the proceedings,
        whether on appeal or in the court from whose decree
        the appeal is preferred, to which reference may be
        considered necessary, shall pronounce judgment in open
        Court, either at once or on some future day of which
        notice shall be given to the parties or their
        pleaders.
(2) Where a written judgment is to be pronounced, it
        shall be sufficient if the points for determination,
        the decision thereon and the final order passed in the
        appeal are read out and it shall not be necessary for
        the Court to read out the whole judgment, but a copy
        of the whole judgment shall be made available for the
        perusal of the parties or their pleaders immediately
        after the judgment in pronounced.”
14.   Thus, this Rule does not make it incumbent on the Appellate

Court to refer to any part of the proceedings in the court from

whose   decree   the   appeal      is   preferred.    The     Appellate      Court   can

refer, after hearing the parties and their pleaders, to any part of

these proceedings to which reference be considered necessary. It is

in    the   discretion      of    the   Appellate     Court     to   refer      to   the

proceedings. It is competent to pronounce judgment after hearing

what the parties or their pleaders submit to it for consideration.

It      follows therefore that if the appellant submits nothing for

its   consideration,        the   Appellate   Court    can     decide     the    appeal

without any reference to any proceedings of the courts below and,

in doing so, it can simply say that the appellants have not urged

anything which would tend to show that the judgment and decree

under appeal were wrong. [See :
“Thakur Sukhpal Singh”
(supra)]
5
15.   In the aforesaid view of the matter, we allow this appeal.
16.   The impugned judgment and order of the High Court is set

aside.
17.   Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of.
…………………………………………J
                                             (J.B. PARDIWALA)




                                             …………………………………………J
                                             (R. MAHADEVAN)
NEW DELHI
16TH APRIL, 2025.
va