[Cites
22
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Hussain Ahmed Choudhury vs Habibur Rahman (Dead) Through Lrs on 23 April, 2025
2025 INSC 553                                                REPORTABLE

                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5470 OF 2025
                         (Arising from SLP (C) No. 3056 OF 2016)




          HUSSAIN AHMED CHOUDHURY & ORS.                    ...APPELLANTS



                                         Versus



          HABIBUR RAHMAN (DEAD) THROUGH LRs
          & ORS.                                          ...RESPONDENTS




                                     JUDGMENT
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHANDRESH
Date: 2025.04.23
17:40:19 IST
Reason:
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                            Page 1 of 31
J.B. PARDIWALA, J.
1.   Leave granted.
2.   This appeal arises from the common judgment and order passed by
     the High Court of Guwahati dated 09.10.2015 in Regular Second
     Appeal No. 3 of 2007 and Regular Second Appeal No. 11 of 2007
     respectively by which the High Court allowed both the Second Appeals
     preferred by the respondents herein (original defendants) and thereby
     set aside the judgment and decree passed by the Trial Court as
     affirmed by the First Appellate Court in favour of the appellants herein
     (original plaintiffs).
3.   For the sake of convenience, the appellants herein shall be referred
     to as the original plaintiffs and the respondents herein shall be
     referred to as the original defendants.
A.   FACTUAL MATRIX
4.   The facts giving rise to this appeal may be summarized as under:
i.    A registered Gift Deed dated 26.04.1958 in respect of land
            admeasuring 08 bighas and 06 chatak (which includes the suit
            land admeasuring 04 bighas, 05 katha and 06 chatak), was
            executed by one Haji Abdul Aziz Choudhury (grandfather of the
            original plaintiff) in favour of Siraj Uddin Choudhury (original
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                    Page 2 of 31
plaintiff). The reason for the execution of the Gift Deed being
          that as Abdul Aziz’s son had predeceased him, his grandson,
          Siraj Uddin, would not otherwise have been eligible to inherit
          his grandfather’s property as per Muslim law.
ii.   The appellants herein are the legal heirs of the original plaintiff.
iii.   The grandfather of the original plaintiff passed away in 1971.
iv.    On 05.05.1997, the respondent no. 1 allegedly purchased part
          of the suit land from the original defendant nos. 1 to 6 (brothers
          and sisters of the plaintiff’s deceased father) who, according to
          the plaintiff, had no title or saleable rights over the suit
          property.
v.    The Title Suit, bearing No. 88/1997 was filed by the plaintiff,
          seeking declaration, confirmation of possession and mandatory
          injunction over the suit land. The cause of action for the suit
          arose in 1997 when the defendants started threatening to
          dispossess the plaintiff from the suit property, and did succeed
          in forcibly dispossessing him on 08.05.1999, during the
          pendency of the suit.
vi.    The plaint was accordingly amended on 28.08.1999, to seek
          recovery of possession as the plaintiff was dispossessed during
          pendency of the suit.
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                    Page 3 of 31
vii.   The    Trial   Court   framed    the   following   issues    for   its
          consideration:
“Upon the pleadings of both the sides, the following
                issues were framed:
1. Is there any cause of action for the suit?
2. Is the suit bad for defect of necessary parties?
3. Whether late Haji Abdul Aziz Choudhury,
                   grandfather of the plaintiff as well as predecessor
                   of the defendants, gifted the suit land in favour of
                   the plaintiff by executing registered Gift Deed No.
                   2656      dated     26.04.1958      and    delivered
                   possession?
4. Whether the plaintiff acquired right, title, interest
                   and possession over the suit land on the basis of
                   Gift Deed No. 2656?
5. Whether the defendants threatened the plaintiff
                   to dispossess him, out of the possession of the
                   suit land illegally?
6. Is the plaintiff entitled to a decree as prayed for?
7. To what other relief/reliefs, the parties are
                   entitled to?
--xxx--
Additional Issue:
(1) Is the suit maintainable in law, as well as, on
                facts?”

  viii.   The T.S. No. 88/1997 came to be allowed vide the judgment
          and decree dated 21.05.2001 in favour of the plaintiff, with all
          issues decided in his favour. The Civil Judge, Cachar, Silchar
          was pleased to hold as follows:
“1. That the Gift Deed was validly executed by the
                plaintiff’s grandfather in his favour, as corroborated
                by unimpeachable documentary and oral evidence.
2. The property transferred by virtue of the Gift Deed
                was clearly identifiable by the specific boundary
                description contained in its Schedule and the mis-
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                      Page 4 of 31
description of the Dag numbers did not hamper
              proper identification of the property conveyed.
              Accordingly, the plaintiff had acquired right, title
              interest and possession over the suit land by virtue
              of the said deed of gift.
3. Defendants no. 1 to 6 had no saleable interest to
              sell the suit land. Furthermore, the land covered by
              the alleged subsequent sale deed was distinct and
              had no relation with the suit land.”



   ix.    Two separate appeals against the judgment and decree dated
          21.05.2001 were preferred:
a. Title Appeal No. 15/2001 by respondent no. 21 herein
             (original defendant no. 2),
          b. Title Appeal No. 17/2001 by respondent no.1 herein
             (original defendant no. 14, being the alleged subsequent
             purchaser).
x.    The First Appellate Court vide two different judgments, both
          dated 17.06.2006, affirmed the findings of the Trial Court that
          the Gift Deed was validly executed in favour of the plaintiff and
          possession was handed over to the plaintiff through his mother.
          It was further reiterated that despite mis-description of the suit
          land in the Gift Deed, the Schedule land was clearly
          identifiable, and that the plaintiff had proved his title thereon.
xi.    The original defendants being dissatisfied with the judgment
          and order passed by the First Appellate Court preferred two
          second appeals in the High Court.
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                   Page 5 of 31
xii.   The High Court vide its common judgment and order dated
          09.10.2015 affirmed the finding of the Trial Court and the
          Appellate Court that: (i) the Gift Deed was validly executed and
          delivery of possession in pursuance thereof had taken place; (ii)
          that the mis-description was a mere irregularity that did not
          affect the identity of the property.
xiii.   The relevant observations made by the High court in para 29
          and 30 respectively of its impugned judgment reads thus:
“29. In the instant case, there is no evidence of any
              oral gift. Both the courts below had held that the gift
              deed, Ext. 1, to be duly executed by the donor, who
              was the grandfather of the plaintiff. The gift deed
              also indicated the purpose for which the gift was
              made, namely, the plaintiff would not have inherited
              any property of the donor as the plaintiff’s father had
              expired during the lifetime Nails of the donor and as
              Risa Msg each under the Mahomedan Law, son of a
              pre-deceased son is not entitled to inherit ancestral
              property. The plaintiff and PW 2, the attesting
              witness, had deposed towards execution of the gift
              deed by the grandfather of the plaintiff and their
              evidence is not impeached in any manner and as
              such, it must be held that the gift deed was duly
              executed by the grandfather of the plaintiff. With
              regard to acceptance of the gift and delivery of
              possession, I am inclined to uphold the view taken
              by the learned courts below that mother of the
              plaintiff had accepted the gift and taken delivery of
              possession. I am Unable to accept the submission
              advanced by Mr. Kalita and Mr. Purkayastna that
              acceptance of the gift by the mother of the plaintiff
              was an afterthought, merely because in the plaint,
              the said fact was not expressly mentioned. Absence
              of any recital in the gift deed that gift was accepted
              and delivery of possession was given will not be of
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                   Page 6 of 31
any consequence in respect of a gift under the
              Mahomedan Law. The learned courts below, on the
              basis of Ext. 2 and Ext, 9, came to the conclusion that
              the aforesaid deeds established that plaintiff was
              delivered possession of the property pursuant to the
              gift. A finding was also recorded by the learned
              courts below that the suit land as described in the
              plaint conforms to the boundary given in Ext, 1 and
              that Dag No. 174 of 2nd R.S. Patia No. 7 and Dag No,
              175 of 2nd R.S. Patta No. 109 are adjacent dags. In
              that view of the matter, the learned courts below
              were justified to hold that there was mis-description
              with regard the dag numbers in the gift deed.
30. When there is no doubt as to the identity of the
              land and there is only mis-description that could be
              treated as a mere irregularity. If no boundaries had
              been given in the gift deed, matter would have been
              different. But in the instant case, both boundaries
              and dag numbers are mentioned and in the
              circumstances of the case, mistakes in the dag
              numbers must be treated as a mere mis-description
              not affecting the identity of the property gifted.”
                                                (Emphasis Supplied)



  xiv.    It appears from the above that although the High Court agreed
          with the two Courts below as regards the Gift Deed being validly
          executed, yet it went on to allow the two second appeals and
          thereby, dismissed the suit of the plaintiffs on the ground that
          in the absence of challenge to the subsequent sale deed and
          omission on the part of the plaintiff to seek the consequential
          relief of cancellation of the sale deed, the plaintiff would be
          disentitled from obtaining a decree declaring his right, title and
          interest over the suit property.
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                   Page 7 of 31
xv.    In the aforesaid context, we may reproduce paras 34, 35, 36
          and 37 respectively of the impugned judgment. The same reads
          thus:
“34. However, there is another facet of the matter.
              Even if the plaintiff was entitled to have right, title
              and interest on the basis of the gift deed, the question
              arises as to whether in absence of any challenge to
              the sale deed, Ext. A, on the basis of which the
              defendant No. 14 had taken possession over a part
              of the suit property, the plaintiff would be entitled to
              the reliefs prayed for in the suit.
35. The plaintiff by way of amendment prayed for
              recovery of khas possession without challenging the
              sale deed. The learned lower appellate court before
              which the question was raised that the plaintiff
              would not be entitled to the reliefs as prayed for in
              absence of the challenge made to the sale deed,
              skirled the issue and did not give any decision on the
              question posed.
36.In Md. Noorul Hoda v. Bibi Raifunnisa
and ors.,
              reported in (1996) 7 SCC 767, the Apex Court had
              laid down that when the plaintiff seeks to establish
              his title to the property which cannot be established
              without avoiding a decree by a court or an instrument
              that stands as an insurmountable obstacle in his
              way, the plaintiff has to seek a declaration and have
              the decree or the instrument cancelled or set aside.
Similar view is taken by the Apex Court in the case
              of Abdul Rahim and ors. v. Sheikh Abdul Zabbar and
              ors., reported in (2009) 6 SCC 140.
37. In the facts of the case, a prayer for cancellation
              of Ext. A as a consequential relief was necessary to
              enable the plaintiff to get a decree declaring his right,
              title and interest. If was incumbent upon the plaintiff
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                     Page 8 of 31
to have challenged the sale deed. It must not be
                forgotten that suit land was mutated in the names of
                the vendors of the sale deed by way of inheritance
                and there was no objection by the plaintiff ~ to such
                mutation. That apart, dag numbers were also
                wrongly given in the gift deed, Ext. 1 and the same
                were not corrected and rectified. Without there being
                any challenge to Ext. A, the learned courts below
                proceeded to embark upon an enquiry to find out
                legality and validity of the sale deed and whether the
                defendant No. 14 could have taken possession of
                land in Dag No. 174 by virtue of such sale deed. The
                exercise undertaken by the courts below was
                impermissible in law. In absence of a declaration
                that the sale deed is invalid in law, which was not
                sought for, learned courts below could not have
                granted a decree declaring right, title and interest in
                favour of the plaintiff and for recovery of khas
                possession from the defendant No. 14 in respect of,
                the land which was sold to him through the sale
                deed, Ext. A.”
5.   In such circumstances
referred to above
, the original plaintiffs are
     here before this Court with the present appeal.
B.   SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS
6.   Mr. Parthiv K. Goswami, the learned senior counsel appearing for the
     plaintiffs vehemently submitted that the High Court committed an
     egregious error in passing the impugned judgment and order. He
     would submit that the High Court erred in setting aside the decree
     passed in favour of the plaintiff on the ground that the consequential
     relief of cancellation of the subsequent sale deed had not been prayed
     for in the suit. He would submit that the plaintiff had acquired right,
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                     Page 9 of 31
title and possession over the suit property by virtue of a prior, validly
     executed and duly registered Gift Deed in 1958, and the said finding
     stands affirmed even in the impugned order. He submitted that the
     alleged subsequent sale deed dated 05.05.1997 which forms the basis
     for the claim of respondent no.1 herein is void-ab-initio and non est on
     account of the fact that it was executed by vendors who were not
     competent to transfer it in terms of
Section 7
of the Transfer of
     Property Act, 1882.
7.   It was argued that a vendor cannot transfer a title to the vendee better
     than what he possesses. It was submitted that once the plaintiff has
     successfully established his right, title and interest over the suit
     property based on a prior instrument, it was not incumbent upon him
     to seek cancellation of the subsequent sale deed which was void-ab-
     initio.
8.   The learned counsel in support of his aforesaid submissions placed
     strong reliance on the decision of this Court in the case of
Sk. Golam
     Lalchand v. Nandu Lal Shaw & Ors.
, reported in 2024 SCC OnLine
     SC 2456.
9.   In the last, it was argued that the subsequent sale deed has been
     otherwise also specifically found by the Civil Judge to have no relation
     to the suit land covered by Dag Nos. 174 and 175 respectively. He
     invited our attention to the following findings recorded by the High
     Court:
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                    Page 10 of 31
“But from Ext.5 (Settlement Map of Mouza Niz Banskandi
           Part-11), it transpires that the said Purchased land has
           no relation with the suit land, covered by dag No.174 and
           Part of dag No.175. Though in the schedule of Ext.A; there
           is mention of sale of 2 bighas 14 kathas 7 chhattaks of
           land in Dag No.174, but the boundary description of the
           land does not refer to any land of Dag No.l74. From the
           Ext.S, it is revealed that land appertaining to Dag No. 174
           situates at a distance from Dag No: 21/22 intervened by
           many plots under different dags and hence both the plot
           of lands cannot be sold by a ·single boundary. The
           boundaries given in the schedule of Ext.A rather refer a
           complete different plot of land near the plot of land
           covered under Dag No.20 of the Said Mouza, i.e. towards
           adjacent South of Dag No.20. It is, therefore, proved that
           the defendant No.14 Habibur Rahman acquired no right,
           title and interest over the suitland appertaining to Dag
           Nos.174/ 175 and he has been possessing the same
           illegally.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
10. The learned counsel submitted that in view of the specific finding
    recorded by the Trial Court that the land covered by the subsequent
    sale deed was distinct and had no relation with the suit land, the High
    Court fell in error in setting aside the decree declaring the right, title
    and interest of the plaintiff over the suit land, more so, in light of the
    fact that the said findings were not disturbed or interfered within the
    impugned order.
11. In such circumstances
referred to above
, the learned counsel prayed
    that there being merit in his appeal, the same may be allowed and the
    impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court be set aside.
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                   Page 11 of 31
C.   SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE DEFENDANTS:
12. Mr. Avijit Roy, the learned counsel appearing for the defendants
     vehemently submitted that no error, not to speak of any error of law,
     could be said to have been committed by the High Court in passing
     the impugned order. The counsel would submit that the High Court
     rightly allowed the two appeals and thereby dismissed the suit
     instituted by the plaintiff on the ground that the plaintiff failed to
     challenge the subsequent sale deed and thus the omission on the part
     of the plaintiff to seek the consequential relief of cancellation of the
     sale deed would disentitle the plaintiff from seeking a declaration as
     regards his right, title and interest over the suit property. The learned
     counsel submitted that the High Court rightly held at para 37 of its
     impugned judgment that without there being any challenge to the sale
     deed, the courts below could not have proceeded to embark upon an
     enquiry to find out the legality and validity of the sale deed and further
     whether the defendant no. 14 i.e., respondent no. 1 herein could have
     taken over the possession of land in Dag No. 174 by virtue of such
     sale deed. The exercise undertaken by the courts below was
     impermissible in law. In the absence of a specific declaration that the
     sale deed is invalid in law, which was not sought for, the courts below
     could not have granted a decree declaring right, title and interest in
     favour of the plaintiff and for recovery of possession of khas from the
     defendant no. 14 i.e., respondent no. 1 herein, in respect of the land
     which was sold to him through the sale deed dated 05.05.1997.
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                    Page 12 of 31
13. The counsel further submitted that under the
Specific Relief Act,
    1963
, (for short, “the Act, 1963”) the aggrieved can seek cancellation
    of a registered instrument on the ground of fraud, by filing a suit
    under
Section 31
. In case a person, without any title, executes a sale
    deed, the real owner may file a suit under
Section 34
of the Act, 1963,
    if his peaceful enjoyment of ownership right is impinged due to the
    said sale. He also argued that the provision of
Section 34
of the Act,
    1963 was not discussed in
Sk. Golam Lalchand
(supra).
14. It was argued that in order to obtain the relief of declaration, the
    plaintiff must establish that (i) the plaintiff at the time of institution
    of the suit was entitled to any legal character or any right to any
    property, (ii) the defendant had denied or was interested in denying
    the character or the title of the plaintiff, (iii) the declaration asked for
    was a declaration that the plaintiff was entitled to a legal character or
    to a right to property, and (iv) the plaintiff was not in a position to
    claim any further relief. In the present case the answering
    respondents/ defendant no. 14 as the purchaser, clearly denied the
    claim of title by the plaintiffs over the suit land.
15. It was also argued that even assuming without admitting that the
    plaintiffs have a legal right over the suit land
,
in that case
, this Court
    in
Ram Rattan v. State of U.P.
reported in (1977) 1 SCC 188 had
    held that a true owner has every right to dispossess or throw out a
    trespasser while he is in the act or process of trespassing but this
    right is not available to the true owner if the trespasser has been
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                     Page 13 of 31
successful in accomplishing his possession to the knowledge of the
    true owner. In such circumstances, the law requires that the true
    owner should dispossess the trespasser by taking recourse to the
    remedies under the law. Therefore, in the instant case, the High Court
    rightly held at para 37 of the impugned judgment that without there
    being any challenge to the sale deed, the courts below could not have
    proceeded to embark upon an enquiry to test the legality and validity
    of the sale deed and whether the defendant no. 14 could have taken
    over the possession of land in Dag No. 174 by virtue of such sale deed.
16. The learned counsel in support of his aforenoted submissions placed
    strong reliance on the following two decisions:
i.
Mohd. Noorul Hoda v. Bibi Raifunnisa
, reported in (1996) 7
          SCC 767.
ii.
Abdul Rahim & Ors v Sk. Abdul Zabar & Ors.
, reported in
          (2009) 6 SCC 160.
17.
In such circumstances
referred to above
, the learned counsel
    appearing for the respondents prayed that there being no merit in the
    appeal, the same may be dismissed.
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                 Page 14 of 31
D.   ANALYSIS
18. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having
     gone through the materials on record, the following question of law
     falls for our consideration:
“Whether the High Court was right in taking the view that the suit of
     the plaintiff for declaration of his title based on a valid Gift Deed should
     fail as the plaintiff omitted to pray for the consequential relief of
     cancellation of the sale deed or a declaration that the same is not
     binding on him?”
19. Before we proceed to answer the question of law as formulated above,
     we must look into
Sections 31
and
34
of the Act, 1963 respectively.
Section 31
reads thus:
“
Section 31
. When cancellation may be ordered.—
            (1) Any person against whom a written instrument is void
            or voidable, and who has reasonable apprehension that
            such instrument, if left outstanding may cause him
            serious injury, may sue to have it adjudged void or
            voidable; and the court may, in its discretion, so adjudge
            it and order it to be delivered up and cancelled.
            (2) If the instrument has been registered under the
Indian
            Registration Act, 1908
(16 of 1908), the court shall also
            send a copy of its decree to the officer in whose office the
            instrument has been so registered; and such officer shall
            note on the copy of the instrument contained in his books
            the fact of its cancellation.”
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                      Page 15 of 31
20. A Full Bench of Madras High Court in
Muppudathi Pillai v.
    Krishnaswami Pillai
reported in 1959 SCC OnLine Mad 5
    considered the scope of Sections 39 and 41 of Specific Relief Act, 1877
    (which are now
Sections 31
and
33
of the Act, 1963). The principle
    entrenched in Section 39 was explained thus:
“The principle is that such document though not
          necessary to be set aside may, if left outstanding, be a
          source of potential mischief. The jurisdiction under S.39
          is, therefore, a protective or a preventive one. It is not
          confined to a case of fraud, mistake, undue influence etc.
          and as it has been stated it was to prevent a document to
          remain as a menace and danger to the party against
          whom under different circumstances it might have
          operated. A party against whom a claim under a
          document might be made is not bound to wait till the
          document is used against him. If that were so he might
          be in a disadvantageous position if the impugned
          document is sought to be used after the evidence
          attending its execution has disappeared. Section 39
          embodies the principle by which he is allowed to
          anticipate the danger and institute a suit to cancel the
          document and to deliver it up to him. The principle of the
          relief is the same as in quia timet actions.”
                                                (Emphasis supplied)
21. It was further laid down as under:
“The provisions of S.39 make it clear that three conditions
          are requisite for the exercise of the jurisdiction to cancel
          an instrument: (1) the instrument is void or voidable
          against the plaintiff; (2) plaintiff may reasonably
          apprehend serious injury by the instrument being left
          outstanding; (3) in the circumstances of the case, the
          Court considers it proper to grant this relief of preventive
          justice. On the third aspect of the question the English
          and American authorities hold that where the document
          is void on its face the Court would not exercise its
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                  Page 16 of 31
jurisdiction while it would if it were not so apparent. In
          India it is a matter entirely for the discretion of the Court”


          “The question that has to be considered depends on the
          first and second conditions set out above. As the principle
          is one of potential mischief, by the document remaining
          outstanding, it stands to reason the executant of the
          document should be either the plaintiff or a person who
          can in certain circumstances bind him. It is only then it
          could be said that the instrument is voidable by or void
          against him. The second aspect of the matter emphasizes
          that principle. For there can be no apprehension if a mere
          third party, asserting a hostile title creates a document.
          Thus, relief under S.39 would be granted only in respect
          of an instrument likely to affect the title of the plaintiff and
          not of an instrument executed by a stranger to that title.”
                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
22.
In
Deccan Paper Mills Company Limited v. Regency Mahavir
    Properties and Others
reported in (2021) 4 SCC 786, this Court
    held that the proceedings under
Section 31
of the Act, 1963 are in
    personam in nature and therefore, any question pertaining to
Section
    31
would be amenable to adjudication by an arbitral tribunal. While
    stating so, this Court explained the ambit and scope of
Section 31
in
    detail and authoritatively held that the expression “any person”
    occurring in this provision does not include a third party but is
    restricted to either a party to the written instrument or any person
    who is bound by a party to the instrument.
Placing reliance on
Muppudathi Pillai
(supra), this Court observed thus:
“19. The Court then continued its discussion as follows :
(
Muppudathi            Pillai
case [
Muppudathi
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                      Page 17 of 31
Pillai v. Krishaswami Pillai
, 1959 SCC OnLine Mad 314 :
(1959) 72 LW 543] , SCC OnLine Mad paras 13-16)

             “13. … The provisions of Section 39 make it clear that
             three conditions are requisite for the exercise of the
             jurisdiction to cancel an instrument : (1) the instrument
             is void or voidable against the plaintiff; (2) plaintiff
             may reasonably apprehend serious injury by the
             instrument being left outstanding; (3) in the
             circumstances of the case the court considers it proper
             to grant this relief of preventive justice. On the third
             aspect of the question the English and American
             authorities hold that where the document is void on its
             face the court would not exercise its jurisdiction while
             it would if it were not so apparent. In India it is a
             matter entirely for the discretion of the court.
14. The question that has to be considered depends
             on the first and second conditions set out above. As
             the principle is one of potential mischief, by the
             document remaining outstanding, it stands to reason
             the executant of the document should be either the
             plaintiff or a person who can in certain circumstances
             bind him. It is only then it could be said that the
             instrument is voidable by or void against him. The
             second aspect of the matter emphasises that principle.
             For there can be no apprehension if a mere third party
             asserting a hostile title creates a document. Thus relief
             under Section 39 would be granted only in respect of
             an instrument likely to affect the title of the plaintiff
             and not of an instrument executed by a stranger to
             that title.
15. Let us take an example of a trespasser purporting
             to convey the property in his own right and not in the
             right of the owner. In such a case a mere cancellation
             of the document would not remove the cloud
             occasioned by the assertion of a hostile title, as such
             a document even if cancelled would not remove the
             assertion of the hostile title. In that case it would be
             the title that has got to be judicially adjudicated and
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                  Page 18 of 31
declared, and a mere cancellation of an instrument
             would not achieve the object.
Section 42
of the Specific
             Relief Act would apply to such a case. The remedy
             under Section 39 is to remove a cloud upon the title,
             by removing a potential danger but it does not
             envisage an adjudication between competing titles.
             That can relate only to instruments executed or
             purported to be executed by a party or by any person
             who can bind him in certain circumstances. It is only
             in such cases that it can be said there is a cloud on
             his title and an apprehension that if the instrument is
             left outstanding it may be a source of danger. Such
             cases may arise in the following circumstances : A
             party executing the document, or a principal in respect
             of a document executed by his agent, or a minor in
             respect of a document executed by his guardian de
             jure or de facto, a reversioner in respect of a document
             executed by the holder of the anterior limited estate, a
             real owner in respect of a document executed by the
             benamidar, etc. This right has also been recognised in
             respect of forged instruments which could be
             cancelled by a party on whose behalf it is purported
             to be executed. In all these cases there is no question
             of a document by a stranger to the title. The title is the
             same. But in the case of a person asserting hostile
             title, the source or claim of title is different. It cannot
             be said to be void against the plaintiff as the term void
             or voidable implies that but for the vitiating factor it
             would be binding on him, that is, he was a party to
             the contract.
16. There is one other reason for this conclusion.
             Section 39 empowers the court after adjudicating the
             instrument to be void to order the instrument to be
             delivered up and cancelled. If the sale deed is or
             purported to have been executed by a party, the
             instrument on cancellation could be directed to be
             delivered over to the plaintiff. If on the other hand such
             an instrument is executed by a trespasser or a person
             claiming adversely to the plaintiff it is not possible to
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                    Page 19 of 31
conceive the instrument being delivered over not to the
              executant but his rival, the plaintiff.”
---xxx---
21. A reading of the aforesaid judgment [
Muppudathi
          Pillai v. Krishaswami Pillai
, 1959 SCC OnLine Mad 314 :
(1959) 72 LW 543] of the Full Bench would make the
          position in law crystal clear. The expression “any person”
          does not include a third party, but is restricted to a party
          to the written instrument or any person who can bind
          such party. Importantly, relief under Section 39 of the
          Specific Relief Act, 1877 would be granted only in respect
          of an instrument likely to affect the title of the plaintiff,
          and not of an instrument executed by a stranger to that
          title. The expression “any person” in this section has been
          held by this Court to include a person seeking derivative
          title from his seller [see
Mohd. Noorul Hoda v. Bibi
          Raifunnisa [Mohd. Noorul Hoda
v. Bibi Raifunnisa,
          (1996) 7 SCC 767] , at p. 771]. The principle behind the
          section is to protect a party or a person having a
          derivative title to property from such party from a
          prospective misuse of an instrument against him. A
          reading of
Section 31(1)
then shows that when a written
          instrument is adjudged void or voidable, the Court may
          then order it to be delivered up to the plaintiff and
          cancelled—in exactly the same way as a suit for
          rescission of a contract under
Section 29
. Thus far, it is
          clear that the action under
Section 31(1)
is strictly an
          action inter parties or by persons who obtained derivative
          title from the parties, and is thus in personam.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
23. The decision in
Sk. Golam Lalchand
(supra), which has been
    canvassed by the counsel appearing on behalf of the plaintiff,
    observed as follows:
“23. A faint effort was made in the end to contend that
          the plaintiff-respondent Nandu Lal had not asked for any
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                   Page 20 of 31
relief of cancellation of the sale deed by which the
            property was purchased by the defendant-appellant S.K.
            Golam Lalchand and, therefore, is not entitle to any relief
            in this suit. The argument has been noted only to be
            rejected for the simple reason that
Section 31
of
            the Specific Relief Act, 1963 uses the word ‘may’ for
            getting declared the instrument as void which is not
            imperative in every case, more particularly when the
            person is not a party to such an instrument.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
24. This observation made in
Sk. Golam Lalchand
(supra) must
    necessarily be understood in the context of our preceding discussion.
All that has been stated therein is that as
Section 31
of the Act, 1963
    uses the word “may”, it is not a mandate, even as regards the parties
    to the instrument or the persons claiming through or under them, to
    seek for the cancellation of an instrument which is otherwise void and
    therefore, it cannot be contended that a stranger to that instrument
    must necessarily seek for its cancellation. By no stretch of
    imagination can this be construed to mean that when there exists an
    instrument with respect to the same property but executed by some
    other person, the plaintiff despite being a stranger to that instrument
    would fall under the scope of “any person” in
Section 31
of the Act,
    1963.
25. Having explained the scope of
Section 31
, we now deem it necessary
    to examine
Section 34
of the Act, 1963, which reads thus:
“Section 34. Discretion of court as to declaration of
            status or right.—
            Any person entitled to any legal character, or to any right
            as to any property, may institute a suit against any
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                    Page 21 of 31
person denying, or interested to deny, his title to such
             character or right, and the court may in its discretion
             make therein a declaration that he is so entitled, and the
             plaintiff need not in such suit ask for any further relief:
Provided that no court shall make any such
             declaration where the plaintiff, being able to seek further
             relief than a mere declaration of title, omits to do so.
Explanation.—A trustee of property is a “person
             interested to deny” a title adverse to the title of some one
             who is not in existence, and whom, if in existence, he
             would be a trustee.”
26. Section 34 entitles a person to approach the appropriate court for a
    declaration, if that person is entitled to (i) any legal character or (ii)
    any right as to any property. “Legal character” and “right to property”
    are used disjunctively so that either of them, exclusively, may be the
    basis of a suit. The disjunctive ‘or’ cannot be read as a conjunctive
    ‘and’.
27. The object of the proviso to Section 34 is to obviate the necessity for
    multiple suits by preventing a person from getting a mere declaration
    of right in one suit and then subsequently seeking another remedy
    without which the declaration granted in the former suit would be
    rendered otiose. However, the answer to the question whether it was
    incumbent upon the plaintiff to ask for further relief must depend on
    the facts of each case and such relief must be appropriate to and
    consequent upon the right or title asserted. “Further relief” must be a
    relief flowing directly or necessarily from the declaration sought, i.e.,
    the relief should not only be capable of being granted but of being
    enforced by the court and such relief should be necessary to make the
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                     Page 22 of 31
declaration fruitful. The relief must also be such that it is not
    automatically granted to the plaintiff by virtue of the declaration
    already sought for.
28. The words used in proviso to Section 34 are “further relief” and “no
    other relief”. Since, a further relief must flow necessarily from the relief
    of declaration, if such further relief is remote and is not connected in
    any way with the cause of action which has accrued in favour of the
    plaintiffs, then there is no need to claim a further relief and the proviso
    to Section 34 will not be a bar. All that the proviso forbids is a suit for
    pure declaration without necessary relief where the plaintiff being able
    to seek such a relief, has omitted to do so. The proviso must not be
    construed in a manner which compels the plaintiff to sue for any and
    all the reliefs which could possibly be granted to him. The plaintiff
    must not be debarred from obtaining a relief that he wants for the
    reason that he has failed to seek a relief which is not directly flowing
    from the relief of declaration already sought for.
29. Where the executant of a deed wants it to be annulled, he has to seek
    cancellation of the deed under
Section 31
of the Act, 1963. But if a
    non-executant seeks annulment of a deed, he has to only seek a
    declaration that the deed is invalid, or non est, or illegal or that it is
    not binding on him. The difference between a prayer for cancellation
    and declaration in regard to a deed of transfer/conveyance, can be
    brought out by the following illustration relating to ‘A’ and ‘B’ ─ two
    brothers. ‘A’ executes a sale deed in favour of ‘C’. Subsequently ‘A’
    wants to avoid the sale. ‘A’ has to sue for cancellation of the deed. On
    the other hand, if ‘B’, who is not the executant of the deed, wants to
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                     Page 23 of 31
avoid it, he has to sue for a declaration that the deed executed by ‘A’
    is invalid/void and non est/ illegal and he is not bound by it. In
    essence, both may be suing to have the deed set aside or declared as
    non-binding. [See : Suhrid Singh alias
Sardool Singh v. Randhir
    Singh & Ors.
, reported in (2010) 12 SCC 112]
30. As observed aforesaid, a plaintiff who is not a party to a decree or a
    document, is not obligated to sue for its cancellation. This is because
    such an instrument would neither be likely to affect the title of the
    plaintiff nor be binding on him. We have to our advantage two very
    old erudite judgments of the Madras High Court and one of the Privy
    Council on the subject.
31.
In
Unni v. Kunchi Amma
reported in 1890 SCC OnLine Mad 5, the
    legal position has been thus explained:
“If a person not having authority to execute a deed or
           having such authority under certain circumstances which
           did not exist, executes a deed, it is not necessary for
           persons who are not bound by it, to sue to set it aside for
           it cannot be used against them. They may treat it as non-
           existent and sue for their right as if it did not exist.”
                                                (Emphasis supplied)
32. The same principle has been distinctly
laid down by
the Privy Council
    in
Bijoy Gopal Mukerji v. Krishna Mahishi Debi
, reported in 1907
    SCC OnLine PC 1, where the jural basis underlying such transactions
    was pointed out. In that case, the reversioner sued for a declaration
    that a lease granted by the widow of the last male owner was not
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                   Page 24 of 31
binding on him and also for khas possession. It was objected that the
    omission to set aside the lease by a suit instituted within the time
    limit prescribed by
Article 91
of the Indian Limitation Act, 1877 was
    fatal to the suit. The following observations which are equally
    applicable to the case at hand, are apposite:
“A Hindu widow is not a tenant for life, but is owner of
           her husband’s property subject to certain restrictions on
           alienation and subject to its devolving upon her
           husband’s heirs upon her death. But she may alienate it
           subject to certain conditions being complied with. Her
           alienation is not, therefore, absolutely void, but it is prima
           facie voidable at the election of the reversionary heir. He
           may think fit to affirm it, or he may at his pleasure treat
           it as a nullity without the intervention of any Court, and
           he shows his election to do the latter by commencing an
           action to recover possession of the property. There is, in
           fact, nothing for the Court either to set aside or cancel as
           a condition precedent to the right of action of the
           reversionary heir. It is true that the appellants prayed by
           their plaint for a declaration that the ijara was inoperative
           as against them, as leading up to their prayer for delivery
           to them of khas possession. But it was not necessary for
           them to do so, and they might have merely claimed
           possession, leaving it to the defendants to plead and (if
           they could) prove the circumstances, which they relied on,
           for showing that the ijara of any derivative dealings with
           the property were not in fact voidable, but were binding
           on the reversionary heirs.”
33. In fact, it is logically impossible for a person who is not a party to a
    document or to a decree to ask for its cancellation. This is clearly
    explained by Wadsworth, J., in the decision rendered in
Vellayya
    Konar (Died) & Anr. v. Ramaswami Konar & Anr.
, reported in
    1939 SCC OnLine Mad 149, thus:
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                     Page 25 of 31
“When, the plaintiff seeks to establish a title in himself
           and cannot establish that title without removing an
           insuperable obstruction such as a decree to which he has
           been a party or a deed to which he has been a party, then
           quite clearly he must get that decree or deed cancelled or
           declared void ‘in toto’, and his suit is in substance a suit
           for the cancellation of the decree or deed even though it
           be framed as a suit for declaration. But when he is
           seeking to establish a title and finds himself threatened
           by a decree or a transaction between third parties, he Is
           not in a position to get that decree or that deed cancelled
           ‘in toto’. That is a thing which can only be done by parties
           to the decree or deed or their representatives. His proper
           remedy therefore in order to clear the way with a view to
           establish his title, is to get a declaration that the decree
           or deed is invalid so far as he himself is concerned and
           he must therefore sue for such a declaration and not for
           the cancellation of the decree or deed.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
34. Therefore, filing a suit for cancellation of a sale deed and seeking a
    declaration that a particular document is inoperative as against the
    plaintiff are two distinct, separate suits. The plaintiff in the present
    case, not being the executant of the sale deed dated 05.05.1997
    executed in favour of the respondent no. 1 (original defendant no. 14),
    was therefore, not obligated to sue for its cancellation under
Section
    31
of the Act, 1963. The question that remains is whether the plaintiff
    ought to have sought for a declaration that the sale deed dated
    05.05.1997 was inoperative in so far as he is concerned or is not
    binding on him.
35. One should not lose sight of the fact that a suit for declaration of title
    to be decided by a court takes within its fold, consideration of several
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                   Page 26 of 31
factors as to how the plaintiff is entitled for declaration of title. In such
    cases, the plea of the defendants about the validity, enforceability and
    binding nature of any document defeating the title of the plaintiff have
    also to be considered. In such cases, the court naturally views the
    evidence on both sides leaving apart the frame of the suit.
36. Therefore, the High Court having concurred with the Courts below on
    the legality and validity of the Gift Deed should not have dismissed
    the suit only on the ground that the plaintiff failed to pray for
    cancellation of the sale deed. The High Court should have kept the
    settled position of law in mind that the declaration of title is as good
    as a relief of cancellation of the sale deed or at least, a declaration that
    the sale deed is not binding on the plaintiff being void and thus non
    est.
37. Furthermore, it is a well-known and settled principle of law that the
    plaint must be read as a whole and the actual relief sought can also
    be culled out from the averments of the plaint. Those reliefs can be
    granted, if there is evidence and circumstances justifying the grant of
    such relief, though not directly or specifically claimed, or asked as a
    relief. The plaintiff had averred in his plaint that the original
    defendant nos. 1 to 6 had no title or saleable rights over the suit
    property. This reflects the intention of the plaintiff to not be bound by
    any instrument which they may have executed in favour of another
    party.
38. Courts have ample inherent powers and indeed it is their duty to
    shape their declaration in such a way that they may operate to afford
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                      Page 27 of 31
the relief which the justice of the case requires.
Section 34
of the Act,
    1963 is not exhaustive of the cases in which a declaratory decree may
    be made and the courts have power to grant such a decree
    independently of the requirements of the Section. Section 34 merely
    gives statutory recognition to a well-recognised type of declaratory
    relief and subjects it to a limitation, but it cannot be deemed to
    exhaust every kind of declaratory relief or to circumscribe the
    jurisdiction of courts to give declarations of right in appropriate cases
    falling outside Section 34. The circumstances in which a declaratory
    decree under Section 34 should be awarded is a matter of discretion
    depending upon the facts of each case. [See: Supreme
General Films
    Exchange Ltd. v. His Highness Maharaja Sir Brijnath Singhji Deo
    of Maihar and Ors.
, reported in (1975) 2 SCC 530]
39. Before we close the matter, we should also explain, why the two
    judgments upon which strong reliance has been placed on behalf of
    the defendants are of no avail to them.
40.
In
Mohd. Noorul
(supra), the petitioner therein had, through a
    benamidar, purchased the suit property which was jointly owned by
    three persons. Pursuant thereto, a partition suit was filed by the
    respondent (one of the joint owners), and a partition decree was
    passed, wherein the suit property fell to the share of the respondent.
    Almost seven years after the decree, the petitioner therein got a sale
    deed in respect of the suit property executed by his benamidar in his
    favour, and filed the underlying suit for setting aside the partition
    decree on the grounds of fraud, collusion, etc.
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                   Page 28 of 31
41. The question as formulated in para 6 of
the said judgment
was solely
    limited to whether the suit was barred by limitation, having been filed
    much beyond a period of three years (stipulated under
Article 59
) from
    the date of the partition decree sought to be set aside. The petitioner
    therein contended that the limitation under
Article 59
would not apply
    as he was not a party to the partition decree sought to be set aside in
    the underlying suit.
42. This Court had held that the appellant would be deemed to have
    constructive notice through his benamidar, who was a party thereto,
    and that
Article 59
read with
Section 31
of the Act, 1963 would apply
    not only to parties to the decree or the instrument sought to be
    cancelled, but also to ‘persons’ claiming through or under them. It
    was in the said factual conspectus that this Court had held that:
“[...] When the plaintiff seeks to establish his title to the
          property which cannot be established without avoiding
          the decree or an instrument that stands as an
          insurmountable obstacle in his way which otherwise
          binds him, though not a party, the plaintiff necessarily
          has to seek a declaration and have that decree,
          instrument or contract cancelled or set aside or rescinded.
          [...]”
43.
In
Abdul Rahim
(supra), the question of law as framed in para 1 of
    the decision pertains to the interpretation and/or application of the
    Islamic law on gift vis-à-vis handing over of possession of the property
    gifted, and whether the underlying suit therein was barred by
    limitation on account of
Article 59
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
. The
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                   Page 29 of 31
dispute involved therein pertained to the validity of a gift deed
    executed by the father of the contesting parties in favour of the
    petitioner. The contentions raised by the respondents were that (i) the
    said gift deed was invalid as possession had not been handed over to
    the petitioners and the property continued to be in possession of the
    tenants, and rent being paid to the petitioners was not reflective of
    transfer of possession as even before the alleged execution of the gift
    deed, rent was being paid to the petitioners; (ii) their suit was not
    barred by limitation.
44. This Court proceeded to hold that the essentials of a valid gift deed
    can be met even by constructive handover of possession and did not
    require actual occupation of the property by the donee. On the
    question of limitation, this Court held the suit filed in 1980 to be
    barred, as it was filed beyond the three-year period (stipulated in
Article 59
) from the date the respondent had knowledge of the
    instrument/transaction sought to be set aside. The judgment in
Mohd. Noorul
(supra) was relied upon by this Court in para 29 on the
    aspect of limitation.
45. The plaintiff herein cannot be said to be otherwise bound by the sale
    deed dated 05.05.1997 executed in favour of the respondent no. 1 as
    stated in
Mohd. Noorul
(supra) for the simple reason that unlike a
    benamidar, he is not a person claiming through or under the vendors
    of that instrument i.e. original defendant no. 1 to 6. Furthermore,
    there exist concurrent findings of the Courts below holding the Gift
    Deed as valid and the respondent has also chosen not to challenge
    the same.
In such a circumstance, there arises no occasion or
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                 Page 30 of 31
overwhelming reason for us to apply the dictum
laid down in
Abdul
    Rahim
(supra) in the facts of the present case.
46. In the result, the appeal succeeds and is hereby allowed. The
    impugned common judgment and order dated 09.10.2015 passed by
    the High Court in Regular Second Appeal No. 3 of 2007 and Regular
    Second Appeal No. 11 of 2007 is hereby set aside and the original
    decree passed by the Trial Court as affirmed by the First Appellate
    Court is hereby restored.
47. No order as to costs.
48. Pending application(s), if any, also stand disposed of.
……………………………….J.
                                                   (J.B. PARDIWALA)




                                               …….…………………………J.
                                                    (R. MAHADEVAN)

New Delhi,
April 23, 2025.
SLP (C) No. 3056 of 2016                                  Page 31 of 31