[Cites
46
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Bangalore Club vs The Commissioner Of Wealth Tax on 8 September, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 4204, AIRONLINE 2020 SC 720, 2021 (1) AKR 150
Author:
R.F. Nariman
Bench:
Indira Banerjee
,
Navin Sinha
,
R. F. Nariman
REPORTABLE



                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3964-71 OF 2007

                M/S BANGALORE CLUB                                     …Appellant


                                                VERSUS


                THE COMMISSIONER OF WEALTH TAX & ANR.                 ...Respondents



                                             JUDGMENT
R.F. Nariman, J.
1. In the year of grace 1868, a group of British officers banded together to

                start the Bangalore Club. In the year of grace 1899, one Lt. W.L.S.

                Churchill was put up on the Club’s list of defaulters, which numbered 17,

                for an amount of Rs.13/- being for an unpaid bill of the Club. The “Bill”

                never became an “Act”. Till date, this amount remains unpaid. Lt. W.L.S.

                Churchill went on to become Sir Winston Leonard Spencer Churchill,

                Prime Minister of Great Britain. And the Bangalore Club continues its
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Nidhi Ahuja
Date: 2020.09.08
17:47:19 IST
Reason:
mundane existence, the only excitement being when the tax collector

                knocks at the door to extract his pound of flesh.
1
2. Fast forward now from British India to free India and we come to

  assessment years 1981-82 and 1984-85 upto 1990-91. The question for

  determination in these appeals is whether Bangalore Club is liable to

  pay wealth tax under the
Wealth Tax Act
. The order of assessment

  dated 3rd March, 2000, passed by the Wealth Tax Officer, Bangalore,

  referred to the fact that Bangalore Club is not registered as a society, a

  trust or a company. The assessing officer, without further ado, “after a

  careful perusal” of the rules of the Club, came to the conclusion that the

  rights of the members are not restricted only to user or possession, but

  definitely as persons to whom the assets of the Club belong. After

  referring to Section 167A, inserted into the
Income Tax Act, 1961
, and

  after referring to Rule 35 of the Club Rules, the assessing officer

  concluded that the number of members and the date of dissolution are

  all uncertain and variable and therefore indeterminate, as a result of

  which the Club was liable to be taxed under the
Wealth Tax Act
. By a

  cryptic order dated 25th October, 2000, the CIT (Appeals) dismissed the

  appeal against the aforesaid order. On the other hand, by a detailed

  order passed by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Bangalore dated

  7th May, 2002, the Appellate Tribunal first referred to the Objects of the

  Bangalore Club, which it described as a “social” Club, as follows:
“1. To provide for its Members, social, cultural, sporting,
           recreational and other facilities;
2
2. To promote camaraderie and fellowship among its
             members.
3. To run the Club for the benefit of its Members from out
             of the subscriptions and contributions of its member.
4. To receive donations and gifts without conditions for the
             betterment of the Club. The General Committee may use
             its discretion to accept sponsorships for sporting Areas
5. To undertake measures for social service consequent
             on natural calamities or disasters, national or local.
6. To enter into affiliation and reciprocal arrangements
             with other Clubs of similar standing both in India and
             abroad.
7. To do all other acts and things as are conducive or
             incidental to the attainment of the above objects.
Provided always and notwithstanding anything hereinafter
             contained, the aforesaid objects of the Club, shall not be
             altered, amended, or modified, except, in a General
             Meeting, for which the unalterable quorum shall not be
             less than 300 members. Any resolution purporting to alter,
             amend, or modify the objects of the Club shall not be
             deemed to have been passed, except by a two thirds
             majority of the Members present and voting thereon.”
3. The Tribunal then set out Rule 35 of the Club Rules, which stated as

  follows:
“RULE 35 APPOINTMENT OF LIQUIDATORS:
If it be resolved to wind up, the Meeting shall appoint a
             liquidator or liquidators and fix his or their remuneration.
             The liquidation shall be conducted as nearly as
             practicable in accordance with the laws governing
             voluntary liquidation under the
Companies Act
or any
             statutory modifications thereto and any surplus assets
             remaining after all debts and liabilities of the Club have
             been discharged shall be divided equally amongst the
3
Members of the Club as defined in Rules 6.1(i), 6.1(ii), 6.1
(iii), 6.2(i), 6.2(ii), 6.2(iii), 6.2(vii), 6.2(viii) and 6.2(ix).
4. After setting out
Section 21AA
of the Wealth Tax Act, the Tribunal then

  referred to this Court’s judgment in
CIT v. Indira Balkrishna
(1960) 39

  ITR 546 and held:
“9. From the facts of the case, it is clear that members who
           have joined here have not joined to earn any income or to
           share any profits. They have joined to enjoy certain
           facilities as per the objects of the club. The members
           themselves are contributing to the receipts of the club.
           The members themselves are contributing to the receipts
           of the club (sic) and what is the difference between the
           Income and Expenditure can be said to be only surplus
           and not income of the assessee-club. It is an accepted
           principle that principle of mutuality is applicable to the
           assessee club and hence not liable to income-tax also. At
           the most, this. may be called the "Body of Individuals" but
           not an AOP formed with an intention to earn income.”
5. It then referred to a CBDT Circular dated 11th January, 1992, explaining

  the pari materia provision of Sections 167A in the
Income Tax Act
, and

  therefore inferred, from a reading of the aforesaid Circular, that Section

  21AA would not be attracted to the case of the Bangalore Club. It was

  then held, on a reading of Rule 35, that since members are entitled to

  equal shares in the assets of the Club on winding-up after paying all

  debts and liabilities, the shares so fixed are determinate also making it

  clear that Section 21AA would have no application to the facts of the

  present case. As a result, the Appellate Tribunal allowed the appeal and

  set aside the orders of the Assessing Officer and the CIT (Appeals).
4
6. Against this order, by a cryptic order of the High Court, the decision in
CWT v. Club
197 ITR Karnataka 609 was stated to cover the facts of

  the present case, as a result of which the question raised was decided

  in favour of the revenue by the impugned order dated 23rd January,

  2007. A Review Petition filed against the aforesaid order was dismissed

  on 19th April, 2007.
7. Shri Nikhil Nayyar, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant,

  referred to the object for the enactment of
Section 21AA
of the

  Wealth Tax Act and then took us through the provisions of Section

  21AA. According to him, it is settled law by several judgments of this

  Court that “association of persons” in the context of a taxing statute

  would only refer to persons who band together with a common object in

  mind – the common object being to create income and make a profit. As

  it is clear that the present Club is a social club where the members do

  not band together for any commercial or business purpose of making

  income or profits, the section does not get attracted at all. Further, in

  any case, as a without prejudice argument, it is clear that the individual

  shares of the members of the said association in income or assets of

  the association must be indeterminate or unknown to attract the

  provision of Sec. 21AA. He took us to the Appellate Tribunal judgment

  and to Rule 35, in particular, to argue that since on winding-up all

  members get an equal share in the surplus that remains after all debts
5
and liabilities are dealt with, their shares cannot be said to be

  indeterminate or unknown. For this purpose, he cited a number of

  judgments of the High Courts. He then adverted to an explanation that

  was added to the definition of “person” contained in
Section 2(31)
of the

  Income Tax Act, which made it clear that on and from 1st April, 2002, an

  association of persons need not be persons who band together for the

  object of deriving income or profits. This explanation does not apply to

  the
Wealth Tax Act
, and, in any case, given the fact that the assessment

  years in question are way before 1st April, 2002, the law
laid down by
this Court in several judgments on association of persons would directly

  apply.
8. To counter these arguments, Shri Vikramjit Banerjee, learned Additional

  Solicitor General, referred to Rule 35 of the Club Rules and relied

  heavily upon Section 21AA(2). According to Shri Banerjee, sub-section

  (2) deals with a situation where the association of persons is dissolved,

  and given Rule 35, the Section, therefore, would directly apply to the

  Bangalore Club. He then referred to this Court’s judgment in
Bangalore

  Club v. CIT
(2013) 5 SCC 509, in which, for income tax purposes, the

  Bangalore Club was assessed as an association of persons. This being

  the case, it cannot be that for income tax purposes, the Bangalore Club

  is treated as an association of persons but for wealth tax purposes, it

  cannot be so treated.
He then referred to this Court’s judgment in
6
CWT v. Ellis Bridge Gymkhana (1998) 1 SCC 384 in order to support

   the impugned judgment of the High Court which, according to him,

   correctly followed Chikmagalur Club’s case (supra) which, in turn, only

   relied upon this Court’s judgment in Ellis Bridge Gymkhana (supra).

   He also stated that the finding of the Assessing Officer that the shares

   of a fluctuating body of members would be indeterminate is correct and

   therefore, even on this ground it is clear that the High Court judgment

   can be supported.
9. Having heard learned counsel for both sides, it is important to first advert

   to
Section 3
, which is the charging section in the
Wealth Tax Act
.
Section 3(1)
states as follows:
“3. Charge of wealth-tax — (1) Subject to the other
            provisions contained in this Act, there shall be charged for
            every assessment year commencing on and from the first
            day of April, 1957 but before the first day of April, 1993, a
            tax (hereinafter referred to as wealth-tax) in respect of the
            net wealth on the corresponding valuation date of every
            individual, Hindu undivided family and company at the rate
            or rates specified in Schedule I.”
10. It will be noticed that only three types of persons can be assessed to

   wealth tax under
Section 3
i.e. individuals, Hindu undivided families and

   companies. It is clear that if
Section 3(1)
alone were to be looked at,

   the Bangalore Club neither being an individual, nor a HUF, nor a

   company cannot possibly be brought into the wealth tax net under this

   provision.
7
11. By the Finance Bill of 1981, Section 21AA was introduced into the
Wealth Tax Act
. The explanatory notes on the introduction of Section

   21AA were as follows:
“21.1
Under the Wealth Tax Act, 1957
, individuals and
           Hindu Undivided Families are taxable entities but an
           association of persons is not charged to wealth tax on its
           net wealth. Where an individual or a Hindu Undivided
           Family is a member of an association of persons, the
           value of the interest of such member in the association of
           persons is determined in accordance with the provisions
           of the rules and is includible in the net wealth of the
           member.
21.2 Instances had come to the notice of the Government
           where certain assessees had resorted to the creation of a
           large number of associations of persons without
           specifically defining the shares of the members therein
           with a view to avoiding proper tax liability. Under the
           existing provisions, only the value of the interest of the
           member in the association which is ascertainable is
           includible in his net wealth. Accordingly, to the extent the
           value of the interest of the member in the association
           cannot be ascertained or is unknown, no wealth tax is
           payable by such member in respect thereof.
21.3 In order to counter such attempts at tax avoidance
           through the medium of multiple associations of persons
           without defining the shares of the members, the
Finance
           Act
has inserted a new Section 21-AA in the
Wealth Tax
           Act
to provide for assessment in the case of associations
           of persons which do not define the shares of the members
           in the assets thereof. Sub-section (1) provides that where
           assets chargeable to wealth tax are held by an association
           of persons (other than a company or a cooperative
           society) and the individual shares of the members of the
           said association in income or the assets of the association
           on the date of its formation or at any time thereafter, are
           indeterminate or unknown, wealth tax will be levied upon
           and recovered from such association in the like manner
           and to the same extent as it is leviable upon and
8
recoverable from an individual who is a citizen of India and
            is resident in India at the rates specified in Part I of
            Schedule I or at the rate of 3 per cent, whichever course
            is more beneficial to the Revenue.”
12. With this object in mind, Section 21AA was enacted w.e.f. 1st April, 1981

   as follows:
“21AA. Assessment when assets are held by certain
            associations of persons — (1) Where assets
            chargeable to tax under this Act are held by an association
            of persons, other than a company or cooperative society
            or society registered under the
Societies Registration Act,
            1860
(21 of 1860) or under any law corresponding to that
            Act in force in any part of India, and the individual shares
            of the members of the said association in the income or
            assets or both of the said association on the date of its
            formation or at any time thereafter are indeterminate or
            unknown, the wealth-tax shall be levied upon and
            recovered from such association in the like manner and to
            the same extent as it would be leviable upon and
            recoverable from an individual who is a citizen of India and
            resident in India for the purposes of this Act.
(2) Where any business or profession carried on by an
            association of persons referred to in subsection (1) has
            been discontinued or where such association of persons
            is dissolved, the Assessing Officer shall make an
            assessment of the net wealth of the association of
            persons as if no such discontinuance or dissolution had
            taken place and all the provisions of this Act, including the
            provisions relating to the levy of penalty or any other sum
            chargeable under any provisions of this Act, so far as may
            be, shall apply to such assessment.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of
            sub-section (2), if the Assessing Officer or the Deputy
            Commissioner (Appeals) or the Commissioner (Appeals)
            in the course of any proceedings under this Act in respect
            of any such association of persons as is referred to in sub-
section (1) is satisfied that the association of persons was
            guilty of any of the acts specified in
section 18
or
section
9
18A, he may impose or direct the imposition of a penalty
            in accordance with the provisions of the said sections.

            (4) Every person who was at the time of such
            discontinuance or dissolution a member of the association
            of persons, and the legal representative of any such
            person who is deceased, shall be jointly and severally
            liable for the amount of tax, penalty or other sum payable,
            and all the provisions of this Act, so far as may be, shall
            apply to any such assessment or imposition of penalty or
            other sum.
(5) Where such discontinuance or dissolution takes place
            after any proceedings in respect of an assessment year
            have commenced, the proceedings may be continued
            against the persons referred to in sub-section (4) from the
            stage at which the proceedings stood at the time of such
            discontinuance or dissolution, and all the provisions of this
            Act shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly.”
13. It can be seen that for the first time from 1st April, 1981, an association

   of persons other than a company or cooperative society has been

   brought into the tax net so far as wealth tax is concerned with the rider

   that the individual shares of the members of such association in the

   income or assets or both on the date of its formation or at any time

   thereafter must be indeterminate or unknown. It is only then that the

   section gets attracted.
14. The first question that arises is as to what is the meaning of the

   expression “association of persons” which occurs in Section 21AA.
In

   an early judgment of this Court where the expression “association of

   persons” occurred in the
Income Tax Act, 1922
– a cognate tax statute,
10
this Court in
CIT v. Indira Balkrishna
(supra) posed question no.3 as

   follows:
“(3) Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the
              case the Tribunal was right in holding that the assessment
              made on the three widows of Balkrishna Purushottam
              Purani in the status of an association of persons is legal
              and valid in law?”
15. After referring to the amendments made in the
Income Tax Act
speaking

   of “association of persons” and “association of individuals”, this Court

   went on to hold:
“8…In the absence of any definition as to what constitutes
              an association of persons, we must construe the words in
              their plain ordinary meaning and we must also bear in
              mind that the words occur in a section which imposes a
              tax on the total income of each one of the units of
              assessment mentioned therein including an association of
              persons. The meaning to be assigned to the words must
              take colour from the context in which they occur…
9. It is enough for our purpose to refer to three
              decisions: In      re,   B.N.    Elias [(1935)      3    ITR
              408];
CIT v. Laxmidas Devidas
[(1937) 5 ITR 584]; and In
              re. Dwaraknath Harishchandra Pitale [(1937) 5 ITR 716].
In B.N. Elias Derbyshire, C.J. rightly pointed out that the
              word “associate” means, according to the Oxford
              dictionary, “to join in common purpose, or to join in an
              action”. Therefore, an association of persons must be one
              in which two or more persons join in a common purpose
              or common action, and as the words occur in a section
              which imposes a tax on income, the association must be
              one the object of which is to produce income profits or
              gains. This was the view expressed by Beaumont, C.J.
              in
CIT v. Laxmidas Devidas
at p. 589 and also in Re.
              Dwaraknath        Harishchandra     Pitale.    In re.   B.N.
              Elias [(1935) III ITR 408] Costello, J. put the test in more
              forceful language. He said: “It may well be that the
              intention of the legislature was to hit combinations of
11
individuals who were engaged together in some joint
           enterprise but did not in law constitute partnership….
           When we find …. that there is a combination of persons
           formed for the promotion of a joint enterprise …. then I
           think no difficulty arise in the way of saying that these
           persons did constitute an association….”
10. We think that the aforesaid decisions correctly lay
           down the crucial test for determining what is an
           association of persons within the meaning of
Section 3
of
           the Income Tax Act, and they have been accepted and
           followed in a number of later decisions of different High
           Courts to all of which it is unnecessary to call attention. It
           is, however, necessary to add some words of caution
           here. There is no formula of universal application as to
           what facts, how many of them and of what nature, are
           necessary to come to a conclusion that there is an
           association of persons within the meaning of
Section 3
; it
           must depend on the particular facts and circumstances of
           each case as to whether the conclusion can be drawn or
           not.”
16. Likewise, in
G. Murugesan & Brothers v. CIT
88 ITR 432 (1973), this

   Court referred with approval to
Indira Balakrishna
(supra) and then

   held:
“11. For forming an “Association of Persons”, the
           members of the association must join together for the
           purpose of producing an income. An “Association of
           Persons” can be formed only when two or more
           individuals voluntarily combine together for a certain
           purpose. Hence volition on the part of the member of the
           association is an essential ingredient. It is true that even
           a minor can join an “Association of Persons” if his lawful
           guardian gives his consent. In the case of receiving
           dividends from shares, where there is no question of any
           management, it is difficult to draw an inference that two
           more shareholders functioned as an “Association of
           Persons” from. The mere fact that they jointly own one or
           more shares, and jointly receive the dividends declared
12
those circumstances do not by themselves go to show that
            they acted as an “Association of Persons”. “
17. These judgments have since been referred to with approval in
Meera

   and Co. v. CIT
(1997) 4 SCC 677 (see paras 19 and 20) and Ramanlal

   Bhailal Patel v. State of Gujarat (2008) 5 SCC 449 (see paragraph
28). It may be mentioned in passing at this stage that under the
Income

   Tax Act
an explanation has been added to the definition of “person”

   contained in
Section 2(31)
, sub-clause (v) of which includes “an

   association of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated or

   not”. The explanation inserted by amendment, which is w.e.f. 1st April,

   2002, is as follows:
“Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, an
            association of persons or a body of individuals or a local
            authority or an artificial juridical person shall be deemed
            to be a person, whether or not such person or body or
            authority or juridical person was formed or established or
            incorporated with the object of deriving income, profits or
            gains;”
18. Obviously, therefore, after 1st April, 2002, the ratio of the aforesaid

   judgments has been undone by this explanation insofar as income tax

   is concerned.
19. It is well-settled that when Parliament used the expression “association

   of persons” in
Section 21AA
of the Wealth Tax Act, it must be presumed

   to know that this expression had been the subject matter of comment in

   a cognate allied legislation, namely, the
Income Tax Act
, as referring to
13
persons banding together for a common purpose, being a business

   purpose in the context of a taxation statute in order to earn income or

   profits. This presumption is felicitously referred to in the following

   judgments.
20.
In
P. Vajravelu Mudaliar v. Special Deputy Collector
for Land

   Acquisition (1965) 1 SCR 614, this Court had to decide whether the

   4th Amendment to the Constitution of India, which amended
Article 31(2)
of the Constitution, made any change in whether compensation being a

   just equivalent in money to be paid for acquisition continued to be a just

   equivalent or something less.
This Court held that since the expression

   “compensation”, as interpreted in
State of W.B. v. Bela Banerjee
1954 SCR 558, continued even after the 4th Amendment, a just

   equivalent in terms of money for land acquisition would continue having

   to be paid. The Court held:
“… Even after the amendment, provision for
            compensation or laying down of the principles for
            determining the compensation is a condition for the
            making of a law of acquisition or requisition. A legislature,
            if it intends to make a law for compulsory acquisition or
            requisition, must provide for compensation or specify the
            principles for ascertaining the compensation. The fact that
            Parliament used the same expressions, namely,
            “compensation” and “principles” as were found in
Article
            31
before the amendment is a clear indication that it
            accepted the meaning given by this Court to those
            expressions in
Mrs Bela Banerjee
case [(1954) SCR 558]
            . It follows that a legislature in making a law of acquisition
            or requisition shall provide for a just equivalent of what the
            owner has been deprived of or specify the principles for
14
the purpose of ascertaining the “just equivalent” of what
            the owner has been deprived of. If Parliament intended to
            enable a legislature to make such a law without providing
            for compensation so defined, it would have used other
            expressions like “price”, “consideration” etc. In Craies on
            Statute Law, 6th Edn., at p. 167, the relevant principle of
            construction is stated thus:
“There is a well-known principle of construction, ‘that
            where the legislature used in an Act a legal term which
            has received judicial interpretation, it must be assumed
            that the term is used in the sense in which it has been
            judicially interpreted unless a contrary intention appears.”

            The said two expressions in
Article 31(2)
before the
Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act
, have received an
            authoritative interpretation by the highest court in the land
            and it must be presumed that Parliament did not intend to
            depart from the meaning given by this Court to the said
            expressions.”

                                                            (at page. 626)
21.
In
Sakal Deep Sahai Srivastava v. Union of India
(1974) 1 SCC 338,

   in the context of the
Limitation Act
, this Court held:
“8. The only question of some difficulty raised before us is
            whether
Article 102
or
Article 120
of the
Limitation Act
of
            1908 would apply to the case. After having heard the
            attractive arguments of Mr Yogeshwar Prasad, we have
            no doubt that a good deal can be said in favour of the
            contention that a claim for arrears of salary is
            distinguishable from a claim for wages. But, our difficulty
            is that the question appears to us to be no longer open for
            consideration afresh by us, or, at any rate, it is not
            advisable to review the authorities of this Court, after such
            a lapse of time when, despite the view taken by this Court
            that
Article 102
of the
Limitation Act
of 1908 was
            applicable to such cases, the
Limitation Act
of 1963 had
            been passed repeating the law, contained in
Articles 102
and
120
of the
Limitation Act
of 1908, in identical terms
            without any modification. The Legislature must be
15
presumed to be cognizant of the view of this Court that a
           claim of the nature before us, for arrears of salary, falls
           within the purview of
Article 102
of the
Limitation Act
of
           1908. If Parliament, which is deemed to be aware of the
           declarations of law by this Court, did not alter the law, it
           must be deemed to have accepted the interpretation of
           this Court even though the correctness of it may be open
           to doubt. If doubts had arisen, it was for the Legislature to
           clear these doubts. When the Legislature has not done so,
           despite the repeal of the
Limitation Act
of 1908, and the
           enactment of the
Limitation Act
of 1963 after the decisions
           of this Court, embodying a possibly questionable view, we
           think it is expedient and proper to overrule the submission
           made on behalf of the appellant that the correctness of the
           view adopted by this Court in its decisions on the question
           so far should be re-examined by a larger Bench.”
22. Likewise, in Diwan Bros. v. Central Bank of India (1976) 3 SCC 800,

   this Court referred to the well-known dictum of Lord Buckmaster in

   Barras v. Aberdeen Steam Trawling and Fishing Company 1933 AC

   402 and held as under:
“22. Apart from the above considerations, it is a well-
           settled principle of interpretation of statutes that where the
           Legislature uses an expression bearing a well-known
           legal connotation it must be presumed to have used the
           said expression in the sense in which it has been so
           understood. Craies on Statute Law observes as follows:
“There is a well-known principle of construction, that
           where the legislature uses in an Act a legal term which
           has received judicial interpretation, it must be assumed
           that the term is used in the sense in which it has been
           judicially interpreted, unless a contrary intention appears.”
23. In Barras v. Aberdeen Steam Trawling and Fishing
           Company [1933 AC 402, 411] Lord Buckmaster pointed
           out as follows:
16
“It has long been a well-established principle to be applied
              in the consideration of Acts of Parliament that where a
              word of doubtful meaning has received a clear judicial
              interpretation, the subsequent statute which incorporates
              the same word or the same phrase in a similar context
              must be construed so that the word or phrase is
              interpreted according to the meaning that has previously
              been ascribed to it.”

              Craies further points out that the rule as to words judicially
              interpreted applies also to words with well-known legal
              meanings, even though they have not been the subject of
              judicial interpretation. Thus applying these principles in
              the instant case it would appear that when the
Court Fees
              Act
uses the word “decree” which had a well-known legal
              significance or meaning, then the Legislature must be
              presumed to have used this term in the sense in which it
              has been understood, namely, as defined in
the Code of
              Civil Procedure
even if there has been no express judicial
              interpretation on this point.”
23. A recent judgment of this Court namely,
Shree Bhagwati Steel Rolling

   Mills v. CCE
(2016) 3 SCC 643, refers to the same presumption as

   follows:
“21. It is settled law that Parliament is presumed to know
              the law when it enacts a particular piece of legislation.
The
              Prevention of Corruption Act
was passed in the year 1988,
              that is long after 1969 when the Constitution Bench
              decision in
Rayala Corpn. [Rayala Corpn. (P) Ltd. v.
              Director of Enforcement
, (1969) 2 SCC 412] had been
              delivered.
It is, therefore, presumed that Parliament
              enacted
Section 31
knowing that the decision in
Rayala
              Corpn. [Rayala Corpn. (P) Ltd. v. Director of Enforcement
,
              (1969) 2 SCC 412] had stated that an omission would not
              amount to a repeal and it is for this reason that
Section 31
was enacted.
This again does not take us further as this
              statement of the law in
Rayala Corpn. [Rayala Corpn. (P)
              Ltd. v. Director of Enforcement
, (1969) 2 SCC 412] is no
              longer the law declared by the Supreme Court after the
              decision in Fibre Board case [
Fibre Boards (P) Ltd. v. CIT
,
17
(2015) 10 SCC 333]. This reason therefore again cannot
            avail the appellant.”
24. This being the case, it is clear that in order to be an association of

   persons attracting
Section 21AA
of the Wealth Tax Act, it is necessary

   that persons band together with some business or commercial object in

   view in order to make income or profits. The presumption gets

   strengthened by the language of Sec. 21AA (2), which speaks of a

   business or profession carried on by an association of persons which

   then gets discontinued or dissolved. The thrust of the provision

   therefore, is to rope in associations of persons whose common object is

   a business or professional object, namely, to earn income or profits.
Bangalore Club being a social club whose objects have been referred

   to by the Appellate Tribunal in this case make it clear that persons who

   are banded together do not band together for any business purpose or

   commercial purpose in order to make income or profits.
In fact, the

   nature of these kind of clubs has been set out in
Cricket Club of India

   Ltd v. Bombay Labour Union
(1969) 1 SCR 600 as follows:
“What we have to see is the nature of the activity in fact
            and in substance. Though the Club is incorporated as a
            Company, it is not like an ordinary Company constituted
            for the purpose of carrying on business. There are no
            shareholders. No dividends are ever declared and no
            distribution of profits takes place. Admission to the Club is
            by payment of admission fee and not by purchase of
            shares. Even this admission is subject to balloting. The
            membership is not transferable like the right of
            shareholders. There is the provision for expulsion of a
18
Member under certain circumstances which feature never
            exists in the case of a shareholder holding shares in a
            Limited Company. The membership is fluid. A person
            retains rights as long as he continues as a Member and
            gets nothing at all when he ceases to be a Member, even
            though he may have paid a large amount as admission
            fee.
He even loses his rights on expulsion. In these
            circumstances, it is clear that the Club cannot be treated
            as a separate legal entity of the nature of a Limited
            Company carrying on business. The Club, in fact,
            continues to be a Members' Club without any
            shareholders and, consequently, all services provided in
            the Club for Members have to be treated as activities of a
            self-serving institution.”
                                                        (at page. 614)

   This judgment has been referred to with approval recently in
State of

   West Bengal v. Calcutta Club Limited
(2019) 13 SCALE 474 at

   paragraph 28.
25. At this stage, it is important to refer to CWT v. Ellis Bridge Gymkhana,

   (supra). In this case, the Ellis Bridge Gymkhana, like the Bangalore

   Club, is an unincorporated club. The assessment years involved in this

   case are from 1970-71 to 1977-78 i.e. prior to Section 21AA coming into

   force. Despite the fact that Section 21AA did not apply, this Court

   referred to Section 21AA as follows:
“15. All these provisions go to show that the
Wealth Tax
            Act
has been drafted on the same lines as the
Indian
            Income Tax Act, 1922
. There is great similarity of wording
            between the various provisions of the
Wealth Tax Act
and
            corresponding provisions of the
Indian Income Tax Act,
            1922
. But in the case of the charging
Section 3
of the
            Wealth Tax Act, the phraseology of the charging
Section
            3
of the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922 has not been
            adopted. Unlike
Section 3
of the Income Tax Act,
Section
19
3
of the Wealth Tax Act does not mention a firm or an
        association of persons or a body of individuals as taxable
        units of assessment.
16. The position has been placed beyond doubt by
        insertion of Section 21-AA in the
Wealth Tax Act
itself.
This amendment was effected by the
Finance Act, 1981
with effect from 1-4-1981. It provides for assessment of
        association of persons in certain special cases and not
        otherwise.”

The Court then went on to hold:
“17. It will be seen that assessment as an association of
        persons can be made only when the individual shares of
        members of the association in the income or assets or
        both of the association on the date of its formation or any
        time thereafter are indeterminate or unknown. It is only in
        such an eventuality that an assessment can be made on
        an association of persons, otherwise not. Sub-section (2)
        of Section 21-AA deals with cases of such associations as
        mentioned in sub-section (1). That means only
        association of persons in which individual shares of the
        members were unknown or indeterminate can be
        subjected to wealth tax. Sub-section (3) also deals with
        association of persons referred to in sub-section (1). Sub-
        sections (4) and (5) deal with some consequences which
        will follow the members of an association of persons
        spoken of in sub-section (1) in the case of discontinuance
        or dissolution.
xxx xxx xxx
19. In our view, Section 21-AA far from helping the case
        of the Revenue directly goes against its contention. An
        association of persons cannot be taxed at all under
Section 3
of the Act. That is why an amendment was
        necessary to be made by the
Finance Act, 1981
whereby
        Section 21-AA was inserted to bring to tax net wealth of
        an association of persons where individual shares of the
        members of the association were unknown or
        indeterminate.”
20
After referring to the explanatory notes introducing Section 21AA in

   paragraph 32, the Court then went on to hold:
“33. It will appear from this notification that the Central
             Board of Direct Taxes clearly recognised that the charge
             of wealth tax was on individuals and Hindu Undivided
             Families and not on any other body of individuals or
             association of persons. Section 21-AA has been
             introduced to prevent evasion of tax. In a normal case, in
             assessment of an individual, his wealth from every source
             will be added up and computed in accordance with
             provisions of the
Wealth Tax Act
to arrive at the net wealth
             which has to be taxed. So, if an individual has any interest
             in a firm or any other non-corporate body, then his interest
             in those bodies or associations will be added up in his
             wealth. It is only where such addition is not possible
             because the shares of the individual in a body holding
             property is unknown or indeterminate, resort will be taken
             to Section 21-AA and association of individuals will be
             taxed as association of persons.”
26. A perusal of this judgment would show that Section 21AA has been

   introduced in order to prevent tax evasion. The reason why it was

   enacted was not to rope in association of persons per se as “one more

   taxable person” to whom the Act would apply. The object was to rope

   in certain assessees who have resorted to the creation of a large

   number of association of persons without specifically defining the

   shares of the members of such associations of persons so as to evade

   tax. In construing Section 21AA, it is important to have regard to this

   object.
27.
In
K P Varghese v. ITO
, 1982 (1) SCR 629, what arose for interpretation

   before the Supreme Court was in the context of capital gains – as to
21
whether, to attract the applicability of
Sec. 52(2)
of the Income Tax Act,

   understatement of consideration is a prerequisite. On a purely literal

   reading of Sec. 52(2), it would be clear that no such condition has been

   mentioned. However, this Court, after referring to the object of the

   section held:
“Thus it is not enough to attract the applicability of sub-
            section (2) that the fair market value of the capital asset
            transferred by the assessee as on the date of the transfer
            exceeds the full value of the consideration declared in
            respect of the transfer by not less than 15 per cent of the
            value so declared, but it is furthermore necessary that the
            full value of the consideration in respect of the transfer is
            understated or in other words, shown at a lesser figure
            than that actually received by the assessee. Sub-section
            (2) has no application in case of an honest and bona fide
            transaction where the consideration in respect of the
            transfer has been correctly declared or disclosed by the
            assessee, even if the condition of 15 per cent difference
            between the fair market value of the capital asset as on
            the date of the transfer and the full value of the
            consideration declared by the assessee is satisfied.”

                                                      (at page. 652, 653)
28. The Bangalore Club is an association of persons and not the creation,

   by a person who is otherwise assessable, of one among a large number

   of associations of persons without defining the shares of the members

   so as to escape tax liability. For all these reasons, it is clear that
Section

   21AA
of the Wealth Tax Act does not get attracted to the facts of the

   present case.
22
29. However, the impugned judgment of the High Court relies solely upon
CWT v. Chikmagalur Club
(supra). This case dealt with a club that was

   registered under the provisions of the
Karnataka Societies Registration

   Act, 1960
. After referring copiously to the Appellate Authority’s orders

   on facts in this case, the Court went on to hold:
“10. … Several High Courts and the Tribunals have taken
            different view on the question whether a club registered
            under the provisions of
Karnataka Societies Registration
            Act
is exigible to tax under the provisions of the
Wealth
            Tax Act
, but in our view, for the present, the issue is now
            settled by the pronouncement of the Supreme Court in the
            case of the
Commissioner of Wealth Tax v. Ellis Bridge
            Gymkhana
[ 229 ITR 1.]
— wherein it is held that ‘club is
            not assessable to wealth tax in assessment years 1970-
            1971 to 1977-1978 as an Association of Persons’ and
            while saying so, the Court has observed that’ the position
            has been placed beyond doubt by the insertion of Section
            21AA in the
Wealth Tax Act
itself.”

   For this purpose, paragraph 17 already extracted in the Ellis Bridge

   Gymkhana case (supra) was referred to by the said judgment. After

   referring to paragraph 17, the Court then concluded:
“13. … Now that the scope of
Section 21AA
of the Act has
            been explained by the Apex Court in Ellies Bridge
            Gymkhana Club's case-229 ITR 1, we need not dilate
            much on the scope and interpretation of the said Section.
            It would be suffice to notice that assessment as an
            association of persons can be made only, when the
            individual shares of the members of the association in the
            income or assets or both of the association on the date of
            its formation or any time thereafter are indeterminate or
            unknown can be subjected to wealth tax. In the present
            case, the assessee is a club registered under the
            provisions of the
Karnataka Societies Registration Act
and
            had declared ‘nil’ wealth and had claimed that it is not
23
susceptible to the provision of wealth Tax Act, since it is
            only an association of persons providing recreation
            facilities to its members. This claim, in our view, is rightly
            rejected by both the assessing authority as well as by the
            first appellate authority on the ground that the assessee is
            an association of persons and the members are the
            owners of the assets and the individual shares of the
            members in the owners of the assets and the individual
            shares of the members in the income or assets or both of
            the association on the date of formation or any time
            thereafter or indeterminate or unknown and accordingly,
            has subjected the assessee to wealth tax.”
30. What will be noticed is that the High Court in
Chikmagalur Club
(supra)

   only referred to paragraph 17 and omitted to refer to paras 19, 32 and

   33 of the Ellis Bridge Gymkhana judgment (supra) which have been

   referred to by us hereinabove. If all these paragraphs would have been

   referred to, what would have been clear is that a social club like the

   Chikmagalur Club could not possibly be said to be an association of

   persons regard being had to the object sought to be achieved by

   enacting Section 21AA, which is a Section enacted in order to prevent

   tax evasion. As has been pointed out by us hereinabove, the Section

   was not introduced to add one more category to the category of taxable

   persons – that could have been done by amending the charging section

   i.e.
Section 3(1)
of the Wealth Tax Act.         Further, the High Court

   judgment is completely oblivious of the line of judgments starting with

   Indira Balakrishna’s case (supra) by which “association of persons”

   must mean persons who are banded together with a common object –
24
and, in the context of a taxation statute, common object being a

   business object being to earn income or profits.
This judgment does not

   refer to
Indira Balakrishna
(supra) and the judgments following it at all.
For all these reasons, the judgment in
CWT v. Chikmagalur Club
(supra) not being correctly decided, is overruled. Equally, the High

   Court judgment which rests solely upon the decision in Chikmagalur

   Club’s case (supra) has no legs to stand.
31. We now come to some of the points raised by the learned Additional

   Solicitor General, Shri Banerjee. The submission that Section 21AA (2)

   which deals with dissolution of an association of persons and the fact

   that on dissolution under Rule 35 of the Bangalore Club, members get

   an equal share would show first, that the Bangalore Club is an

   association of persons; and second, that the member’s share in its

   income and assets are indeterminate or unknown, is an argument which

   has to be stated to be rejected. First and foremost, sub-section (2)

   begins with the words “any business or profession carried on” by an

   association of persons. No business or profession is carried on by a

   social members club. Further, the association of persons mentioned in

   sub-section (1) must be persons who have banded together for a

   business objective – to earn profits – and if this itself is not the case,

   then sub-section (2) cannot possibly apply. Insofar as Rule 35 is

   concerned, again what is clear is that on liquidation, any surplus assets
25
remaining after all debts and liabilities of the club has been discharged,

   shall be divided equally amongst all categories of members of the club.

   This would show that “at any time thereafter” within the meaning of

   Section 21AA (1), the members’ shares are determinate in that on

   liquidation each member of whatsoever category gets an equal share.
32. The judgments cited by Shri Nikhil Nayyar in so far as this aspect is

   concerned, have no direct relevance. The judgment in CWT v. Rama

   Varma Club 226
ITR 898 and CWT v. George Club
191 ITR 368 are

   both judgments in which no part of the assets is to be distributed even

   on liquidation to any of the members of these clubs. Thus, it was held in

   these cases that the members do not have any share in the income or

   assets of the club at all. The same cannot be said in the facts of this

   case inasmuch as under Rule 35 the members of the Bangalore Club

   are entitled to receive surplus assets in the circumstances stated in Rule

   35 - equally on liquidation. However, the result remains the same – viz.,

   that even if it be held that the Bangalore Club is an association of

   persons, the members’ shares being determinate do not attract Section

   21AA.
33. Shri Banerjee then relied upon the judgment in
Bangalore Club v. CIT
(2013) 5 SCC 509 only in order to point out that the Bangalore Club was

   taxed as an AOP under the
Income Tax Act
and cannot and should not

   therefore, escape liability under the
Wealth Tax Act
(an allied and
26
cognate Act). First and foremost, the definition of “person” in
Section

2(31)
of the Income Tax Act would take in both an association of

persons and a body of individuals. For the purposes of income tax, the

Bangalore Club could perhaps be treated to be a ‘body of individuals’

which is a wider expression than ‘association of persons’ in which such

body of individuals may have no common object at all but would include

a combination of individuals who had nothing more than a unity of

interest.
This distinction has been made by the Andhra Pradesh High

Court in
Deccan Wine and General Stores v. CIT
106 ITR 111 at

pages 116, 117. Quite apart from this, to be taxed as an association of

persons under the
Income Tax Act
is to be taxed as an association of

persons per se. We have already seen that Section 21AA does not

enlarge the field of tax payers but only plugs evasion as the association

of persons must be formed with members who have indeterminate

shares in its income or assets. For all these reasons, we cannot accede

to Shri Banerjee’s argument that being taxed as an association of

persons under the
Income Tax Act
, the Bangalore Club must be

regarded to be an ‘association of persons’ for the purpose of a tax

evasion provision in the
Wealth Tax Act
as opposed to a charging

provision in the
Income Tax Act
. One last argument of Shri Banerjee

needs to be addressed. According to the learned ASG, the fact that the

membership of the club is a fluctuating body of individuals would
27
necessarily lead to the conclusion that the shares of the members in the

assets or the income of the club would be indeterminate.
In CWT v.

Trustees of H.E.H. Nizam's Family 108 ITR 555 (1977), this court had

to construe
Sec. 21
of the Wealth Tax Act.
Sec. 21 (1)
& (4) which are

relevant for our purpose are set out hereinbelow:
“21. (1) In the case of assets chargeable to tax under this
        Act, which are held by a court of wards or an
        administrator-general or an official trustee or any receiver
        or manager or any other person, by whatever name
        called, appointed under any order of a court to manage
        property on behalf of another, or any trustee appointed
        under a trust declared by a duly executed instrument in
        writing, whether testamentary or otherwise (including a
        trustee under a valid deed of wakf), the wealth-tax shall
        be levied upon and recoverable from the court of wards,
        administrator-general, official trustee, receiver, manager
        or trustee, as the case may be, in the like manner and to
        the same extent as it would be leviable upon and
        recoverable from the person on whose behalf or for whose
        benefit the assets are held, and the provisions of this Act
        shall apply accordingly.
xxx xxx xxx

        (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section,
        where the shares of the persons on whose behalf or for
        whose benefit any such assets are held are indeterminate
        or unknown, the wealth-tax shall be levied upon and
        recovered from the court of wards, administrator-general,
        official trustee, receiver, manager, or other person
        aforesaid as if the person on whose behalf or for whose
        benefit the assets are held were an individual for the
        purposes of this Act.”
28
34. The argument made in this case was that, as the members of the

   Nizam’s family trust who are beneficiaries thereof would be a fluctuating

   body of persons, the beneficiaries must be said to be indeterminate as

   a result of which
Sec. 21(4)
of the Act would apply and not
Sec. 21(1)
.

   This was repelled by this Court stating:
“This immediately takes us to the question as to which of
           the two sub-sections, (1) or (4) of
Section 21
applies for
           the purpose of assessing the assessees to wealth tax in
           respect of the beneficial interest in the remainder qua
           each set of unit or units allocated to the relatives specified
           in the Second Schedule. Now it is clear from the language
           of
Section 3
that the charge of wealth tax is in respect of
           the net wealth on the relevant valuation date, and,
           therefore, the question in regard to the applicability of sub-
           section (1) or (4) of
Section 21
has to be determined with
           reference to the relevant valuation date. The Wealth Tax
           Officer has to determine who are the beneficiaries in
           respect of the remainder on the relevant date and whether
           their shares are indeterminate or unknown. It is not at all
           relevant whether the beneficiaries may change in
           subsequent years before the date of distribution,
           depending upon contingencies which may come to pass
           in future. So long as it is possible to say on the relevant
           valuation date that the beneficiaries are known and their
           shares are determinate, the possibility that the
           beneficiaries may change by reason of subsequent
           events such as birth or death would not take the case out
           of the ambit of sub-section (1) of
Section 21
. It is no
           answer to the applicability of sub-section (1) of
Section 21
to say that the beneficiaries are indeterminate and
           unknown because it cannot be predicated who would be
           the beneficiaries in respect of the remainder on the death
           of the owner of the life interest. The position has to be
           seen on the relevant valuation date as if the preceding life
           interest had come to an end on that date and if, on that
           hypothesis, it is possible to determine who precisely would
29
be the beneficiaries and on what determinate shares, sub-
section (1) of
Section 21
must apply and it would be a
matter of no consequence that the number of beneficiaries
may vary in the future either by reason of some
beneficiaries ceasing to exist or some new beneficiaries
coming into being. Not only does this appear to us to be
the correct approach in the application of sub-section (1)
of
Section 21
, but we find that this has also been the
general consensus of judicial opinion in this country in
various High Courts during the last about thirty years. The
first decision in which this view was taken was rendered
as far back as 1945 by the Patna High Court in Khan
Bahadur M. Habibur Rahman v.CIT [(1945) 13 ITR 189
(Pat)] and since then, this view has been followed by the
Calcutta High Court in Suhashini Karuri v. WTO [(1962)
46 ITR 953 (Cal)] the Bombay High Court in Trustees of
Putlibai R.F. Mulla Trust v. CWT [(1967) 66 ITR 653, 657-
8 (Bom)] and CWT v. Trustees of Mrs Hansabai Tribhu
wandas Trust [(1967) 69 ITR 527 (Bom)] and the Gujarat
High Court in Padmavati Jaykrishna Trust v.CIT [(1966)
61 ITR 66, 73-4 (Guj)]. The Calcutta High Court pointed
out in Suhashini Karuri case:
“The share of a beneficiary can be said to be
indeterminate if at the relevant time the share cannot be
determined but merely because the number of
beneficiaries vary from time to time, one cannot say that it
is indeterminate.”

The same proposition was formulated in slightly different
language by the Bombay High Court in Trustees of
Putalibai R.F. Mulla Trust case [(1967) 66 ITR 653, 657-8
(Bom)]:
“The question whether the shares of the beneficiaries are
determinate or known has to be judged as on the relevant
date in each respective year of taxation. Therefore,
whatever may be the position — as to any future date, so
far as the relevant date in each year is concerned, it is
upon the terms of the trust deed always possible to
determine who are the sharers and what their shares
respectively are.”
30
The Gujarat High Court also observed in Padmavati
            Jaykrishna Trust case [(1966) 61 ITR 66, 73-4 (Guj)] :
“. . . in order to ascertain whether the shares of
            beneficiaries and their numbers were determinate or not,
            the Wealth Tax Officer has to ascertain the facts as they
            prevailed on the relevant date and therefore any variation
            in the number of beneficiaries in future would not matter
            and would not make sub-section (4) of
Section 21
applicable.”

            These observations represent correct statement of the law
            and we have no doubt that in order to determine the
            applicability of sub-section (1) of
Section 21
, what has to
            be seen is whether on the relevant valuation date, it is
            possible to say with certainty and definiteness as to who
            would be the beneficiaries and whether their shares would
            be determinate and specific, if the event on the happening
            of which the distribution is to take place occurred on that
            date. If it is, sub-section (1) of
Section 21
would apply: if
            not, the case will be governed by sub-section (4) of
Section 21
.”
35. It is thus clear that what has to be seen in the facts of the present case

   is the list of members on the date of liquidation as per Rule 35 cited

   hereinabove. Given that as on that particular date, there would be a

   fixed list of members belonging to the various classes mentioned in the

   rules, it is clear that, applying the ratio of Trustees of H.E.H. Nizam's

   Family (supra), such list of members not being a fluctuating body, but a

   fixed body as on the date of liquidation would again make the members

   ‘determinate’ as a result of which, Sec. 21AA would have no application.
31
36. For all these reasons, the impugned judgment and the review judgment

   are set aside. The appeals are allowed with no order as to costs.
……………..………………J.
                                              (R. F. Nariman)



                                              ………..……………………J.
                                              (Navin Sinha)



                                              ………..……………………J.
                                              (Indira Banerjee)
   New Delhi.
September 08, 2020.
32