[Cites
5
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Shreyas Sinha vs The West Bengal National University Of ... on 9 September, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 4279, AIRONLINE 2020 SC 724
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
S. Ravindra Bhat
,
Hemant Gupta
,
L. Nageswara Rao
REPORTABLE


                                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                              CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3085 OF 2020
                                       (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 1283 OF 2020)


                         SHREYAS SINHA                                                   .....APPELLANT(S)



                                                                      VERSUS



                         THE WEST BENGAL NATIONAL UNIVERSITY
                         OF JURIDICAL SCIENCES & ORS.                                  .....RESPONDENT(S)




                                                             JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
1.      The challenge in the present appeal is to an order passed by the

                                 Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court on 23rd December, 2019

                                 whereby an appeal against the order passed by the learned Single

                                 Judge on 22nd July, 2019 was dismissed.
2.      The appellant had sought admission to the five-year law course
Signature Not Verified
offered by the West Bengal National University of Juridical
Digitally signed by
GEETA AHUJA
Date: 2020.09.10
15:38:29 IST
Reason:
Sciences1 on the basis of the amendment in the West Bengal

                         1    for short, ‘University’
1
National University of Juridical Sciences Act, 19992 vide the
Amending Act
which came into force on 21 st May, 2019.
Such

     Amending Act
inter alia provided for reservation of seats for

     students domiciled in the State of West Bengal to the extent of at

     least thirty percent of the total intake of the University.
The

     Amending Act
reads as such:
“1.   (1)
This Act
may be called
The West Bengal
             National University of Juridical Sciences (Amendment) Act,
             2018
.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2.
In the West Bengal National University of Juridical
             Sciences Act, 1999
, after
section 4
, the following sections
             shall be inserted:-
4A. (1) The tuition fees in the University shall be such
                    as may be determined by the State Government
                    from time to time.
(2) The University shall allow free-ship in tuition
                      fees to at least five per centum of their total
                      strength to the students belonging to poor and
                      economically backward classes.
Note.- The relevant criteria for determining poor
                      and economically backward class shall be such as
                      may be determined by the State Government from
                      time to time.
(3) The University shall compulsorily make
                      provision for reservation of seats for the students
                      domiciled in the State of West Bengal to the extent
                      of at least thirty percent of the total intake in the
                      University.
4B. (1) Admission of the student in the University shall
                    be made on the basis of merit.
(2) Merit for admission in the University may be
                      determined either on the basis of marks or grade
                      obtained in the qualifying examination or on the
                      basis of marks or grade obtained in a relevant
                      entrance examination conducted by the University

2   for short, ‘the Act’
2
or by Common Entrance Test conducted at the
                         State or National level."
3.     An advertisement was published on 5th January 2019 by a

       consortium of 21 National Law Universities in the country to

       conduct Common Law Admission Test 3 on 12th May 2019 for which

       the last date of submission of application forms was 31st March

       2019. The under-graduate admissions process herein provided for a

       choice of institution to the candidate, in which such candidate was

       willing to seek admission based on merit. The date of CLAT was

       later changed to 26th May 2019 in which the appellant participated

       and was ranked 731 in the All India Merit List, declared on 14 th June

       2019. As per the merit list and his choice, he was selected to get

       admission in National Law University, Odisha but admittedly, he did

       not join such institution.
4.     The University had issued a Brochure to fill up 127 seats based on

       CLAT merit list.      As per the Brochure, 74 seats were meant for

       general category candidates and 10 seats for West Bengal

       domiciled candidates including 4 seats for general category.
5.     The grievance of the appellant is that 30% of the seats were

       reserved for the students domiciled in the State of West Bengal

       when the Act was amended on 21st May 2019.
The Act
had come

       into force before CLAT was conducted, but the benefit of reservation

       had not been extended to the students by the University in the

       Academic Session 2019-2020.
3    for short, ‘CLAT’
3
6.   The stand of the University before the Learned Single Judge was

     that the consortium conducts the CLAT examination for admission

     of students from all over the country. The seat matrix as well as the

     general information about the said examination was uploaded on

     the website in January, 2019. The table towards the total allocation

     of seats across the categories was incorporated in the information

     uploaded.   All the seats in the Domicile category of West Bengal

     have been filled up, whereas, for the remaining vacant seats, the

     candidates in terms of the rank have been asked to confirm their

     acceptance. The last candidate who would be admitted in the

     General Category has rank 262, whereas the rank of the appellant

     is 731. It was also contended that the
Amending Act
is prospective

     and cannot be made applicable in respect of the admission process

     which has already commenced from January 2019. The elaborate

     exercise of admission was started before the
Amending Act
came

     into force and the students had given their option for admission

     based on choices of National Law Universities available.
7.   The learned Single Bench of the High Court dismissed the writ

     petition inter-alia holding that the
Amending Act
is prospective. The

     rank of the last candidate admitted from the General Category is

     262 whereas the rank of the appellant is 731.       In terms of the

     Amending Act, 34 seats are, thus, reserved for the candidates

     domiciled in the State of West Bengal being 30% of the total intake.

     Such seats have to be taken away from the unreserved category
4
and added to the domiciled category. It would disrupt the entire

     admission process. The candidates who have already been allotted

     seats in different Universities all over the country as per the option

     would be seriously prejudiced.
8.   In the appeal, before the Division Bench of the High Court, an

     affidavit was filed on behalf of the University, and it stated that the

     first round of admission was completed on 4 th July, 2019 and

     thereafter the last vacant seats were allotted on 23 rd July, 2019. The

     University has attached the resolution of the Executive Council of

     the University on 10th August 2019 based on the recommendation

     of the Academic Council of the University on 27 th July 2019. It was

     decided that the benefit of reservation in terms of the
Amending

     Act
would be given from the next Academic Year i.e. 2020-2021.
9.   The Division Bench affirmed the findings recorded by the Single

     Bench, holding that the
Amending Act
is prospective and all seats

     under the West Bengal domiciled category have already been filled

     up so as to prevent students of domiciled in Bengal to migrate to

     other States. It was held that sub-section (3) of
Section 4A
of the

     Amending Act makes it clear that the reservation provided to

     candidates to apply for CLAT is for the session starting after the law

     comes into force. It also held that the test of reasonableness and

     fairness has not been compromised in any manner by the

     University.   The Court held that the
Amending Act
has come into

     force after the admission process was started, therefore, such
5
Amending Act
would amount to changing the rules of the game

        after the start of the admission process.
10.     In the Special Leave Petition against the Order passed by the High

        Court, the show cause was issued limited to the question as to

        whether the appellant can be accommodated for admission to the

        University for the year 2020-2021.
11.     Mr. Vikas Singh, learned senior counsel for the appellant submitted

        that since the
Amending Act
came into force at once, the University

        was bound to provide reservation to students who are domiciles of

        West Bengal. As the test was held after the
Amending Act
came

        into force on 21st May 2019, the action of the University in not

        granting benefit of domicile to the appellant was unwarranted,

        illegal and contrary to the provisions of the
Amending Act
. It was

        also argued that the appellant was the only candidate who had

        sought admission against the seats meant for West Bengal

        domiciled candidates, therefore, he should be admitted dehors the

        merit list. Learned senior counsel for the appellant relied upon the

        direction (iii) in the judgment of this Court reported in
S. Krishna

        Sradha v. The State of Andhra Pradesh & Ors.4
to contend that

        if a meritorious candidate has been denied admission for no fault of

        the candidate, for the reason that the cut-off date has passed, such

        candidate is entitled to be admitted in the next session, if the

        candidate has approached the Court at the earliest and without any

        delay. The court can direct the admission to such a candidate in the


4     2019 SCC OnLine SC 1609
6
next academic year by directing to increase in the number of seats

        and if it is found that the management was at fault and wrongly

        denied the admission to the meritorious candidate, the Court may

        direct to reduce the number of seats in the management quota.
12.     The Judgment in Anupal Singh & Ors. v. State of U.P. Through

        Principal Secretary, Personnel Department & Ors. 5 was relied

        upon to contend that the
Amending Act
does not amount to

        changing the rules of the game after the commencement of the

        selection process.
13.     On the other hand, Mr. Chatterji, learned counsel appearing for the

        University contended that the last candidate admitted in the

        category of domicile students in the West Bengal against the

        existing quota of 10 was at merit rank No. 356, whereas, the rank

        of the appellant is No. 731. The decision of the Executive Council

        of the University was in terms of the
Amending Act
as the

        University resolved to provide compulsory reservation in view of

        the fact that the admission process had already been started and

        the option of the candidates to seek admission in the various

        National Law Universities had already been given. Any change in

        the choice of admission would not be possible at such a stage

        because of the large number of candidates taking CLAT. Therefore,

        the University had decided to give the benefit of reservation in

        terms of the
Amending Act
from the next Academic Year. It was

        argued that even if the option for domicile for West Bengal


5     (2020) 2 SCC 173
7
candidates was made available to the appellant, still, he would only

        have a remote chance of getting admission in the University

        keeping his rank in the merit list.
14.     Learned counsel for the respondent relied upon a judgment of this

        Court in
P. Bhima Reddy v. State of Mysore & Ors.6
to contend

        the expression commencement of the
Amending Act
“at once”

        means within a reasonable time after the commencement of the

        Act.   The decision of the Executive Council of the University was

        taken within a reasonable time and cannot be said to be arbitrary

        as the admission process was initiated before the
Amending Act
came into force. Therefore, it was not possible to give effect to the

        provisions of the Act from the Academic Session 2019-2020. Thus,

        the action of the University to grant the benefit of the
Amending Act
from the next academic session cannot be said to be unreasonable

        and is a possible decision in terms of the
Amending Act
.
15.     The Bill for amending the Act was tabled on 16th November, 2018.
The same came to be approved and published in the State

        Government Gazette on 21st May 2019.
The Amending Act
comes

        into force at once i.e. on 21 st May 2019 but there is no provision in

        the
Amending Act
that it will apply to the on-going admission

        process.        The University was mandated to provide compulsory

        reservation of seats to the extent of at least 30% of the total intake

        in the University but the year from which the said admission was to

        be reserved was not prescribed in the statute.        The Academic
6     (1969) 1 SCC 68
8
Council of the University in its 36 th meeting held on 27th July, 2019

      resolved that 30% reservation for West Bengal domiciles will be

      implemented from the next Academic Year.        Such decision of the

      Academic Council was approved by the Executive Council of the

      University on 10th August, 2019.
16.   The total seats at the University are 127 including the seats meant

      for State domicile candidates prior to the amendment. The

      additional seats reserved were required to be provided at the time

      of initiation of the admission process which started in January,

      2019. Each of the candidates intending to appear in the CLAT is

      required to give three choices for admission into the National Law

      Universities.   The candidates had given these choices keeping in

      view the reservation policy of each State.     Since the reservation

      policy of 30% seats was not available on the date when the

      admission process was initiated, the decision of the University to

      provide reservation from the next Academic Year cannot be said to

      be contradictory to the provisions of the
Amending Act
.
The Act
is

      silent in respect of Academic Year in which the benefit of

      reservation is to be given.   The candidates have already applied

      and given an option for admission in the various National Law

      Universities before the coming into force of the
Amending Act
.

      Therefore, the University extended the benefit of the reservation

      from the next Academic Session. We find such decision to be fair,

      reasonable and not arbitrary or capricious.
9
17.   None of the judgments referred to by Mr. Vikas Singh are helpful to

      the arguments raised. In Anupal Singh’s case, the challenge was

      to the bifurcation of vacancies in the cadre of subordinate

      agricultural service in the State of Uttar Pradesh on the ground that

      it amounts to changing of the rules of the game in the middle of the

      selection process. However, the bifurcation of seats amongst the

      different categories was due to the wrong calculation of seats as

      per the statutory provisions. It was held that such an amendment

      in the bifurcation of seats did not amount to change of rules of the

      game as it was necessitated on account of a mistaken calculation of

      seats in terms of the provisions of the statute.
18.   S. Krishna Sradha’s case is applicable only if a meritorious

      candidate has been denied admission.        In the present case, the

      appellant cannot be said to be a meritorious candidate in the

      Academic Session 2019-2020. The benefit of reservation had been

      extended to the candidates by the Universities from the next

      Academic Session i.e. 2020-2021. Since there is no mandate in the
Amending Act
to grant the benefit of reservation in the Academic

      Year 2019-2020, therefore, the University keeping in view the entire

      facts and circumstances has rightly held that the benefit of

      reservation would be extended from the next academic year as the

      admission process had already been initiated before coming into

      force of the
Amending Act
.
19.   We also find that the judgment referred to by Mr. Chatterji is not
10
helpful to the arguments raised. The case pertained to a successful

      tenderer who was not granted a license because he had failed to

      furnish a statement of immovable properties and to furnish certain

      sureties as required by the Rules prescribed. It was in these

      circumstances, the Court held that the expression “at once” has to

      be interpreted as to be within a reasonable time.            However, the

      Amending Act in the present case came into force from the date of

      its publication in the Official Gazette. Since the Amending Act does

      not contemplate that the benefit of reservation has to be granted in

      the ongoing academic session, therefore, the University was at

      liberty to decide to extend the benefit from the next academic

      session.
20.   We do not find any error in the findings recorded by the High Court

      or that this decision of the University contravenes the provisions of

      the
Amending Act
, which may warrant interference in the present

      appeal. The appeal is, thus, dismissed with no order as to cost.
.............................................J.
                                                      (L. NAGESWARA RAO)



                                       .............................................J.
                                                            (HEMANT GUPTA)



                                       .............................................J.
                                                        (S. RAVINDRA BHAT)

 NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 09, 2020.
11