[Cites
20
, Cited by
9
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Kerala vs Mohammed Basheer on 22 January, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 2994, 2019 (4) SCC 260, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 618, (2019) 1 KER LT 386, (2019) 1 WLC(SC)CVL 263, (2019) 2 KER LJ 60, 2019 (4) KCCR SN 396 (SC), AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 3036
Author:
S. Abdul Nazeer
Bench:
A.K. Sikri
,
S. Abdul Nazeer
,
M.R. Shah
1


                                                                                     REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 10075-10076 of 2014


            STATE OF KERALA AND ANR.                                          … APPELLANTS

                                                       VERSUS

            MOHAMMED BASHEER                                                  … RESPONDENT



                                               J U D G M E N T
S. ABDUL NAZEER, J.
1.           The appellant-State of Kerala has preferred these appeals challenging the

            legality and correctness of the judgment passed by the High Court of Kerala in

            M.F.A. No.160 of 1991 dated 18.09.2001 and the order in RP No.572 of 2001 in

            M.F.A. No.160 of 1991 dated 06.02.2007.
2.           The respondent herein filed a petition in the Forest Tribunal, Palakkad under
Section 8
of the Kerala Private Forests (Vesting and Assignment) Act, 1971 (for

            short 'the KPF Act') for settlement of the dispute in relation to land measuring
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
about 2 acres bearing R.S No. 1200, Muppenad (now in Vellar mala village)
SUSHIL KUMAR
RAKHEJA
Date: 2019.01.22
17:56:53 IST
Reason:
Vythiri Taluk, Wynad district (for short 'the land'). In the petition, it was contended
2
that one K.C. Kunji Moosa had orally leased the land in favour of the respondent's

father in the year 1962 and that his father was personally cultivating the land; after

the death of his father, he was personally cultivating the land.    It is not a private

forest as defined under Section 2(f) of the KPF Act; the land was principally

planted with coffee long before the appointed day; thus, it had not vested in the

government under Section 3 of the KPF Act;           he was issued a certificate of

purchase under
Section 72K
of the Kerala Land Reforms Act, 1963 (for short 'the
Land Reforms Act
') by the Land Tribunal in respect of the said land.            It was

further contended that on 25.02.1987, the officials of Social Forestry Department

entered the land and destroyed the coffee plants.        In this connection, he had

complained to the local police and the Village Officer, and that till 25.02.1987,

there was no obstruction for cultivating the land from the forest officials.
3.    The appellants filed a counter-affidavit disputing the claim of the

respondent. It was contended that the land has not been cultivated and that the

certificate of purchase produced by the respondent is not binding on them.        The

respondent was not in possession of the land as on the date of vesting or

subsequent to that date. The land was vested in the government on 10.05.1971 and

is under the custody of the Forest Department since then. Since there is no

evidence to show the respondent's title or possession over the land on the appointed

day, his claim under Sections 3(2) and 3(3) of the KPF Act is not sustainable.
3
4.    The Tribunal, by its order dated 30.06.1990, dismissed the petition. The

respondent challenged the said order by filing an appeal before the High Court.

The High Court, by its order dated 18.09.2001, allowed the writ petition and set

aside the order of the Tribunal. The review petition filed by the appellant-State

was dismissed by the High Court on 06.02.2007.
5.    Appearing for the appellant-State, Shri Jaideep Gupta, learned senior

counsel, submits that the local inspection report shows that no cultivation

whatsoever was seen in the land. The Tribunal found that the land was a private

forest at the time of coming into force of the KPF Act.         The only document

produced by the respondent was the certificate of purchase issued by the Land

Tribunal to prove his title to the property. The certificate of purchase is not

conclusive as regards the title and possession. Forest Department was not a party

to the said proceedings and hence, it is not bound by the said certificate. The other

documents produced by the respondent, such as revenue receipts do not prove title

of the respondent over the land.     It is argued that the respondent has failed to

establish his possession with valid title to the land as on 10.05.1974 or thereafter.

Therefore, the High Court was not justified in interfering with the order of the

Tribunal.
6.    Shri K. Rajeev, learned counsel for the respondent submits that the father of

the respondent had taken the property in the year 1962. In the year 1968 the land
4
was planted with coffee. The respondent got possession of the property from his

father. Since then, the respondent has been in possession of the land. The Land

Tribunal took suo motu proceedings under Rule 5 of the Kerala Land Reforms

(Vesting and Assignment) Rules, 1970 (for short 'Land Reforms Rules') for

assignment of the right, title and interest of the said land to the cultivating tenant in

possession, under
Section 72B
of the Land Reforms Act. The Land Tribunal, after

inquiry, issued certificate of purchase in favour of the respondent, as he was found

to be the cultivating tenant in possession of the said land. The land is not a private

forest and it did not vest in the State in terms of sub-section (1) of
Section 3
as it is

exempted under sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the KPF Act. Taking into

consideration the materials placed on record, the High Court has rightly allowed

the writ petition. In the year 1987, the Forest officials illegally destroyed the

coffee cultivation claiming that it is a private Forest vested in the Government. He

prays for dismissal of the appeals.
7.    We have carefully considered the submission of the learned counsel made at

the Bar.
8.    The KPF Act has been enacted to provide for the vesting in the Government

of private forests in the State of Kerala, and for the assignment thereof to

agriculturists and agricultural labourers for cultivation.
Section 3
is an important

section in this Act, in the sense that it provides for the vesting of all private forests
5
in the State Government free from all encumbrances. But by virtue of sub-sections

(2) and (3), two categories of lands are exempted or excluded from the application

of the provision for vesting. These provisions are as under:
"3. Private forests to vest in Government:- (1)
            Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for
            the time being in force, or in any contract or other
            document, but subject to the provisions of sub-sections
            (2) and (3), with effect on and from the appointed day,
            the ownership and possession of all private forests in the
            State of Kerala shall by virtue of this Act, stand
            transferred to and vested in the Government free from all
            encumbrances, and the right, title and interest of the
            owner or any other person in any private forest shall
            stand extinguished.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply in
            respect of so much extent of land comprised in private
            forests held by an owner under his personal cultivation
            as is within the ceiling limit applicable to him under the
Kerala Land Reforms Act, 1963
(1 of 1964) or any
            building or structure standing thereon or appurtenant
            thereto.
Explanation: - For the purposes of this sub-
section, 'cultivation' includes cultivation of trees or plants
            of any species.
(3) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply in
            respect of so much extent of private forests held by an
            owner under a valid registered document of title executed
            before the appointed day and intended for cultivation by
            him, which together with other lands held by him to
            which
Chapter III of the Kerala Land Reforms Act, 1963
,
            is applicable, does not exceed the extent of the ceiling
            area applicable to him under
Section 82
of the said Act."
(emphasis supplied)
6
9.     It is clear from sub-section (2) of
Section 3
that the extent of land comprised

in private forests held by the owner under his personal cultivation is exempted

from vesting, if the ceiling limit under the
Kerala Land Reforms Act
is not

exceeded. Similarly, sub-section (3) of
Section 3
does not apply in respect of so

much of extent of private forests as is held by an owner under a valid registered

document of title executed before the appointed day and intended for cultivation by

him, if the ceiling limit under
Chapter III of the Kerala Land Reforms Act
is not

exceeded. The appointed day for the purpose of
Section 3
is 10.5.1971, which is

clear from Section 2(a) of the KPF Act.
10.   The contention of the respondent is that his father had taken the land on

lease from K.C. Kunji Moosa in the year 1962, and that his father was cultivating

seasonal crops in the lands till 1967. He planted coffee in the year 1969. In

pursuance of suo moto proceedings initiated by the Land Tribunal, the jenman right

(right of the landlord) was assigned in his favour. In support of his contention, he

has produced exhibit A1, the certificate of purchase issued by the Land Tribunal

under
Section 72K
of the Land Reforms Act.           The question is whether this

document establishes the respondent's ownership and possession over the land as

on the date of vesting in the government under the KPF Act and whether it is

exempted from vesting in the State Government.
7
11.
The Land Reforms Act
received the assent of the President on 31.12.1963.
Sections 2
to
71
,
73
to
82
,
84
,
99
to
108
and
110
to
132
came into force on

01.01.1970. The expression "landlord" is defined in sub-section (29) of
Section 2
as a person under whom a tenant holds and includes a landowner. "Landowner" is

defined in sub-section (30) of
Section 2
as the owner of the land comprised in a

holding and includes (i) a landholder holding Sree Pandaravaka lands on pattam,

otti, jenmam, kudijenmam, danam or any other tenure; and (ii) a landholder

holding Sreepadam lands on Sreepadam-pattam or other favourable tenure. The

land in question is genmam land which is clear from the records. Sub-section (32)

of
Section 2
defines "Land Tribunal" as Land tribunal constituted under
Section 99
.

Sub-section (57) of
Section 2
defines a "tenant" as any person who has paid or

agreed to pay rent or other consideration for his being allowed to possess and to

enjoy any land by a person entitled to lease that land. It is an inclusive definition

containing clauses (a) to (j)
12.
Section 72
of the Land Reforms Act provides for vesting of landlord's rights

in Government. As per this provision, all right, title and interest of the landowners

and intermediaries in respect of holdings held by cultivating tenants (including

holders of kudiyiruppus and karaimas) entitled to fixity of tenure under
Section 13
and in respect of which certificates of purchase under sub-section (2) of
Section 59
have not been issued, vest in the Government free from all encumbrances created
8
by the landowners and intermediaries subsisting thereon on the date to be notified

by the Government in that behalf in the Gazette.
13.
Section 72B
of the Land Reforms Act lays down that the cultivating tenant

of any holding or part of a holding, the right, title and interest in respect of which

have vested in the Government under Section 72, shall be entitled to assignment of

such right, title and interest.
14.    Sub-section (1) of Section 72K states that as soon as may be after the

determination of the purchase price under Section 72F or the passing of an order

under sub-section (3) of Section 72MM, the Land Tribunal shall issue a certificate

of purchase to the cultivating tenant, and thereupon the right, title and interest of

the landowner and the intermediaries, if any, in respect of the holding or part

thereof to which the certificate relates, shall vest in the cultivating tenant free from

all encumbrances created by the landowner or the intermediaries, if any. Sub-

section (2) of Section 72K states that the certificate of purchase issued as above,

shall be conclusive proof of the assignment to the tenant of the right, title and

interest of the landowner and the intermediaries, if any, over the holding or portion

thereof to which the assignment relates. These two provisions are as under:
"72K. Issue of certificate of purchase – (1) As soon as
              may be after the determination of the purchase price
              under Section 72F [or the passing of an order under sub-
              section (3) of Section 72MM] the Land Tribunal shall
              issue a certificate of purchase to the cultivating tenant,
              and thereupon the right, title and interest of the
9
landowner and the intermediaries, if any, in respect of the
            holding or part thereof to which the certificate relates,
            shall vest in the cultivating tenant free from all
            encumbrances created by the landowner or the
            intermediaries, if any.
Explanation – For the removal of doubts, it is
            hereby declared that on the issue of the certificate of
            purchase, the landowner or any intermediary shall have
            no right in the land comprised in the holding, and all his
            rights including rights, if any, in respect of trees reserved
            for his enjoyment shall stand extinguished.
            (2)        The certificate of purchase issued as above,
            shall be conclusive proof of the assignment to the
            tenant of the right, title and interest of the landowner
            and the intermediaries, if any, over the holding or
            portion thereof to which the assignment relates."
(emphasis supplied)
15.
Section 102
of the Land Reforms Act authorises the Government or any

person aggrieved by any order of the Land Tribunal to file an appeal within such

time, as may be prescribed, to the Appellate Authority.
16.   Rule 5 of the Land Reforms Rules authorizes the Land Tribunal to initiate

suo motu proceedings; which is as under:
"5. Land Tribunal to initiate suo motu proceedings. –
            (1) Where a Land Tribunal receives information that the
            right, title and interest of the landowner and
            intermediaries in respect of a holding or part of a holding
            situate within its jurisdiction have vested in the
            Government under Section 72, it shall, notwithstanding
            that an application referred to in Rule 4 has not been
            received in respect of that holding or part, as the case
            may be, of its own motion assign such right, title and
            interest to the cultivating tenants entitled thereto in the
            manner hereinafter provided."
10
17.   As noticed above, sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the KPF Act provides for

the exemption of the private forest from vesting. It states that the land comprised

in private forest held by an owner under his personal cultivation is exempted from

vesting, if the ceiling limit under the
Kerala Land Reforms Act
is not exceeded.

The land in question measures about 2 acres. It is not the case of the appellants

that the land exceeds the ceiling limit under the
Kerala Land Reforms Act
. The

expression 'held by the owner under his personal cultivation' contained in sub-

section (2) of Section 3 of the KPF Act is crucial. To bring the land under the

exempted category, the claimant should hold the same as an owner and that it

should be under his personal cultivation. 'To own' is to have good legal title to hold

and possess the property. Black's Law Dictionary, Ninth Edition defines the

word 'own' as 'to rightfully have or possess as property; to have legal title to'.
18.   It is well settled that when the enactment enjoins that any evidence would be

treated as a conclusive proof of certain factual situation or legal hypothesis, the law

would forbid other evidence to be adduced for the purpose of contradicting or

varying the aforesaid conclusiveness. This is the principle embodied in
Section 4
of the Evidence Act, 1872 when it defines "conclusive proof" (See:
Cheeranthoodika Ahmmedkutty and Anr. v. Parambur Mariakutty Umma

and Ors.
reported in 2000 (2) SCC 417).
11
19.    In the instant case, the land in question is jenmam land. The Land Tribunal

initiated suo motu proceedings under Rule 5 of the Land Reform Rules, after

obtaining information that the cultivating tenant had been in possession, obviously

on a report of the revenue inspector. It is evident from
Section 74
of the Land

Reforms Act that any tenancy after 01.04.1964 is prohibited. Any tenancy created

after that date is invalid. The Land Tribunal initiating proceedings under Section

72B in favour of the cultivating tenant would be considering the possession of a

tenant as on the said date which is far earlier than the KPF Act. Possession and

title under the certificate of purchase have to relate back to a date prior to the date

of vesting under the
Land Reforms Act
, i.e. 01.04.1964.        Therefore, there is no

question of vesting of the land in the Government under the KPF Act which has

come into force subsequent to the date of
Land Reforms Act
. As noted above, the

certificate of purchase issued under the
Land Reforms Act
is attributed with

statutory conclusiveness as regards ownership/title under sub-section (2) of Section

72K.    The certificate issued by a competent Land Tribunal after finding that the

tenant was in possession of the property as a cultivating tenant is a conclusive

proof of possession as well.
20.    In the instant case, certificate of purchase has been issued in favour of the

respondent after enquiry by the Land Tribunal. Though the State Government is

not a party to this order, there was no bar for it to challenge this order under
12
Section 102
of the Land Reforms Act. No appeal has been filed challenging the

certificate of purchase either by the Government or by any other person. Thus, the

certificate of purchase has become final.
21.    To sum up, the certificate of purchase was issued by the Land Tribunal,

under sub-section (1) of Section 72K. Sub-section (2) of
Section 72K
of the Land

Reforms Act clearly states that the certificate of purchase issued under sub-section

(1) shall be a conclusive proof of the assignment to the tenant of the right, title and

interest of the landlord and the intermediaries, if any, over the holding or portion

thereof to which the assignment relates. Thus whatever right, title and interest, the

landlord had in the land, has been assigned in favour of the respondent under the

certificate of purchase. Therefore, it can safely be concluded that the respondent is

the owner of the land as he has legal title to hold the said land. As noticed above,

the certificate is also a conclusive proof of the fact that the respondent has been in

possession of the land as a cultivating tenant right from the date of vesting of the

land under the
Kerala Land Reforms Act
. In our view, the land in question is

exempted from vesting in the State under sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the KPF

Act.
22.    In Kunjanam Antony (Dead) by LRs. v. State of Kerala and Anr. (2003)

3 SCC 221, relied on by the learned senior counsel for the appellants, it has been

held that the order of the Thaluka Land Board is a piece of evidence so far as the
13
proceedings under the
Kerala Private Forests (Vesting and Assignment) Act, 1971
are concerned, but it cannot be treated as binding on the authorities. In this

judgment, the statutory conclusiveness of title under sub-section (2) of
Section

72K
of the Land Reforms Act has not been considered. Apart from the above, it

was held that the certificate of purchase is also a piece of evidence which cannot be

totally discarded. In the instant case, the respondent has established that he is the

owner and in possession of the land on the appointed day on the basis of certificate

of purchase and other materials placed on record.
23.    The appeals are devoid of merit and are accordingly dismissed without order

as to costs.
………………………………J.
                                                    (S. ABDUL NAZEER)



                                                    ………………………………J.
                                                    (DEEPAK GUPTA)
New Delhi;
January 22, 2019.