[Cites
7
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
High Court Of Hyderabad For The State Of ... vs P. Murali Mohana Reddy And Ors. Etc. on 25 January, 2019
Author:
A.K. Sikri
Bench:
S. Abdul Nazeer
,
A.K. Sikri
1

                                                                                REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 73-74 OF 2019



     HIGH COURT OF HYDERABAD FOR THE
     STATE OF TELANGANA AND STATE OF
     ANDHRA PRADESH, THROUGH ITS
     REGISTRAR GENERAL & ANR. ETC.                                 .....APPELLANT(S)

                                         VERSUS

     P. MURALI MOHANA REDDY AND ORS.
     ETC.                            .....RESPONDENT(S)


                                              JUDGMENT
A.K. SIKRI, J.
In these appeals, challenge is laid to the judgment dated March 25,

                         2015 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of judicature at

                         Hyderabad, whereby two writ petitions filed by the respondents herein

                         have been allowed. There are, in all, four persons who had filed these

                         two writ petitions and who are appointed as Additional District and
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ASHWANI KUMAR
Date: 2019.02.28
Session Judges in the erstwhile State of Andhra Pradesh (now States of
11:53:26 IST
Reason:
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana) as Adhoc Fast Track Court District

                         Judges.
2
2) The issue of appointment of such Adhoc Judges came up for

      consideration before this Court in
Brij Mohan Lal v. Union of India &

      Ors.1
whereby this Court prescribed the modalities and procedure to be

      undertaken for absorption of such Judges on regular basis. It included

      qualifying test as well as viva voce test. Pursuant to these directions, the

      appellant herein, namely, High Court held the qualifying examination and

      also conducted interviews. These four persons (hereinafter referred to

      as the ‘respondents’) were considered not qualified for absorption on

      regular basis. The respondents, feeling aggrieved by the decision of the

      appellant, had challenged the same in the aforesaid two writ petitions

      which have been allowed in the following terms:
"31. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we hold that the decision of the
           Selection Committee declaring that the petitioners and each of them are
           not eligible to be absorbed for not securing the minimum qualifying
           marks in viva voce or aggregate qualifying marks in written and viva
           voce is illegal and arbitrary. Therefore, we direct the respondents to
           appoint the petitioners and each of them as they have qualified in the
           written test and have also taken viva voce test. This appointment shall be
           made within a period of one month from the date of communication of
           this order, subject to compliance with other formalities as required under
           law.”
3) Some facts relevant for deciding the controversy, may now be taken

      note of:
1          (2012) 6 SCC 502
3
Pursuant to the directions of this Court in Brij Mohan Lal’s case

on the aspect of establishment and functioning of Fast Track Courts, the

State of Andhra Pradesh created several Fast Track Court throughout

the State of Andhra Pradesh. After establishing such Fast Track Court,

the Government of Andhra Pradesh issued orders dated October 06,

2003 appointing 20 advocates (19 advocates and 1 APP) from Bar on

ad-hoc basis (in terms of Rules of Andhra Pradesh State High Judicial

Service Special Rules for Ad hoc appointment 2001) to preside over the

Fast Track Courts vide GOMs. No. 1798, dated October 06, 2003. From

the date of their appointment, the respondents and the similarly situated

persons (all over the country) were claiming absorption permanently to

the post of District and Sessions Judge (Entry Level). Ultimately, this

Court in Brij Mohan Lal’s case directed all the States to conduct written

examination for the ad-hoc Fast Track Court District Judges, who were

appointed directly from the Bar and presiding/presided over the Fast

Track Courts, and to initiate the process of selection for absorption of

those officials. This Court in the aforesaid case also specified the mode

and manner in which ad-hoc Fast Track District Judges are to be

absorbed in the State Judicial Service.       In nutshell, the relevant

directions can be summarised:
(a)   Written examination is to be conducted for 150 marks.
(b)   Interview is to be conducted for 100 marks.
4
(c)   Qualifying marks in the written examination shall be aggregate

  40% for general candidates and 35% for SC/ST/OBC candidates.
(d)   Each of the appointees shall be entitled to one mark per year of

  service in the FTCs, which shall form part of the interview marks.
4) In pursuance of the aforesaid directions, the High Court placed the matter

  before the Committee of Judges constituted for recruitment to the cadre of

  District Judges in the meeting held on August 09, 2012 and the Committee

  resolved to issue a notification calling for applications from the working/former

  ad-hoc Fast Track Court District Judges for absorption into regular cadre of

  Additional District Judges and directed to conduct a written examination with

  the syllabus that was given at the time of conducting written examination for

  the post of District Judge and to place the notification in the official website of

  Andhra Pradesh High Court on August 13, 2012 calling for applications from

  working/former Adhoc Fast Track Court District Judges fixing the last date for

  receipt of applications as August 31, 2012. It would be relevant to point out

  that for appointment of Judicial Officers in the State, Andhra Pradesh Judicial

  Services Rules, 2007 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Rules’) were also in place.
All the 19 Adhoc Fast Track Court District Judges submitted their applications.

  The High Court set up the mode of examination which comprised of Paper-I

  objective questions with multiple choice for 50 marks (50 questions at the rate

  of one mark per question) and Paper-II subjective or narrative for 100 marks (5
5
questions, 20 marks per question) (Total duration for two papers-three hours)

   and viva voce for 100 marks.        It was also specified that in the written

   examination one has to get minimum qualifying marks of 40% in aggregate for

   general candidates and 35% for SC/ST/BC candidates.             Similarly, marks

   relating to the completed years of service as Adhoc Fast Track Court District

   Judges, were to be given to all the candidates.
5) Written examination was held on September 06, 2012. Thereafter, the answer

   sheets were evaluated.      For conducting oral interviews to the qualified

   candidates, the matter was placed before the Committee of the judges in the

   meeting held on November 27, 2012.           The Committee found that out of

   nineteen candidates, seventeen alone were qualified for the oral interview and

   they were to be called for interview. Accordingly, call letters were sent to those

   seventeen candidates to appear for oral interview. Two other candidates were

   permitted to attend the oral interview in view of interim orders obtained by

   them by filing writ petitions. After completion of interviews for 19 candidates,

   a merit list was prepared, and the same was placed before the Committee. The

   Committee after considering the same found that twelve candidates were

   eligible to be appointed as regular Additional District Judges. They have since

   been regularised.
6) As per the High Court, other seven candidates including the four respondents,
6
did not secure the required percentage of marks. Insofar as four respondents are

   concerned, who filed the writ petitions, the marks secured by them are noted

   hereunder:
Sl. Regd.    Name      of        the Group/     Require       Marks secured out
   No. No.      Candidate               Category   percentage    of 250
                                                   of marks to   (Written + Viva
                                                   be secured    Voce)
                                                   out of 250
   1   108      Sunitha Busireddy      OC          100           99.7 (67.5 + 32.2)
   2   111      S. Sarada Devi         OC          100           99.3 (60.5 + 38.8)
   3   103      G.     Bhuvaneswari BC-A           87.5          81 (53 + 28)
                Raju
   4   104      P.    Muralimohana OC              100           89 (63 + 26)
                Reddy
7) Vide impugned judgment, these writ petitions have been allowed by the High

   Court.
8) At this juncture, we would like to take note of the reasons which have weighed

   with the High Court in granting the relief to the four respondents. The High

   Court has taken note of the marks obtained by these four respondents in the

   written examination as well as oral interview, as mentioned above. On that

   basis, the High Court has itself observed that 40% qualifying marks in case of

   general candidates would be 100 and in case of reserved candidates, it would be

   87.5. Insofar as written examination is concerned, all the four candidates had

   secured the minimum qualifying marks. However, none of them had secured

   40%/35% marks in the viva voce. Further, none of them had secured 40%/35%
7
marks in combined written test and viva voce examination. Precisely this was

  the reason for excluding the respondents from the consideration zone from

  absorption as they could not secured the qualifying marks in viva voce test and

  aggregate qualifying marks of 40%/35%. This approach of the appellant was

  questioned on the ground that no such norm was published in the advertisement

  which was later on stipulated unilaterally. Further, it was in derogation of the

  Rules    inasmuch as these Rules do not stipulate securing of minimum

  qualifying marks in the viva voce test. The appellant, on the other hand, sought

  to justify the selection process in which respondents stood excluded, with the

  submission that this process was followed strictly in accordance with the

  judgment of this Court in Brij Mohan Lal’s case.
9) The High Court has accepted the submission of the respondents. It observed

  that each of them qualified the written examination by securing the minimum

  qualifying marks as per the stipulation given in the advertisement, which was

  also in accordance with the Rules. Insofar as advertisement is concerned,

  following stipulation was inserted therein:
Viva Voce (Interview)       :       100 marks
          Minimum qualifying marks to :       Qualifying marks in the written
          be secured                          examination shall be 40%
                                              aggregate for general candidates
                                              and    35%     for    SC/ST/BC
                                              candidates.

                                              Each of the appointees shall be
                                              entitled to one mark per year of
                                              service in the FTCs, which shall
8
form part of the interview marks.




10)     Rule 6 of the Rules prescribed the methodology for conducting the
examination relevant portion whereof is as under:
"6. Methodology for conducting examination: (1) The High Court from
        time to time shall notify the number of vacancies for the category of
        District Judges to be appointed by direct recruitment indicating inter alia,
        the eligibility criteria, the syllabus, the number of marks allotted for
        written examination, the qualifying mark to be secured by a candidate,
        the number of marks allotted for the viva voce and the minimum to be
        secured therein by the candidate.
Provided that owing to the contingency it shall be open to the
        High Court to conduct a screening test which shall be objective type
        before conducting the written examination followed up by viva voce
        after duly notifying the same.
(2) While the written examination is meant to test the academic
        knowledge of the candidate, the viva voce is to test his communication
        skills; his tact; ability to defuse the situations to control the examination
        of witnesses and also lengthy irrelevant arguments and the like; and his
        general knowledge.
(3) ..
(4) The written examination shall invariably carry 80 marks limiting the
        viva voce to the remaining 20 marks.
Provided that the candidate shall secure a minimum qualifying
        mark of 40% for O.C. category, 35% for B.C. category; and 30% for
        S.C. and S.T. category in the written examination. (as amended by
        G.O.Ms.No.132, dated 16th November, 2011)

        (5) ..
(6) ..
(7) ..
(8) ..
(9) ..
9
(10) ..”
11)     The High Court, on the basis of the aforesaid stipulation in the

  advertisement as well as in the Rules pointed out that there is no stipulation for

  securing minimum qualifying marks in viva voce test either as per

  advertisement or as per the Rules. Insofar as judgment in Brij Mohan Lal’s

  case is concerned, the High Court took the view that it does not mention

  qualifying marks in viva voce and also clarifies that examination and interview

  were to be held in accordance with the relevant Rules enacted by the State for

  direct appointment of Higher Judicial Services. On that basis, the High Court

  concluded:
"20. While reading the above pronouncement of Supreme Court
        harmoniously with the Rule, we think the following procedure would
        have been a fair one, as
the said judgment
has not ignored, rather
        accepted the relevant Rules:-
(i) Written test would be for 150 marks.
(ii) Viva voce would be for 100 marks.
(iii) Candidate has to secure minimum 40% qualifying marks in written
        test.
(iv) Candidate has to participate in viva voce test.
(v) Securing qualifying marks in viva voce or in aggregate are not the
        requirements.
21. Therefore, we are of the view that the Selection Committee should
        not have adopted the norm of securing a minimum qualifying mark in
        the viva voce test or for that matter, minimum aggregate qualifying
        marks.”
10
12)       Regarding the move of the appellant in changing the criteria after issuing

      the advertisement, the High Court has held that it could not be permitted and the

      discussion in this behalf proceeds as under:
"22. Moreover, it is rightly contended by the learned counsel for the
             petitioners, relying on the aforesaid judgment of Supreme Court in
Umesh Chandra Shukla v. Union of India
(
3 supra) and A.A. Calton v.
             Director of Education
(2 supra), that the respondents and each of them
             cannot act contrary to the norms as published in the advertisement or the
             Rules and admittedly, the advertisement does not stipulate a minimum
             qualifying mark for the viva voce test or that of aggregate marks both in
             written and viva voce test. As the petitioners and each of them, in terms
             of the advertisement as well as the rules, have acted upon and that they
             acquired a vested right to be considered in terms of the advertisement
             and the rules.
23. It is not that the norms cannot be changed or varied, but this has to be
             done in terms of the statutory rules. If they do not permit, the Selection
             Committee cannot lay down the same as it will be ultra vires.
24. Moreover, as it appears from the original record produced before us,
             we find that the assessment was made on the basis of minimum
             qualifying marks in the aggregate as well as in viva voce tests and it does
             not appear that the aforesaid norms were ever published.”
13)       In support, the High Court has referred to various judgments2.
14)       We may mention at the outset that the High Court is right to the extent

      that the appointments are to be made in terms of stipulations contained in the

      advertisement. Though, such terms can be changed, but that has to be done in

      terms of statutory Rules. Insofar as advertisement is concerned, there was no

      mention of securing minimum qualifying marks in the viva voce test.
The High

2             Umesh Chandra Shukla v. Union of India & Ors.
, (1985) 3 SCC 721;
A.A. Calton v.
Director of Education & Anr.
, (1983) 3 SCC 33;
K. Manjusree v. State of Andhra Pradesh & Anr.
,
(2008) 3 SCC 512;
State of Bihar & Ors. v. Mithilesh Kumar
, (
2010) 13 SCC 467 and Arunachal
Pradesh Public Service Commission & Anr. v. Tage Habung & Ors.
, (2013) 7 SCC 737.
11
Court is also right in pointing out that Rule 6 of the Rules does not contains any

  provision of securing minimum qualifying marks in the interview. At the same

  time, it stipulates qualifying aggregate marks in written examination and viva

  voce, as 40% for general category, 35% for backward category and 30% for

  SC/ST category in the written examination.          This requirement of securing

  minimum qualifying marks in the written examination was fulfilled by the

  respondents.
15)     In the aforesaid backdrop, the only question remains to be seen is as to

  whether the approach adopted by the appellant was in consonance with the

  modalities stipulated by this Court in Brij Mohan Lal’s case. The manner

  prescribed by this Court for appointment of such ad-hoc judges on regular basis

  is contained in para 207.9 of the judgment which makes the following reading:
"207.9. All the persons who have been appointed by way of direct
        recruitment from the Bar as Judges to preside over FTCs under the FTC
        Scheme shall be entitled to be appointed to the regular cadre of the
        Higher Judicial Services of the respective States only in the following
        manner:
(a) The direct recruits to FTCs who opt for regularisation shall take a
        written examination to be conducted by the High Courts of the
        respective States for determining their suitability for absorption in the
        regular cadre of Additional District Judges.
(b) Thereafter, they shall be subjected to an interview by a Selection
        Committee consisting of the Chief Justice and four seniormost Judges of
        that High Court.
(c) There shall be 150 marks for the written examination and 100
        marks for the interview. The qualifying marks shall be 40%
        aggregate for general candidates and 35% for SC/ST/OBC
        candidates. The examination and interview shall be held in
12
accordance with the relevant Rules enacted by the States for direct
        appointment to Higher Judicial Services.
(d) Each of the appointees shall be entitled to one mark per year of
        service in the FTCs, which shall form part of the interview marks.
(e) Needless to point out that this examination and interview should be
        conducted by the respective High Courts keeping in mind that all these
        applicants have put in a number of years as FTC Judges and have served
        the country by administering justice in accordance with law. The written
        examination and interview module, should, thus, be framed keeping in
        mind the peculiar facts and circumstances of these cases.
(f) The candidates who qualify the written examination and obtain
        consolidated percentage as aforeindicated shall be appointed to the
        post of Additional District Judge in the regular cadre of the State.
(g) If, for any reason, vacancies are not available in the regular cadre, we
        hereby direct the State Governments to create such additional vacancies
        as may be necessary keeping in view the number of candidates selected.
(h) All sitting and/or former FTC Judges who were directly appointed
        from the Bar and are desirous of taking the examination and interview
        for regular appointment shall be given age relaxation. No application
        shall be rejected on the ground of age of the applicant being in excess of
        the prescribed age.”
16)     A conjoint reading of sub-para (c) and (f) of the methodology stipulated

  above would clearly bring out the following factors:
(a)   Written examination was to be for 150 marks and interview for 100

  marks.
(b)   Such written examination and interview was to be held in accordance

  with relevant Rules enacted by the State for direct appointment to High Judicial

  Services.
(c)   Each candidate was required to qualify the written examination.
(d)   No qualifying marks for viva voce.
13
(e)   At the same time, candidates were supposed to obtain ‘consolidated

  percentage as afore-indicated’, which means 40% aggregate and 35% for

  SC/ST/OBC candidates. Such consolidate percentage means 40% and 35%

  respectively out of 250 marks.
17)     We are, therefore, of the opinion that even the judgment in Brij Mohan

  Lal’s case does not lay down minimum qualifying marks for viva voce. It,

  however, prescribes qualifying marks in aggregate i.e. both for written

  examination and interview combined.
18)     Since the Court also directed that examination and interview shall be held

  in accordance with the relevant Rules enacted by the State for direct

  appointment to the Higher Judicial Services, such Rules were to be followed

  except to the extent they stood modified by the modalities prescribed by the

  Court. For example, in the instant case, though Rule 6 of the Rules prescribes

  30% qualifying marks for SC and ST category in written examination. Thus,

  the candidates were required to obtain such qualifying marks in the written

  examination. At the same time they were also mandated to secure consolidated

  qualifying marks (i.e. both in written plus interview) as prescribed in Brij

  Mohan Lal’s case.
19)     It follows from the above that insofar as written examination and

  interview is concerned, the minimum qualifying marks could be insisted upon if

  there was a stipulation to this effect in the Rules, inasmuch as there was no such
14
direction in the judgment on this aspect. We find that insofar as Rules are

  concerned, minimum qualifying marks are mentioned for written examination

  only. A combined and cumulative effect of the judgment along with the Rules

  would be as under:
(a)   Minimum qualifying marks are required for written examination by

  general candidates and SC/ST/OBC candidates respectively.
(b)   No minimum qualifying marks are required for interview. However,

  consolidated qualifying marks for written examination and interview are

  required which is 40% aggregate for general candidates and 35% for

  SC/ST/OBC candidates.
20)     As noted above, all the respondents obtained qualifying marks in written

  examination.    At the same time, none of them could secure qualifying

  aggregate/consolidated percentage marks. Insofar as non-securing of qualifying

  consolidated marks by the respondents is concerned, though the High Court has

  noted this fact but has not touched upon this aspect at all. It has only dealt with

  the aspect of requirement of minimum qualifying marks in viva voce test.
21)     We are, thus, faced with the situation where the respondents could not

  secure qualifying marks as per the judgment of this Court. However, a close

  scrutiny of the marks obtained by respondents would disclose that two

  candidates, namely, Sunitha Busireddy and S. Sarada Devi have secured 99.7

  and 99.3 marks as against the required marks of 100.           Insofar as Sunitha
15
Busireddy is concerned, when the marks are rounded off, it has to be treated as

  100 marks. Since, S. Sarada Devi is also short by only 0.7 marks, there is no

  reason not to round off her marks to 100 as well, going by the consideration that

  they have been working as ad-hoc judges for number of years and also the fact

  that it was only a qualifying examination for the purpose of regularisation.
Therefore, these two candidates/respondents have to be treated as qualified the

  written test and interview when their marks are aggregated.
22)     No doubt, other two candidates could not secure 40%/35% aggregates

  marks and, therefore, they cannot be treated as having qualified the examination

  (consisting of written test and interview). However, we find that they have, by

  this time, substantial number of years of service. Moreover, in the written

  examination they could secure 40%/35% marks though they fell short of this

  target when it comes to securing aggregate marks is concerned. It may also be

  pointed out that one of the candidates belongs to the Scheduled Caste category

  and as per the Rules persons belonging to the SC/ST category are supposed to

  secure a minimum qualifying mark of 30% in the written examination. In such

  circumstances, it would be more appropriate to give them one more chance to

  appear in the written examination and viva voce, which should be held by the

  High Court in accordance with the mandate in Brij Mohan Lal’s case. This

  direction, therefore, is given having in mind the aforesaid equitable

  considerations, and in exercise of our powers under
Article 142
of the

  Constitution. The High Court may hold such an examination within a period of
16
six months from today and during this period these two persons shall also

    continue in service.
23)     As a result, these appeals are disposed in the aforesaid terms.
No order as to cost.
.............................................J.
                                                                                (A.K. SIKRI)



                                                    .............................................J.
                                                                 (S. ABDUL NAZEER)

NEW DELHI;
JANUARY 25, 2019.