[Cites
67
, Cited by
19
]
Supreme Court of India
New Delhi Municipal Council vs Association Of Concerned Citizens Of ... on 22 January, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2387, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1718, (2019) 1 SCALE 638, (2019) 256 DLT 1, (2019) 2 RECCIVR 43
Author:
A.K. Sikri
Bench:
Ashok Bhushan
,
A.K. Sikri
REPORTABLE


                                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 903-930       OF 2019
                                  (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 23186-23213 OF 2017)


                         NEW DELHI MUNICIPAL COUNCIL ETC.                                .....APPELLANT(S)
                         ETC.

                                                      VERSUS

                         ASSOCIATION    OF     CONCERNED                              .....RESPONDENT(S)
                         CITIZENS OF NEW DELHI AND OTHERS
                         ETC. ETC.

                                                                  WITH

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).   964 OF 2019
                                       (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 2305 OF 2019)
                                        (ARISING OUT OF DIARY NO. 35928 OF 2017)



                                                         JUDGMENT
A.K. SIKRI, J.
Leave granted.
Introductory Remarks:
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SUSHIL KUMAR
2)     These appeals are filed by New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC)
RAKHEJA
Date: 2019.01.22
17:56:57 IST
Reason:
against the judgment dated August 10, 2017 rendered by High

                                Court of Delhi in a batch of writ petitions which were filed by the
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.       Page 1 of 72
persons who have their houses/properties in NDMC area. Some

       of the petitions were by the associations of residents as well

       (hereinafter referred to as the “assessees/respondents”).                   In

       those writ petitions filed by the assessees they had challenged

       the constitutional validity of NDMC (Determination of Annual

       Rent) Bye-laws, 2009 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘impugned

       Bye-laws’).        These Bye-laws changed the earlier regime of

       determining the rateable value for the purposes of levying

       property tax. These Bye-laws seek to alter the earlier system of

       determining the rateable value on the basis of he annual rent at

       which the land or buildings may reasonably be expected to be let

       from year to year. On that basis annual rent used to be fixed and

       a particular percentage was prescribed for the purposes of

       payment of property tax. The impugned Bye-laws introduced the

       system of Unit Area Method (UAM). As per this method Unique

       Area Value (UAV) per sq. ft/meter                 of a property is fixed with

       reference to the characteristics of the property such as location,

       occupancy, age, structure of the said property. This UAV is then

       multiplied by the area of the vacant land or covered space to

       arrive at its annual value. When the annual value is determined

       on the basis of such a formula, property tax thereupon is to be

       paid by the assessees.
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.      Page 2 of 72
3)     It may be mentioned at this stage itself that the impugned Bye-
laws have been framed by the Government of India in exercise of

       powers conferred by sub-section (1) of
Section 391
of the New

       Delhi Municipal Act, 1944 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’). It

       is also to be noted that
Section 63
of the Act deals with

       determination of annual rent.                Various grounds were raised

       challenging the validity of these Bye-laws and one of the grounds

       was that the UAM of fixing the annual value as prescribed in the

       Bye-laws was foreign to the provisions of
Section 63
of the Act,

       meaning thereby that the language of
Section 63
did not permit

       determination of annual value on such a basis as it prescribed the

       method of fixing annual rent on the basis of the rent which the

       land or building may reasonably be expected to let from year to

       year. It was, thus, argued by the assessees in the writ petitions

       that the impugned Bye-laws were ultra vires the provisions of
Section 63
of the Act. The High Court chose to confine itself to

       this particular submission and eschewed the discussion on other

       grounds on which these bye-laws were also challenged. In the

       impugned judgment, the High Court accepts the submission of

       the assessees holding that the impugned Bye-laws are ultra vires

       the NDMC Act as they are far beyond the scope and ambit of the
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 3 of 72
powers vested in NDMC under
Section 388(1)(A)(9)
of the Act.
Section 388
gives rule making power to the NDMC.
4)     When the matter was argued before us, initially the parties

       confined to the aforesaid aspect on which High court has

       rendered its decision. However, arguments were heard on the

       other grounds of challenge as well, so that decision is given on

       merits, if the circumstances so warrant. We may also mention at

       this stage that many applications for intervention/impleadment

       have been filed by those assessees who were not parties to the

       writ petitions in the High Court. Such assessees are satisfied

       with the impugned Bye-laws and, therefore, they have not

       supported the case set up by the NDMC.
Factual background:
5)     Before adverting to the controversy, it would be appropriate to

       take note of some relevant facts:
6)     As is well-known, during the period of the British India, Delhi

       became the capital of India in the year 1911.                   Even before it

       became the capital, for the first time house tax was made

       applicable and levied in Delhi in the year 1902. After becoming

       the capital of India, Delhi was detached from Punjab and Delhi
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.        Page 4 of 72
Enclave covering an area of 1240 sq. miles was formed and new

       roads were constructed between the temporary capital near Civil

       Lines and Raisina. The Punjab Improvement Act was passed in

       the year 1922 and it became the town planning legislation. A

       large chunk of land was acquired by the Imperial Delhi Committee

       and was transferred to the Imperial (New) Delhi Municipal

       Committee which was constituted in the year 1916 but came into

       effect in the year 1925 when this Delhi Municipal Committee was

       upgraded to the level of a second class municipality to be

       governed under the
Punjab Municipal Act, 1911
(hereinafter

       referred to as ‘PMA’).
Section 188
of the PMA conferred power

       on the Committee to make Bye-laws, inter alia, for carrying out

       the purposes of the PMA.               In 1932, the Imperial (New) Delhi

       Municipal Committee was renamed as ‘New Delhi Municipal

       Committee’ (NDMC). After obtaining the independence and with

       the adoption of the Constitution of India in the year 1950, Delhi

       was shown as Part-C State. However, in the year 1956, vide the
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956
, Delhi became a

       Union Territory.         Immediately, thereafter the
Delhi Municipal

       Corporation Act, 1957
(DMC Act
) was passed whereunder

       Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD) was constituted to which

       first election took place in the year 1958. The jurisdiction of MCD
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 5 of 72
covers the entire Union Territory of Delhi including the rural areas,

       but excluding the New Delhi Municipal Committee and Delhi

       Cantonment Areas. However, the area under the jurisdiction of

       the NDMC was reduced from 32 sq. miles to 16 sq. miles.
7)     In terms of the powers conferred under
Section 188(v)
of the PMA

       which related to assessment and collection of house tax, the

       NDMC made the NDMC House Tax Bye-laws, 1962 (‘the 1962

       Bye-laws). These were published in the Official Gazette by a

       notification dated 24th April, 1964. There are only around 12,000

       units which are subject to assessment for property tax in the

       NDMC area.          20% of these are residential units and rest are

       commercial units.           However, only 20% of the properties are

       private properties.           The remaining 80% are (a) properties

       belonging to the Union of India, (b) properties of Diplomatic

       Missions and Foreign Embassies, (c) properties of State

       Governments and (d) properties of Railways.
8)     The above four types of properties are outside the purview of

       property tax assessment. This is because
Articles 285
and
289
of

       the Constitution prohibit levy of taxes on the properties of the

       Centre and State by the State and Centre respectively. Except

       the properties belonging to the Union of India, the other three
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 6 of 72
types of properties do not pay even the service charges to the

       local authorities. 75% of the property tax demand is collected

       from just about 6.25% of the properties in the NDMC area.
Therefore, the tax base for the purpose of collection of property

       tax is small compared to the MCD area.
9)     For the governance of Union Territory of Delhi, the Parliament

       passed the Delhi Administration Act, 1966 which continued to

       operate till 1992, when a special status was conferred upon Delhi

       by rechristening it as National Capital Territory of Delhi (NCTD).

       This happened with the insertion of
Article 239AA
and
239AB
in

       the     Constitution       of    India     vide
Constitution   (Sixty-Ninth

       Amendment) Act, 1991
.               Simultaneously, the Parliament also

       enacted Government of NCTD Act, 1991 which replaced the

       earlier Delhi Administration Act, 1966. With these developments

       several provisions of PMA were also brought in tune with the

       GNCTD Act, 1991. Subsequently, for the NDMC area, the

       Parliament enacted NDMC Act in the year 1994 that replaced

       PMA. Hitherto New Delhi Municipal Committee was also replaced

       by New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC).
10)    As per Section 60 of the NDMC Act, the power to levy taxes,

       including property tax, is vested with the NDMC. The NDMC, in
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.        Page 7 of 72
exercise of powers conferred under Section 416(2)(a) of the

       NDMC Act adopted the existing 1962 Bye-laws insofar as levy of

       property tax is concerned as it was found that they were not

       inconsistent with the NDMC Act. Under these Bye-laws, as noted

       above, the method of arriving at annual rent is on the basis of

       annual rent which land and building may reasonably be expected

       to be let from year to year. It would be significant to mention that

       even in the Bye-laws of MCD, identical method of levying the

       house tax/property tax was incorporated.
11)    There were certain concerns expressed at various quarters about

       the said annual rent method in the Bye-laws. Insofar as the MCD

       is concerned, it constituted V.K. Malhotra Committee to study and

       report upon the efficacy of the property tax assessment and

       collection system, so that the faults in the system could be ironed

       out. While this Committee was in the process of undertaking that

       study, the Union of India circulated ‘Guidelines for Property Tax

       Reforms’ in the year 1998 in order to bring needed reforms in the

       method of calculation of property tax and to exploit the potential

       of property tax as a major source of income for strengthening the

       revenue base of these municipalities.                      The V.K. Malhotra

       Committee submitted its report to the MCD in the year 2002.
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.       Page 8 of 72
Based on its recommendations, an Expert Committee under the

       Chairmanship of Sh. K. Dharmarajan was constituted by the

       Lieutenant Governor of Delhi for recommending the modalities

       required for the interpretation of the UAM of property tax

       assessment         in    the     MCD      area,     which       was      the    major

       recommendation of the V.K. Malhotra Committee. After receiving

       the final report from Dharmarajan Committee, the Delhi Municipal

       Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2003 was passed.                            Further, in

       exercise of the powers conferred                     by the
Delhi Municipal

       Corporation (Amendment) Act
, the Delhi Municipal Corporation

       (Property Taxes) Bye-laws, 2004 were also made.
12)    With the aforesaid introduction of UAM for the purposes of

       property tax assessment in MCD area, the NDMC also

       deliberated        on     this     subject,       having        regard     to     the

       recommendations given by the Dharmarajan Committee.                              In a

       meeting held by NDMC on 27th April, 2005, it was resolved that it

       would request GNCTD to amend the provisions of Section 65 of

       the NDMC Act.
13)    On 13th February, 2006, the NDMC in its meeting discussed that

       the rateable value Bye-laws may be prepared in such a way so as

       to remove most of the difficulties faced in the present system. It
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.             Page 9 of 72
was suggested to introduce UAM selectively for self-occupied

       residential properties in the Bye-laws. Thereafter, on 10 th March,

       2006, the Chairperson of the NDMC constituted a committee (the

       NDMC Special Committee) under Section 9 of the NDMC Act to

       advice upon the property tax. This Special Committee submitted

       its final report in February, 2007 which was, in principle, accepted

       by the NDMC in its meeting on 12th February, 2007.                          More

       deliberations took place thereafter and it is not necessary to spell

       out the same. Suffice it is to mention that amendments in the

       Bye-laws were proposed and objections invited. Ultimately on,

       24th February, 2009, the GNCTD notified the New Delhi Municipal

       Council      (Determination        of    Annual      Rent)      Bye-laws,   2009

       (Impugned Bye-laws) in the Official Gazette.                    These Bye-laws

       were enforced from 1st April 2009 and were made applicable in

       the area under the jurisdiction of the NDMC.
Provisions of the Bye-laws and the NDMC Act:
14)    It is pertinent to mention that the NDMC Special Committee which

       was appointed by the Chairperson, had submitted its final report

       in February, 2007. In that report, the Committee noted that it was

       difficult to advise a perfect tax system. However, keeping in view

       the distinct advantages offered by the UAM, the NDMC Special
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.         Page 10 of 72
Committee recommended a modified form of UAM for NDMC

       which attempted to balance the principles of neutrality, stability,

       accountability, ease of administration, fairness based on benefits

       received and the ability to pay. The NDMC Special Committee

       also examined the financial position of the NDMC with special

       reference to the profit profile of NDMC wherein a large

       percentage of properties are owned by the Government and only

       a very small percentage of private properties are liable for

       payment of property tax. The NDMC Special Committee stated

       that it considered the following options:
“(a) Maintain the status-quo as far as the method of
              assessment is concerned. Thus to continue with the
              annual value method of property tax assessment but
              address procedural shortcomings.
Or
(b) Selective introduction of Unit Area Method in respect of
              residential units that are self-occupied (or for both self
              occupied W.P.(C) 3348/2010 & connected matters Page
              26 of 40 and rented) and for institutional buildings and
              hotels. The remaining properties to continue under the
              reasonable rent method of assessment as at present. Or
(c) Levy uniform service charges for all non-residential
              properties regardless of their ownership, government or
              private. The service charges would be liable for increases
              from time to time to keep pace with the inflation and
              increased cost of services. The base service charges
              would be fixed at some proportion of land values and unit
              rate subject to the condition that they will not be lower than
              the existing Rateable Value

              Or
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 11 of 72
(d) Introduce a modified form of Unit Area Method for all
              properties by fixing the unit rates solely by category of use
              and land values. Thus the lowest unit rate (or multiplicative
              factors) would be in respect of a self-occupied residential
              property in an area where land values are low; the highest
              unit rate (or multiplicative factor) would be in respect of
              commercial properties/hotels that are located in areas
              where land values are the highest (land values to be
              computed as per Land & Development Office rate
              schedules amended from time to time)”
15)    The NDMC Special Committee rejected options (a), (b) and (c). It

       recommended            acceptance         of    option      (d).   However,     it

       recommended “a formula which is revenue neutral and at the

       same time optimizes the objective of vertical equity. The analysis

       of data compiled by the tax department suggests that there is

       extreme variation in taxation of similarly placed properties for

       various reasons discussed earlier. This problem will be

       automatically addressed as horizontal equity is inbuilt in the Unit

       Area System.”
16)    It is significant that the NDMC Special Committee did not touch

       upon the manner of bringing about the above change i.e. whether

       it should be by amending the Bye-laws or amending the NDMC

       Act itself. However, in the position paper submitted to the NDMC,

       the Special Committee, while recommending the adoption of a

       modified UAM, had suggested that it should be introduced

       selectively for “self-occupied residential properties.”                  It also
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.        Page 12 of 72
added: “However, Bye-laws cannot go beyond what is provided in

       the Act. As such, depending upon the final decision in the matter,

       an appropriate amendment in the Act appears to be the only

       alternative.”
17)    Since the impugned Bye-laws are declared by the High Court as

       ultra vires the NDMC Act, it would also be necessary to notice

       some of the relevant provisions of the NDMC Act.                From the

       reading of these Bye-laws, it is clear that the UAM for determining

       the rateable value has been introduced which is different from

       ‘annual rent’. Bye-laws 2 of impugned Bye-laws mentions that

       the annual rent for which the land and building were expected to

       be let would be determined as per Bye-law 3 in respect of special

       categories of lands and buildings and as per Bye-law 4 in respect

       of other lands and buildings.
18)    Some of the relevant provisions of the impugned Bye-laws, may

       now be noted:
"2.   Determination of Annual Rent – For the purpose of
              sub-section (1) of
Section 63
of the New Delhi Municipal
              Council Act, 1994 (44 of 1994) hereinafter referred to as
              the ‘Act’) the annual rent, for which lands and buildings are
              expected to let from year, shall be determined as under:-
“(i) Special categories of lands and buildings as per
                 provisions of bye-law 3 and;
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 13 of 72
(ii) Other lands and buildings as per provisions of
                 bye-law 4.
3. Annual Rent of Special Category of land and buildings:-
(1)    the annual rent of the lands and buildings, which are
              not normally let, being the property of the Union,
              Government, State or used as school, college, hostel,
              guest house, clubs, cinema hall, hotels and such other
              lands and buildings as may be specified by the Valuation
              Committee, shall be calculated at such percentage, as
              may be determined by the Valuation Committee, being not
              less than 5% and not more than 10% of the aggregate of:
(a) value of land falling in the jurisdiction of New
                 Delhi, at the circle rate of Rs. 43,000 (Rupees forty
                 three thousand only) per square meter, as increased
                 by the multiplication factor for user of the land,
                 specified in sub-bye-law (3); and
(b) value of covered space of the building at Rs.
15,000 (Rupees fifteen thousand only) per square
                 meter of the covered space of the building as
                 reduced by the age factor of the building as reduced
                 by the age factor of the building specified in sub-bye-
                 law (4).
xxx         xxx     xxx

              (3) The use factor for the land shall be as under:-
Use                                             Factor

              Residential, Public Purpose, School, College
Hostel, Hospital                                          1
Public Utility Government Offices, Embassies              2
Club, Guest Houses, Cinema Halls and Hotels               3
(Other than 5 star hotels)

              Explanation:- Use Factor for a particular year shall be
              determined based on usage of a particular type for more
              than 180 days in a financial year.
(4)      Age factor for age of the building shall be as under:-
Age                                          Factor

              Constructed upto 1960                                    0.5
              Constructed upto 1960-69                                 0.6
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.         Page 14 of 72
Constructed upto 1970-79                                 0.7
              Constructed upto 1980-89                                 0.8
              Constructed upto 1990-99                                 0.9
              Constructed upto 2000-09                                 1.0

              4.     Annual Rent of other land and buildings-
              (1)    The annual rent of lands and buildings valuation of
which is not covered by bye-law 3 shall be the aggregate
              of the bona fide annual value of land and bona fide annual
              value of the covered space of the buildings.
xxx     xxx    xxx

              (5)   The relevant factors for the increasing on decreasing
              or for not increasing or decreasing, the base unit area
              values specified in respect of each of the parameters of
              type of use, age, type of structure, occupancy status,
              average rentals available in the building, location of
              covered space and any other relevant factors as may be
              necessary for determining the bona fide annual value of
              land and building shall be fixed by the Valuation
              Committee, from time to time.
(6)    Pending fixation of relevant factors and revisions
              thereof by the Valuation Committee, the multiplication
              factor for use and occupancy of the covered space shall
              be as under:
Use of land and covered space of building                Factor
Residential                                               1
Others                                                    6
Occupancy of land and covered space of building Factor
Self-Occupied or Vacant                                       1
Others                                                        3
Provided that the location factor covered space in
              basement used for storage, parking and utilities will be
              taken 0.5.
Explanations:-
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.            Page 15 of 72
(i)   The premises owned by companies, firm, trust etc.
              and used by the directors, employees or partners for
              residence or guest house shall not be treated as self-
occupied by the owners.
(ii)  For a particular year, the use factor and the
              occupancy factor shall be determined on the basis of
              usage/occupancy prevailing for more than 180 days in that
              year. In case the occupancy factor is determined as
              “others” and the premises actually remains vacant for part
              of the year, the property will be eligible for vacancy
              remission as per provisions below the heading “Remission
              and Refund” under Chapter-VIII relating to “Taxation” of
              the
New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994
(44 of 1994).

              (7)     Age factor for age of the building shall be as under:-
Age                                              Factor

              Constructed upto 1960                                    0.5
              Constructed upto 1960-69                                 0.6
              Constructed upto 1970-79                                 0.7
              Constructed upto 1980-89                                 0.8
              Constructed upto 1990-99                                 0.9
              Constructed upto 2000-09                                 1.0

              (8)    Where the land and the covered space of the
building is let and actual rent is in excess of the bona fide
              annual value of land and building referred to in sub-bye-
              law (1), the rateable value for the purposes of that sub-
              bye-law shall be such actual rent.
Provided that this will not apply to residential
              properties used by occupier exclusively for residential
              purposes.”
19)    Let us also scan through the relevant provisions of the Act:
"
Section 60
: Levy of Taxes -
1.     The Council shall for the purposes of this Act, levy
              the following taxes, namely:-
a. Property tax;
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.         Page 16 of 72
b. x x x x x x
2. X X X X X X
3. The taxes specified in sub-section (1) and sub-section
              (2) shall be levied, assessed and collected in accordance
              with the provisions of this Act and the bye-laws made
              thereunder.
Section 61
: Rate of Property Tax-
1. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the property tax
              shall be levied on lands and buildings in New Delhi and
              shall consist of not less than ten and not more than thirty
              per cent of the rateable value of lands and buildings:
provided that the Council may, when fixing the rate at
              which the property tax shall be levied during any year,
              determine that the rate leviable in respect of lands and
              buildings or portions of lands and buildings in which any
              particular class of trade or business is carried on shall be
              higher than the rate determined in respect of other lands
              and buildings or portions of other lands and buildings by
              an amount not exceeding one-half of the rate so fixed:
Provided further that the tax may be levied on graduated
              scale, if the Council so determines.
Explanation. - Where any portion of a land or building is
              liable to a higher rate of the tax such portion shall be
              deemed to be a separate property for the purpose of
              municipal taxation.
2. The Council may exempt from the tax lands and
              buildings of which the rateable value does not exceed one
              thousand rupees.
Section 62
: Premises in respect of which property tax is to
              be levied-
Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the property tax
              shall be levied in respect of all lands and buildings in New
              Delhi except-
a. lands and buildings or portions of lands and buildings
              exclusively occupied and used for public worship or by a
              society or body for a charitable purpose:
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 17 of 72
Provided that such society or body is supported wholly or
              in part by voluntary contributions, applies its profits, if any,
              or other income in promoting its objects and does not pay
              any dividend or bonus to its members.
Explanation. - "Charitable purpose" includes relief of the
              poor, education and medical relief but does not include a
              purpose which relates exclusively to religious teaching.

              b. lands and buildings vested in the Council, in respect of
              which the said tax, if levied, would under the provisions of
              this Act be leviable primarily on the Council;

              c. agricultural lands and buildings (other than dwelling
              houses).
2. Lands and buildings or portions thereof shall not be
              deemed to be exclusively occupied and used for public
              worship or for a charitable purpose within the meaning of
              clause (a) of sub-section (1) if any trade or business is
              carried on in such lands and buildings or portions thereof
              or if in respect of such lands and buildings or portions
              thereof, any rent is derived.
3. Where any portion of any land or building is exempt
              from the property tax by reason of its being exclusively
              occupied and used for public worship or for a charitable
              purpose such portion shall be deemed to be a separate
              property for the purpose of municipal taxation.
Section 63
: Determination of rateable value of lands and
              buildings assessable to property tax-
1. The rateable value of any lands or buildings assessable
              to any property taxes shall be the annual rent at which
              such land or building might reasonably be expected to let
              from year to year less a sum equal to ten per cent of the
              said annual rent which shall be in lieu of all allowances for
              cost of repairs and insurance, and other expenses, if any,
              necessary to maintain the land or building in a state to
              command that rent:
Provided that in respect of any land or building the
              standard rent of which has been fixed under the
Delhi Rent
              Control Act, 1958
(59 of 1958) the rateable value thereof
              shall not exceed the annual amount of the standard rent so
              fixed.
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.    Page 18 of 72
2. The rateable value of any land which is not built upon
              but is capable of being built upon and of any land on which
              a building is in process or erection shall be fixed at five per
              cent of estimated capital value of such land.
3. All plant and machinery contained or situate in or upon
              any land or building and belonging to any of the classes
              specified from time to time by public notice by the
              Chairperson with the approval of the Council, shall be
              deemed to form part of such land or building for the
              purpose of determining the rateable value thereof under
              sub-section (1) but save as aforesaid no account shall be
              taken of the value of any plant or machinery contained or
              situated in or upon any such land or building.
Section 65
: Taxation of Union Properties-
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing
              provisions of this Chapter, lands and buildings being
              properties of the Union shall be exempt from the property
              tax specified in
section 61
:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall prevent the
              Council from levying property tax on such lands and
              buildings to which immediately before the 26th January,
              1950, they were liable or treated as liable, so long as that
              tax continues to be levied by the Council on other lands
              and buildings.
(2) Where the possession of any land or building, being
              property of the Union, has been delivered in pursuance of
              section 20 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and
              Rehabilitation) Act, 1954 (44 of 1954) to a displaced
              persons, or any association of displaced person, whether
              incorporated or not, or to any other person [hereafter in
              this sub-section and the proviso to sub-section (1) of
              section 66 referred to as the transferee], the property tax
              specified in section 61 shall be leviable and shall be
              deemed to have been leviable in respect of such land or
              building with effect from the 7th day of April, 1958 or the
              date on which possession thereof has been delivered to
              the transferee, whichever is later, and such property tax
              shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other
              provision of this Act, be recoverable with effect from that
              day or date, as the case may be.
Section 66
: Incidence of Property Tax-
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 19 of 72
(1) The property tax shall be primarily leviable as follows:-
(a)     if the land or building is let, upon the lessor;
(b)    If the land or building is seb-let, upon the superior
              lessor
(c) if the land or building is unlet, upon the person in
              whom the right to let the same vests:
Provided that the property tax in respect of land or
              building, being property of the Union, possession of which
              has been delivered in pursuance of
section 20
of the
              Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act,
              1954 (44 of 1954) shall be primarily leviable upon the
              transferee.
(2)    If any land has been let for a term exceeding one
              year to a tenant and such tenant has built upon the land,
              the property tax assessed in respect of that land and
              building erected thereon shall be primarily leviable upon
              the said tenant, whether the land and building are in the
              occupation of such tenant or a sub-tenant of such tenant.
Explanation. - The term "tenant" includes any person
              deriving title to the land or the building erected upon such
              land from the tenant whether by operation of law or by
              transfer intervivos.
3. The liability of the several owners of any buildings
              which is, or purports to be, severally owned in parts or flats
              or rooms, for payment of property tax or any installment
              thereof payable during the period of such ownership shall
              be joint and several.
Section 67
: Apportionment of liability for property tax
              when the premises are let or sub-let-
(1) If any land or building assessed to property tax is let,
              and its rateable value exceeds the amount of rent payable
              in respect thereof to the person upon whom under the
              provision of
section 66
the said tax is leviable, that person
              shall be entitled to receive from his tenant the difference
              between the amount of the property tax levied upon him
              and the amount which would be leviable upon him if the
              said tax was calculated on the amount of rent payable to
              him.
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.     Page 20 of 72
(2) If the land or building is sub-let and its rateable value
              exceeds the amount of rent payable in respect thereof to
              the tenant by his sub-tenant, or the amount of rent payable
              in respect thereof to a sub-tenant by the person holding
              under the sub-tenant, the tenant shall be entitled to receive
              from his sub-tenant or the sub-tenant shall be entitled to
              receive from the person holding under him, as the case
              may be, the difference between any sum recovered under
              this section from such tenant or sub-tenant and the
              amount of property tax which would be liable in respect of
              the said land or building if the rateable value thereof were
              equal to the difference between the amount of rent which
              such tenant or sub-tenant receives and the amount of rent
              which he pays.
(3) Any person entitled to receive any sum under this
              section shall have, for the recovery thereof, he same rights
              and remedies as if such sum were rent payable to him by
              the person from whom he is entitled to receive the same.”
20)    Though some other provisions may also be relevant, instead of

       reproducing those provisions, the gist thereof can be mentioned.

       It is extracted from the discussion from the impugned judgment

       as it correctly captures the essence of these provisions.
21)    Under Section 61 (1) of the NDMC Act, property tax shall be

       levied on lands and buildings in New Delhi and "shall consist of

       not less than ten and not more than thirty per cent of the rateable

       value of lands and buildings.” The proviso to Section 61(1) of the

       NDMC Act states that the NDMC may, "when fixing the rate at

       which the property tax shall be levied during any year, determine

       the rate leviable in respect of lands and buildings or portions of

       lands and buildings in which any particular class of trade or
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 21 of 72
business is carried on shall be higher than the rate determined in

       respect of other lands and buildings or portion of other lands and

       buildings by an amount not exceeding one-half of the rate so

       fixed.” The second proviso to
Section 61 (1)
states that “the tax

       may be levied on graduated scale, if the Council so determines.”

       The explanation to
Section 61 (1)
states that “where any portion

       of a land or building is liable to a higher rate of the tax such

       portion shall be deemed to be a separate property for the purpose

       of municipal taxation.”
22)    Under Section 61 (2) of the NDMC Act, the NDMC can exempt

       from tax the lands and buildings where “the rateable value does

       not exceed Rs.1,000.”
23)    The expression ‘rateable value’ is defined under Section 2 (42) of

       the NDMC Act to mean “the value of any land or building fixed in

       accordance with the provisions of this Act and the Bye-laws made

       thereunder for the purpose of assessment to property taxes.”
24)    Section 62 of the NDMC Act relates to the 'Premises in respect of

       which tax is to be levied'.
Section 62 (1)
lists out such lands or

       buildings or portions thereof which will not be subject to levy of

       property tax. This includes lands exclusively occupied and used
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 22 of 72
for public worship or by a society or body for a charitable

       purpose. It also includes lands and buildings vested in the NDMC

       in respect of which the tax, if levied, would be leviable primarily

       on the NDMC and agricultural lands and buildings (other than

       dwelling houses).
Section 62 (3)
clarifies that if a portion of the

       land or building is exempted from property tax by reason of the

       exclusive use or occupied for public worship or charitable

       purpose then such portion “shall be deemed to be a separate

       property for the purpose of municipal taxation.”
25)    Section 63 of the NDMC Act sets out the method of determination

       of the rateable value of lands and buildings assessable to

       property tax.
Section 63 (1)
provides that the rateable value of

       any land or building assessable to property tax shall be the

       annual rent at which such land or building might reasonably be

       expected to let from year to year less a sum equal to 10% of the

       said annual rent which shall be in lieu of all allowances for cost of

       repairs and insurance, and other expenses necessary to maintain

       the land or building in a state to command that rent. The proviso

       to Section 63 (1) of the NDMC Act states that in respect of any

       land or building the standard rent of which has been fixed under

       the
Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958
(‘
DRC Act
’), the rateable value
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 23 of 72
thereof "shall not exceed the annual amount of the standard rent

       so fixed.".
26)    Section 632) of the NDMC Act states that the rateable value of

       any land which is not built upon but is capable of being built upon

       and any land on which a building is in process of erection “shall

       be fixed at five per cent of estimated capital value of such land.”

       Under
Section 63(3)
the Chairperson of the NDMC can by public

       notice, with the approval of the NDMC, specify a plant and

       machinery which will be deemed to form part of such land and

       building for the purposes of determination of rateable value.

       Section 65(1) of the NDMC Act clarifies that lands and buildings

       being properties of the Union shall be exempt from the property

       tax specified in Section 61 of the NDMC Act.
27)    Section 66 of the NDMC Act speaks of the incidence of the

       property tax. It is primarily on the lessor if a building or land is

       given on lease. It is on the superior lessor if the land or building is

       given on a sub-lease. If it is not leased then on the person on

       whom the right to let the same vests.
28)    Section 67 of the NDMC Act talks of apportionment of liability of

       the property tax when the premises are let or sub-let.
Section 68
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 24 of 72
clarifies who will be primarily liable for the property tax due in

       respect of any land or building and in the event of default of the

       person liable to pay such propertytax as specified in
Section 66
. It

       is clarified that this would be the occupier of such land or building.
29)    Section 70 of the NDMC Act deals with the ‘Assessment List’.
This is a list of all lands and buildings which contains such

       particulars with respect to each land and building as may be

       prescribed by the Bye-laws. When such Assessment List is

       prepared, the Chairperson under Section 70 (2) of the NDMC Act

       gives a public notice thereof and every person claiming to be an

       owner, lessor or occupier of a land or building included in the List

       shall be at liberty to inspect the List and take extracts therefrom

       free of charge. Under
Section 70 (3)
, the Chairperson is to give a

       public notice of a date not less than one month thereafter when

       he would proceed to consider the rateable value of the lands and

       buildings entered in the Assessment List. He is also to give the

       written notice where the rateable value is proposed to be

       increased. Section 70 (4) of the NDMC Act provides for objections

       to be filed to the Assessment List in writing to the Chairperson.

       Section 70 (5) of the NDMC Act talks of an objection being

       notified into and investigated, and the person making them shall
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 25 of 72
be allowed an opportunity of being heard either in person or by

       authorised agent before the final Assessment List is prepared

       under Section 70 (6) of the NDMC Act. Section 72 of the NDMC

       Act provides for amendment of the Assessment List and
Section

       73
for preparation of new Assessment List.
30)    Under Section 81 the Chairperson of the NDMC Act employs

       valuers to give advice or assistance in respect of valuation of any

       land or building.
The Impugned Judgment:
31)    After taking note of the aforesaid provisions of the Act as well as

       Bye-laws, the Delhi High Court, inter alia, observed that insofar

       as definition of ‘rateable value’ given under
Section 2(42)
of the

       NDMC Ac is concerned, it means ‘value of any land or building

       fixed in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the Bye-
laws made thereunder for the purposes of assessment of

       property taxes’. According to it, the conjunction “and” used in the

       above definition makes the legislative intent explicit, namely, the

       rateable value has to be fixed both in accordance with the NDMC

       Act as well as the Bye-laws. Consequently, it is inconceivable

       that the manner of determination of the rateable value under the

       Bye-laws could be inconsistent or different from that provided
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 26 of 72
under the Act. Therefore, the rateable value has to be fixed, both

       in accordance with the provisions of the Act and in accordance

       with the Bye-laws. Further,
Section 63
, which prescribes the

       method for determination of the rateable value of lands and

       building stipulated that the rateable value of any land or building

       assessable to property tax shall be the annual rent at which such

       land and building might reasonably be expected to let from year

       after year less a sum equal to 10% of the said annual rent. Also,

       the proviso to Section 63(1) of the NDMC Act states that in

       respect of any land or building the standard rent of which has

       been fixed under the
Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958
, the rateable

       value thereof ‘shall not exceed the annual amount of the standard

       rent so fixed.”
32)    Further in the opinion of the High Court though under Section 81

       of the NDMC Act, the Chairperson can employ valuers to give

       advice or assistance in respect of valuation of land and building,

       this is different from the determination of the rateable value. Such

       value becomes relevant when there is attachment of the property

       to cover the arrears of municipal taxes and the value of such land

       and building has to be determined to ascertain what could be

       recovered towards the arrears. By reading these provisions in
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 27 of 72
the aforesaid manner, the High Court has held insofar as NDMC

       Act is concerned that the legislative scheme                    envisages

       determination of rateable value only on one basis, i.e., on the

       basis of the ‘annual rent’ at which the land or building might

       reasonably be expected to let from year to year. In contrast,

       holds the High Court, the impugned Bye-laws seek to introduce a

       completely different system of rateable value than what is

       provided under the NDMC Act. As it provides UAM which

       envisages fixing UAV with reference to the characteristics of a

       property and then multiplying the UAV by area of the vacant land

       or covered space to find out ‘annual value’. This method of levy

       assessment collection of tax is entirely different from what is

       provided under the NDMC Act and, therefore, could not have

       been introduced by the Bye-laws in terms of
Section 388(1)(A)(9)
which confers power to make Bye-laws relating to the levy,

       assessment, collection, refund or imposition of taxes ‘under this

       Act’.
33)    Such a course of action could not be taken without amending the

       provisions of NDMC Act. Relevant discussion in this behalf is

       reproduced below:
"Analysis of the new impugned Bye-laws
52. The new impugned Bye-laws in the present case seek
               to introduce a completely different system of rateable
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 28 of 72
value than what is provided under the NDMC Act. While
              the NDMC Act provides for rateable value to be
              determined on the basis of the annual rent at which the
              land or building might reasonably be expected to let from
              year to year, the UAM envisages fixing the UAV with
              reference to the characteristics of a property and then
              multiplying the UAV by the area of the vacant land or
              covered space to find out the ‘annual value'.
53. It is not as if the NDMC was unaware that this could be
              done only by amending the NDMC Act. Yet only because
              this might be a time consuming process it chose the short
              cut of making the new impugned Bye-laws without
              amending the NDMC Act. Section 388 (1) of the NDMC Act
              begins with the expression “Subject to the provisions of
              this Act”. Clearly, therefore, the legislative intent was to
              confer upon the NDMC the power to make Bye-laws which
              were subject to and consistent with the provisions of the
              Act.
54. Secondly,
Section 388 (1)
A (9) of the NDMC Act
              confers powers to make Bye-laws relating to the levy,
              assessment, collection, refund or imposition of taxes
              "under this Act". The expression 'relating to' preceding the
              words “levy, assessment, collection...” clearly means,
              therefore, that Bye-laws will have to be consistent with
              what is already provided under the NDMC Act. A method of
              levy, assessment, collection of taxes which is different
              from what is provided under the NDMC Act cannot
              possibly be introduced by the Bye-laws in terms of
Section
              388 (1)
A (9) of the NDMC Act. That would make the Bye-
              laws inconsistent with and contrary to the NDMC Act.
55. There are specific provisions of the NDMC Act which
              have been sought to be supplanted by the Bye-laws.
              Illustratively, the whole system of determination of annual
              rent under Section 63(1) of the NDMC Act is sought to be
              substituted by the UAM. There is no provision in the new
              impugned Bye-laws that could be related to Section 63(1)
              of the NDMC Act. The new impugned Bye-laws create
              classification among assessees which are different from
              the classification envisaged under the NDMC Act and in
              particular classification of property as spelt out in Sections
              62 and 65 of the NDMC Act. Section 66 of the NDMC Act
              contemplates imposition of the property tax in respect of
              three categories of properties i.e. the property that has
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 29 of 72
been let, sub-let and properties that are not let out at all.
There is no further classification contemplated in the
              NDMC Act on the basis of nature of rights which are
              created in respect of such land and buildings.
56. Under the proviso to
Section 63(1)
of the Act, the
              rateable value cannot exceed the standard rent fixed
              under the
DRC Act
. This is sought to be overwritten by the
              impugned new Bye-laws. Under the explanation to
Section
              61(1)
of the Act where a portion of a land or building is
              liable to a higher rate of tax then such portion will be
              deemed to be a separate property for the purpose of
              municipal taxation. This is sought to be substituted under
              the UAM which seeks to aggregate the value of land as a
              whole with the value of the space covered on such land.
57. While categorising the occupancy factor, the impugned
              Bye-laws create only two categories i.e. (i) self-occupied or
              vacant buildings or lands and (ii) others. Thereby the
              letting out of a property for use by a person other than the
              owner for no consideration is treated at par with the letting
              out such property for consideration. These are only the
              illustrations of changes brought about by the new
              impugned Bye-laws.
58.
In
State Trading Corporation India Limited v. New Delhi
              Municipal Council
(supra), the Supreme Court emphasised
              that the manner of determination of rateable value has to
              be only in terms of Section 63 of the NDMC Act even in
              respect of properties that have been sub-let and not in
              terms of Bye-law 12 of the 1962 Bye-laws which were
              found to be inconsistent with the provisions of the NDMC
              Act.
59. Consequently, as far as the present case is concerned
              it is plain that the new impugned Bye-laws are ultra vires
              the NDMC Act. They require to be invalidated on this
              ground alone.”


Submission of the Counsel:
34)    Mr. Sanjay Jain, learned senior counsel appeared on behalf of the

       appellant, NDMC. After referring to the various provisions of the
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 30 of 72
NDMC Act as well as the impugned Bye-laws, he submitted that

       as per Bye-law 5 the valuation committee sits every year and lays

       down the standards for fixing the annual rent.                  The process

       undertaken is with a purpose to arrive at ‘annual rent’ which

       according to him is in consonance with Section 63 of the NDMC

       Act. He read
Section 63
to emphasise that even as per that

       provision it is the rateable value on which tax is to be imposed on

       lands and building which are assessable to any property tax.
This rateable value, the provisions sates, shall be the ‘annual

       rent’. Thus, the tax has to be on the annual rent which is the

       rateable value and no particular method is given under Section 63

       of the NDMC Act for fixing such annual rent. Therefore, it was

       permissible to lay down a method of fixing annual rent in the Bye-

       laws which would not be contrary to
Section 63
of the Act. He

       also submitted that UAM provided in the Bye-laws is more

       rationale and takes care of many anomalies of the old system.

       According to him, the High Court committed certain errors in

       approaching the subject. In the first instance it referred to the

       provisions of Delhi Rent control Act and application thereof which

       is without any basis. Other error was to wrongly assume that

       there are three categories of properties where the Bye-laws

       create only two categories. Thirdly, methodology which is worked
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.     Page 31 of 72
out and mentioned in para 22 of the judgment (relating to

       interpretation that is to be given to Section 181 of the NDMC Act)

       is contrary to Section 63 of the NDMC Act.
35)    Mr. Jain also submitted that the observations of the Delhi High

       Court in
State Trading Corporation of India Ltd. vs. New Delhi

       Municipal Council1
are wrongly interpreted as the Court did not

       hold
in that case
that determination of rateable value has to be

       only in terms of Section 63 of the NDMC Act. He further argued

       that even in respect of those properties which are let out, still

       exercise is to be dome to find out the annual value inasmuch as

       the ‘rent’ which it is likely to fetch has to be determined as per
Section 63
. On the other hand, in respect of the properties which

       are self-occupied, in any case annual rent has to be arrived at.

       The impugned Bye-laws seek to achieve that purpose only, which

       was very much in consonance with Section 63 of the NDMC Act.

       He also submitted that the judgment in question has created a

       void insofar as intervening period is concerned as the NDMC has

       taxed the properties, after coming into force the Bye-laws, in

       accordance with the new Bye-laws which have been struck down

       and thereby leaving the properties in question without any tax for

       the intervening period.
1   104(2003) DLT 808 = AIR 2003 Delhi 295
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 32 of 72
36)    Mr. Jain also submitted that UAM introduced by the MCD has

       been upheld by this Court.
37)    In a nutshell, it is the case of NDMC that the impugned Bye-laws

       are not ultra vires the NDMC Act. The NDMC has contended that

       the finding of the impugned judgment that the Bye-laws of NDMC

       as ultra vires the NDMC Act, on the premise that the same

       instead of supplementing
Section 63(1)
, supplants the same is

       erroneous.
38)    NDMC has also contended that the entire functioning and

       activities of NDMC is dependent on its revenue collections.

       Property tax accounts for the major individual source of revenue

       of NDMC. In the event the Bye-laws are struck down in their

       entirety, as has been done by the impugned judgment dated 10 th

       August, 2017 of the Delhi High Court, NDMC will stand to lose a

       huge portion of its revenue, in the absence of which NDMC will

       not be in        a position to provide the services that it currently

       provides in the New Delhi area.
39)    As per NDMC, no particular method is prescribed under
Section

       63(1)
for arriving at annual rent and the said gap has been filed

       up by the Bye-laws of 2009.                  It claims that what has been
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 33 of 72
prescribed by
Section 63 (1)
is only the broad principle on which

       the rateable value would be determined, which is the annual rent

       that the property “might reasonably be expected to let from year

       to year.
40)
Section 63(1)
is silent on how to determine the annual rent of a

       property and for calculation of annual rent, NDMC can employ

       any method which is reasonable to arrive at the hypothetical rent

       which a property might reasonably be expected to let from year to

       year. Using the current Bye-laws to arrive and determine the

       annual rent, cannot be said to be unreasonable or ultra vires of

       the provisions of the NDMC Act.
41)    Mr. Parag Tripathi, who appeared in the civil appeal arising out of

       Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 35938 of 2017, supported the

       case set up by the NDMC. He also argued that
Section 63
provides for the determination of rateable value for buildings

       assessable to property tax which is on the basis of annual rent

       which the land or building might reasonably be expected to let

       from year to year. There is no statutory formula provided and

       indeed there can be non to determine the value of rent at which

       any land or building might reasonably be expected to let from

       year to year. It is for this reason that
Section 388(1)(A)(9)
of the
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 34 of 72
NDMC Act, 1994 vests power on the Council to make bye-laws I

       n all matters relating to levy, assessment, collection, refund or

       remission of taxes under the Act. It is a well-settled position of

       law that the term ‘levy’ is a term of wide import and includes

       charge as well as imposition of tax, as
laid down in
the followings

       judgments:
(
I)    Ashok Singh vs. Asstt. Controller of Estate Duty
2
(
ii)   Assistant Collector of Central Excise vs. National

       Tobacco Co. of India Ltd.3
(
iii) Mafatlal Industries & Ors. vs. Union of India & Ors.
4
42)    Analyzing the Impugned Judgment dated 10.08.2017 of the High

       Court, he argued that it has proceeded on the basis that the

       concept of annual value sought to be introduced by the NDMC

       (Determination of Annual Rent) Bye-laws, 2009 is completely

       alien to the statutory scheme of the NDMC Act on the following

       basis:
(i)    Bye-law 2 of the 2009 Bye-laws provides that ‘for the

       purposes of
Section 63(1)
” the annual rent for which the lands

       and buildings are expected to let from year to year shall be

       determined in terms of Bye-laws 3 and 4.,
2   (1992) 3 SCC 169
3   (1972) 2 SCC 560
4   (1997) 5 SCC 536
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 35 of 72
(ii)    Bye-law 4 provides that the annual rent of lands and

       buildings not covered by Bye-law 3 shall be the aggregate of the

       bona fide annual value of land and bona fide annual value of

       covered space of the building. In terms of sub- bye-law 3 of Bye-

       law 4 the annual value of any covered space shall be the amount

       arrived at by multiplying the total area by the base unit area value

       of such covered space and the relevant factors stipulated in sub-

       bye laws 5,6 and 7.
(iii)   ‘Annual value” for the purpose of arriving at the annual rent

       which a property may reasonably expected to fetch is not a new

       concept and has been applicable to the NDMC area until the

       enactment of the NDMC Act in 1994. In this regard, reference

       may also be had to the definition of “annual value” in
Section 3(1)
(b) of the
Punjab Municipal Act
which provides that annual value

       shall mean the gross annual rent which a house or building may

       reasonably be expected to let from year to year.
(iv)    It is, therefore, clear that the term ‘annual value’, which is

       arrived at by taking into account factors such as area, usage of

       the property, age factor and also occupancy, is only an indicator

       of the rent which a particular property would fetch when let for

       use or enjoyment.
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 36 of 72
43)    Mr. Tripathi further submitted that the impugned judgment also

       proceeds on the basis that the 2009 Bye-laws have overwritten

       the proviso to
Section 63(1)
which provides that the rateable

       value shall not exceed the standard rent fixed under the
Delhi

       Rent Control Act
. Questioning this approach, he submitted that

       the High Court has, with respect, lost sight                    of the fact that

       concept of standard rent is no longer available under the
Delhi

       Rent Control Act, 1958
since the Delhi High Court was pleased to

       strike down
Sections 4
,
6
and
9
of the said Act dealing with

       Standard Rent in
Raghunandan Saran Ashok Saran (HUF) vs.

       Union of India and Others
5 , which judgment was never

       challenged in appeal and has thus attained finality.
44)    This aspect was also noted by this Court in
State Trading

       Corporation vs. New Delhi Municipal Council
6. In that view of

       the matter, there was no occasion for the High Court to strike

       down the Bye-laws on the ground that the Bye-laws have

       overwritten the proviso to Section 63(1).
45)    Mr. Tripathi also submitted that various judgments relied upon by

       the High Court on the aspect of excessive delegation were not

       applicable in the facts of the present case.
5   95(2002)DLT 528
6   (2016) 12 SCC 603
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.        Page 37 of 72
46)    One additional submission was made by Mr. Parag Tripathi

       deviating from the NDMC stand. Learned senior counsel referred

       to the provisions of Section 63(2) of the NDMC as well as
Section

       388(1)(A)(9)
of the Act which read as under:
"Section 63(2): The ratable value of any land which is not
              built upon but is capable of being built upon and of any
              land on which a building is in process of erection shall be
              fixed at five per cent of estimated capital value of such
              land.
Section 388(1)(A)(9) : any other matter relating to the
              levy, assessment, collection, refund or remission of taxes
              under this Act.”
47)    His submission was that from a conjoint reading of the aforesaid

       provisions it is clear that that provisions of Section 388(1)(A)(9)

       sufficiently empower NDMC to make Bye-laws in respect of

       matters covered under Section 63, i.e., Sections 63(1) and 63 (2).
His further submission was that this Court has, time and again,

       held while interpreting taxing statute that percentage of tax or

       charges or penalties provided is to be treated not as a mandatory

       provision but merely as indicative of a ceiling.                  For this

       submission, he invited the attention of this Court to the following

       passage in
P. Ratnakar Rao and Others vs. Sate of A.P. and

       Others7
:
"4. The contention raised before the High Court and
              repeated before us by Shri Rajeev Dhavan, the learned
7   (1996) 5 SCC 359
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 38 of 72
Senior Counsel for the petitioners is that the discretion
              given in
Section 200(1)
of the Act is unguided, uncanalised
              and arbitrary. Until an accused is convicted under Section
              194, the right to levy penalty thereunder would not arise.
              When discretion is given to the court for compounding of
              the offence for the amount mentioned under Section 200, it
              cannot be stratified by specified amount. It would,
              therefore, be clear that the exercise of power to prescribe
              maximum rates for compounding the offence is illegal,
              arbitrary and violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution. We
              find no force in the contention. For violation of Sections
              113 to 115, Section 194 accords penal sanction and on
              conviction for violation thereof, the section sanctions
              punishment with fine as has been enumerated
              hereinbefore. The section would give guidance to the State
              Government as a delegate under the statute to specify the
              amount for compounding the offences enumerated under
              sub-section (1) of Section 200. It is not mandatory that the
              authorised officer would always compound the offence. It
              is conditional upon the willingness of the accused to have
              the offences compounded. It may also be done before the
              institution of the prosecution case. In the event of the
              petitioner's willing to have the offence compounded, the
              authorised officer gets jurisdiction and authority to
              compound the offence and call upon the accused to pay
              the same. On compliance thereof, the proceedings, if
              already instituted, would be closed or no further
              proceedings shall be initiated. It is a matter of volition or
              willingness on the part of the accused either to accept
              compounding of the offence or to face the prosecution in
              the appropriate court. As regards canalisation and
              prescription of the amount of fine for the offences
              committed, Section 194, the penal and charging section
              prescribes the maximum outer limit within which the
              compounding fee would be prescribed. The discretion
              exercised by the delegated legislation, i.e., the executive is
              controlled by the specification in the Act. It is not
              necessary that Section 200 itself should contain the details
              in that behalf. So long as the compounding fee does not
              exceed the fine prescribed by the penal section, the same
              cannot be declared to be either exorbitant or irrational or
              bereft of guidance.”
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 39 of 72
48)    On that basis, he argued that the 5% rate stipulated under

       Section 63(2) should be treated as the ceiling which can be used

       to determine the rateable value. Section 63(2) on a fair reading

       thereof and in view of the various judgments of this Court does

       not mandate rateable value fixed at 5% of the capital value of the

       land. This is only the ceiling and has to be dealt with accordingly.
49)    He also argued that the whole idea behind Section 63(2) is to

       determine the property tax. When there is no enjoyment of the

       property itself and the building is in the process of erection, then

       the land falls in the category of ‘not built up but is capable of

       being built up’ or is actually being built up.
50)    In these circumstances once a building is demolished and a fresh

       building is constructed after obtaining sanction plans from the

       NDMC, the rateable value can be determined under Section 63(2)

       only for the period during which the building is fully demolished,

       i.e., the land in question becomes fully vacant till such time as the

       roof of the ground floor is constructed. Once such construction is

       made after obtaining the sanction plan, by no stretch of

       imagination can the land be said to be vacant, as it now contains

       a building, with a constructed roof in accordance with the

       sanctioned plan. According to him, any other interpretation will
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 40 of 72
create a huge discrimination between those parties who are

       seeking to construct a building and others who are enjoying the

       benefit of a constructed building.                 In the case of a newly

       constructed building, once the construction is complete, the

       rateable value will not exceed Rs. 1 to 4 lakhs whereas a

       percentage of the capital value of the land at 5%, the same would

       be in the region of Rs. 3 to 4 crores. This discrimination which is

       60-80 times would be totally without any justification because no

       new or additional benefit are accruing to a party which is

       demolishing and reconstructing the property, rather a great health

       hazard will be created with the old building are continued to be

       used in that dilapidated stage.
51)    He, thus, argued that a 5% levy is wholly arbitrary and does not

       serve any purpose also for the reason that no municipal services

       whatsoever whether sewerage, water or electricity are really

       being provided by the NDMC to a demolished property because

       there is no resident, but only a limited extent of water and

       electricity is used for the purposes of construction. Emphasizing

       that property tax is really in the nature of a fee on account of the

       services rendered by the Municipal Authority. (See:
Pradeep Oil
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 41 of 72
Corporation vs. Municipal Corporation of Delhi and Anr.
;
(2011) 5 SCC 270).
52)    He submitted that the levy must commensurate to the services

       rendered by the authority. On that basis, Mr. Tripathi has sought a

       direction from this Court to the NDMC to formulate Bye-laws in

       respect of Section 63(2) as well and/or laid down guidelines in the

       case of those building where pursuant to sanction plan existing

       building is demolished and a fresh building is constructed, the

       property tax during the period of vacancy of the land due to the

       demolition of the building, be determined at the same rate, as the

       building upon construction based on the sanction plans would be

       subject to.      Further, any in any case this period during which

       rateable value would be determined under Section 63(2) should

       be limited to from the period of demolition of the existing

       structure/building till such time as the roof of the ground floor is

       laid and constructed.
53)    Ms. Maninder Acharya, M/s. Mukul Rohatgi, Sanjay R. Hegde,

       Huzefa Ahmadi, B.B. Gupta, Ms. Vibha Datta Makhija, learned

       senior counsel, M/s. Sanjeev Anand, B.B. Jain and many other

       counsel appeared on behalf of the different respondents/

       assessees and defended the judgment of the High Court. It may
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 42 of 72
not be necessary to separately state the arguments advanced by

       these counsel. Instead the arguments of these counsel are noted

       below in a consolidated manner.
54)    Before concentrating on the main issue of ultra vires, the counsel

       for the respondents highlighted that under the impugned Bye-

       laws     NDMC         is   demanding/collecting           property   taxes    on

       unconstructed/vacant land which are otherwise incapable of

       being constructed upon. This is notwithstanding the fact that

       Section 63 of the NDMC Act stipulates the annual rateable value

       (ARV) can only be determine don the basis of constructed/vacant

       land which is capable of being constructed upon. In order to

       show that a large portion of land falling under the jurisdiction of

       NDMC cannot be built upon, following aspects are highlighted:
A.     A majority of the properties of NDMC are situated in the

       Lutyens’ Bungalow Zone (“LBZ” and are governed by the LBZ

       Guidelines dated 8th February, 1988, which not only prohibit

       construction on a large part of the plots falling in LBZ but also

       severely restrict new development and construction beyond the

       area previously constructed upon.
B.     Similar restrictions exist for properties falling within the

       ‘prohibited areas’ and ‘regulated areas’ declared by the
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.        Page 43 of 72
Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) under the
Ancient

       Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958
and

       amendments thereto.
C.     Given limitations of building bye-laws, such a legally

       required setbacks, it is quite clear that there are portions of the

       property that owners are compelled by law to leave vacant.

       Larger plots of land also require larger setbacks and lesser

       ground coverage.
55)    It is submitted that the above three restrictions make it impossible

       to construct on the entire plot of land, and result in large portions

       of these plots becoming unconstructed/vacant land that are not

       capable of being built upon. In fact, over 50% of properties falling

       with the NDMC jurisdiction are governed by either LBZ Guidelines

       and/or by ASI regulations.             The respondents argue that, it is

       completely discriminatory vis-a-vis properties situated outside

       such areas to levy heavy taxes on such vacant land when

       development thereupon is strictly prohibited.
56)    It is also argued that on such properties, no property tax can be

       levied. Support from the judgment of the High Court of Delhi, in

       the case of
Municipal Corporation of Delhi vs. Shashank
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 44 of 72
Steel Industries (P) Ltd.8
is taken in this behalf wherein the

       Court interpreted the expression ‘capable of being built upon’

       appearing in
Section 116(2)
of the Delhi Municipal Corporation

       Act, 1957, which is stated to be in pari materia with Section 63(2)

       of the NDMC Act. Therein, that High Court has held that property

       tax is leviable only in respect of land which is otherwise ‘capable

       of being built upon’ and where construction is permission. It was

       submitted that the civil appeal filed by the Municipal Corporation

       of Delhi against the decision of the Full Bench was dismissed by

       this Court.
57)    The impugned Bye-laws are also questioned as violative of
Article

       14
of the Constitution of India on the ground that they lack

       reasonable classification. All areas under the NDMC from B.K.

       Dutt Colony to Golf Links to Bengali Market to Prithviraj Road, are

       treated at par in that the same base UAV Rs. 1,000/- per sq. mtr.
(later increased by 20% to Rs. 1,1200/- per sq.                 mtr. w.e.f.

       01.04.2013) is imposed on them even though the rent that they

       would fetch is in no way comparable. The Annual Rateable Value

       for two buildings/houses (of say 1,000 sq. mtr. each built between

       2000-09 on plots below between 500 to 1,000 sq. mtrs.) one in

       B.K. Dutt Colony and the other on Golf Links, where both are

8   100 (2002) DLT 66 (FB)
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 45 of 72
used as a residence by the individuals who own them, would be

       the same, calculated by the formula below:
bona fide Annual Rateable Value of the Covered Space

       =Base unite Area Value x Covered Space x Age factor x Use

       Factor x Occupancy Factor

       =1,200x1,000x1x1x1.5x1=18,00,000/- less 10% deduction

       = Rs. 16,20,000/-
58)    It is submitted that fixing the same base unit area value for all the

       colonies falling within the jurisdiction of the appellant ignores the

       roles, location and social factors play in determining annual rent

       and thus tax, and accordingly treat unequals as equals. This is

       argued as discriminatory, as held in
State of Kerala vs. Haji

       Kutty9
wherein this Court held that “imposing a uniform tax on

       objects, persons or transaction essentially dissimilar may result in

       discrimination”. Comparison is made with the Scheme adopted

       by the MCD, which has divided the area under its jurisdiction into

       six different zones and has provided a separate location factor for

       each zone for calculating the property tax.
59)    Further submissions predicated on
Article 14
of the Constitution

       are as under:
9   AIR 1969 SC 378
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 46 of 72
(i)    The impugned Bye-laws seek to impose onerous terms

       upon firms, companies, trusts etc. by denying the benefit of self-

       occupation         use      to    their     properties          in   which    their

       partners/directors/employees/trustees reside, and charging three

       times the property tax being charged from individual assessees.

       Such impermissible impugned Bye-laws have been made in utter

       disregard of Section 66 of the NDMC Act, sub-section (1) of which

       clearly mandates that:
"The property tax shall be primarily leviable as follows:-
(a)   if the land or building is let, upon the lessor;
(b)   if the land or building is sub-let, upon the superior
              lessor;
(c)   if the land or building is unlet, upon the person in
              whom the right to let the same vests.”


              This Section clearly contemplates the classification of unlet

       land or building as a single category if there is no lease/sub-
lease, therefore, suggesting that such properties owned by firms,

       companies or trusts etc. fall in the same class as self-occupied

       properties. Such unequal treatment is indubitably discriminatory.
(ii)   Furthermore, the impugned Bye-laws seek to tax the

       property not on the basis of its user but on the basis of the legal

       status of the owner, which goes against the principle that property

       tax is a tax on a property and not a tax on the owner. This is also

       discriminatory as many beneficial owners of the property hold the
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.          Page 47 of 72
same through a firm, company, trust, etc. for reasons such as

       estate planning, family settlements, synergies of business, court

       decrees, business exigencies etc. and they cannot be penalised

       on the basis of nature of ownership and that too for a historic and

       irreversible act done by them or their predecessors-in-it.
(iii)   The service provided by NDMC towards sewage, public

       health, streets, roads, drainage, parks etc. does not change and

       there is no qualitative and quantitative difference in the same for

       firms, companies, trusts etc.
(iv)    The impugned Bye-laws [Bye-law 4(6)] seek to impose

       unreasonably and discriminatory onerous terms upon the

       assessees putting their property to any permissible use “other

       than residential” by charging a six times factor for calculating the

       Annual Rateable Value of covered space. This omnibus category

       of “Other than Residential” does not envisage multiple diverse

       uses that a property may be put to an unreasonably and

       arbitrarily clubs all uses “other than residential” into one category

       without providing any distinction between a use which is likely to

       yield profits and/or cause more burden on the infrastructural

       facilities of the appellant and other uses which may be non-profit

       and/or do not cause an additional excess burden on the

       infrastructure as compared to residential use. This is in stark
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 48 of 72
contrast to the MCD Act, which, in Section 116A classifies vacant

       land and buildings into colonies and groups and specifies base

       area value thereafter. In this calculation, use wise categorization

       is done, nut just into ‘residential’ and ‘other than residential’, but

       into categories like business building, mercantile building, building

       for recreation, public purpose building, etc. Bye-law 6 of the Delhi

       Municipal Corporation (Property Taxes) Bye-laws 2004 goes so

       far as to exempt land or buildings used for charitable purposes

       such as orphanages, hospitals and schools that are free of cost,

       etc. This demonstrates a significant application of mind by the

       MCD in contrast to the appellant herein.
The outcome of the Impugned Bye-laws is that if a trust

       owns a property which is used partly for the residential purpose of

       its trustees and partly for running a charity, the tax obligation

       would be many times the amount of tax payable by a house next

       door which is owned by the individual who resides in it, both on

       account of the multipliers for non-self occupied and ownership not

       by an individual. This scenario is unreasonable and violative of
Article 14.
(v)    Properties which are designated for residential use [as per

       the city master plan] and are put to ‘residential cum office use’ by

       foreign/diplomatic missions operating out of such properties as
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 49 of 72
permitted under applicable law (whether as owner or tenant)

       cannot be treated as “other than residential” and consequently be

       subjected to higher factor for calculating the Annual Rateable

       Value of covered space.
(vi)   Rationality of the impugned Bye-laws is also questioned on

       the ground that under the impugned Bye-laws, if some portion of

       the covered space of the property is partly rented and the

       remaining covered space of the property is self-occupied, the

       impugned Bye-laws do not give a self occupation rebate on the

       unconstructed/vacant land {i.e. applying the current base unit

       area of Rs. 1,200/- per sq. mtr. Instead of Rs. 600/- per sq. mtr.)

       even though the unconstructed/vacant land may be I n complete

       occupation/enjoyment of the owners. Even in cases where as

       little as one room in the barsati floor or outhouse is rented and the

       tenant is not given any access to the unconstructed/vacant land

       (except right of entry/ingress from the main gate/driveway), the

       landlord/owners would be obligated to pay an inexplicably and

       substantially higher amount of property tax.
(vii) As per the Bye-law 4(8) of the impugned Bye-laws, in case

       of commercial properties, the Annual Rateable Value of the

       covered space as per the impugned Bye-laws is the value arrived

       under the Impugned Bye-laws or the actual rent fetched,
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 50 of 72
whichever is higher. Grievance is that in this way, the NDMC is

       trying to achieve best of both worlds, which is not consistent with

       the “optionality” underlying the impugned Bye-laws. Moreover,

       after the NDMC has taken the stand that the impugned-Bye-Laws

       seek only to provide a method by which to calculate the annual

       rent, it is incongruous that the actual rent be taken into

       consideration.
(viii) Given that Delhi is one state, there is no reason for different

       systems between the NDMC and MCD areas. For this purpose,

       reference is made to the case of
State Trading Corporation of

       India Ltd.
case wherein a Single Judge of the High court of Delhi

       observed as under:
"37. Before parting with this judgment, I must express my
              anguish at the fact that though Delhi is one city, different
              parameters are being followed by Municipal authorities in
              the same town. It is only for purposes of convenience that
              jurisdiction have been divided among NDMC, MCD and
              Delhi Cantonment Board. The least that is expected is that
              all these Municipal authorities should act at tandem and
              follow similar principles in determination of rateable value.
              Merely because the house of one person falls in one area
              or the other, which may even be adjacent, and a different
              Municipal authority is dealing with the issue of
              determination of rateable value, should not imply totally
              different concepts in determination of such rateable value.
              It is appropriate that all the Municipal authorities must
              meet and consider this aspect to bring a uniformity in the
              system of determination of the rateable value in parts of
              Delhi when they fall within one jurisdiction or the other.
              This is more so as the provisions under said
Act and the
              DMC Act
are para materia. The MCD, in fact, now
              proposed to apply a different concept of a unit method of
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 51 of 72
taxation, but so far, the NDMC has not finalised any
                proposal in the same terms.”

                It is argued that although the appeal against
the said

       decision
was allowed by a Division Bench of the High Court of

       Delhi in
NDMC vs. State Trading Corporation10
, the aforesaid

       observations were neither overruled nor commented upon by the

       Division Bench and do hold good.
In any case, appeal against

       the judgment of the Division Bench was thereafter allowed by this

       Court in
State Trading Corporation
case. Therefore, as per the

       respondents, these observations do hold the field.
(ix)     It is also submitted that the impugned Bye-laws seek to

       penalise private citizens at the cost of the union and state

       instrumentalities. Out of the total NDMC area of land about 90%

       of the land is owned by the Government itself and the rest 10% is

       owned by the individuals, body corporates etc. As the

       Government has been exempted from paying taxes, therefore the

       burden to pay tax is on the persons, who occupy only 10% land of

       the total NDMC area.              This according to the respondents is

       discriminatory and in violation of
Article 14
of the Constitution of

       India.
60)    Adverting to the issue of ultra vires which has appealed to the

       High Court thereby quashing the impugned Bye-laws, the
10 126(2006) DLT 191
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 52 of 72
respondents supported the reasons given by the High Court in

        this behalf. Emphasizing the fact that as per Section 63(1) of the

        NDMC Act, annual rent to be arrived at has to be the rent which

        such land or building might reasonably be expected to be let from

        year to year. Respondents emphasised that
Section 63(1)
uses

        the word ‘rent’ and not ‘value’ and, therefore, the only way for

        determining the annual rent is to see the ‘rent’ which the

        properties likely to reasonably fetch. The respondents have

        submitted that this language contained in Section 63(1) of the

        NDMC Act has come up for interpretation before this Court in

        number cases and interpreted in the same manner in which the

        High Court has dealt with the issue. The respondents, in this

        behalf, referred to the following judgments:
(
i)    The Corporation of Calcutta vs. Smt. Padma Debi and

        Others11
;
(
ii) The Guntur Municipal Council vs. The Guntur Town
        Rate Payers’ Association
etc.12
(
iii) Dewan Daulat Rai Kapoor vs. New Delhi Municipal
        Council and Others13
(
iv) Indian Automobiles                 Ltd.    vs.     Calcutta   Municipal
        Corporation and Anr.14
(v)    State Trading Corporation case
11   (1962) 3 SCR 49
12   (1970) 2 SCC 8703
13   (1980) 1 SCC 685
14   (2002) 3 SCC 388
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.       Page 53 of 72
61)    It is thus argued that the High Court has rightly held that the UAM

       is not a means or method of collecting the rent for which a

       property might reasonably be expected to let. In support of this

       contention, the respondents referred to some of the Bye-laws and

       the position thereunder which according to the respondents

       makes it clear that UAM introduced in the impugned Bye-laws is

       completely foreign to the methodology of ‘annual rent’ provided

       under
Section 63
. The Bye-laws referred to are as below:
62)    Bye-laws 4(6) introduces a “multiplication factor for use and

       occupancy of the covered space”, wherein the multiplication

       factor for residential use is 1 but all other use is 6. Similarly, for

       self occupied or vacant properties, the multiplication factor is 1

       whereas for others it is 3. As per the explanation to this Bye-law.
"premises owned by companies, firms, trusts, etc. and
              used by the directors, employees or partners for residence
              or guest house shall not be treated as self occupied by the
              owners.”
63)    Thus, by way of illustration, a property owned by a trust and used

       by it as a guest house or to run a charity would be taxed 18 times

       what an identical self occupied residential property would be

       taxed. Properties fetch the same rent whether they are owned by

       an individual or a trust, whether they are used as a residence or a
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 54 of 72
guest house.          This Bye-law is thus directly contrary to the

       contention that the Impugned Bye-laws are a method of

       computing rent.
64)    The impugned Bye-laws provide for the calculation of tax to begin

       by multiplying the total covered area by an assigned base UAV of

       Rs. 1,000/- per sq. mtr. (revised to Rs. 1200/- per sq. mtr. w.e.f.
01.04.2013), irrespective of location. The appellant thus seems

       to be inexplicably equating the rent a property which a house in

       B.K. Dutt would fetch with one in Golf Links or Prithviraj Road.
65)    Factors such as location, neighborhood, corner plot, architectural

       style, etc. which play a significant role in ascertaining the rent a

       property would fetch are ignored in the impugned Bye-laws.
66)    It is, thus, argued that the Impugned Bye-laws are not a means of

       calculating the rent a property would fetch. To the contrary, they

       lay out a method that is entirely different from                the parent

       legislation. Respondents also point out difference in the following

       manner:
(a)    Firstly, Section 63(2) of the NDMC Act provides for taxation

       only on land capable of being built upon. Given that parts of the

       NDMC area fall under the Lutyens’ Bungalow Zone (‘LBZ’) or
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 55 of 72
‘prohibited’ or ’regulated area’ declared by the Archaeological

       Survey of India under the
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological

       Sites and Remains Act, 1958
(including the rules framed

       thereunder), and given that building bye-laws require certain

       setbacks to be left vacant, the unconstructed/vacant land is often

       not capable of being built upon. Bye-law 4(2), which provides for

       calculation of bona fide value of land not constructed upon,

       ignores this aspect and thus contradicts the parent legislation.
(b)    Secondly, the categories created under the Bye-law 4(6) are

       different from the classification envisaged under the NDMC Act

       and in particular classification of property in Section 62 and 65 of

       the NDMC Act. Section 66 of the NDMC Act creates three

       categories of properties – those which have been let, those which

       have been sub-let and those that are not let out at all.                The

       impugned Bye-laws, however, create an entirely different method

       of categorization.
(c)    Furthermore, the Impugned Bye-laws confer extensive

       powers upon the Valuation Committee in Bye-Law 5, which

       amounts to excessive delegation of power in a manner that has

       not even been envisaged in the parent statute.
Consideration of the arguments:
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 56 of 72
67)    In the first place, we take up the fundamental issue, namely,

       whether the impugned Bye-laws are ultra vires Section 63 of the

       NDMC Act?          As noted above, judgment of the High Court is

       confined to this issue alone. As can be seen from the legislative

       scheme contained in various provisions pertaining to property tax,
Section 60
is the charging Section which authorizes the NDMC to

       levy various types of taxes including property tax. As per sub-
section (3), tax can be assessed and collected in accordance with

       the provisions of the Act and Bye-laws made thereunder, rates at

       which the property tax can be charged are mentioned in Section
61. This Section, inter alia, provides that the property tax shall be

       levied on lands and buildings in New Delhi and shall consistent of

       not less than 10% and not more than 30% of the rateable value of

       lands and buildings. Thus, property tax can be charged on lands

       and buildings for which rates can be prescribed and these rates

       have to be between 10% to 30%.                  Further, this percentage is of

       the ‘rateable value’ of lands and buildings. Definition of ‘rateable

       value’ is given in Section 2(42) of the NDMC Act to mean ‘the

       value of any land or building fixed in accordance with the

       provisions of this Act and Bye-laws made thereunder for the

       purposes of assessment to property taxes’.
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.      Page 57 of 72
68)    Various premises, viz:           lands and buildings, in respect of which

       property tax can be levied are mentioned in
Section 62
. Insofar

       as rateable value is concerned, the manner of determination

       thereof is specified in
Section 63
of the Act. Since, the method of

       determination is the fulcrum of the dispute,
Section 63
assumes

       importance for the purposes of deciding the issue in these

       appeals. It is also an accepted position that the interpretation that

       is to be given to this provision would lead to the outcome of the

       case. For these reasons and for the sake of continuity and clarity,

       we reproduce
Section 63(1)
and (2) thereunder:
"
Section 63
: Determination of rateable value of lands and
              buildings assessable to property tax-
1. The rateable value of any lands or buildings assessable to
              any property taxes shall be the annual rent at which such land
              or building might reasonably be expected to let from year to
              year less a sum equal to ten per cent of the said annual rent
              which shall be in lieu of all allowances for cost of repairs and
              insurance, and other expenses, if any, necessary to maintain
              the land or building in a state to command that rent:
Provided that in respect of any land or building the standard
              rent of which has been fixed under the
Delhi Rent Control Act,
              1958
(59 of 1958) the rateable value thereof shall not exceed
              the annual amount of the standard rent so fixed.
2. The rateable value of any land which is not built upon but is
              capable of being built upon and of any land on which a building
              is in process or erection shall be fixed at five per cent of
              estimated capital value of such land.”
69)    As per Section 63(1) rateable value of any lands or building

       assessable to any property taxes is the ‘annual rent’. Further,
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.    Page 58 of 72
such annual rent has to be determined ‘at which such land or

       building might be reasonably be expected to let from year to

       year….’ .
70)    The ‘rateable value’, as per Section 2(42) of the NDMC Act is to

       be fixed in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the Bye-

       laws made thereunder. Therefore, the first question is as to what

       are the provisions made in this behalf in the Act. For this Section

       63 comes into play which prescribes that ‘annual rent’ would be

       rateable value. This annual rent, as per this provisions, is one

       such land or building is expected to let from year to year minus

       10% thereof. The Impugned Bye-laws lay down the procedure for

       fixing of annual rent on UAM. This leads us to the question as to

       whether this UAM can be stated to be the method of arriving at

       annual rent which land or building is reasonably expected o let

       from year to year? Here it may be noted that as per NDMC,

       Section 63 does not prescribe any particular method for arriving

       at annual rent and, therefore, this gap has been filled up by the

       Impugned Bye-laws by prescribing the formula based on UAM. It

       would be difficult to accept such an interpretation of Section 63(1)

       as sought to be given by the learned senior counsel for NDMC.
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 59 of 72
71)    Section 63(1) is not silent on how to determine the annual rent of

       a property. This annual rent has to be the one which the land or

       the property ‘might reasonably be expected to let from year to

       year’. It is, thus, based on the letting yearly value of the property.

       Such a conviction has come up for interpretation before this Court

       in a series of cases right from 1960s till date. It would be relevant

       to note that similar language was used in the unamended

       provisions of
Delhi Municipal Corporation Act
as well as similar

       acts of some other states.
72)    The Corporation of Calcutta vs. Smt. Padma Debi and

       Others15
has analyzed the words ‘gross annual rent at which the

       land or building might reasonably be expected to let from year to

       year”. In a similar provision under the Calcutta Municipal Act,

       1923 as
Section 63(1)
and held as under:
"We shall first look at the provisions of the section to ascertain
              the meaning: The crucial words are "gross annual rent at which
              the land or building might at the time of assessment reasonably
              be expected to let from year to year". The dictionary meaning of
              the words "to let", is "'grant use of for rent or hire". It implies that
              the rent which the landlord might realise if the house was let is
              the basis for fixing the annual value of the building. The
              criterion, therefore, is the rent realisable by the landlord and not
              the value of the, holding in the hands of the tenant. This aspect
              has been emphasized by the Judicial Committee in
Bengal
              Nagpur Railway Company Limited v. Corporation of Calcutta
(AIR 1942 Calcutta 455)(1).
15 (1962) 3 SCR 49
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.           Page 60 of 72
73)    In the case of
The Guntur Municipal Council
case, this Court

       again analyzing similar provision under the Madras District

       Municipalities Act, 1920 held as under :
"……………
Section 82
gives the method of assessment. It
              is provided by sub-section (2) of that section that the
              annual value of lands and buildings shall be deemed to be
              the gross annual rent at which they may reasonably be
              expected to let from month to month or from year to year
              less certain deductions. …..
…………..Now
Section 82(2)
of the Municipalities Act, as
              stated before, makes provision for the fixation of annual
              value according to the rent at which lands and buildings
              may reasonably be expected to be let from month to
              month or from year to year less the specified deduction.
              The test essentially is what rent the premises can lawfully
              fetch if let out to a hypothetical tenant. The municipality is
              thus not free to assess any arbitrary annual value and has
              to look to and is bound by the fair or the standard rent
              which would be payable for a particular premises under
              the
Rent Act
in force during the year of assessment…….”
74)    In
Dewan Daulat Rai Kapoor
case, this Court held as under:
" …..The criterion is the rent realisable by the landlord and
              not the value of the holding in the hands of the tenant. The
              rent which the landlord might realise if the building were let
              is made the basis for fixing the annual value of the
              building. The word “reasonably” in the definition is very
              important. What the landlord might reasonably expect to
              get from a hypothetical tenant, if the building were let from
              year to year, affords the statutory yardstick for determining
              the annual value. Now, what is reasonable is a question of
              fact and it would depend on the facts and circumstances of
              a given situation. …...”
75)    Similarly, in
Indian Automobiles Ltd.
case, it was held that the

       criterion for calculating annual valuation must be the rent
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 61 of 72
realizable by the landlord and not the value of holdings, and that

       the word ‘reasonably’ in the Section was a question of fact.
76)    In
State Trading Corporation
case, while dealing with certain

       other Bye-laws as against the NDMC Act came to the conclusion

       that:
"7. …...Since there is a provision and procedure under
               Section 63 of the NDMC Act for calculating the annual
               rent, one need not refer at all to the bye-laws as quoted
               above since they are apparently inconsistent with the
               provisions of the NDMC Act. In short, it is impermissible to
               refer to the bye-laws framed under the Punjab Act in view
               of specific provisions made under the NDMC Act providing
               for the levy, assessment and collection of property tax.
8. Therefore, the only basis for fixation of rateable value is
               the annual rent at which the land or building might
               reasonably be expected to be let from year to year, subject
               to the deductions provided under the Act.”
77)    The aforesaid judgments give a clear message that annual rent is

       to be the one which the landlord might realize if the house was

       let. The criteria, thus, is the rent realizable by the landlord and not

       the value of the holding. The test essentially is what rent the

       premises can lawfully fetch if let out to a hypothetical tenant.
In

       the
Guntur Municipal Council
case, this Court made it clear that

       having regard to the provision in the Act, the municipality was not

       free to assess any arbitrary annual value and has to look to and

       is bound by the fair or standard rent which would be payable for a
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 62 of 72
particular premises under the
Rent Act
in force during the

       assessment.
78)    In State Trading Corporation, which was a case directly dealing

       with this very provisions, namely, Section 63 of the NDMC Act,

       the Court again reiterated in unambiguous terms ‘the only basis

       for fixation of rateable value is the annual rent at which the land

       or building might reasonably be expected to let from year to year,

       subject to the deductions provided under the Act’.
79)    Even in common parlance, simple language of
Section 63(1)
clearly conveys that the rateable value is the annual rent which

       the property is likely to fetch. The yardstick is the ‘letting’. Two

       words used in this Section convey this meaning very clearly,

       namely, the word ‘rent’ in the phrase ‘annual rent’ and the word

       ‘let’. Therefore, annual rent is to be determined on the basis of

       the letting value which is expected reasonably. In cases where

       the property is already let out, actual rate at which the property is

       let out becomes the amount at which the land or building is

       reasonably expected to fetch. Exception may be those cases

       where the property is let out actually at a rent which is lesser than

       the rent it would be fetched otherwise. This is the ratio of

       Mehrasons Jewellers Private Limited2.                           It was a case in
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.          Page 63 of 72
respect of premises not controlled by
Delhi Rent Control Act
.
This Court held that the annual rent received by the landlord is

       what willing lessee uninfluenced by other circumstances would

       pay to the willing lessor; actual annual rent in these

       circumstances can be taken as the annual rateable value of the

       property for assessment of property tax.
80)    The question directly arose for consideration in
Government

       Servant Cooperative House Building Society Limited and

       Others vs. Union of India and Others16
, this Court noticed the

       1988 amendment to the
Delhi Rent Control Act
and various

       judgments referred to hereinabove by us and concluded as

       under:
“8. Therefore, the annual rent actually received by the
              landlord, in the absence of any special circumstances,
              would be a good guide to decide the rent which the
              landlord might reasonably expect to receive from a
              hypothetical tenant. Since the premises in the present
              case are not controlled by any rent control legislation, the
              annual rent received by the landlord is what a willing
              lessee, uninfluenced by other circumstances, would pay to
              a willing lessor. Hence, actual annual rent, in these
              circumstances, can be taken as the annual rateable value
              of the property for the assessment of property tax. The
              municipal corporation is, therefore, entitled to revise the
              rateable value of the properties which have been freed
              from rent control on the basis of annual rent actually
              received unless the owner satisfies the municipal
              corporation that there are other considerations which have
              affected the quantum of rent.”


16 (1998) 6 SCC 381
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 64 of 72
81) In case there is a proof and/or material to find out that the

       reasonable rent could have been more than at which it is actually

       let out, the actual rent receipt can be discarded by adopting the

       expected rent which, on the basis of material, can be said to be

       reasonable. In those cases where the property is self-occupied

       or is vacant and not let out, it can be gathered from the rent at

       which a comparable property is let out. However, in such a case

       there would be two situations. Going by the dicta
laid down in
Dewan Daulat Rai Kapoor and other cases, the reasonable rent

       would be the standard rent which can be determined under the

       provisions of
Delhi Rent Control Act
.                  However, this principle

       would be applicable only in respect of those properties where
Delhi Rent Control Act
applies.               In other cases, the yardstick

       would be the letting value of comparable properties, i.e., the rent

       at which comparable properties are let out.                     However, such

       criteria of fixation of standard rent has lost its relevance after the

       judgment of the Delhi High Court in Raghunandan Saran Ashok

       Saran (HUF) vide which
Sections 4
,
6
and
19
of the Delhi Rent

       Control Act which deal with fixation of standard rent, were

       declared as ultra vires of the Constitution of India.
The aforesaid

       decision has been affirmed by this Court in
State Trading

       Corporation of India Ltd.
case.
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.       Page 65 of 72
82) Be as it may, in the context of the issue at hand, we emphasize

       that it is the annual letting value fixed in the aforesaid manner

       which can be the annual rent and not the value of the property in

       question. The expression ‘annual rent’ is to be read in

       contradistinction to ‘annual value’. Two concepts are altogether

       different.     Inasmuch as the latter expression relates to annual

       value of the property which may be based on parameters

       different from fixing the annual rent of the property.
83) Having cleared the aforesaid aspect, we need to discuss as to

       whether UAM specified in the impugned Bye-laws aims to strive

       at ascertaining ‘annual rent’? If the answer is in the affirmative,

       only then one can say that the impugned Bye-laws are in tune

       with the provisions of Section 63(1) of the NDMC Act. After going

       through the Bye-laws and the manner in which the rateable value

       is fixed, we are constrained to observe that it is not in sink with

       the scheme of Section 63(1) of the NDMC Act. To recapitulate in

       brief, Bye-law 4 stipulates that the bona fide annual value of land

       not covered under Bye-law 3 would be the annual value of land

       and bona fide annual value of the covered space of the building.

       Bye-law 3 seeks to fix the entire value of land falling in the

       jurisdiction of New Delhi at the circle rate of Rs. 43,000/- (Rupees
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 66 of 72
Forty Three Thousand only) per square meter. Likewise, Bye-law

       4(10) where annual rent of any building is determinable under

       more than one-sub-bye-law, the annual rent shall be the

       aggregate of the annual value determined under sub-bye-law of

       this Bye-law.          We, therefore, reject the arguments of the

       appellants and do not deem it necessary to deal therewith any

       further.
84) Thus, we agree with the High Court that the Impugned Bye-laws

       that provide UAM which is based on value of the property that on

       rental which the property is likely to fetch and are, there, foreign

       to the methodology provided in Section 63 of the NDMC Act.

       Such Bye-laws are, thus, ultra vires the provisions of NDMC Act.

       They are in excess of the scope and ambit of powers vested in

       the NDMC Act under Section 388(1)(A)(9) of the NDMC Act.
85) As rightly contended by the assessees, initially, same was the

       thinking process in the NDMC as well inasmuch as there was a

       move to amend the Act in order to bring UAM for the purpose of

       levying property tax. This is how the Municipal Corporation of

       Delhi achieved its objective.              However, for the reasons best

       known to the appellants, without amending the provisions of the

       Act it went ahead in bringing Impugned Bye-laws, 2009.
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 67 of 72
86) No doubt, in many ways, UAM is a better method in comparison

       with the earlier method based on annual rent. For this reason,

       this method has now been followed for the purpose of levying

       property tax not only in the areas in Delhi itself covered under the

       Municipal Corporation of Delhi but in many other States as well.

       However, such a method which may be a better method can be

       incorporated in accordance with the law. In the present case, it

       could be done after amending the provisions of the NDMC Act.

       Since, we are agreeing with the High Court which has quashed

       the Impugned Bye-laws as ultra vires, it becomes meaningless

       and irrelevant to go into other issues or other arguments

       advanced before us. However, we may only add that once the

       appellants take steps for amending the Act and want to

       reintroduce the Bye-laws of 2009, many aspects highlighted by

       the assessees in respect of Bye-laws would be kept in mind. We

       are    not     suggesting       that    the    contentions      raised   by   the

       respondents/assessees relating to validity of different Bye-laws

       are well-founded, nor are we suggesting that they are ill-

       conceived.        This Court has not expressed any views on the

       merits of these contentions, either waym as this Court has not

       gone into the merits of such contentions. At the same time in
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.        Page 68 of 72
order to obviate any future challenge the NDMC is expected to

       keep in mind the arguments of the appellants on these aspects.
87) We may record here that when the matter was heard at a stage

       when the counsel for NDMC had argued the matter and even

       respondents have made their submissions in reply thereto,

       learned counsel for the NDMC before giving rejoinder made a

       statement on 16th January, 2018 that the new Bye-laws had been

       accepted by approximately 95% assessees. Further, because of

       the interim order passed by this Court permitting such assessees

       to deposit the property tax on the basis of these Bye-laws, they

       had voluntarily deposited the property tax as well on the basis of

       self-assessment. Having regard to this, the learned counsel for

       the      NDMC         submitted        that     the     grievances     of     the

       respondents/assessees can be looked into by the Valuation

       Committee. Based on this statement, following order was passed

       on 16th January, 2018.
"Learned counsel for the respondents have completed
              their submissions. The petitioner(s) have to give rejoinder
              thereto. Before making the submissions in rejoinder Mr.
              Yoginder Handoo, learned counsel appearing for
              petitioner(s), has stated that approximately 95%
              assessees have accepted the new bye-laws and pursuant
              to the order passed by this Court, they have come forward
              voluntarily and deposited the property tax on the basis of 4
              self-assessment. He submits that some of the grievances
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.        Page 69 of 72
which are stated by the respondents herein in respect to
              their properties which according to them are in the
              impugned bye-laws can be looked into by the Valuation
              Committee. He further submits that Valuation Committee
              may be having its sitting within two weeks and may give its
              report in this behalf within five weeks. He, therefore,
              makes a request to adjourn the matters for five weeks. The
              matters stand adjourned to 06.03.2018.
We make it clear that the aforesaid exercise would be
              without prejudice to the rights and contentions of the
              parties. The petitioners may file its written submissions
              during this period. In the meantime, interim order to
              continue.”
88)    When the matter came up on 6 th March, 2018, Mr. Sanjay Jain

       made a statement on behalf of NDMC that the revised guidelines

       have been framed and put on website, to which objections have

       been invited. He also stated that after receiving and considering

       the objections, the matter would be finalized at NDMC’s end. The

       respondent/assessee and some others also submitted their

       objections to the modified guidelines. These were looked into by

       the NDMC and decision thereon was taken by the Chairperson,

       NDMC under Bye-law 5(2) of the Impugned Bye-laws after the

       Valuation Committee had given its recommendations for the year

       2018-19. This decision dated 14 th May, 2018 of the Chairperson

       was handed over to the Court. As per this, various objections of

       the assessees were considered and decision taken thereon

       which are reflected in the tabulated form. Many respondents/
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 70 of 72
assessees are still not satisfied with the decision taken on various

       aspects and the arguments. We, however, leave it to the NDMC

       to take a final call thereupon having due regard to the legal

       position on these aspects.
89)    One last but very significant aspect is still required to be dealt

       with. The declaration of Impugned Bye-laws as ultra vires has

       created a difficult situation. These Bye-law were framed in the

       year 2009.        They were struck down by the High Court vide

       impugned judgment dated 10th August, 2017. They held the field

       from 2009-2017. While issuing notice in these Special Leave

       Petitions on 22nd September, 2017, in respect of the direction of

       the High Court to pass re-assessment order, this Court observed

       that it would be open to the NDMC not to pass such re-
assessment orders. That interim order has prevailed during the

       pendency of these appeals. Further, as already noted above,

       95% of the assessees are agreeable to pay the tax as per Bye-

       laws 2009. They have even paid the taxes on that basis. In

       these circumstances, to upset the applecart completely may not

       be appropriate. In such a peculiar situation, in exercise of powers

       under
Article 142
of the Constitution, we direct that those

       assessees who have paid the tax as per Bye-Laws, 2009, their
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.   Page 71 of 72
assessments shall not be reopened. Another reason for taking

       this course of action is that these assessees are satisfied with the

       assessments under Bye-laws, 2009. However, it will not apply to

       the respondents herein, namely, those assessees who were the

       writ petitioners in the High Court. In their cases, the direction

       given by the High Court in the impugned judgment shall prevail.
90)    The appeals stand disposed of in the aforesaid terms.
.............................................J.
                                                                                  (A.K. SIKRI)



                                                      .............................................J.
                                                                    (ASHOK BHUSHAN)
NEW DELHI;
JANUARY 22, 2019.
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 23186-23213 of 2019 & Ors.                Page 72 of 72