[Cites
36
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
Delhi Dayalbagh Cooperative House ... vs Registrar Cooperative Societies on 30 January, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 598, 2019 (3) SCC 745, (2019) 1 CURCC 375, (2019) 1 RECCIVR 833, (2019) 1 WLC(SC)CVL 586, 2019 (203) AIC (SOC) 10 (SC), (2019) 259 DLT 154, (2019) 2 SCALE 230, (2020) 138 ALL LR 35, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2432, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2573
Author:
A.M. Khanwilkar
Bench:
Ajay Rastogi
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
NON­REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO(s) 1313 OF 2019
                               (Arising out of SLP(Civil) No(s). 8138 of 2013)

          DELHI DAYALBAGH COOPERATIVE HOUSE
          BUILDING SOCIETY LTD.                                    …….Appellant(s)

                                   VERSUS

          REGISTRAR
          COOPERATIVE SOCIETIES AND ORS.                        ……..Respondent(s)

                                                  WITH

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO(s) 1314 OF 2019
                               (Arising out of SLP(Civil) No(s). 9015 of 2010)

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO(s) 1315 OF 2019
                               (Arising out of SLP(Civil) No(s). 26905 of 2010)


                                             JUDGMENT
Rastogi, J.
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP(Civil) No(s). 8138 of 2013,
          SLP(Civil) No(s). 9015 of 2010,
          SLP(Civil) No(s). 26905 of 2010
1.             Leave granted.
2.
Signature Not Verified
The above noted appeals are directed against the orders
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK SINGH
separately passed by the High Court of Delhi in writ petitions
Date: 2019.01.30
17:26:11 IST
Reason:
filed at the instance of the present appellant Society which came
1
to be dismissed upholding the order of the Cooperative Tribunal

setting aside the award passed by the Registrar Cooperative

Societies holding that the Arbitrator had no jurisdiction to

examine the validity and legality of the registered sale deed which

can be questioned only by availing a remedy in the Civil Court

holding jurisdiction.    Orders were separately passed by the

Tribunal in the cases of the individual members in whose favour

sale deed was executed by the society, having been separately

decided by the High Court, which has been challenged in these

batch of appeals.
3.   The facts that emerge from the multitude and collateral and

exhaustive pleadings in brief are that the appellant is a house

building   Society   originally   registered   with   the   Registrar,

Cooperative Societies, Delhi (“hereinafter being referred to as

“RCS”) under the provisions of the Bombay Cooperative Societies

Act, 1925. On enactment of the
Delhi Cooperative Societies Act,

1972
, the provisions of the Act, 1972 and the rules framed

thereunder came to govern the field. However, the Act of 1972

came to be repealed by the
Delhi Cooperative Societies Act,

2003
(hereinafter being referred to as the “Act 2003”) as amended
2
by the Delhi Cooperative Societies(Amendment Act), 2006 which

now governs the field along with Delhi Cooperative Societies

Rules, 2007 framed thereunder.
4.   The Society framed its bye­laws, namely, Delhi Dayalbagh

Cooperative House Building Society Ltd., Soami Nagar, New

Delhi, with the primary object to acquire the land either through

outright purchase or on lease for construction of houses for its

members, either on rent or on hire purchase system or by

outright sale with a stipulation that no member shall be

permitted to transfer, sell or mortgage his house to any person

other than the members of the society or the society itself as

referred to under bye­law 51 and after the object being achieved

for which the Society has been formed, the procedure may be

followed for its liquidation as referred to under bye­law 65. Para

5, 51 and 65 of bye­laws which are relevant for the purpose are

reproduced                           as                      under:­


        ”5.    (i)    Any person shall be eligible to be a
        member of the society provided:­­
(a)     he is a follower of Radha Soami
               faith and a member of Radha Soami
               Satsang affiliated to Radha Soami Sabha,
               Dayalbagh, Agra;
3
(b)     He, at the time of enrolment as a
       member, is domiciled in the    Union
       Territory of Delhi or has been resident in
       the Union     Territory of Delhi for two
       years or more; provided that this
         condition shall not apply to members of
       All India Services and employees of the
       Central Government and the Delhi
       Administration.

       (c)     his     written  application  for
       membership has been approved by a
         majority of the Managing Committee.

       (d)     his age is more than 18 years,
       except in the case of minor heir of a
       deceased member;

       (e)    he is not a member of any other
       house building society;

       (f)     he or his wife (she or her husband
       in case of a woman) or any of his/her
       dependents does not own a dwelling house
       or a plot for building a house in Delhi;

       (g)     directly or indirectly he does not
       deal in purchase or sale of house     or
       land for construction of houses either
       himself or through any    of             his
       dependents.

       (h)    he has carried out the provisions of
       bye­law.
(ii)Every person seeking membership of the society
shall sign a declaration to the effect that he or his
wife(she or her husband) or any of his/her dependents
does not own a dwelling house or plot in Delhi and that
he/she is not a member of any other co­operative
house building society.
(iii)Every member on admission shall pay Rs.10/­ as
admission fee which shall not be refunded in any case.
(iv)When a person’s application has been accepted by
the Committee and he has paid his admission fee and
4
first instalment of this shares, he shall be deemed to
have acquired all the rights and incurred all the
obligations and liabilities of a member of the society as
laid down in the Co­operative
Societies Act
, the Rules
made there under and these bye­laws.
(v) Application for admission as member and for
allotment of shares shall be made to the Secretary in
the form, if any, prescribed by the society for the
purpose. Every such application shall be disposed off
by the Managing Committee who shall have power to
grant admission or to refuse it after recording reasons
for such refusal, provided, however, that any person
whose application has been refused by the Managing
Committee may prefer an appeal within 30 days to the
Assistant Registrar, Co­operative Societies(Housing).
The decision of the Assistant Registrar shall be final.
51.      No member shall be permitted to transfer, sell or
mortgage his house to any person other than the members
of the society or the society itself.
65.     The society shall be wound up and dissolved only
by order of the Registrar under
Section 39
,
40
or 42 of the
Co­operative
Societies Act
.
After all the liabilities including the paid up share capital
have been met, the surplus assets shall not be divided
among the members, but shall be devoted to any object of
public utility determined by the General Meeting of the
society within three months of the date of final liquidation,
and approved by the Registrar, or they may in consultation
with them either be assigned by the Registrar in whole or in
part to any or all of the following :­
(a)    an object of public utility of local interest ;
(b)    a charitable purpose as defined in section (2)
  of the
Charitable Endowment Act
;
(c)    or may be placed on deposit with The Delhi
  State Co­operative Bank until such time as a new
  society with similar conditions is registered when,
  with the consent of the Registrar, such surplus may
  be credited to the Reserve Fund of such new
  society.”
5
5.   To fulfil the object with which the society was formed, it was

desirous of obtaining land for construction of dwelling units to be

made available for its members. However, it did not go into the

market to purchase land but approached the appropriate

Government for its assistance with an application invoking
Part

VII of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894
, to provide the land located

in various Khasras admeasuring 137 bighas & 11 biswas

situated at village Chirag Delhi for construction of dwelling

houses for its members.
6.
Part VII of Land Acquisition Act, 1894
under the heading

“Acquisition of Land for Companies” begins with
Section 38
and

runs upto
Section 44
B.
Section 38
was repealed by
Section 68
of 1984 with effect from 24 th September, 1984. The issue in the

present case is pertaining to year 1955 when the acquisition

proceedings were initiated. Section 38A was a part of the Statute

at the relevant point of time when the acquisition proceedings

were initiated by the appropriate Government in the year 1955.
7.
Section 39
lays down that
Sections 6
to
16
and
Sections 18
to
37
(both inclusive) shall not be put in force in order to acquire
6
land on behalf of the company without previous consent of the

Government unless the company(includes society) executes an

agreement. In terms of
Section 40
, a consent is to be obtained

after the appropriate Government record its satisfaction either on

the report of the Collector under Section 5A or by the inquiry

held as provided for the purpose of acquisition is to obtain land

for erection of dwelling houses for workmen employed by the

company or that such acquisition is needed for construction of

building or work for the Company and that work is likely to be

proved useful to the public.
8.   The State Government thus proceeded under
Part VII of the

Land Acquisition Act
and after holding preliminary enquiry as

envisaged under
Section 40
of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894

and after recording its satisfaction, executed an agreement laying

down the terms & conditions with the appellant Society under
Section 41
dated 12th April, 1955 which was published under

notification dated 13th May, 1955 in the Official Gazette in terms

of
Section 42
of the Act, became the force of law and binding not

only upon the parties to the agreement but also on the public at

large.   The terms & conditions indicated in the agreement dated
7
13th May, 1955 published in the Gazette and relevant for the

present purpose are reproduced hereunder:­

       “1.      That the Society shall pay to the State
       Government or such person or persons as the State
       Government may appoint in this behalf before
       possession of the said land is given to the Society the
       compensation, if any, as settled by the Collector or if
       reference is made to the court by the final court or
       appeal and all compensation inclusive of all payments
       and allowances in respect thereof payable under the
       said Act and all Courts costs and pleaders fees etc.
       incurred by the State Government in defending the
       reference, if any, made to the court as aforesaid and on
       appeal or appeals filed in connection therewith and all
       compensation, pleaders fee etc. payable or paid by the
       State Government to the claimant in the said matters.
       The State Government shall not be bound to give
       possession of the land until all the said money have
       been paid, and may withdraw from the acquisition, and
       in case of withdrawal the Society shall be liable to
       indemnify the State Government against all expenses
       incurred and damage sustained as the result of
       anything done by them in the matter of acquisition till
       the date of withdrawal.
2. That upon such payment by the Society the Chief
       Commissioner covenants to convey and grant to the
       Society the said land described in the Schedule hereto,
       to held the same to the said Society for every subject to
       the conditions hereafter not forth, namely:­
(a) That the Society shall within 15 years of
           being put in possession of the said land
           utilise this land for the purpose it is
           acquired.
(b) That    the Society its successors and
           assignees    shall use the said land for
           aforesaid    purposes and for no other
           purposes,   whatsoever.
(c) That if the Society fails to carry out any
           of the terms of this agreement or if the said
           land no longer required by the said Society
           for the aforesaid purpose, then the Society
8
shall forthwith relinquish and restore the
            same in favour of the Chief Commissioner
            and land shall be liable to be resumed and
            taken by the State Government on payment
            to the Society of the amount of award as
            finally settled or the estimated market value
            of the land at the time of resumption,
            whichever, shall be less and if there are any
            buildings     on    the    land   the   Chief
            Commissioner may at his option either
            purchase the buildings on payment of their
            estimated value at the time or direct the
            Society to remove the buildings at its own
            cost which such time as may be allowed by
            the State Government.
(d) That should any dispute or difference
            arise touching or concerning the subject
            matter of this agreement or any covenant or
            clause of thing contained therein, the same
            shall be referred to the Sole Arbitration of any
            person nominated by the Chief Commissioner
            of Delhi or in case his designation is changed
            or his office is abolished to the sole
            arbitration of any person nominated by the
            officer, who for the time being is entrusted,
            whether or not in addition to other functions
            with the functions of the Chief Commissioner
            of Delhi by whatever designation such officer
            may be called. It will be no objection to any
            such appointment that the arbitrator so
            appointed is a Government servant that he
            had to deal with the matters to which this
            indenture relate and in the course of his
            duties as such Government servant he has
            expressed views on all or any of the matters
            in dispute or difference. The award of the
            arbitrator so appointed shall be final and
            binding on the parties.”
9.   After acceptance of the terms & conditions of the agreement

being deduced in writing, duly published in the Official Gazette

under
Section 42
of the Act, having the force of law, the State
9
Government proceeded to complete the acquisition proceedings

and published the award under
Section 11
of the Act dated 26 th

February     1957     and   after   taking    possession   free   from

encumbrances under
Section 16
of the Land Acquisition Act,

handed over possession to the society in terms of the agreement

dated 13th May, 1955 on 11th June, 1957 and 30th July, 1957

respectively. It may be relevant to note that any agreement or

Memorandum       of    Understanding,    if   any,   executed     while

possession of the subject land was handed over to the society,

has not been placed by the society on record and inference can

be drawn that while handing over possession, the State

Government intended to comply with the terms & conditions of

the agreement dated 13th May, 1955 to be adhered to in its true

spirit by the society and indisputedly breach, if any, of the

conditions of the agreement has not been brought to the notice of

the Court.
10.   The appellant Society in fulfilment of its obligations and in

terms of the agreement dated 13 th May, 1955 allotted plots to its

members within the stipulated period of 15 years by a separate

registered sale deed executed on certain terms and conditions.
10
Since the terms and conditions of allotment as recited in the sale

deed are common, we have noticed from the registered sale deed

dated 30th December 1968 in reference to plot no. B­68 to its

member Mr. Manocha, on acceptance of full consideration for the

plot in question.
11.   Coming to the facts of the Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(C )

No. 8138 of 2013, Mr. K.L. Manocha, as a lead case, who was a

member of the Society allotted a plot no. B­68, Soami Nagar and

sale deed was executed in his favour on 30 th December, 1968 in

the same terms.      It reveals that Mr. Manocha, had initially

constructed a single storey house later intended to demolish and

construct a multi storey structure for his own needs and

requirements. The appellant came across with the advertisement

in the magazine titled “Real Property Times” in June, 2005 for

sale of a basement, four bedroom apartments on each of the

upper four floors of the building constructed on the plot in

question. This fact came to the notice of the society on 18 th June,

2005.    The society published a notice inviting the public in

general that the residential plots in Soami Nagar cannot be sold

to persons who are not the members and who are not eligible to

be members of the society and violation of the society bye­laws
11
and the sale deed even if registered shall be at his own risk and

peril.
12.      At this stage, a claim petition was filed at the instance of

society under
Section 70
of the Act, 2003 seeking declaration of

the sale/transfer of the property in question by the allottee to a

non­member without prior notice or permission, as illegal and

void being in violation of clauses 2 & 3 of the sale deed and

clause 51 of the bye­laws and it was prayed that the same may

be cancelled and the property be referred back to the society.
13.      The award was passed in favour of the appellant society and

against the respondent no. 2 dated 1st December 2006 holding

that sale/transfer was violative of clauses 2 & 3 of the sale deed

and bye­law 51 directing the impleaded respondent(member of

the society) to hand over the property within the stipulated time

to the appellant society.     But no order was passed against the

transferees/purchasers including the respondents being non­

members of the society. When the proceedings were initiated in

execution of the award and property was stated to be attached at

one stage on 28th November, 2007, the respondents who were

stated to be the parties and claiming to be the purchasers and
12
occupants filed separate appeals against the award before the

Cooperative Tribunal.   At the same time, the appellant society

also filed appeal assailing the award to the limited extent with

regard to deletion of names of the impleaded respondent nos. 3

and 4 with a prayer for reinstatement. The appeals filed by the

impleaded respondents and of the appellant society were heard

by the Tribunal and disposed of by a common judgment dated 6 th

January, 2012. The appeal of the appellant society was allowed

but the award passed by the Arbitrator dated 1 st December, 2006

was set aside which was the subject matter of challenge before

the Delhi High Court and after being affirmed on dismissal of the

writ petition preferred by the appellant society, the matter is

under challenge in the present batch of appeals.
14.   Civil appeal arising out of SLP(Civil) No. 9015 of 2010 has

been filed against the order dated 28th October, 2009. Although

the question was the same with the additional factor raised that

in terms of condition nos. 2 & 3 of the sale deed, notice was

served on the society that was not responded failing which the

member proceeded to sell the subject plot but service of notice

was disputed by the appellant society and the Tribunal held that
13
the appeal of the society for cancellation of the legally executed

registered sale deed is not a subject matter which is covered

under the provisions of the
Delhi Cooperative Societies Act
and

rules framed thereunder and such registered instrument, if at all

one is aggrieved, could be challenged in a civil Court having

jurisdiction and in the writ petition preferred by the society, the

High Court while upholding the view of the Tribunal further

observed that in the absence of the purchaser being impleaded as

party to the proceedings, his rights indeed has been jeopardised

who indisputedly was a necessary party to the proceedings and

when the valid transaction is sought to be set aside by the

Arbitrator under its impugned award, the purchaser was to be

heard and was held against the appellant and on the twin ground

the writ petition came to be dismissed is the subject matter of

challenge.
15.   In civil appeal arising out of SLP(C ) No. 26905 of 2010, the

order of the Tribunal which was on the same lines and placing

reliance on the earlier order of the High Court dated 28 th October

2009, the Writ Petition(C ) no. 2136/2008 came to be dismissed

with additional fact taken into consideration that Section 91 of
14
the Act, 2003 gives recognition to purchase through the

registered agreement to sell or power of Attorney or a sale deed

and on fulfilment of conditions, the applicant, if apply for

membership by paying transfer fee, share money and admission

fee etc. as per the provision of the bye­laws, the society and the

committee has to grant membership to the applicant within 30

days of the submission of application and refusal by the

Committee may give rise to appeal by the applicant to the

Registrar of the Cooperative Societies.
16.   Mr. Shekhar Naphade, learned senior counsel for the

appellant submits that it is not in dispute that the land was

acquired by the appropriate Government under
Part VII of the

Land Acquisition Act
and for the aforesaid purpose, the appellant

society and the Government entered into an agreement dated 13 th

May, 1955 under
Section 41
of the Land Acquisition Act which

came to be published in the official Gazette in compliance of
Section 42
of the Act and has a force of law and learned senior

counsel submits that in terms of the agreement, the Government

has to execute a deed of conveyance and grant the said land to

the society. Indisputedly, the Government has failed to execute
15
deed of conveyance or make the grant in favour of the society and

further to support its title, the society filed a Writ Petition No.

6406 of 2001 and order came to be passed on 7 th January, 2004

directing the Government by Writ of Mandamus to execute the

deed of conveyance. Taking assistance thereof, learned senior

counsel submits that in the absence of any agreement/deed of

conveyance been executed by the Government, the appellant

society itself does not hold a freehold title and is not a owner of

the subject land in question and so long as the society is not the

owner of the subject land, it could not transfer ownership rights

to its members as the transferor cannot confer on the transferee

a better right than what he himself possess and the purported

sale deeds executed by the society in favour of its members even

though indicated in the recital of the sale deed as owner of the

subject plot but that may not transfer any ownership/freehold

title on its members.
17.   According to the learned senior counsel, the title of the

parcel of land is still with the Government and the Government

has not executed any deed of conveyance so far despite order of

the Delhi High Court dated 7th January, 2004 and the agreement
16
dated 13th May, 1955 is nothing more than a promise to execute

a deed of conveyance and the agreement may have a binding

force in view of its publication in the Gazette under
Section 42
of

the Land Acquisition Act but cannot be construed as extending

freehold title to the society.
18.   Learned senior counsel further submits that
Section 44 A
of

the Land Acquisition Act clearly provides that no company (which

include society) for whom land is acquired under
Part VII of the

Act
is entitled to transfer the land or any part thereof by sale,

mortgage, gift or otherwise except with the previous sanction of

the Government. According to learned senior counsel, the sale

deeds executed after 1962, when Section 44 A came on the

statute book w.e.f. 12th September, 1962 does not indicate that

any previous sanction has been obtained from the Government

and mere permission to use does not create any right or interest

on the subject land in favour of the society. At least, in any case,

no ownership of freehold right is created so far and
Section 54
of

the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 is merely a codification of the

principle of common law which may not be of any assistance to

the respondents as its defence.
17
19.   Learned senior counsel appears to be very futuristic in his

approach when submits that even if the Government decides at

later stage to grant ownership to the society, such ownership

would always be subject to
Section 44A
of the Land Acquisition

Act and society cannot make any transfer in any form, without

previous consent of the Government and the very concept of

freehold means that the holder of the land has an absolute right

to transfer and/or create any rights in the land without being

required to take any permission or consent of any other authority

or person and in this context, the finding which has been

recorded converting freehold rights in favour of the members in

respect of the plots allotted to them is erroneous and contrary to

law which according to him is not sustainable.
20.   According to learned senior counsel Mr. Shekhar Naphade,

the purported sale deed executed by the society in favour of its

members has no legal effect and even the terms on which the

members of the society are occupying their respective plots or

their houses confers no right in favour of the allottees. Thus, the

transfer made by individual members to third parties/non­
18
members without previous sanction of the Government are void

ab initio bad and such transfer without prior permission/consent

of the society even by registered sale deed apart from being in

violation of the provisions of the bye­laws are also hit by
Section

44A
of the Land Acquisition Act and no legitimate right can be

conferred on the allottee or its transferee to whom rights have

been transferred on the subject plot in question and placed

reliance on the judgment of this Court reported in
Zoroastrian

Cooperative Housing Society Ltd. and another          Vs. District

Registrar, Cooperative Societies(Urban) and Others
2005(5)

SCC 632.
21.   Per contra, Mr. Ranjit Kumar, learned senior counsel for the

respondents while supporting the judgment of the High Court

submitted that the question which has been raised by the

counsel for the appellant is beyond the pleadings and it was

never the case of the society either before the Arbitrator or the

Tribunal or the High Court or even in the pleadings in the civil

appeal that in the absence of any deed of conveyance being

executed in terms of clause 2 of the agreement dated 13 th May,
19
1955,   the society does not hold freehold title/rights over the

subject land in question and what is being argued before this

Court is beyond the pleadings and has been raised for the first

time while making oral submissions and there is no factual

foundation on record in support of what is being prayed and

further submitted that the subject plots have been allotted to the

members of the society as its owner free from encumbrances

transferred by the Government, after being acquired at the behest

of the society under the provisions of the
Land Acquisition Act
.
22. Learned senior counsel for the respondents further submits

that after the agreement dated 12 th April, 1955 been executed

under
Section 41
of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and

published in the Gazette dated 13th May, 1955 become a force of

law by virtue of
Section 42
of the Act and the agreement dated

13th May, 1955 recites certain terms & conditions and on its

satisfaction, the appropriate Government had proceeded to

complete the acquisition proceedings and handed over possession

of the subject land in question to the society free from

encumbrances on 11th June, 1957 & 30th July, 1957 and after

the possession was taken over by the society, the society
20
proceeded in making allotment to its members by a registered

sale deed conferring rights and title in favour of the allottee.
23.   Learned senior counsel for the respondents submits that a

conjoint reading of clauses 2 & 3 of the sale deed (dated 30 th

December, 1968 in the instant case), the society reserves its pre­

emptive rights over the subject plot in question and if the society

fails to purchase within the stipulated period at the prevailing

market price, the member will be at liberty to dispose of in the

manner as he/she likes.
24.   According to learned senior counsel,
Section 91
of the Delhi

Cooperative Societies Act, 2003 envisage that any member of the

housing society who has sold his plot or flat on the registered

Power of Attorney or agreement for sale or by sale deed ceases to

be a member of the society and the transferee who has

purchased the subject property on the registered Power of

Attorney or agreement for sale or by sale deed on fulfilment of the

conditions as stipulated on depositing the transfer fee and share

money, if any, the Society and the Committee is under obligation

to grant membership to the applicant within 30 days from the

submission of application and in case of refusal, there is remedy
21
to the applicant to approach the Registrar of the Cooperative

Societies for redressal of his/her grievance.
25.   Learned senior counsel submits that there is no refusal ever

made by the society to the transferees who had purchased the

subject plot in question contemplated under
Section 91
of Act,

2003 failing which the transferees, in their own capacity, be

considered and deemed to be a member of the society in the

absence of any order being passed by the society to the contrary.
26.   Learned senior counsel for the respondents further submits

that throughout even, from the correspondence evident from the

letter dated 27th July, 1985 from the Secretary of the Society to

Lt. Governor stated in para 2 that the “Delhi Administration

acquired approx. 30 acres of land allotted to the society on 25 th

March, 1957 on freehold basis”. Later, in the letter dated 15 th

March, 1989 addressed to the authority from the Secretary of the

Society, it was stated that “the status of the land is totally

freehold and allotment of plots to the society’s members was also

on the same basis.”      That apart, the society, at one stage,

approached the District Judge in RCA 95/82 titled as Delhi
22
Dayalbagh Cooperative House Building Society Ltd. Vs. Arjun Das

and after the matter was being heard, the learned trial Judge also

recorded its finding that the subject land in dispute is being a

freehold and there is no legal bar to the same being sold and the

order passed by the learned trial Judge never came to be

challenged by the society and accepted the nature of the land of

which the possession was handed over by the appropriate

Government on completion of acquisition proceedings initiated at

the instance of the society vested free from encumbrances.
27.   Learned senior counsel further submits that
Section 70
of

the Act have a limited jurisdiction to examine the dispute

touching the constitution, management or the business of the

cooperative society to arbitration and the prayers made are in the

nature of declaration that the registered sale deed in favour of the

non­members be held to be null and void is indisputedly beyond

its scope and jurisdiction and has been rightly interfered by the

Tribunal and confirmed by the High Court on dismissal of the

writ petition preferred at the instance of the society and placed

reliance on the judgment of this Court in
Usha Ranjan
23
Bhattacharjee and Others Vs. Abinash Chandra Chakaborty

and Ors.
reported in 1997(10) SCC 344.
28.   Learned senior counsel submits that after the enactment of

the
Delhi Cooperative Societies Act, 1972
or 2003, the bye­laws

of the societies have to be in conformity with the provisions of the

Act. There is a restrictive clause if inconsistent with the

provisions of the Act, 2003 may not have any enforceability under

the law and      further submits that the possession free from

encumbrances was handed over by the appropriate Government

to the society after passing of the award in June/July 1957 and

it may not be open for the appellant to take a summersault and

raise a question which was never agitated.       In last 60 years,

much water has flown in the Ganges, conferring rights over the

subject property and at this belated stage when number of sale

deeds have been executed at various point of time by the society

with its members which has been further transferred to non­

members by registered power of attorney or agreement to sell or

sale deed and their rights are protected under
Section 91
of Act,

2003 and at such belated stage when there is no residential plot

available with the society at its disposal, question of deed of
24
conveyance not executed may not arise for consideration and it

appears that this plea has been raised to nullify the winding up

proceedings which is adversely affecting the rights of the society.
29.   We have heard learned senior counsel for the parties at

length and with their assistance perused the records.
30.   Before adverting further, we will discuss some material facts

and the relevant provisions of the
Delhi Cooperative Societies Act
and the bye­laws of the society which may have a direct bearing

on the issue under consideration.
31.   After the action been initiated by the society for providing

land in fulfilment of the public purpose in providing plots to its

members, the appropriate Government issued a notification

under
Section 4
dated 19th March, 1955 and after holding a

preliminary inquiry, as contemplated under Chapter 40 of
Part

VII of the Act, 1894
, and on its satisfaction, the appropriate

Government executed an agreement dated 12 th April, 1955 with

the society under
Section 41
in fulfilment of the necessary

requirements, namely, payment to the Government of the cost of
25
acquisition, the transfer of land to the society on such payment

prescribing the terms on which the land shall be provided to the

society and where the acquisition is for the purpose of erecting

dwelling houses, all the provisions of Act connected therewith,

time and the manner in which the dwelling houses have to be

erected, on the terms & conditions came to be published in the

Gazette under
Section 42
of the Act on 13th May, 1955 which

became the law and binding on the parties and the public at

large.   The appropriate Government thereafter proceeded in

making declaration under
Section 6
of the Act.             Consequent

thereto, award came to be passed under
Section 11
on 11 th

February, 1957 and the appropriate Government took possession

of the subject land in question, free from all encumbrances,

under
Section 16
of the Land Acquisition Act and it has come on

record that possession was transferred to the society for whom

the acquisition proceedings were initiated at its instance on 11 th

June,    1957   and   30th   July,   1957   respectively    free   from

encumbrances and, therefore, the title in transferring the land to

the society in terms of the agreement dated 13th May, 1955

created a statutory genesis. It is not the case of either party that

there was any breach or violation of the terms and conditions
26
which has been referred to under the agreement dated 13 th May,

1955 either by the society or its members or the purchasers or

the successors in interest.
32.   The emphasis of learned senior counsel for the appellant

that the title of the land in question never stood transferred to

the society in the absence of the deed of conveyance been

executed, is without substance for the reason that the title at the

first place in favour of the society was not created by any of the

modes ascribable to the
Transfer of Property Act
and once the

acquisition proceedings have been initiated by the Government,

on fulfilment of the conditions referred to under
Section 41
of

Land Acquisition Act on being published in the Gazette dated 13 th

May 1955 under
Section 42
of the Act which became the law,

there appears no further statutory requirement to register any

deed of conveyance under the
Transfer of Property Act
. Besides

it, the consideration amount was paid by the society as

demanded by the competent authority and physical and actual

possession, free from encumbrances, was delivered to the

appellant society and the land stood conveyed and granted in

terms of clause 2 of the agreement. At the same time, no party in
27
the instant proceedings ever raised any objection/dispute on the

issue of physical possession of the land in question being

delivered to the appellant society and/or the same being passed

on to the person who have purchased plots/flats therein

subsequently.       In the given facts and circumstances, it can

legitimately be observed that the marketable title in transferring

respective plots to its members has created a statutory genesis.
33.   It is also not the case of the appellant society that at any

later stage, after the appropriate Government handed over

possession, free from encumbrances, of the subject land in

question to the society, it ever raised objection in reference to the

breach of the terms & conditions of the agreement dated 13 th

May, 1955 to resume the subject land or for taking legal recourse

in reference to the title of the subject land in question. In the

given facts and circumstances, a legal presumption can be drawn

that after the peaceful possession free from encumbrances, was

handed over by the State Government to the society, all rights of

the   said   land    stood   vested   with   the   society   free   from

encumbrances and transferred to its members on the terms as

indicated in the registered sale deed executed by the society.
28
34.   The sale deed dated 30 th December, 1968 was executed in

favour of one of the applicant Shri Manocha, member of the

society to whom plot no. B­68 was allotted by registered sale deed

on certain terms & conditions on depositing the cost of the land,

the physical possession of the subject land/plot was passed on to

the member of the society. The extract clause of the sale deed

dated 30th December, 1968 which are standardised conditions in

all the sale deeds relevant for the purpose is reproduced as

under:­



            “This   Sale Deed is made on this 30 th day of
          December 1968 by the Delhi Dayalbagh Co­operative
          House Building Society Ltd. Delhi,        in favour of
          Shri/Smt. K.L. Manocha, son of Shri M.R. Manocha,
          resident of Delhi, a member of the Society,

          WHEREAS the Chief Commissioner, Delhi vide
          notification No. F­15 (147/34­LSG dated 17.3.55 and
          notification No. F­15(147)/54­LSG dated 13.6.56 and
          Awards in pursuance thereof acquired land for the
          colony of the Society now known as “SOAMI NAGAR
          COLONY” and whereas the society is the owner of the
          plot No. B­68 measuring 488 Sq. yds. forming part of
          the SOAMI NAGAR COLONY and whereas the member
          Shri K.L. Manocha has paid to the Society all the dues
          in respect of the share money, the cost of the land, and
          development charges.
AND WHEREAS the said plot No. B­68 situated in the
          said colony of the Society has been hereunder sold to
          Shri K.L. Manocha for a sum of Rs.1952/­(Rupees One
          Thousand Nine Hundred Fifty Two only) being the cost
          of land, which amount has been paid by the member to
          the society.
29
AND WHEREAS the purchaser member has agreed
   that he/she shall pay to the vendor Society or to whom
   it directs, the amount which may be found by the
   Vendor Society to be due from him/her in future in
   respect of the aforesaid plot and in case of failure to
   pay such dues which shall always be deemed as a debt
   due to the Vendor Society, which dues shall be first
   charge on the said plot and the building constructed
   thereon.
AND WHEREAS the member Shri K.L. Manocha has
   agreed to always abide by the Rules and Bye­laws of
   the Society in force time to time.
AND WHEREAS the purchaser member agreed that
   he/she shall construct a house on the said plot sold to
   him/her within two years after the sale deed by the
   vendor society is registered.
NOW THIS DEED OF SALE WITNESSETH AS UNDER:­
1. That subject to conditions stated in this sale deed and
   in consideration of Rs. 1952/­ (Rupees One Thousand
   Nine Hundred Fifty Two only) as the cost of the land
   paid by the member to the said society, it hereby
   transfers, and conveys to the member Shri K.L.
   Manocha his/her heirs and assignees all rights in the
   plot of land no. B­68 as delineated on the plan
   annexed to this Sale Deed, to hold the same to the
   member on the plan annexed to this Sale Deed, to held
   the same to the member for ever.
2. The purchaser member will continue to be the member
   of the vendor society, if the purchasing member
   proposes to sell or transfer his house or plot, he/she
   undertakes to sell or transfer it to or through the
   society. If the society does not purchase the house
   within six months at the prevailing market price, the
   member will be at liberty to dispose it off as he/she
   likes.
3. The successor will have also to be a member of the
   vendor Society. If he/she does not become a member
   of the society, he/she shall sell the house of plot to or
   through the Society at the prevailing market price, if
   the Society does not purchase the house within six
   months, the successor will be at liberty to own it as
   any other member or dispose it off as he/she likes.
30
4. That the purchaser member agrees to construct and
         build house on the plot in accordance with the rules
         and bye­laws of the Municipal Corporation and will not
         do anything to violate the said rules and bye­laws of
         the Corporation or of the Government which may bring
         about or shift any liability on his/her account to the
         Society and if he/she does anything which on his/her
         account the vendor society is made liable, he/she shall
         compensate the vendor Society and if/she does not pay
         the vendor Society the said dues, the Vendor Society
         liability on him/her will/be the first charge on the plot
         and/or the house constructed by him/her.
5. Expenses in connection with the registration and
         stamp will be borne by the vendor/society.”
35.   Prior to the enactment of the Act 2003, the
Delhi

Cooperative Societies Act, 1972
was in force, but by passage of

time, it revealed that the Act of 1972 fails to fulfil the object and

rule of cooperative societies which had undergone a sea change.

In order to gear up the cooperative societies to meet the challenge

posed due to economic liberalisation and superfast growth in the

field of Information Technology and to protect the interests of the

members of the cooperative societies as financial stakes had

become high, the Government of the National Capital Territory of

Delhi earlier appointed a Committee in 1995 to prepare a new

cooperative law and after a detailed discussion, Committee

submitted a report on 31st August, 1998 which was further
31
reviewed by the Review Committee and after the report being

submitted, the
Delhi Cooperative Societies Act, 2003
came into

force on its publication in the Gazette of 3rd March, 2004.

Certain amendments were made vide the Cooperative Societies

Amendment Act, 2004 and 2006 respectively and in exercise of

power under Section 137, the Delhi Cooperative Societies Rules,

2007 were framed to achieve the object of the provisions of the
Delhi Cooperative Societies Act, 2003
.
36.   Apart from the provisions in reference to the settlement of

disputes as referred to under Chapter VIII, a separate Chapter IX

was    introduced   incorporating   the   special   provisions   for

Cooperative Housing societies.      The Chapter applies to all

cooperative housing societies including housing financial society.

Section 74(a) defines allottee a member of the cooperative society

to whom plot or land or site or flat could be allotted by the

cooperative society and the principal object of the cooperative

housing society is defined in Section 74(e) and (f) of Section 74

deals with dwelling unit which includes a house, flat or

apartment for the purpose of dwelling and sub­section (k) defines

the occupancy rights of an allottee to possess and use the plot or
32
the land. The limitation of membership has been provided under

Section 75 and the rights and privileges of members on allotment

of plot or dwelling unit in a cooperative housing society has been

defined under Section 76.            It further takes note of not only

allotment but has a provision for nomination and restriction on

transfer of share or interest of a member. Permission to transfer

the occupancy right is not to be ordinarily refused is explained

under Section 80 with a special provision providing for settlement

of disputes and Section 91 introduces a special provision for

regularisation of occupancy rights of persons who have acquired

rights through the instrument on registered Power of Attorney or

agreement for sale or registered sale deed to become a member of

the society on depositing the requisite transfer fee, admission fee,

etc. Section 74(e), (f), (k), Section 80 and Section 91 which are

relevant for the purpose are reproduced as under:­


        74(e) "co-operative housing society" means a co-
        operative society-
(i)    registered or deemed to be registered as a co-
operative housing society under this Act;
(ii)   the principal object of which is to provide its
                members open plots under plot housing, dwelling
                units or flats (whether in a multi-storeyed building
                or otherwise) in a complex under group housing
                and in case where open plots or dwelling units or
                flats are already acquired to provide its members
33
common amenities and services including
         services relating to the arrangement of finances
         for facilitating construction of dwelling units in
         order to solve their needs of dwelling units through
         mutual-aid in accordance with the co-operative
         principles, and includes a house building, co-
         partnership, co-ownership housing society, co-
operative       housing    maintenance       society,
         multipurpose co-operative housing society and
         any other co-operative society of like nature and
         purpose;
(iii)   "co-operative housing maintenance society"
means a co-operative society formed by the
         owners of dwelling units in a building for the
         purpose of maintenance of the building and
         provisions of common amenities, services, etc;
(iv)    "co-ownership co-operative housing society"
means a co-operative society known as "house
         building" or plotted society in which the land is
         held either on lease-hold or free-hold basis by the
         co-operative society and the houses constructed
         on it are owned or to be owned by its members;
(v)     "co-partnership co-operative housing society"
known as group housing means a co-operative
         society in which land and buildings are held by the
         co-operative society on lease-hold or free hold
         basis and members are allotted flats or such other
         premises in such buildings with a right to occupy
         the same in accordance with terms of lease,
         Government's guidelines and the bye-laws of such
         group housing;
(vi)    "multi-purpose co-operative housing society"
means a society formed with the object of
         undertaking multifarious activities for the economic
         and social development of its members,
         particularly of slum dwellers and economically
         weaker sections of the people, in addition to
         providing better housing accommodation and
         better environment to improve their quality of life;
(f) "dwelling unit" includes a house, flat and apartment for
the purpose of dwelling;
34
(k) "occupancy right" means the right of an allottee to
possess and use the plot of land, site or dwelling unit or flat
allotted to him with power to give it on hire or on lease and
licence or to mortgage it or to donate or to gift or to transmit it
by will or by inheritance or to transfer it after paying the
transfer fee;
80.Permission for transfer of occupancy right not to be
ordinarily refused and provision for appeal-

(1) No co-operative housing society shall ordinarily refuse to
grant to its member permission for transfer of his occupancy
right in the property of the co-operative housing society
unless the transferee is otherwise not qualified to be a
member:
Provided that nothing contained in any agreement,
  contract or the bye-laws regarding eligibility for
  membership stipulated therein shall apply to a
  nominee, heir or legal representative of the
  deceased member for his admission to membership
  of the co-operative housing society:
Provided further that aforesaid transfer in case of
  lease hold land shall be governed by the provisions
  of the perpetual lease of land.
(2) The decision of the co-operative housing society on an
application for permission to such transfer shall be
communicated to the applicant within thirty days from the
date of receipt of the application.
(3) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the co-
operative housing society refusing permission for such
transfer may within thirty days from the date on which the
refusal of permission is communicated to him appeal to
the Registrar.
(4) The Registrar shall dispose of the appeal within a
period of one hundred and twenty five days whose
decision shall be final.
91.A member of a housing society who has sold his plot or
flat on the power of attorney or agreement for sale or by
sale deed, shall cease to be a member of that society from
the date of the sale of plot or flat:
Provided that the purchaser having registered
     power of attorney or registered agreement for sale
     or registered sale deed, as the case may be, in
35
respect of such plot or flat, may apply for
               membership by paying transfer fee of five hundred
               rupees and share money and admission fee as
               per the provisions of the bye-laws of the society
               and the committee shall grant membership to the
               applicant within thirty days after the submission of
               his application. In case of refusal by the
               committee, the applicant may appeal to the
               Registrar within thirty days and the decision of the
               Registrar shall be final:
Provided further that no purchaser shall be entitled
               for more than one membership in a housing
               society.
37.   It may be further noticed that Section 131, save the existing

cooperative societies, registered either under the Act of 1904 or

under the Act of 1912 or under the
Bombay Cooperative Societies

Act
1925 which was in force in Delhi or the
Delhi Cooperative

Societies Act, 1972
, shall be deemed to be registered under the

corresponding provisions of this Act(Act of 2003) and rules

framed thereunder with the further legislative mandate that bye­

laws thereof shall, so far as the same are not inconsistent with

the express provisions of this Act, continue to be in force until

altered   or    rescinded.         Section     140     overrides      other   law,

notwithstanding anything inconsistent with the provisions of this

Act. Section 141 being repeal and savings stipulates that the day

on which the
Delhi Cooperative Societies Act, 2003
comes into

force, the
Delhi Cooperative Societies Act, 1972
which was in
36
force in the National Capital Territory of Delhi shall stand

repealed preserving the actions under the Repeal Act.
38.       The Scheme of Act 2003, on its very inception, was

introduced with the object to meet the challenge posed due to

economic liberalisation and superfast growth and to protect the

interests of the members of the societies as financial stakes had

become high which made the Government and the National

Capital Territory of Delhi conscious by replacing the Act to sub­

serve the purpose in protecting the interest of the members and

of the society which have been created for the welfare of its

members.     The principal object of the cooperative housing

societies as referred to under Section 74(e), shall not be

ordinarily refused for transfer of occupancy rights, as referred to

under Section 80 and Section 91 mandates that if a member of

the housing society has sold his plot or flat on the Power of

Attorney or agreement for sale or sale deed, shall cease to be a

member of the society from the date of the sale of the plot of land

and the purchaser will enter into his shoes having registered

power of Attorney or registered sale deed, as the case may be, in

respect of the plot or a flat on depositing the transfer fee, share

money and admission fee as per the provisions of the bye­laws.
37
The society and the committee are under obligation to grant

membership to the applicant within a period of 30 days and if the

society have assigned reasons to refuse, the remedy lies with the

applicant to file appeal to the Registrar. What is borne out from

the scheme of Act, 2003 that the purchaser having registered

Power of Attorney or agreement for sale or sale deed on fulfilment

of certain basic requirements on deposit the member fee, transfer

fee, share money and admission fee, etc. as per the provisions of

the bye­laws of the society is entitled ordinarily to become the

member of the society. Section 91 read with
Section 131
of the

Act provides that any bye­laws if inconsistent or any other

enactment which is not in conformity with the provisions of Act of

2003, is ultimately the substantive law that has to prevail upon.
Section 131
&
141
of the Act, 2003 are reproduced below:­
131. Saving of existing co­operative societies­ (1)
        Every existing co­operative society which had been
        registered under the Co­operative Credit Societies Act,
        1904 or under the Co­operative
Societies Act, 1912
, or
        under the Bombay Co­operative Societies Act, 1925, as
        was in force in Delhi, or the Delhi Co­operative
Societies Act, 1972
shall be deemed to be registered
        under the corresponding provisions of this Act and
        rules framed thereunder and bye­laws thereof shall, so
        far as the same are not inconsistent with the express
        provisions of this Act, continue in force until altered or
        rescinded.
(2) All appointments, rules and orders made,
        notifications and notices issued and suits and other
38
proceedings instituted under the said Acts shall, so far
         as they are consistent with the provisions of this Act,
         be deemed to have been respectively made, issued and
         instituted under this Act, save that an order made
         cancelling registration of a co­operative society shall be
         deemed, unless the co­operative society has already
         been finally liquidated, as an order issued under
         section 95 or section 96 or section 97 for its being
         wound up.
141. Repeal and savings – On the day on which the
         Delhi Co­operative
Societies Act, 2003
comes into
         force, the Delhi Co­operative
Societies Act, 1972
(35 of
         1972) in force in the National Capital Territory of Delhi
         shall stand repealed:
Provided that the repeal shall not affect­
(a) The previous operation of the Act so repealed
              or anything duly done or suffered thereunder;
              or
(b) Any right, privilege, obligation or liability
              acquired, accrued or incurred under the Act
              so repealed; or
(c) Any penalty, forfeiture or punishment
              incurred in respect of any offence committed
              against the Act so repealed; or
(d) Any investigation, legal proceedings or
              remedy in respect of any such right, privilege,
              obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or
              punishment as aforesaid and any such
              investigation, legal proceedings or remedy
              may be instituted, continued or enforced and
              any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment
              may be imposed as if that Act had not been
              repealed.”
39.   For saving the existing cooperative societies registered either

under the Act of 1904, 1912 or under the Act of 1925 which was

in force in Delhi at one stage or the Act of 1972, such existing

cooperative societies were deemed to be registered under the
39
corresponding provisions of the Act 2003 and the rules framed

thereunder and its bye­laws thereof, so far as the same are not

inconsistent with the express provisions of the Act, 2003,

continue to be in force until altered or rescinded. It goes without

saying that bye­laws of the existing cooperative societies have to

be in conformity with the express provisions of the Act of 2003

and all previous actions stood saved by virtue of
Section 141
of

the Act.
40.   The contention of the learned senior counsel for the

appellant that the sale/transfer of the plot in question by the

member of the society being in violation of condition nos. 2 and 3

of the registered sale deed or clause 51 of the bye­laws which put

restriction on the member to transfer or a sale or otherwise to a

non­member of the society, without permission of the society in

our opinion, deserves to be negated for the reason that there is

no restriction/prohibition under the provisions of the Act, 2003

which has been discussed in detail earlier and to be noticed that

if the bye­laws to the extent are inconsistent to the provisions of

Act 2003, it is the statute which will prevail and it is not the case

of the appellant that the transaction of sale/transfer of the plot in
40
question by the member of the society by registered sale deed or

registered instrument is in violation of the provisions of the

mandate of Act 2003 or rules 2007 framed thereafter.
41.    To the contrary, it appears to be the duty of the Registrar

cooperative societies including the registered housing cooperative

society to scrutinise the bye­laws of the society and to the extent

they are inconsistent with the provisions of Act 2003 or of Rule

2007    framed   therein,   to   ask   them   to   make   appropriate

corrections and to amend it to make it in conformity with the Act,

2003.    It is needless to say that it is the onerous duty of the

competent authority to ensure that it performs the statutory task

in this behalf but if the task has not been performed as yet, at

least no provision in the bye­laws inconsistent with the

provisions of the Act, 2003 can have a force of law.
42.    As regards clauses 2 & 3 of the original sale deed executed

between the member of the society at the time of initial allotment

is concerned, the society reserves its pre­emptive rights to have a

cooling period of six months before the member may have an

opportunity to transfer the subject plot in the manner he or she

likes at least there was no absolute bar or restrain under clause
41
2 or 3 of the original sale deed, of which reference has been

made, to transfer the land or is otherwise impermissible to a non­

member under any other laws.       But it was possible with prior

notice to the society and the cooling period of six months which

may enable the society to purchase the plot on the market value

and if it is unable to purchase, the member reserves the right to

transfer or sell out the plot in a manner he or she likes reserving

the pre­emptive rights of the society. In the given circumstances,

transfer by a registered instrument cannot be held void unless it

is in contravention of any law, which is not the case of the

appellant society.
43.   It reveals that what transpired before the Tribunal or the

High Court was whether the transfer of title by a registered

instrument as alleged was open for scrutiny within the scope of
Section 70
of Act, 2003. Although it was never the case of the

appellant society that alleged registered sale deed was void ab

initio, bad or obtained by fraud or malpractices and it was also

not the case of the appellant society that the member of the

society in transferring the rights over the property by a registered
42
sale deed, is in violation of any of the provisions of the Act of

2003, or the rules of 2007 framed thereunder.
44.   It is gainful to add that the possession was handed over to

the society on fulfilment of the conditions of the agreement dated

13th May, 1955, published in the Gazette under
Section 42
of the

Land Acquisition Act, and became the law as observed, that at

the time when the possession was handed over to the society by

the State Government, no further deed or MOU was executed

restricting the rights of the society for fulfilment of its obligation

of its plots to its members, that persuades to infer that the

possession was handed over to the society of the subject land in

question by the Government free from encumbrances with

unrestrictive rights to execute the sale deed/allot the plots to its

members obviously as per its bye­laws keeping in view of the

mandate of the statutory provisions of the Act, 1973 or Act, 2003

which has later on taken over the field in protecting the interests

of the members of the cooperative societies including the

cooperative housing society as in the instant case.
45.    It may be relevant to note that the subject land was

throughout exhibited by the society as freehold land having

ownership rights and allotments were made by the society to its
43
members by the registered sale deed at the time of allotment of

plots.   It is to be noticed that a letter dated 27 th July, 1985 was

written by the Secretary of the society to the Lt. Governor and it

was mentioned in paragraph 2 of the letter that “Delhi

Administration acquired 30 acres of land allotted to the society

on 25th March, 1957 on freehold basis.” Later, in the letter dated

15th March, 1989 issued to the Secretary of the Society it was

certified that the status of the land is totally freehold and

allotment of the plots to the society members was also on the

basis of it and the society at one stage approached to the civil

Court in RCA No. 95/82 titled Delhi Dayalbagh Cooperative

House Building Society Ltd. Vs. Arjun Das and it was observed by

the learned trial Judge that “the land in dispute is freehold one

and there is no legal bar to the same being sold.” In the given

facts and circumstances, if the allotment has been made by the

society as a freehold land to its members who have further

transferred/sold the subject land/plot by registered sale deed to

its successors/purchasers, their rights to become member of the

society are indeed saved under
Section 91
of the Act, 2003 that

in no manner could be eluded by the bye­laws and that apart if

anyone     has    any     objection   regarding     the   registered
44
instrument(sale deed) pursuant to which right has been created,

at least it is not open to examine its validity within the domain

and ambit of Section 70 of the cooperative societies Act and any

person, if felt aggrieved, the remedy lies only before the civil

Court having jurisdiction questioning the registered instrument

within the parameters available under the law.
46.   The appellant society at one stage in their counter affidavit

has stated that the subject land is a grant under the
Government

Grants Act
.    It was nowhere the case ever set up and it was

raised just to denude the rights of the parties which deserves

outright rejection for the additional reason that the subject land

was acquired by the Government under
Part VII of the Land

Acquisition Act
and transferred to the society          free from

encumbrances, there is no applicability to the
Government

Grants Act
. The judgment on which reliance was placed by the

learned senior counsel for the appellant in
Mohsin Ali and

Others Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh
1975(2) SCC 122 may not

be of any assistance.
45
47.   As regards submission made in respect to
Section 44A
of

the Act is concerned, it may not have any application, since the

rights of the parties are governed after the land stood vested with

the society free from encumbrances and regulated under the

special enactment of the Act 2003 and Rules 2007 framed

thereunder.
48.   In conclusion, we find no substance in either of the

submissions made by the appellant to interfere with the

judgment impugned before us.         The appeals, being devoid of

merit, are accordingly dismissed.
49.   In terms of the dismissal of the appeals, application(s) for

impleadment, does not survive and are accordingly disposed of.
50.   Pending application(s), if any, shall also stand disposed of.
…………………………J.
                                            (A.M. KHANWILKAR)


                                            ………………………….J.
                                            (AJAY RASTOGI)
New Delhi
January 30, 2019
46
47