[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Anil Kumar vs Union Of India And Ors on 21 January, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2602, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2434
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
Hemant Gupta
,
Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud
1

                                                                        REPORTABLE
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 888 OF 2019
                                   (Arising out of SLP(C) 32073 of 2016)



                      ANIL KUMAR                                  Appellant(s)


                                                    VERSUS

                      UNION OF INDIA AND ORS                      Respondent(s)




                                                  JUDGMENT
Dr. Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud, J.
Leave granted.
The appellant was aggrieved by the rejection of his claim

                      for financial upgradation by the Council for Scientific and

                      Industrial Research (“CSIR”) with effect from 10 May 2011. He

                      was also aggrieved by not being promoted to the post of Senior

                      Controller of Administration / Senior Deputy Secretary in Pay

                      Band-4 i.e. Rs.37,400 – 67,000 with a grade pay of Rs. 8700 in

                      respect of vacancies for 2013-2014 under the CSIR Recruitment &

                      Promotion Rules for Administrative Staff, 1982.
He moved the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh.
Signature Not Verified
The Tribunal did not find any substance in his grievance for
Digitally signed by
MANISH SETHI
Date: 2019.01.25
17:29:00 IST
Reason:               the reason that he did not fulfil the benchmark of “Very Good”

                      for financial upgradation. The Tribunal was of the view that

                      CSIR is an autonomous body and that the circulars issued by the
2
Union of India would not ipso facto apply.
The grievance of the appellant was that the failure to

communicate the Annual Confidential Reports in which he had

failed to meet the benchmark violated the O.Ms issued by the

Department of Personnel and Training.
The Tribunal rejected that contention holding that since

CSIR had adopted the requirement of conveying the ACRs from a

particular    date       in    the    future,    the    decision         could     not   be

questioned.        On the issue of promotion, it has been held that

this    involved     a    selection      on    the    basis    of    performance         in

service    and     in    the    interview       and    since    the        Departmental

Promotion Committee had graded the appellant as “good”, he was

not     considered       for    promotion.      This     view       of     the     Central

Administrative Tribunal was challenged before the High Court of

Punjab and Haryana.
By a judgment dated 13 July 2006, the writ petition filed

by the appellant was dismissed.
The first grievance of the appellant was that he was

entitled to financial upgradation under the MACP scheme adopted

by     CSIR. It is not in dispute that the benchmark prescribed

was “Very Good” for financial upgradation to the grade pay of

Rs. 7600/- and above.                CSIR, by its letter dated 30 December

2013, notified the eligibility of the appellant for the grant

of     financial     upgradation        with    effect     from       10     May    2011.

Similarly, by its circular dated 6 February 2014, CSIR issued

an All India Final Seniority List of Common Cadre Officers as

on 1 January 2014.             The name of the appellant stood at Serial
3
No.     2   in     the   category       of       Deputy       Secretary/Controller            of

Administration.
On 9 May 2014, CSIR declared the result of the exercise

conducted by the Screening Committee which met on 21 April

2014. The name of the appellant did not appear in the list of

officers for financial upgradation from 10 May 2011.
The       ACRs   of    the    appellant         were       below    the    benchmark

required      for    certain     years       namely         2003-2004,      2008-2009        and

2009-2010.
The        gradings     were        eventually          communicated           to    the

appellant on 9 July 2014 to which he submitted a representation

and appeared for the interview for regular promotion for 2013-

2014.       The    grievance     is        that    the       representation            was   not

considered.When          the    panel       for    the        post    of    Senior       Deputy

Secretary/Senior Controller of Administration for 2013-2014 was

notified, officers junior to the appellant were empaneled for

promotion.
The appellant was neither granted a financial upgradation

nor   was     he    promoted    as     a    part       of    the   exercise       of    regular

promotion to the higher post.
The High Court affirmed the view of the Tribunal and

rejected the writ petition filed by the appellant.
In
Dev Dutt vs. Union of India & Ors.1
a two Judge Bench

of this Court held that fairness in public administration and

transparency          require        that        all        entries    in     the        Annual

Confidential Reports of a public servant must be communicated

1(2008) 8 SCC 725
4
within a reasonable period in order to enable the employee to

    make a representation for upgradation.                   The view of the Court

    was that non-communication of entries in the ACRs has civil

    consequences since it may affect the chances of the employee

    for promotion and other benefits.                 A failure to communicate

    would be arbitrary.           This Court held that these directions

    would   apply    to   employees    of      statutory      authorities,   public

    sector corporations and other instrumentalities of the State,

    in addition to government servants.
A three Judge Bench of this Court has in
Sukhdev Singh

    vs. Union of India & Ors.2
affirmed the correctness of the view

    taken in
Dev Dutt
(supra) noting that an earlier three Judge

    Bench in
Abhijit Ghosh Dastidar vs. Union of India & Ors.3
had

    adopted the same principle.
The   three   Judge   Bench       in
Sukhdev    Singh
(supra),   held

thus:
“8. In our opinion, the view taken in Dev
              Dutt that every entry in ACR of a public
              servant must be communicated to him/her
              within a reasonable period is legally
              sound and helps in achieving threefold
              objectives. First, the communication of
              every entry in the ACR to a public servant
              helps him/her to work harder and achieve
              more that helps him in improving his work
              and give better results. Second and
              equally important, on being made aware of
              the entry in the ACR, the public servant
              may feel dissatisfied with the same.
              Communication of the entry enables him/her
              to make representation for upgradation of
              the remarks entered in the ACR. Third,
              communication of every entry in the ACR
2 (2013) 9 SCC 566
3 (2009) 16 SCC 146
5
brings   transparency   in  recording  the
           remarks relating to a public servant and
           the system becomes more conforming to the
           principles    of   natural   justice.  We,
           accordingly, hold that every entry in ACR
- poor, fair, average, good or very good -
           must be communicated to him/her within a
           reasonable period.”

       In view of the above statement of law, both the Tribunal

and the High Court were in error in coming to the conclusion

that CSIR being an autonomous entity and having adopted the

O.Ms of the Department of Personnel and Training with effect

from a specified date, the appellant could not make a grievance

of the non-communication of the ACRs for the relevant period.
The      failure      to     communicate          the    ACRs        deprived       the

appellant of the opportunity to submit his representation in

the    matter      of     financial     upgradation.              Subsequently,            the

appellant     was       furnished    with     an    opportunity         to    submit       his

representation          before    his   case       was     taken       up    for    regular

promotion, but his representation was not considered.
The appellant did not have the benefit of submitting his

representation when the Screening Committee took up the case

for financial upgradation.              CSIR by reason of its autonomy may

have   certain      administrative          privileges.          No     authority      can,

however, claim a privilege not to comply with a judgment of

this Court.         Once the law was enunciated in Dev Dutt’s case

(supra),     all    instrumentalities          of    the       State    were       bound    to

follow the principles
laid down by
this Court.                               CSIR was no

exception.
The    appellant       has     since    retired         from     service      on    30
6
September 2014.
The grant of MACP benefit is not a matter of right and it

is after the Screening Committee finds that the officer meets

the benchmark that an upgradation can be granted.
Hence, we are of the view that the appellant should be

granted an opportunity, within a period of four weeks from

today to submit his representation in respect of the ACRs for

the concerned years where he did not fulfil the benchmark for

financial   upgradation.     Upon      the    submission    of   his

representation,   the    respondents     shall   consider   it   and

communicate the outcome to the appellant within a period of two

months thereafter.      Based on that decision, the case of the

appellant for financial upgradation shall be considered afresh.

In the event his ACRs for the relevant period are upgraded,

the case for financial upgradation shall be determined within a

period of three months thereafter.
We also direct that in the event that the ACRs for the

relevant period are upgraded, the case of the appellant for

promotion to the post of Senior Deputy Secretary/Controller of

Administration shall be considered afresh by the Departmental

Promotion Committee expeditiously.           This exercise shall be

carried out with reference to the date on which his junior in

service came to be promoted.
In the event that the case of the appellant is considered

favourably, he would be entitled to all consequential benefits

which flow from the financial upgradation and upon the grant of

regular promotion to the post of Senior Deputy Secretary.
7
The appeal is, accordingly, allowed and the judgment of

the High Court shall stand set aside.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

      No order as to costs.
...…...….......………………........J.
                                  (DR. DHANANJAYA Y. CHANDRACHUD)



                                   …...…........……………….…........J.
                                  (HEMANT GUPTA)
 NEW DELHI,
 January 21, 2019
8
ITEM NO.66                  COURT NO.11               SECTION IV-B

                S U P R E M E C O U R T O F      I N D I A
                        RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (C)     No(s).   32073/2016

(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 13-07-2016
in CWP No. 13390/2016 passed by the High Court Of Punjab & Haryana
At Chandigarh)

ANIL KUMAR                                            Petitioner(s)

                                   VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA AND ORS                                Respondent(s)


Date : 21-01-2019 This petition was called on for hearing today.

CORAM :
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE D.Y. CHANDRACHUD
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE HEMANT GUPTA


For Petitioner(s)
                     Mr.   D.N. Goburdhun, Adv.
Mr.   Prashant Chaudhary, AOR
                     Mr.   R.K. Singh, Adv.
Mr.   Syed Jafar Hussain, Adv.
For Respondent(s)
                     Mr. Jayesh K. Unnikrishnan, AOR
                     Mr. Vijay Pratap Singh, Adv.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                              O R D E R

    Leave granted.
The appeal is allowed in terms of the signed order.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
(MANISH SETHI)                                  (SAROJ KUMARI GAUR)
COURT MASTER (SH)                                   BRANCH OFFICER
               (Signed order is placed on the file)