[Cites
34
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
Common Cause (Registered Society) vs Union Of India on 8 January, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 438, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 994, 2019 (2) SCC (CRI) 64, (2019) 3 SERVLR 344, (2019) 1 SCALE 257, (2019) 1 UC 241, (2019) 1 SERVLJ 185, (2019) 1 CURCC 85, 2019 (3) SCC 1, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 11
Author:
Ranjan Gogoi
Bench:
K.M. Joseph
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
,
Ranjan Gogoi
1


                                                                 REPORATABLE

                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                               CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                         WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.1309 OF 2018


          Alok Kumar Verma                                     …. Petitioner(s)

                                            Versus
          Union of India & Anr.                                …Respondent(s)
                                             WITH

                         WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.1315 OF 2018
                         [Common Cause Vs. Union of India & Ors.]


                                          JUDGMENT
RANJAN GOGOI, CJI
1.             That the Rule of law is the bedrock of democracy

          would hardly require any reiteration. However firmly entrenched

          the principle may be, it gets tested in a myriad of situations that

          confronts the courts from time to time. The present is one such

          occasion.
Signature Not Verified
2.
Digitally signed by
VINOD LAKHINA
On    23rd   October,   2018,   the   Central   Vigilance
Date: 2019.01.08
13:19:42 IST
Reason:
Commission (hereinafter referred to as “CVC”) passed an order
2
divesting Shri Alok Kumar Verma, Director, Central Bureau of

Investigation (hereinafter referred to as “CBI”) of the powers,

functions, duties, supervisory role, etc. vested in him as the

Director of the CBI.     The exercise of said power by the aforesaid

order dated 23rd October, 2018, signed by the Central Vigilance

Commissioner and two other Vigilance Commissioners holding

office, is stated to be under
Section 8(1)(a)
and
8(1)(b)
of the

Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003 (hereinafter referred to

as “the CVC Act”)       read with
Section 4(1)
of the Delhi Special

Police Establishment Act, 1946 (hereinafter referred to as “
DSPE

Act
”). The divestment of Shri Alok Kumar Verma, Director, CBI of

his functions, powers, duties and supervisory role, specifically, is

in respect of all cases already registered and/or required to be

registered and/or being inquired/enquired/investigated under

the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
(hereinafter referred to as

“
PC Act
”).
3.           The aforesaid order is stated to be in the nature of an

interim measure till completion of an inquiry into the allegations

contained      in   a   complaint       dated   24th   August,   2018
3
submitted/forwarded by the Cabinet Secretary by letter dated

31st August, 2018 to the CVC.
4.        The said order dated 23rd October, 2018 of the CVC

was followed by an order of the Government of India, Ministry of

Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, Department of

Personnel & Training of the same date i.e. 23 rd October, 2018

divesting Shri Alok Kumar Verma, Director, CBI of his functions,

powers, duties and supervisory role in any manner as the

Director, CBI with immediate effect and until further orders.
5.        There is yet another order of the same date i.e. 23 rd

October, 2018 of the Government of India, Ministry of Personnel,

Public Grievances and Pensions, Department of Personnel &

Training by which one Shri M. Nageshwar Rao, IPS, Joint

Director, CBI has been asked to look after the duties and

functions of Director, CBI with immediate effect.
6.        The legality and validity of the aforesaid three orders is

the subject matter of challenge in Writ Petition (Civil) No.1309 of

2018 filed by Shri Alok Kumar Verma as well as in Writ Petition

(Civil) No.1315 of 2018 filed by Common Cause which claims to
4
be a registered society established/founded in the year 1980 by

one late Shri H.D. Shourie for the purposes of “ventilating the

common problems of the people and securing their resolution”.
7.        In addition to interference with the aforesaid three

orders, in the writ petition filed by Common Cause, further

prayers have been made, inter alia, seeking removal of one Mr.

Rakesh Asthana, Special Director, CBI (respondent no.4 in Writ

Petition (Civil) No.1315 of 2018) from the CBI and for constituting

a Special Investigating Team (“SIT” for short) to go into the

charges of corruption against the officials of the CBI and also the

FIR lodged against Mr. Rakesh Asthana, Special Director, CBI,

details of which are mentioned in the writ petition filed by

Common Cause.
8.        The order of the CVC dated 23rd October, 2018 is fairly

long and elaborate. What is essentially stated therein is that a

complaint dated 24th August, 2018 was forwarded to the CVC by

the Cabinet Secretary by letter dated 31 st August, 2018 which,

prima facie, revealed charges of corruption against the Director,

CBI, Shri Alok Kumar Verma. The CVC considered it worthwhile

to take note of the contents thereof and had sought the
5
explanation/comments of the Director, CBI along with the

relevant record(s).   According to the CVC, instead of cooperating

in the matter, the Director, CBI had sought information as to the

identity of the person who had complained to the Cabinet

Secretary in that regard and had gone to the extent of bringing

specific allegations against the Special Director, CBI Shri Rakesh

Asthana.    Details of several cases of corruption wherein the

Special Director, CBI was alleged to be involved were also

brought to the notice of the CVC by Shri Alok Kumar Verma.
9.         In the order of the CVC dated 23 rd October, 2018 it is

further recorded that Shri Rakesh Asthana, Special Director, CBI

had also made serious allegations against Shri Alok Kumar

Verma, Director, CBI and that, in fact, on 15 th October, 2018, the

CBI had registered RC 13A of 2018 of AC III, New Delhi under
Section 7
and
13(2)
read with 13(1)(d) and
Section 7A
of the PC

Act as amended in 2018 against Shri Asthana. The said RC case

was stated to have been registered on the complaint of one Satish

Babu Sana who is an accused in a case investigated by Special

Director, CBI. At the same time, the CVC also took note of the

fact that Mr. Rakesh Asthana, Special Director, CBI had recorded
6
information received from various sources that huge amounts of

bribe were given to the Director, CBI to avoid taking any action

against Satish Babu Sana.
10.        It is in these circumstances, which may be in the least

be termed as unfortunate, that the CVC had thought it proper to

invoke its powers under Sections 8(1)(a), 8(1)(d) and 11 of the

CVC Act to pass the impugned order dated 23 rd October, 2018

divesting the Director, CBI of his powers, functions, duties, etc.,

details of which have already been noted.
11.        The two further orders of the Government of India,

Ministry   of   Personnel,   Public   Grievances   and   Pensions,

Department of Personnel & Training of the same date i.e. 23 rd

October, 2018 were consequential to the order passed by the

CVC, as stated above.
12.        As already seen, it is the legality, validity and

correctness of the aforesaid orders and the action spelt out

therein that has been challenged before us in the two writ

petitions as well as in the Interlocutory Applications filed by

various applicants, details of which will be noted in due course.
7
13.        It is at the very threshold of the present discourse that

a brief history of the organization called the CBI may be recalled.
The police force in the country was initially governed

by the
Police Act, 1861
.
Section 3
of the said Act had made the

following provision :
“3.   Superintendence         in      the     State
        Government.­
The superintendence of the police throughout a
        general police­district shall vest in and shall be
        exercised by the State Government to which such
        district is subordinate; and except as authorized
        under the provisions of this Act, no person,
        officer, or Court shall be empowered by the State
        Government to supersede, or control any police
        functionary.”
14.
The DSPE Act
was enacted in the year 1946 to carve

out an exception to the
Police Act, 1861
. The same is evident

from
Section 2(1)
which is in the following terms:
“2.     Constitution    and    powers    of   police
        establishment.

        (1)     Notwithstanding anything in the Police
Act, 1861 (5 of 1861) the Central Government
        may constitute a special police force to be called
        the Delhi Special Police Establishment for the
        investigation in any Union Territory of offences
        notified under
Section 3
.
8
15.   Initially the administration of the Delhi Special

Police Establishment was governed by the provisions of
Section 4
of the DSPE Act which contemplated the

following:
“4.        Superintendence and administration of
          SPE­

          (1)    The superintendence of the Delhi Special
          Police Establishment shall vest in the Central
          Government.
(2)     The administration of the said police
          establishment shall vest in an officer appointed
          in this behalf by the Central Government who
          shall exercise in respect of that police
          establishment such of the powers exercisable by
          an Inspector General of Police in respect of the
          police force in a State, as the Central
          Government may specify in this behalf.”
16.          It is the Delhi Special Police Establishment brought

into existence by
DSPE Act, 1946
which today is known as the

CBI. The origin of the organization has been succinctly traced by

this Court in
Vineet Narain and others vs. Union of India
and

another1 and the relevant details are available in paragraphs 30

and 31 of the report of this Court in
Vineet Narain
(supra).


1 (1998) 1 SCC 226
9
Shortly put and as already observed, investigation of anti­

corruption cases; economic offences and ordinary crimes of

special importance have come to be vested in the CBI which

exercises its jurisdiction in the territory of all States and Union

Territories (with consent of the State Governments).
17.       The organization i.e. CBI has grown over the years in

its role, power and importance and today has become the premier

investigative and prosecution agency of the country.     The high

stature and the pre­eminent position that the institution has

acquired is largely on account of a strong perception of the

necessity of having such a premier agency. Such a perception

finds reflection in the conscious attempts of the Government of

the day to introduce reforms, from time to time, so as to enable

the institution to reach greater heights in terms of integrity,

independence and confidence. A close look at such attempts will

now be in order.
18.
In
Vineet Narain
(supra) such developments have

already been taken note of in detail.    The recommendations of

the Committee headed by Shri N.N. Vohra constituted by

Government Order No. S/7937/SS(ISP)/93 dated 9 th July, 1993
10
and those of the Independent Review Committee (IRC) constituted

by Government Order No. 226/2/97­AVD­II dated 8 th September,

1997 has had a major role to play in giving the CBI and the CVC

their present shape and form and the pivotal role and position

that these two bodies have come to occupy in the system of law

enforcement in the country.
Incidentally, the CVC had been in

existence as an administrative body on being established by

Resolution No.24/7/64­AVD dated 11th February, 1964 issued by

the Central Government until conferment of statutory status by

the CVC Act, 2003 on the basis of recommendations of the IRC,

summary of which with regard to the CBI and CVC may now be

taken note of.
“SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS

        I. CBI and CVC
1. CVC to be conferred statutory status;
appointment of Central Vigilance Commissioner
        to be made under the hand and seal of the
        President (para 4.2)
2. Constitution of a Committee for selection of
        CVC (para 4.3)
3. CVC to overview CBI’s functioning (para 5)
4. CBI’s reporting to Government to be
        streamlined without diluting its functional
        autonomy (para 3.3)
11
5. CVC to have a separate section in its Annual
Report on the CBI’s functioning after the
supervisory function is transferred to it (para 6)
6. Constitution of a Selection Committee for
identifying a panel of names for selection of
Director CBI; final selection to be made by ACC
from such panel (para 8.2)
7. Central Government to pursue with the State
Governments to set up credible mechanism for
selection of Police Chief (para 8.3)
8. Director CBI to have a minimum tenure of 2
years (para 8.4)
9. Transfer of incumbent Director CBI would
need endorsement of the Selection Committee
(para 8.5)
10. Director CBI to ensure full freedom for
allocation of work within the Agency, including
constitution of investigation teams (para 8.6)
11. Selection/extension of tenure of officers up to
the level of Joint Director (JD) to be decided by a
Board under Central Vigilance Commissioner; JD
and above would need the approval of ACC (para
8.7)
12. Change in the existing Tenure Rules not
recommended (para 8.8)
13. Proposals for improvement of infrastructure,
methods of investigation, etc., to be decided
urgently (para 8.9.2)
12
14. No need for creation of a permanent core
group in the CBI (para 8.9.3)
15. Severe disciplinary action against officers
who deviate from prescribed investigation
procedures (para 9.1)
16. Director CBI to be responsible for ensuring
time­limits for filing charge­sheets in courts
(para 9.2)
17. Document on CBI’s functioning           to   be
published within three months (para 9.4)
18. Essential to protect officers at the decision­
making         levels       from         vexatious
enquiries/prosecutions (para 10.6)
19. Secretaries to adhere strictly to prescribed
time­frames for grant of permission for
registration of PE/RC. CBI to be free to proceed if
decision not conveyed within the specified time
(para 10.9)
20. Secretary of Administrative Ministry to
convey a decision regarding registration of
PE/RC within 2 months of receipt of request. If
not satisfied with decision, Director CBI free to
make fresh reference to the Committee headed by
Cabinet Secretary within a period of four weeks
and the latter to decide thereon within a period of
four weeks (para 10.10)
21. Protection under the Single Directive not to
cover offences like bribery, when prima facie
established in a successful trap (para 10.12)
13
22. Cases of disproportionate assets of Central
        Government and All India Services Officers to be
        brought within the ambit of the Single Directive
        (para 10.13)
23. Time­limit of 3 months for sanction for
        prosecution. Where consultation is required with
        the Attorney General or the Solicitor General,
        additional time of one month could be allowed
        (paras 10.14 and 10.15)
24. Government to undertake a review of the
        various types of offences notified for investigation
        by the CBI to retain focus on anti­corruption
        activities which is its primary objective (para
        11.1)
25. Cases falling within the jurisdiction of the
        State Police which do not have inter­State or
        international ramifications should not be handed
        over to CBI by States/courts (para 11.2)
26. Government to establish Special Courts for
        the trial of CBI cases (11.3)
27. Severe action against officials found guilty of
        high­handedness; prompt action against those
        officials chastised by the courts (para 11.4)
28. Director CBI to conduct regular appraisal of
        personnel to weed out the corrupt and inefficient,
        and maintain strict discipline within the
        organization (para 11.5)”
19.
In paragraph 58 of the report of this Court in
Vineet

Narain
(supra) directions under
Article 142
of the Constitution of
14
India which were to hold the field till such time that the

necessary statutory enactments are brought into force, came to

be issued by this Court.
Paragraph 58 of the report of this Court

in
Vineet Narain
(supra) insofar as CVC and CBI are concerned

is in the following terms:
“58. As a result of the aforesaid discussion, we
        hereby direct as under:
I. CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (CBI)
        AND CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION (CVC)
1. The Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) shall
        be given statutory status.
2. Selection for the post of Central Vigilance
        Commissioner shall be made by a Committee
        comprising the Prime Minister, Home Minister
        and the Leader of the Opposition from a panel of
        outstanding civil servants and others with
        impeccable integrity, to be furnished by the
        Cabinet Secretary. The appointment shall be
        made by the President on the basis of the
        recommendations made by the Committee. This
        shall be done immediately.
3. The CVC shall be responsible for the efficient
        functioning of the CBI. While Government shall
        remain answerable for the CBI’s functioning, to
        introduce visible objectivity in the mechanism to
        be established for overviewing the CBI’s working,
        the CVC shall be entrusted with the
        responsibility of superintendence over the CBI’s
        functioning. The CBI shall report to the CVC
15
about cases taken up by it for investigation;
progress of investigations; cases in which charge­
sheets are filed and their progress. The CVC shall
review the progress of all cases moved by the CBI
for sanction of prosecution of public servants
which are pending with the competent
authorities, specially those in which sanction has
been delayed or refused.
4. The Central Government shall take all
measures necessary to ensure that the CBI
functions effectively and efficiently and is viewed
as a non­partisan agency.
5. The CVC shall have a separate section in its
Annual Report on the CBI’s functioning after the
supervisory function is transferred to it.
6. Recommendations for appointment of the
Director, CBI shall be made by a Committee
headed by the Central Vigilance Commissioner
with the Home Secretary and Secretary
(Personnel) as members. The views of the
incumbent Director shall be considered by the
Committee for making the best choice. The
Committee shall draw up a panel of IPS officers
on the basis of their seniority, integrity,
experience in investigation and anti­corruption
work. The final selection shall be made by the
Appointments Committee of the Cabinet (ACC)
from the panel recommended by the Selection
Committee. If none among the panel is found
suitable, the reasons thereof shall be recorded
and the Committee asked to draw up a fresh
panel.
7. The Director, CBI shall have a minimum
tenure of two years, regardless of the date of his
superannuation. This would ensure that an
officer suitable in all respects is not ignored
16
merely because he has less than two years to
superannuate from the date of his appointment.
8. The transfer of an incumbent Director, CBI in
an extraordinary situation, including the need for
him to take up a more important assignment,
should have the approval of the Selection
Committee.
9. The Director, CBI shall have full freedom for
allocation of work within the agency as also for
constituting teams for investigations. Any change
made by the Director, CBI in the Head of an
investigative team should be for cogent reasons
and for improvement in investigation, the
reasons being recorded.
10. Selection/extension of tenure of officers up to
the level of Joint Director (JD) shall be decided
by a Board comprising the Central Vigilance
Commissioner, Home Secretary and Secretary
(Personnel) with the Director, CBI providing the
necessary inputs. The extension of tenure or
premature repatriation of officers up to the level
of Joint Director shall be with final approval of
this Board. Only cases pertaining to the
appointment or extension of tenure of officers of
the rank of Joint Director or above shall be
referred to the Appointments Committee of the
Cabinet (ACC) for decision.
11. Proposals for improvement of infrastructure,
methods of investigation, etc. should be decided
urgently. In order to strengthen CBI’s in­house
expertise, professionals from the Revenue,
Banking and Security sectors should be inducted
into the CBI.
17
12. The CBI Manual based on statutory
        provisions of the
CrPC
provides essential
        guidelines for the CBI’s functioning. It is
        imperative that the CBI adheres scrupulously to
        the provisions in the Manual in relation to its
        investigative functions, like raids, seizure and
        arrests. Any deviation from the established
        procedure should be viewed seriously and severe
        disciplinary action taken against the officials
        concerned.
13. The Director, CBI shall be responsible for
        ensuring the filing of charge­sheets in courts
        within the stipulated time­limits, and the matter
        should be kept under constant review by the
        Director, CBI.
14. A document on CBI’s functioning should be
        published within three months to provide the
        general public with a feedback on investigations
        and information for redress of genuine grievances
        in a manner which does not compromise with the
        operational requirements of the CBI.
15. Time­limit of three months for grant of
        sanction for prosecution must be strictly adhered
        to. However, additional time of one month may
        be allowed where consultation is required with
        the Attorney General (AG) or any other law officer
        in the AG’s office.
16. The Director, CBI should conduct regular
        appraisal of personnel to prevent corruption
        and/or inefficiency in the agency.”
20.       What followed thereafter is the enactment of the CVC

Act, 2003.   The salient features of the CVC Act, so far as the

present exercise is concerned, are to be found in
Section 4
of the
18
CVC Act which mandates that the appointment of the Central

Vigilance Commissioner and the Vigilance Commissioners shall

be made by the President on the recommendation of a Committee

consisting of : (a) the Prime Minister; (b) the Minister of Home

Affairs and (c)the Leader of the Opposition in the House of the

People.
Section 6 of the CVC Act contemplates the removal of

Central Vigilance Commissioner and a Vigilance Commissioner

only by order of the President on the ground of proved

misbehaviour or incapacity as may be found by the Supreme

Court of India on a reference being made by the President to the

Court. However, under sub­section (2) of Section 6 of the CVC

Act there is a power in the President of suspension from office

pending inquiry on the reference made to the Supreme Court.

Sub­section (3) of Section 6 of the CVC Act also empowers the

President    to   remove   from    office   the   Central   Vigilance

Commissioner or any Vigilance Commissioner in the following

cases:
“(a).   is adjudged an insolvent; or
19
(b). has been convicted of an offence which, in the
         opinion of the Central Government, involves
         moral turpitude; or
(c).  engages during his term of office in any paid
          employment outside the duties of his office; or
(d). is, in the opinion of the President, unfit to
         continue in office by reason of infirmity of mind
         or body; or
(e).    has acquired such financial or other interest
          as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as
          a Central Vigilance Commissioner or a Vigilance
          Commissioner.”
21.        Though the Director, CBI is to be appointed by the

Central Government on the recommendation of a similar High

Power Committee, no provision with regard to interim suspension

or removal is to be found in the
DSPE Act, 1946
, notwithstanding

the fact that the said Act i.e.
DSPE Act
was amended by the CVC

Act, 2003. The CVC Act, 2003 and the amendments made in the
DSPE Act, 1946
were clearly made to bring the provisions thereof

in proximity to the directions issued by this Court in
Vineet

Narain
(supra) so far as the CVC and the CBI is concerned.
22.        Section 8 of the CVC Act deals with functions and

powers of the CVC whereas Section 11 deals with the power of

the CVC with regard to inquiries. Both the powers vested by the
20
aforesaid two provisions of the CVC Act i.e. Section 8 and Section

11 having been invoked in the present case to support and justify

the impugned actions it will be necessary to extract and notice

the said provisions in extenso:
“8. Functions and powers of Central Vigilance
        Commission.­
        (1). The functions and          powers    of   the
        Commission shall be to­
(a)   exercise    superintendence      over    the
        functioning of the Delhi Special Police
        Establishment in so far as it relates to the
        investigation of offences alleged to have been
        committed under the
Prevention of Corruption
        Act, 1988
(49 of 1988), or an offence with which
        a public servant specified in sub­section (2) may,
        under the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (2 of
        1974), be charged at the same trial;
(b). give directions to the Delhi Special Police
        Establishment for the purpose of discharging the
        responsibility entrusted to it under sub­section
        (1) of
section 4
of the Delhi Special Police
        Establishment Act, 1946 (25 of 1946):
Provided that while exercising the powers of
        superintendence under clause (a) or giving
        directions under this clause, the Commission
        shall not exercise powers in such a manner so as
        to require the Delhi Special Police Establishment
        to investigate or dispose of any case in a
        particular manner;
(c).  inquire or cause an inquiry or investigation
        to be made on a reference made by the Central
        Government wherein it is alleged that a public
        servant being an employee of the Central
        Government or a corporation established by or
21
under any Central Act, Government company,
society and any local authority owned or
controlled by that Government, has committed
an offence under the
Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988
(49 of 1988) or an offence with which a
public servant may, under the
Code of Criminal
Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974), be charged at the
same trial;
(d). inquire or cause an inquiry or investigation
to be made into any complaint against any
official belonging to such category of officials
specified in sub­section (2) wherein it is alleged
that he has committed an offence under the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
(49 of 1988)
and an offence with which a public servant
specified in subsection (2) may, under the
Code
of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974), be
charged at the same trial;
(e).  review the progress of investigations
conducted    by    the   Delhi   Special    Police
Establishment into offences alleged to have been
committed under the
Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988
(49 of 1988) or the public servant may,
under the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (2 of
1974), be charged at the same trial;
(f).  review the progress of applications pending
with the competent authorities for sanction of
prosecution under the
Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988
(49 of 1988);
(g). tender advice to the Central Government,
corporations established by or under any Central
Act, Government companies, societies and local
authorities owned or controlled by the Central
Government on such matters as may be referred
to it by that Government, said Government
companies, societies and local authorities owned
or controlled by the Central Government or
otherwise;
22
(h).   exercise   superintendence      over   the
vigilance administration of the various Ministries
of the Central Government or corporations
established by or under any Central Act,
Government companies, societies and local
authorities owned or controlled by that
Government:
Provided that nothing contained in this clause
shall be deemed to authorize the Commission to
exercise superintendence over the Vigilance
administration in a manner not consistent with
the directions relating to vigilance matters issued
by the Government and to confer power upon the
Commission to issue directions relating to any
policy matters;
2.    The persons referred to in clause (d) of sub­
section (1) are as follows:—
(a). members of All­India Services serving in
connection with the affairs of the Union and
Group ‘A’ officers of the Central Government;
(b). such level of officers of the corporations
established by or under any Central Act,
Government companies, societies and other local
authorities, owned or controlled by the Central
Government, as that Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this
behalf:
Provided that till such time a notification is
issued under this clause, all officers of the said
corporations, companies, societies and local
authorities shall be deemed to be the persons
referred to in clause (d) of sub­section (1).
(c)     on a reference made by the Lokpal under
proviso to sub­section (1) of
Section 20
of the
Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 (1 of 2014), the
persons referred to in clause (d) of sub­section (1)
shall also include—
23
(i)    members of Group B, Group C and Group
D services of the Central Government;
(ii)    such level of officials or staff of the
corporations established by or under any Central
Act, Government companies, societies and other
local authorities, owned or controlled by the
Central Government, as that Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in
this behalf:
Provided that till such time a notification is
issued under this clause, all officials or staff of
the said corporations, companies, societies and
local authorities shall be deemed to be the
persons referred in clause (d) of sub­section (1).
xxx                xxx              xxx


“11. Power relating to inquiries.­
The Commission shall, while conducting any
inquiry referred to in clauses (b) and (c) of sub­
section (1) of section 8, have all the powers of a
civil court trying a suit under
the Code of Civil
Procedure
, 1908 (5 of 1908) and in particular, in
respect of the following matters, namely:­
a.   summoning and enforcing the attendance of
any person from any part of India and examining
him on oath;
b. requiring the discovery and production of
any document;
c.    receiving evidence on affidavits;
d. requisitioning any public record or copy
thereof from any court or office;
e.   issuing commissions for the examination of
witnesses or other documents; and
f.    any other matter which may be prescribed.”
24
23.       The provisions of the
DSPE Act
as amended by Act

No.45 of 2003
(The Central Vigilance Act, 2003
) and Act No.1 of

2014
(Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013
) may also require a

specific notice.
Sections 4
,
4A
and
4B
introduced by the

aforesaid amendments, on which elaborate arguments have been

made by the contesting parties, provide as follows:
“4. Superintendence and administration of
        Special Police Establishment.— (1) The
        superintendence of the Delhi Special Police
        Establishment in so far as it relates to
        investigation of offences alleged to have been
        committed under the
Prevention of Corruption
        Act, 1988
(49 of 1988), shall vest in the
        Commission.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub­section (1),
        the superintendence of the said police
        establishment in all other matters shall vest in
        the Central Government.
(3) The administration of the said police
        establishment shall vest in an officer appointed
        in this behalf by the Central Government
        (hereinafter referred to as the Director) who shall
        exercise in respect of that police establishment
        such of the powers exercisable by an Inspector­
        General of Police in respect of the police force in
        a State as the Central Government may specify
        in this behalf.
4A. Committee for appointment of Director.—
        (1) The Central Government shall appoint the
25
Director on the recommendation of the
Committee consisting of—
(a) the Prime Minister              — Chairperson;
(b) the Leader of Opposition
   recognised as such in the House
   of the People or where there is no
   such Leader of Opposition,
   then the Leader of the single
   largest Opposition Party in that
   House                            — Member;
(c) the Chief Justice of India or
Judge Of the Supreme Court nominated
by him                            — Member;
(2) No appointment of a Director shall be invalid
merely by reason of any vacancy or absence of a
Member in the Committee.
(3) The Committee shall recommend a panel of
officers—
(a) on the basis of seniority, integrity and
experience in the investigation of anti­corruption
cases; and
(b) chosen from amongst officers belonging to the
Indian Police Service constituted under the All­
India Services Act, 1951
(61 of 1951), for being
considered for appointment as the Director.
4B. Terms and conditions of service of
Director.—(1)       The       Director        shall,
notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in the rules relating to his conditions
of service, continue to hold office for a period of
not less than two years from the date on which
he assumes office.
26
(2) The Director shall not be transferred except
        with the previous consent of the Committee
        referred to in sub­section (1) of
section 4A
.”
24.       Shri F.S. Nariman and Shri Dushyant Dave, learned

Senior Counsels, who have argued the case for Shri Alok Kumar

Verma, Director, CBI and Common Cause have contended that

the history of the institutional framework surrounding the CBI

leading to the statutory enactments in question and the views

expressed in the judgment of this Court in
Vineet Narain
(supra), including the operative directions under
Article 142
of

the Constitution, can leave no doubt that the judicial endeavour

should/must always be to preserve, maintain and further the

integrity, independence and majesty of the institution i.e. CBI.

This is the core intent behind the statutory enactments and the

amendments thereto, details of which have been noticed.     The

Director of the CBI is the centre of power in an abundantly

powerful organization having jurisdiction to investigate and to

prosecute key offences and offenders having great ramifications

and consequences on public life.    There can be no manner of

doubt that the Director who has been given a minimum assured
27
tenure of “not less than two years” must be insulated from all

external interference if the CBI has to live up to the role and

expectations of the legislature and enjoy public confidence to the

fullest measure.     This is how the provisions of the cognate

legislations i.e. the CVC Act, 2003 and DPSE Act, 1946 (as

amended), must be interpreted, according to the learned

counsels. It is specifically urged that the embargo under
Section

4B(2)
of the DSPE Act which mentions that the Director shall not

be transferred except with the previous consent of the Committee

must be construed in the broadest perspective to include any

attempt to divest the Director, CBI of his powers, functions,

duties, etc. in any manner whatsoever and         not necessarily

relatable to the transfer of the incumbent as is understood in

ordinary parlance.
According to the learned counsels, unless

such a meaning is attributed to the provisions of
Section 4B(2)
of

the DSPE Act, the legislative intent would be rendered futile and

so would be the entire judicial exercise culminating in the

operative directions of this Court in
Vineet Narain
(supra).
25.       So construed, according to the learned counsels, the

exercise of power in the present case is blatantly and patently
28
flawed. There can be no legal recognition of the action taken on

the strength of the impugned orders which have been notified

without seeking the previous consent of the Committee for

appointment of Director, CBI constituted under
Section 4A(1)
, of

the DSPE Act, 1946.
26.       The alternative argument made is that if the provisions

of
Section 4B(2)
of the DSPE Act are to be “narrowly” construed

by understanding the word “transfer” as is normally understood

in service jurisprudence, the ultimate validity of the impugned

exercise will have to be tested by the adequacy and sufficiency of

reasons to justify a premature curtailment of the tenure of the

Director, CBI.   No such justification, according to the learned

counsels, exists. In this regard, it has been pointed out that the

allegations against the Director, CBI made by Special Director,

CBI Shri Rakesh Asthana and the purported inquiry into such

allegations by the CVC and the disinvestment of powers during

the interregnum i.e. pendency of the inquiry are wholly

unjustified actions prompted by collateral reasons. Interference,

in the larger public interest, by this Court in the exercise of
29
powers of judicial review under
Article 32
of the Constitution of

India would therefore be called for.
27.          The aforesaid argument has been countered by Shri

K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney General appearing for the

Union of India who contends that the role of the Committee

under
Section 4A(1)
of the DSPE Act is limited to making

recommendations on the basis of which the Central Government

is to make the appointment. According to the learned Attorney,

once the recommendation is made by the Committee and the

appointment is made, the Committee becomes functus officio.

Reliance has been placed in this regard on
Shankarsan Dash

vs. Union of India2
and
Jai Singh Dalal and others vs. State

of Haryana
& another3 to contend that when the law does not

recognize in any incumbent, who may have been recommended, a

right to be appointed it cannot be contended that after the

appointment is made        the Committee constituted to make

recommendations for appointment has to be consulted in all

cases of disinvestment of power, even beyond what is specifically

provided for by
Section 4B(2)
of the DSPE Act.
Section 4B(2)
, it is

2 (1991) 3 SCC 47
3 1993 Supp.
(2) SCC 600
30
pointed out provides/mandates the requirement of previous

consent only in cases of transfer of the Director which is also

what had been directed by this Court in paragraph 58(8) of the

report in
Vineet Narain
(supra).      The Learned Attorney has

further submitted that the present is not a case of transfer so as

to require the previous consent of the Committee under
Section

4B(2)
of the DSPE Act.    Reliance has also been placed on the

provisions of
Section 16
of the General Clauses Act, 1897 to

persuade the Court to recognise in the     Central Government a

power to divest the Director, CBI of his powers, functions, duties,

etc.   According to the learned Attorney the power to divest must

be acknowledged to be the logical corollary of the       power of

appointment of the Director, CBI which is vested in the Central

Government.
28.        On the other hand, Shri Tushar Mehta, learned

Solicitor General appearing for the CVC has argued that merely

on the appointment of a Member of the Indian Police Service as

the Director, CBI, the incumbent does not cease to be a public

servant/government servant.     He continues to be, according to

the learned Solicitor General, a civil servant; a member of the
31
Indian Police Service amenable to all service conditions as

applicable and also to the disciplinary control of the Competent

Authority.    The only exception in this regard, according to the

learned Additional Solicitor General, is provided by
Section 4B(1)
of the DSPE Act which provides for a fixed tenure of the Director.

It is only the Rules/conditions of service so far as the retirement

is concerned that stands diluted/affected by the provisions of
Section 4B(1)
of the DSPE Act and none other.
29.          In brief, these are the broad submissions of the

contesting parties. It has been further supplemented by the

learned counsels for the petitioner that on a meaningful

interpretation of the provisions of the relevant statutes the Court

should take the view that what is provided therein is a complete

insulation of the incumbent holding the post of Director of the

CBI and no action affecting his continuance and functioning can

be taken except with the previous consent of the Committee

under
Section 4A
of the DSPE Act. It is only after the incumbent

ceases to hold the post of Director, upon transfer or otherwise,

made with the previous consent of the Committee, that the
32
disciplinary control over such incumbent as a civil servant can be

exercised by the Central Government.
30.       The contentions advanced by the rival parties would

require the Court to consider two issues to determine the validity

of the impugned orders. The first is the competence of the CVC

and the Government of India to divest the Director, CBI of all his

powers, functions, duties, supervisory role, etc. without obtaining

the prior consent of the Committee constituted under
Section

4A(1)
of the DSPE Act to make recommendations for appointment

of the Director, CBI.   Learned counsels for the petitioners are

emphatic in their contentions that obtaining such prior consent

is the in­built mandate under the Statute which flows from the

operative directions issued by this Court in paragraph 58 of
Vineet Narain
(supra).      Therefore, according to the learned

counsels for the petitioners, the impugned orders passed without

obtaining prior consent of the Committee are non­est in law and

no other issue really need be gone into in the present case.
31.       The above contention raises a pure question of law

answerable on application of known and established principles of

law including interpretation of the provisions of the CVC Act,
33
2003 and the
DSPE Act, 1946
and further in the light of such

legislative intent that can be culled out in making the enactments

in question. Not only do we prefer to deal with the said question

in the first instance for the above stated reason but such an

exercise becomes obligatory in view of the jurisdictional questions

that are inbuilt therein.    On the aforesaid basis the second

question raised can be relegated to a later stage of consideration,

which question, we may indicate is one relating to the

sufficiency/adequacy or even the relevance of the reasons that

had prompted the CVC and the Government of India to take the

impugned decisions, a question that may legitimately call for an

answer only in the event of our disagreeing with the contentions

advanced on behalf of the petitioner on the first issue namely

that the divestment of power and authority of the Director, CBI

can only be with the prior consent of the Committee.
32.       There is no manner of doubt that the enactment of the

CVC Act, 2003 and the amendments made by the said

enactment, inter alia, in the
DSPE Act
(by Section 26 of the CVC

Act, 2003) are a sequel to the operative directions of this Court in

paragraph 58 of
Vineet Narain
(supra).
The legislature in its
34
wisdom had not considered the necessity of tempering down the

directions of this Court in
Vineet Narain
(supra) in any manner

whatsoever.
The mode and manner of appointment of Central

Vigilance Commissioner and Vigilance Commissioners as well as

that of the Director, CBI as spelt out by this Court in
Vineet

Narain
(supra) has been scrupulously followed by Parliament.
In

fact, at this stage, we may even take note of the fact that

Parliament on its own in amending
Section 4A
of the DSPE Act

by the
Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013
(Act No.1 of 2014) has

gone a step further to give effect to the directions of this Court

made in
Vineet Narain
(supra) inasmuch as the object for

change of the Committee for making recommendations for

appointment of the Director, CBI has been stated to be the

necessity “to provide a High Power Selection Committee for

selection     of   Director   of        the   Delhi   Special   Police

Establishment”.
33.         The Court, in its bid to understand the true legislative

intention behind the statutory enactments in question, cannot be

oblivious of the views expressed by this Court in
Vineet Narain
35
(supra) leading to the operative directions in para 58 that formed

the basis of the legislative exercise in question.
The said views

must be understood to have been considered fully by Parliament

before engrafting the consequential directions contained in

paragraph 58 of
Vineet Narain
(supra) in the form of statutory

enactments, details of which have been noticed earlier.
In this

regard, paragraphs 3 and 48 of the report of this Court in
Vineet

Narain
(supra) must hold a special field so as to deserve a recall

of the contents thereof which are in the following terms:
“3.     This experience revealed to us the need
        for the insulation of these agencies from any
        extraneous influence to ensure the continuance
        of the good work they have commenced. It is this
        need which has impelled us to examine the
        structure of these agencies and to consider the
        necessary steps which would provide permanent
        insulation to the agencies against extraneous
        influences to enable them to discharge their
        duties in the manner required for proper
        implementation of the rule of law. Permanent
        measures are necessary to avoid the need of every
        matter being brought to the court for taking ad
        hoc measures to achieve the desired results. This
        is the occasion for us to deal with the structure,
        constitution and the permanent measures
        necessary for having a fair and impartial agency.
        The faith and commitment to the rule of law
        exhibited by all concerned in these proceedings is
        the surest guarantee of the survival of democracy
36
of which rule of law is the bedrock. The basic
       postulate of the concept of equality: “Be you ever
       so high, the law is above you,” has governed all
       steps taken by us in these proceedings.
xxx        xxx       xxx
48.     In view of the common perception shared
       by everyone including the Government of India
       and the Independent Review Committee (IRC) of
       the need for insulation of the CBI from
       extraneous influence of any kind, it is imperative
       that some action is urgently taken to prevent the
       continuance of this situation with a view to
       ensure proper implementation of the rule of law.
This is the need of equality guaranteed in the
       Constitution. The right to equality in a situation
       like this is that of the Indian polity and not
       merely of a few individuals. The powers conferred
       on this Court by the Constitution are ample to
       remedy this defect and to ensure enforcement of
       the concept of equality.”
34.       These are the basic facts that cannot be overlooked

while gathering the intention of the legislature in making the

provisions contained in
Section 4A
and
Section 4B
of the DSPE

Act. An indepth consideration of the matter leaves us with no

doubt that the clear legislative intent in bringing the aforesaid

provisions to the statute book are for the purpose of ensuring

complete insulation of the office of the Director, CBI from all

kinds of extraneous influences, as may be, as well as for
37
upholding the integrity and independence of the institution of the

CBI as a whole.
35.          There are certain other relevant facts that cannot be

ignored. The provisions of various State enactments
(Police Act
),

as for example
Uttrakhand Police Act
2007, following the decision

of this Court in
Prakash Singh And Others vs. Union of India

And Others4
(2006) 8 SCC 1,while providing for a tenure of two

years to the Director General of Police of the State expressly

contemplates removal of the incumbent before expiry of the of the

tenure on certain specified      grounds [Section 20 (4) & (5)].

Similarly, Section 6 of the CVC Act, which has been extracted

above, specifically contemplates certain interim measures against

the Central Vigilance Commissioner or a Vigilance Commissioner

pending consideration by the Supreme Court of the reference

made by the President to the Court for removal of any such

incumbent. Removal of any of the aforesaid incumbents holding

any of the aforesaid posts is also contemplated on certain

contingencies occurring as spelt out by sub­section (3) of Section

6 of the CVC Act. No such provision has been engrafted so far as


4 (2006) 8 SCC 1
38
the office of the Director, CBI is concerned except what is

contained in
Section 4B(2)
of the DSPE Act, namely, that “the

Director shall not be transferred except with the previous

consent of the Committee referred to in sub­section (1) of
section 4A
”.   As already noticed,
Section 4B
including sub­

section (2) thereof of the
DSPE Act
, as it exists on date, were

brought in by the same legislation i.e. CVC Act (Act No.45 of

2003).
36.       If the legislative intent would have been to confer in

any authority of the State a power to take interim measures

against the Director, CBI thereby affecting his functioning,

surely, the legislation would have contained enabling provisions

to that effect and consequently would have been differently

worded and drafted. It is against this backdrop that the words

“transferred   except   with   the   previous   consent   of   the

Committee” mentioned in
Section 4B(2)
of the DSPE Act has to

be understood. If the word “transferred” has to be understood in

its ordinary parlance and limited to a change from one post to

another, as the word would normally convey and on that basis

the requirement of “previous consent of the Committee” is
39
understood to be only in such cases, i.e. purely of transfer, such

an interpretation would be self­defeating and would clearly

negate the legislative intent. In such an event it will be free for

the State Authority to effectively disengage the Director, CBI from

functioning by adopting various modes, known and unknown,

which may not amount to transfer but would still have the same

effect as a transfer from one post to another, namely, cessation of

exercise of powers and functions of the earlier post.      This is

clearly not what the legislature could have intended. The long

history of evolution has shown that the institution of the CBI has

been perceived to be necessarily kept away from all kinds of

extraneous influences so that it can perform its role as the

premier investigating and prosecuting agency without any fear

and favour and in the best public interest.      The head of the

institution, namely, the Director, naturally, therefore, has to be

the role model of independence and integrity which can only be

ensured by freedom from all kinds of control and interference

except to the extent that Parliament may have intended. Such

intendment, in our considered view, would require all Authorities

to keep away from intermingling or interfering in the functioning

of the Director. In a situation where such interference may at all
40
be called for, public interest must be writ large against the

backdrop of the necessity.       The relevance and adequacy of the

reasons giving rise to such a compelling necessity can only be

tested by the opinion of the Committee constituted under
Section

4A(1)
of   the   DSPE    Act   in     whom   the   power      to    make

recommendations for appointment of the Director has been

vested by Parliament.       This alone can provide an adequate

safeguard to ensure the independence of the office keeping in

view the legislative intent, as found and held by us.                In this

regard we feel fortified in saying that    the status of the Committe

having undergone an upward movement by the amendment

brought in by the
Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013
(Act No.1 of

2014) it cannot but be said that the legislative intent in shielding

and insulating the office of the Director from any kind of

extraneous     influence   has   been     foremost   in   the   mind      of

Parliament which intent found manifestation in the changes in

law brought about in the circumstances noted above.
37.          There is yet another issue of significance that arises

from the weighty arguments advanced in the course of the long

debate that has taken place.            This is with regard to the

application of Sections 14, 15 and 16 of the General Clauses Act,
41
1897 so as to confer a power in the Central Government to pass

the impugned orders including the order of appointment of an

acting Director of the CBI. The preceding discussions and our

views on the true and correct meaning of the provisions

contained in
Sections 4A
&
4B
of the DSPE Act leaves us

convinced that the aforesaid provisions of the
General Clauses

Act
will have no application to the present case in view of the

clear and apparent intention to the contrary that unequivocally

flows from the aforesaid provisions of the
DSPE Act
.
38.       So far as the correctness of the impugned decisions on

merit is concerned, not much argument have been made either

on the relevance or the sufficiency of the grounds shown and

disclosed for the impugned decisions. This is, perhaps, on the

understanding of the learned counsels that our attempts to keep

the report of the enquiry by the CVC ordered on 26 th October and

12th November, 2018 in sealed cover was sufficiently indicative of

the mind of the Court that this aspect of the case should require

to be unfolded only if inevitable and that too in the event of a

negative decision on the jurisdictional question.      The inherent

limitation in such an exercise of, if at all is to be undertaken, is
42
another inhibiting factor. Be that as it may such an exercise has

now become wholly unnecessary in view of the decision on the

jurisdictional issue.
39.        Consequently, in the light of our views as expressed

above we set aside the following orders dated 23 rd October, 2018:
(i)    of the CVC divesting the powers, functions,
                  duties, supervisory role, etc. of Shri Alok Kumar
                  Verma as Director, CBI
(ii)   of the Government of India, Ministry of Personnel,
                  Public Grievances and Pensions, Department of
                  Personnel & Training divesting Shri Alok Kumar
                  Verma, Director, CBI of his functions, powers,
                  duties and supervisory role with immediate effect
                  and until further orders.
(iii) of the Government of India, Ministry of Personnel,
                  Public Grievances and Pensions, Department of
                  Personnel & Training by which one Shri M.
                  Nageshwar Rao, IPS, Joint Director, CBI has been
                  asked to look after the duties and functions of
                  Director, CBI with immediate effect.
40.   Our interference, as above, will now require the matter to be

considered by the Committee under
Section 4A(1)
of the DSPE
43
Act, 1946 which may be so done at the earliest and, in any case,

within a week from the date of this order.        A meeting of the

Committee may be accordingly convened by the competent

authority.
41.          As the issue of divestment of power and authority of

the Director, CBI is still open for consideration by the Committee

and our interference with the impugned orders has been on the

ground indicated above, we deem it proper to direct that the

petitioner    Shri   Alok   Kumar    Verma,   Director,   CBI,   upon

reinstatement, will cease and desist from taking any major policy

decisions till the decision of the Committee permitting such

actions and decisions becomes available within the time frame

indicated.     We further make it explicit that the role of the

Petitioner Shri Alok Kumar Verma as the Director, CBI during the

interregnum and in terms of this order will be confined only to

the exercise of the ongoing routine functions without any fresh

initiative, having no major policy or institutional implications.
42.          Coming to the several IAs filed, we are of the view that

the orders of transfer etc. impugned/mentioned in the said IAs
44
are a sequel of the three orders dated 23 rd October, 2018 which

were specifically impugned in the writ petitions.     As we have

answered the writ petitions in the manner indicated above, we do

not consider it necessary to examine the correctness of the

further/consequential orders of transfer etc. and that too on the

basis of interlocutory applications filed in pending writ petitions

under
Article 32
of the Constitution, which stand disposed of by

the present order. However, we leave the parties with the remedy

of challenging the said consequential orders in an appropriate

manner and before the appropriate forum, if so required and so

advised.
43.        Both writ petitions and all the IAs are accordingly

disposed of.
…………………………………….,CJI
                                        [RANJAN GOGOI]


                                     …………………………………….,J
                                        [SANJAY KISHAN KAUL]


                                     …………………………………….,J
                                             [K.M. JOSEPH]
NEW DELHI
JANUARY 08, 2019