[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Britannia Industries Ltd. vs Bombay Agricultural Produce Mkt.C.. on 24 January, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 610, (2019) 2 ALLMR 489, 2020 (139) ALR SOC 14 (SC), (2019) 204 ALLINDCAS 159, (2019) 2 SCALE 749
Author:
R. Banumathi
Bench:
R. Subhash Reddy
,
R.Banumathi
1


                                                                                REPORTABLE
                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1746 OF 2010


     BRITANNIA INDUSTRIES LTD.                                            ...APPELLANT(S)

                                                     VERSUS

     BOMBAY AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE MARKETING COMMITTEE
     & ANR.                                                               ….RESPONDENT(S)

                                            WITH

                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1747 OF 2010



                                            J U D G M E N T
R. BANUMATHI,J.
1.                  The issue involved in these appeals is the interpretation

     of the term “Agricultural Produce” (Section 2(1)(a) of the Act)

     contained             in    the
Maharashtra        Agricultural   Produce    Marketing

     (Regulation) Act, 1963
.
2.                  The    appellant    filed    the     writ   petition    seeking     the

     following declarations:
(i)
The   Maharashtra   Agricultural   Produce
                         Marketing (Development) and Regulation Act, 1963
is not applicable to sugar, cashew nuts, refined
                         oil, vanaspati and dry fruits purchased by the
                         appellant.
Signature Not Verified   (ii) The   notification   dated   25.09.1987   is
Digitally signed by
MADHU BALA
Date: 2019.02.01
illegal and utra vires to the extent that it
16:04:58 IST
Reason:                  adds the above items to the
Schedule of the Act
.
(iii) The bulk sugar purchased by the appellant
                         is directly from the Sugar mills located outside
                         the market area of the first respondent is not
2
covered by the provisions of the Act.
3.        During the pendency of the writ petition, before the High

Court, the appellant gave up the challenge in respect of “cashew

nuts” and other “dry fruits”.
4.        The question falling for consideration in these appeals

is whether the provisions of the
Maharashtra Agricultural Produce

Marketing (Regulation) Act, 1963
(Marketing Act) are applicable to

the products “edible oil”, “Vanaspati” and “sugar”?
5.        We have heard Mr. Jawahar Lal, learned counsel appearing

on behalf of the appellant as well as Mr. Vikramjit Banerjee,

learned   Additional   Solicitor   General   appearing   on   behalf   of

Respondent No. 1 - Agricultural Market Committee.
6.
Section 2(1)(a)
of the Maharashtra Agricultural Produce

Marketing (Regulation) Act, 1963 defines “agricultural produce” as

under:-
2(1).     In this Act, unless the context otherwise
     requires:-
(a)   “agricultural produce” means all produce (whether
     processed or not) of agriculture, horticulture, animal
     husbandry, apiculture, pisciculture and forest specified
     in the Schedule.
Section 2(1)(a)
of the Maharashtra Agricultural Produce Marketing

(Regulation) Act, 1963 unambiguously shows that the agricultural

produce which are to be covered by the sweep of the Act necessarily

has to be specified in the Schedule.
7.        As pointed out by the High Court, “sugarcane” has been

separately listed under Item VI in the Schedule along with Gul and

Sugar and thus the intention of the Legislature is to treat sugar
3
as   a   produce     of    sugarcane,   which    is    a     separate   agricultural

produce.    The High Court rightly held that sugar is a produce of

agriculture coming into being in a processed form from sugarcane

and the absence of the word “manufacture” in the definition of

“agricultural produce” under
Section 2(1)(a)
of the Act would not

in any way affect the status of sugar as being an agricultural

produce under the Act.
8.         Admittedly, “sugarcane” has been separately listed under

Item VI in the Schedule along with Gul and Sugar and hence, the

Committee has the power of enforcing its statutory right under

Section    31   of   the    Marketing   Act     to    levy    market    fees   on   the

marketing of sugar in its market area.
9.         So far as “sugar” is concerned, the High Court rejected

the contention of the appellant by holding that sugar was included

in the
Schedule of the Act
originally and it came to be deleted

from Item VI by a notification dated 13.04.1982 and it is not as if

for the first item that sugar is included in the agricultural

produce by notification dated 25.09.1987. After referring various

process involved in bringing out the sugar, the High Court has held

that the sugar is an “agricultural produce” within the meaning of
Section 2(1)(a)
of the Act. The High Court also held that the

intention of the Legislature is to treat sugar as produce of “sugar

cane” as it is added along with other items. The High Court held

that the absence of word “manufacture” would not affect the status

of sugar as being an agricultural produce within the meaning of
Section 2(1)(a)
of the Act.
4
10.         So far as the          “edible oil”         and the      “Vanaspati”       are

concerned,   the    High     Court    has   held      that    they   are    agricultural

produce within the meaning of
Section 2(1)(a)
of the Act.
11.         So   far   as    “Vanaspati”        is    concerned,      the    High   Court

referred to entire process as to how “Vanaspati” is produced from

“edible   oils”     and     that   “edible      oils”    are    subject      to   various

processes    and     the     end     product     of     all    these       processes   is

“Vanaspati”.       The High Court held that the production of dalda or

Vanaspati from edible oils is thus the result of the edible oils

undergoing all these processes which convert edible oils to a new

entity called “Vanaspati”.             Thus, the High Court concluded that

“Vanaspati” is nothing but Hydro Generated Refined Edible Oil and

is an agricultural produce within the meaning of Section 2(1)(a) of

the Marketing Act.
12.
In
Champak Lal H. Thakkar v. State of Gujarat
(1980) 4

SCC 329, this Court held as under:-
“11. …..Oil will remain oil if it retains its essential
      properties and merely because it has been subjected to
      certain processes would not convert it into a different
      substance.
In other words, although certain additions have
      been made to and operations carried out on oil, it will
      still   be  classified   as  oil   unless  its   essential
      characteristics have undergone a change so that it would
      be a misnomer to call it oil as understood in ordinary
      parlance……”

Relying upon
Champak Lal
case, the High Court held that oil will

remain oil even if it has been subject to certain processes and

held that “edible oil” is an “agricultural produce” within the

meaning of Section 2(1)(a) of the Marketing Act.
5
13.          We fully agree with the conclusion of the High Court that

“edible oil”, “Vanaspati” and “sugar” would fall within the meaning

of Section 2(1)(a) of the Marketing Act – agricultural produce.                               We

do    not   find    any    good    ground       warranting      interference          with   the

findings     of    the    High    Court   that       “edible    oil”,     “Vanaspati”         and

“sugar” are agricultural produce within the meaning of
Section 2(1)
(a) of the Marketing Act.
14.          Contention of the appellant is that it procures sugar

from the sugar mills which are located beyond the limits of the

market area of respondent No.1 and therefore, the said transactions

do    not   take    place    within       the       market    area   so   as     to    empower

respondent No.1 to levy market fees under
Section 31
of the Act

read with Rule 5 of the Rules on the sugar produced from outside

the market area.
15.
Section      13(1A)(a)
of     the    Act    states     that    the        area

comprising Greater Bombay and Turbhe Village in Thane Taluka of

Thane District or such areas as may be specified by the State

Government by notification in the Official Gazette from time to

time, shall be deemed to be a market area called the Bombay Market

Area and respondent No. 1 is the Market Committee for that area.
16.    Insofar as the contention of the appellant that the appellant

is not a buyer within the meaning of Section (2)(1)(ca) as bulk

sugar is purchased from outside the market area, the High Court

observed:
“Unless the sugar procurement is done by
             the petitioner-company within the area of
             Greater Mumbai and Turbhe Village of Thane
             Taluka of Thane District or any other area
6
notified by the Government of Maharashtra to be
             a part of the market area of respondent No. 1,
             it cannot levy market fees on sugar.         The
             respondent No. 1 has no power to levy market
             fees under
Section 31
of the Act on the entire
             quantity of sugar that arrives within its market
             area on the procurement made by the petitioner-
             company and directly from the sugar factories
             which are located within the market area of
             respondent No. 1. It is, therefore, necessary
             that the petitioner-company places before the
             respondent No. 1 all its record to show that
             sugar was procured/purchased from the places
             outside the market area of respondent No. 1 and
             if the respondent No. 1 on a verification is
satisfied, to that extent the respondent No. 1
shall have no authority to levy market fees
             under
Section 1
of the Act. This is an issue
             which will have to be examined by the Market
             Committee afresh and it is imperative for the
             petitioner-company to submit all the records
             before the respondent No. 1 for such a
             verification and this should be done at the
             earliest possible. We have no doubt in our mind
             that the respondent No. 1- Market Committee
             shall have powers to levy market fees under
Section 31
of the Act only on the quantity of
             sugar that has been purchased/procured within
             its market area and it cannot levy market fees
             on the entire sugar quantity that is received by
             the petitioner-company……...”
17.          Mr.   Vikramjit    Banerjee,     learned   Additional     Solicitor

General, submitted that as per direction of the High Court, if the

appellant is able to produce relevant documents, Respondent No. 1

shall consider the same by passing appropriate orders.
18.          The   relevant    bills   and   other   documents     filed   by    the

appellant insofar as alleged           purchase of sugar from outside the

market area (
Section 2(1)(i)
) shall be considered as expeditiously

as possible. It is stated by the learned counsel for the appellant

that   the   issue   is   concerned    only   limited   to   the    period      from

01.07.1988 to 03.03.2004.
7
19.      We make it clear that the direction of the High Court in

approaching the concerned Authority is restricted only to sugar.

2o.      The appeals are, accordingly, dismissed.
…………………………………………………………...J.
                                     [R.BANUMATHI]



NEW DELHI                            ………………………………………………………...J.
24TH JANUARY, 2019                   [R. SUBHASH REDDY]