[Cites
9
, Cited by
46
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Himachal Pradesh vs Parkash Chand on 17 January, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 38, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2421
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
Hemant Gupta
,
Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud
1

                                                                           REPORTABLE
                      Item No.8.28/3.4
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO.977 OF 2019
                                 (Arising out of SLP(C) No.28355 of 2016)


                         STATE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH AND ANR.                  APPELLANT(s)

                                                      VERSUS

                         PARKASH CHAND                                       RESPONDENT(s)


                                              J U D G M E N T
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J.
Leave granted.
This appeal arises from a judgment of a Divison Bench

                          of the High Court dated 6 October 2015.

                             The father of the respondent who was working as a

                          Peon in the Revenue Department of the State, died on 4

                          January 1997, while in service.      On the date of the death

                          of his father, the respondent was a minor.       He attained

                          the age of majority on 17 November 2002.       The policy of

                          compassionate appointment framed by the State of Himachal

                          Pradesh, inter alia, contains a stipulation that where

                          none of the children of a deceased government employee

                          have attained the age of majority at the time of the

                          death of the employee, an       application can be submitted
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2019.01.25
on the attainment of the age of twenty one years by the
14:26:34 IST
Reason:
eldest child.   This provision is contained in paragraph 8

                          of the policy dated 18 January 1990.         The application
2
submitted by the respondent upon attaining the age of

majority was processed, but was eventually rejected on 25

April      2008    on    the   ground        that   the     brother      of    the

respondent        is    already   in   the     service      of    the   Himachal

Pradesh Electricity Board.                 The fact that the brother of

the respondent is employed with a State undertaking is

not in dispute.
In   the    writ     petition        before   the     High      Court,   the

respondent urged that his brother was living separately

and relied on a ration card and a certificate issued by

the Pradhan of the Gram Panchayat.                        The fact that the

brother was residing separately for seventeen years was

admitted in the Writ Petition in the following terms:
“...Because the elder brother of the
      petitioner was living separately and no family
      member of the petitioner is in Govt./Semi Govt.
      service,   which  fact   is   clear  from   the
      certificate issued by the competent authority,
      copy of which is annexed herewith as Annexure-
      P7.   The ration card of the family of the
      petitioner clearly shows that the elder brother
      of the petitioner is not residing with the
      petitioner, copy of ration card is annexed
      herewith as Annexure-P8. The Pradhan concerned
      has also certified that the elder brother of
      the petitioner is residing separately for the
      last 17 years, which fact is clear from the
      certificate, copy of which is annexed herewith
      as Annexure-P9.”

      The respondent, in the reliefs which were sought in

the    petition        under
Article       226
of    the    Constitution,

sought     a     direction     for     setting      aside       the   letter   of

rejection dated 25 April 2008 and for his appointment as

a Peon on compassionate grounds.
3
The Policy framed by the State Government contains

the following conditions of eligibility in paragrah 5(c):
“In all cases where one or more members of
   the family are already in government service or
   in employment of autonomous bodies/bodies/
   boards/corporations etc. of the State/Central
   Government, employment assistance should not
   under any circumstances be provided to the
   second or third member of the family. In cases,
   however, where the widow of the deceased
   government servant represents or claims that
   her employed sons/daughters are not supporting
   her, the request of employment assistance
   should be considered only in respect of the
   widow.   Even    for    allowing    compassionate
   appointment to the widow in such cases the
   opinion of the department of personnel, and
   Finance   Department   should   specifically   be
   sought and the matter finally decided by the
   Council of Ministers.”

   In the batch of cases which has been disposed of by

the High Court, one of the issues which were framed for

decision was as follows:
“(ix) In case one or more dependants of a deceased-
     employee is/are in service, though living sepa-
     rately, whether that can be made a ground to deny
     compassionate appointment to the other dependant
     of the deceased-employee?”
   The policy contains a stipulation that where one or

more persons of the family are already in the employment

of the State Government or of autonomous bodies, Boards,

Corporations,      etc.    of   the     State    or    the    Central

Government, employment assistance should not be provided

to another member of the family.           However, an exception

is carved out in the case of the widow of the deceased

government    employee,    if   she    claims   that   her   employed

children     are   not    supporting    her.      Before     allowing
4
compassionate appointment, the opinion of the Department

 of Personnel and Finance Department is required to be

 sought and the matter is left to the ultimate decision of

 the Council of Ministers.
The High Court while deciding issue (ix) has relied

 upon    the    decision     of    this    Court     in
Govind     Prakash

 Verma Vs. Life        Insurance     Corporation          of    India1
more

 specifically on the observation that the mere fact that

 the    elder    brother     of    the    applicant       was     engaged    in

 agricultural work and was also doing the work of a casual

 painter, would not be construed as gainful employment.

 This finding in Govind Prakash Verma is purely on the

 facts of that case and cannot be construed to be of any

 relevance to the present case.
The High Court has observed that the State should

 consider cases for appointment on compassionate basis by

 dealing with the applications submitted by sons, or as

 the    case    may    be,   daughters      of      deceased       government

 employees,     even    though,     one    member    of     the    family    is

 engaged in the service of the government or an autonomous

 board or corporation.            This direction of the judgment of

 the High Court virtually amounts to a mandamus to the

 State Government to disregard the terms which have been

 stipulated     in    paragraph     5(c)    of   its      policy    dated    18

 January 1990.         The policy contains a limited exception

 which is available only to a widow of a deceased employee

1 (2005) 10 SCC289
5
who seeks compassionate appointment even though one of

 the     children     of    the    deceased         employee      is   gainfully

 employed with the State.            The basis for this exception is

 to deal with cases where the widow is not being supported

 financially by her children.
In the exercise of judicial review under
Article 226
of the Constitution, it was not open to the High Court to

 re-write the terms of the policy.                        It is well-settled

 that compassionate appointment is not a matter of right,

 but must be governed by the terms on which the State lays

 down the policy of offering employment assistance to a

 member of the family of a deceased government employee.

 [
Umesh Kumar Nagpal Vs. State of Haryana2
, General Manager

 (D&PB) Vs. Kunti Tiwary3,
Punjab National Bank Vs. Ashwani

 Kumar     Teneja4
,
State       Bank       of   India   Vs.    Somvir   Singh5
,
Mumtaz Yunus Mulani Vs. State of Maharashtra6
,
Union of

 India Vs. Shashank Goswami7
,
State Bank                    of      India    Vs.

 Surya       Narain        Tripathi8
and
Canara Bank Vs. M. Mahesh

 Kumar9]

       For
the above reasons, we are of the view that the

 judgment of the High Court is unsustainable.                          The High

 Court has virtually re-written the terms of the policy


2 (1994) 4 SCC 138
3 (2004) 7 SCC 271
4 (2004) 7 SCC 265
5 (2007) 4 SCC 778
6 (2008) 11 SCC 384
7 (2012) 11 SCC 307
8 (2014) 15 SCC 739
9 (2015) 7 SCC 412
6
and    has   issued     a    direction    to   the    State      to   consider

 applications         which    do   not   fulfill      the    terms      of    the

 policy.      This is impermissible.
That apart, we find from the record that the father

 of the respondent died on 4 January 1997.                         Though the

 respondent applied on attaining majority, as permissible

 under    the    policy,      the   application       was    rejected     on   25

 April 2008.       The Writ Petition was filed nearly two years

 and six months thereafter.               Apart from stating that the

 elder    brother      of     the   respondent    who       was   engaged      in

 government service was living separately, there were no

 factual averments in support of the plea.                     In any event,

 as we have already held, the High Court was not justified

 in    issuing    a    direction     which   would     breach      the   policy

 framed by the State.
For these reasons, we allow the appeal and set aside

 the directions issued by the High Court in its impugned

 judgment and order, as noted earlier.                       In consequence,

 the Writ Petition filed by the respondent shall stand

 rejected.       No costs.
.............................J.
                                    (DR. DHANANJAYA Y. CHANDRACHUD)



                                     .............................J.
                                    (HEMANT GUPTA)

NEW DELHI
JANUARY 17, 2019