[Cites
12
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
Mr. Ravi Agrawal vs Union Of India on 3 January, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 318, 2019 (2) ADR 101, (2019) 1 SCALE 111, (2019) 1 WLC(SC)CVL 225, 2019 (200) AIC (SOC) 7 (SC), 2019 (2) KCCR SN 128 (SC), (2019) 5 MAH LJ 14, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 675, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 50
Author:
A.K. Sikri
Bench:
S. Abdul Nazeer
,
Ashok Bhushan
,
A.K. Sikri
1

                                                                                     REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                          CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


                                    WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1107 OF 2017


     RAVI AGRAWAL                                                     .....PETITIONER(S)

                                          VERSUS

     UNION OF INDIA AND ANOTHER                                     .....RESPONDENT(S)



                                                JUDGMENT
A.K. SIKRI, J.
This writ petition is filed by the petitioner, Ravi Agrawal, under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India as a Public Interest Litigation. The

                         petition is stated to be filed in the interest of handicapped children

                         whose parents have taken Jeevan Aadhar Policy (Table 114) from the

                         Life Insurance Corporation of India (for short, ‘LIC’) for the livelihood of

                         their children. The petitioner himself is a differently abled person as he

                         is suffering from Cerebral Dysphagia. The petitioner also is an income

                         tax assessee whose Permanent Account Number (PAN) issued by the
Signature Not Verified
Income Tax Department is AAPPA5222M. He has stated that he has no
Digitally signed by
ASHWANI KUMAR
Date: 2019.01.03
16:46:43 IST
Reason:
personal interest in the subject matter raised in this petition which he

                         has filed on behalf of the handicapped children.
2
2)
Section 80DD
of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the

  ‘Act’) provides for payment of annuity of lump sum amount for the

  benefit of a dependant, being a person with disability, in the event of the

  death of the individual or the member of the Hindu Undivided Family

  (HUF) in whose name subscription to the scheme stipulated in the said

  provision has been made.          Though it is a long provision, for our

  purposes it would be suffice to reproduce sub-sections (1), (2) and (3)

  thereof, which are as under:
"80DD. Deduction in respect of maintenance including
        medical treatment of a dependant who is a person with
        disability.— (1) Where an assessee, being an individual or a
        Hindu undivided family, who is a resident in India, has, during the
        previous year,—
(a) incurred any expenditure for the medical treatment (including
        nursing), training and rehabilitation of a dependant, being a
        person with disability; or
(b) paid or deposited any amount under a scheme framed in this
        behalf by the Life Insurance Corporation or any other insurer or
        the Administrator or the specified company subject to the
        conditions specified in sub-section (2) and approved by the Board
        in this behalf for the maintenance of a dependant, being a person
        with disability, the assessee shall, in accordance with and subject
        to the provisions of this section, be allowed a deduction of a sum
        of seventy-five thousand rupees from his gross total income in
        respect of the previous year:
Provided that where such dependant is a person with severe
        disability, the provisions of this sub-section shall have effect as if
        for the words “seventy-five thousand rupees”, the words “one
        hundred and twenty-five thousand rupees” had been substituted.
(2) The deduction under clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall be
        allowed only if the following conditions are fulfilled, namely:—
(a) the scheme referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1)
        provides for payment of annuity or lump sum amount for the
3
benefit of a dependant, being a person with disability, in the
        event of the death of the individual or the member of the
        Hindu undivided family in whose name subscription to the
        scheme has been made;
(b) the assessee nominates either the dependant, being a person
        with disability, or any other person or a trust to receive the
        payment on his behalf, for the benefit of the dependant, being a
        person with disability.
(3) If the dependant, being a person with disability, predeceases
        the individual or the member of the Hindu undivided family
        referred to in sub-section (2), an amount equal to the amount paid
        or deposited under clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall be deemed
        to be the income of the assessee of the previous year in which
        such amount is received by the assessee and shall accordingly be
        chargeable to tax as the income of that previous year.”
3) As per clause (b) of sub-section (1), if an assessee, being an individual

  or a HUF, has paid or deposited any amount under the scheme framed

  in this behalf by the LIC or any other insurer etc., such an assessee is

  entitled to deduction of a sum of Rs.75,000/- from his Gross Total

  Income in respect of the previous year. It is subject to the conditions

  which are specified in sub-section (2) of
Section 80DD
.              We are

  concerned with the condition mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (2).
As per this condition, disabled dependant would get annuity or lumpsum

  payment in the event of death of the individual or the death of the

  member of the HUF, in whose name subscription to the scheme has

  been made. In order to give effect to the aforesaid special provision

  meant for the benefit of persons with disability, LIC has floated insurance

  policy named ‘Jeevan Aadhar (Table 114)’ for the benefit of the

  handicapped dependants. Accordingly, those assessees who get the
4
Jeevan Aadhar policy for the benefit of handicapped dependants and

pay or deposit the amount under the said policy become entitled to the

deduction mentioned in
Section 80DD
of the Act. Synopsis of the said

policy introduced by the LIC gives a glimpse of the salient features of

this plan and is, thus, reproduced below:
"A) Synopsis of Plan
1) Age at entry (life assured) – Minimum 22 years, Maximum 65
     years.
(handicapped dependant – 1 year)
     The age of the life assured and handicapped dependant are
     required to be admitted on the basis of standard age proof.
2) Maximum premium ceasing age – 75 years.
3) Premium paying term – 10, 15, 20, 25, 30 & 35 years.
4) Policy term this is whole life plan.
5) Sum assured – Minimum 50000, Maximum – no limit.
6) Mode of payment – Yearly, Half-Yearly, Quarterly, Monthly,
     SSS, Single also.
7) Rebate on mode of payment – Yearly 3% of tabular premium,
     Half-yearly 1.5% of tabular premium, Quarterly/ Monthly/SSS – no
     rebate.
8) Rebate on high sum assured -
25,000 to 49,999 – Re.1/- per 1000 sum assured
     50,000 and above – Rs.2/- per 1000 sum assured.
9) All extra mortality rate class are allowed.
10) All female categories i.e. I, II, III are alloewd.
11) Only NMS is allowed, not NMG.
12) Besides proposal form No. 3000, the life assured (proposer)
     will be required to submit an addendum declaring the disability of
     the handicapped dependant and a certificate stating that
     handicapped dependant is suffering from a permanent physical
5
disability (including blindness) or having mental retardatoin as per
         rules A physician, a surgeon, an oculist or a psychiatrist working
         in Govt hospital should clearly state that due to disability such
         person’s capacity for normal work or engaging in a gainful
         employment or occupation is considerably reduced.”
4) The    grievance     of   the    petitioner   pertains    to    Circular     No.

  CO/CRM/PS/622/23 dated January 24, 2008 which is issued by the

  Income Tax Department. As per this Circular, no benefit can be paid to

  the dependant till the proposer/life assured survives. Relevant portion of

  this Circular is extracted below:
"Representations were received for allowing annuity payments for
         the disabled dependant before death of parents/life assured after
         a certain age. But CBDT/Govt. Of India have refused to do so.
         Hence it is clarified that no benefit can be paid to dependant till
         the proposer/life assured survives.”
5) The Jeevan Aadhar plan also mentions the aforesaid Circular on the

  basis of which clause pertaining to maturity claim in the policy is

  mentioned as under:
"F. MATURITY CLAIM
1) IN FORCE POLICY OR FULLY PAID UP POLICY

         Policy does not have maturity claim. The provisions of maturity
         claim under whole life policies i.e. after completing the age of 80
         years by life assured: is not applicable under this policy.
Representations were received for allowing annuity payments for
         the disabled dependant before death of parents/life assured after
         certain age. But CBDT/Govt. Of India have refused to do so.
         Hence it is clarified that no benefit can be paid to dependant till
         the proposer/life assured survives. (co/crm/ps/622/23 dated
         24/01/2008).”


         It is, thus, clear that even when the entire subscription is paid
6
under this policy meant for handicapped persons, this policy does not

   have maturity claim. The amount is payable to the dependant only on

   the demise of the proposer/life assured.
6) Submission of the petitioner is that by incorporating such a provision, the

   respondents are denying the benefit of the insurance to the handicapped

   persons to get annuity or lumpsum amount during the lifetime of the

   parent/guardian   of   such   a   handicapped     person,   whereas    the

   beneficiaries of other life insurance policy are getting annuity during the

   lifetime of the person who has taken insurance policy. This, according to

   the petitioner, violates the fundamental right of equality of the

   handicapped person enshrined in
Article 14
of the Constitution.
7) The petitioner states that he had lodged a complaint before the

   Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDA) on

   August 06, 2014. However, the said Authority in its reply expressed its

   inability to provide any help having regard to the afore-mentioned

   Circular dated January 24, 2008 of the CBDT.         The petitioner even

   approached the Court of the Chief Commissioner for Persons with

   Disabilities raising the aforesaid grievance. The Chief Commissioner

   heard the matter on various dates and passed the order advising the

   CBDT to once again examine the matter in consultation with the

   Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities, Ministry of
7
Social Justice and Empowerment, as well as National Trust. Relevant

portion thereof reads as under:
"11. During the hearing on 10.03.2015, it was observed that
     Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) had already made the
     submission that the issue of allowing for annuity payment to the
     dependant with disability under Jeevan Aadhar Policy to
     commence after certain age of a subscriber at 55, 58 or 60 years
     was considered during the budgetary exercise for 2007-08 and
     the same was not found to be acceptable.
12. In the light of the mandate of the Chief Commissioner for
     Persons with Disabilities, no direction can be given to CBDT or
     LIC as there is no allegation of non implementation of the stated
     policy or its terms & conditions. It is, however, the view of this
     office that Jeevan Aadhar is not the only LIC Policy that gives the
     benefit of Income Tax exemption and only a few parents of
     persons with disabilities may be tax payers to be able to avail the
     tax exemption, such a well intentioned policy should not be linked
     to such benefits as tax exemption. As the primary objective of the
     policy is to benefit a person with disability, he/she should start
     getting the annuity as early as possible in his/her lifetime.
13. With regard to the allegation of the complainant in Case No.
     2602/1093/2014 that the LIC Agents and professionals told him at
     the time of selling the policy that his child would start getting
     pension @ Rs.2000/- per month for every one lakh of insured
     amount is concerned, LIC is advised to investigate the matter and
     intimate the outcome to the complainant under intimation to this
     Court within two months from the date of receipt of these Record
     of proceedings. In case it is established that it is a case of
     mis-selling, then LIC is advised to suitably compensate the
     complainant.
14. As National Trust was not represented during the hearing
     despite the notice and it has suggested that insured amount
     should be disbursed to the beneficiaries through its LICs, National
     rust is directed to get in touch with the LIC and obtain the details
     of the Jeevan Aadhar Policy holders. After obtaining the consent
     of the policy holders for distribution of annuity through LLCs
     National Trust shall inform LIC for making National Trust as the
     nominee/Trusty for receiving the amount of annuity in respect of
     such policy holders on the terms & conditions as may be finalized
     between LIC and National Trust and ensure that a mechanism is
     put in place to disburse the amount of annuity to the disabled
     dependants of the policy holders till the dependant is alive.
8
15. Both the complainants strongly felt that like other policy
        holders, Jeevan Aadhar Policy should also be allowed to mature
        after 55 years of age of proposer and the annuity amount should
        be disbursed through the LICs of National Trust.
16. In the light of the demand of the complainants, CBDT is
        advised to once again examine the matter in consultation with
        Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities, Ministry
        of Social Justice & Empowerment and National Trust.”
8) The Chief Commissioner had even sent reminder thereof to the CBDT to

  look into the matter. However, nothing moved at the level of the CBDT.
In fact, the petitioner thereafter lodged his grievance with the Prime

  Minister’s Office through Centralised Public Grievance Redressal and

  Monitoring System Portal on October 15, 2015. As he did not receive

  any response, it provoked the petitioner to file the instant writ petition

  with the following prayers:
"(a) Issue a writ of Mandamus or any other appropriate writ, order
        of direction to Respondents No 1 to amend
Section 80DD
of the
        Income Tax Act to allow for the payment of annuity or lump sum
        amount to a person with disability on attaining the age of 55/58
        years by the guardian/parent of disabled person, in addition to in
        the event of death of the guardian/parent.
(b) Issue a writ of Mandamus or any other appropriate writ, order
        or direction to Respondents No 2 to amend the Scheme of Jeevan
        Aadhar Policy (Table 114) to allow for the payment of annuity or
        lump sum amount to a person with disability on attaining the age
        of 55/58 years by the guardian/parent of disabled person, in
        addition to in the event of death of the guardian/parent.
(c) Issue a writ of Mandamus or any other appropriate writ, order
        or direction to Respondents No 2 to pay annuity or a lump sum
        amount to a person with disability, the guardian/parents of whom
        already attained the age of 55/58 or will attend the age of 55/58
        years in the future.
9
(d) Issue a writ of Mandamus or any other appropriate writ, order
        or direction to Respondent No 2 to make proper arrangement for
        the payment of an annuity/pension to the handicapped dependant
        after the death of the guardian, without any further formality
        except the filing of death certificate of the parents/guardian. All
        the paper formalities for the payment of annuity/pension should be
        completed by the LIC after premium paying term of the policy and
        a certificate should be issued by the LIC to the effect that all the
        formalities for the payment of annuity/pension has been
        completed, except filing of death certificate of parents/guardian.
This issuing of the certificate should be conclusive proof for
        releasing of annuity/pension, pending till filing of death certificate
        of parents/guardian.
(e) Pass such other orders and further orders as may be deemed
        necessary on the facts and in the circumstances of the case.”
9) In essence, the grievance of the petitioner is that benefit of Jeevan

  Aadhar policy should not be deferred till the death of the assessee/life

  assured and it should be allowed to be utilised for the benefit of the

  disabled person even during the lifetime of the assessee.
10)     Union of India has filed its affidavit giving justification for the

  aforesaid course of action.       In this regard, it is submitted that vide
Finance Act
(No.2), 1998,
Section 80DD
was substituted for
Sections

  80DD
and
80DDA
. The earlier
Section 80DD
provided for a deduction

  of Rs.15,000/- to an individual or HUF on account of any expenditure

  incurred for the medical treatment (including nursing), training and

  rehabilitation of a dependant relative of an individual or member of HUF.

  The substitution was done to provide for composite Section in respect of

  deduction for expenditure on medical treatment, rehabilitation etc. and
10
for payment made under a scheme of LIC or any other insurer for the

  dependant disabled person. Submission is that in effect
Section 80DD
amalgamates the provisions of the two sections, namely, 80DD and

  80DDA. Thus, both erstwhile
Section 80DDA
and present
Section 80DD
provide that the annuity or lump sum amount for the benefit of the

  dependant who is a person with disability will be disbursed only after the

  death of the subscriber.    Jeevan Aadhar scheme of LIC has been

  designed keeping in mind the tax benefits under
Section 80DDA
/
80DD
of the Act.
11)     It is also submitted by respondent No.1/Union of India that the

  aforesaid provision was specifically provided for in the Act keeping in

  view the fact that the guardians of children with disability are always

  faced with the grim reality about the need for maintenance of the

  disabled after the death of the primary care giver, i.e. the parent or the

  guardian. Many of them would like to deposit some amount during their

  lifetime in some special instrument which would ensure payment of a

  reasonable sum regularly to the disabled on their death.         Thus, a

  separate deduction from Gross Total Income of a specified amount

  deposited in a year in any scheme of LIC or any other insurer

  specifically framed for providing recurring or lump sum payment for the

  maintenance and upkeep of a handicapped dependant after the death of

  the assessee and approved by the CBDT in this behalf was incorporated
11
in the statute. As the scheme was designed to, to a great extent, to

  assuage the anxiety in the minds of parents/guardians of handicapped

  dependants about the destiny of their wards on their death and,

  therefore, to allow for annuity payments to the handicapped dependant

  under Jeevan Aadhar policy to commence after a certain age of the

  subscriber is not possible.
12)    Meeting the argument of the petitioner based on
Article 14
of the

  Constitution of India, it is argued that the deduction under
Section 80DD
of the Act has been specifically provided for persons with disability. This

  is a valid classification for providing specific regime for this class of

  persons.    The stated objective of the scheme was to assure the

  parents/guardian of a dependant with disability of regular payment of

  amount for the care of such dependant after the death of the

  parent/guardian. Attention is drawn to the explanatory memorandum

  relating to Finance Bill, 1998, which is as under:
"Rationalisation of benefits available to parents and guardian of
       physically handicapped and disabled dependant.
Under the existing provisions of
section 80DD
, a deduction of
       Rs.15,000/- is allowed to an individual or Hindu Undivided Family
       in respect of expenditure incurred on medical treatment of a
       handicapped dependant.
Section 80DDA
allows for a separate
       deduction to a parent or guardian in respect of deposits upto
       Rs.20,000/- made specified schemes of Life Insurance
       Corporation or Unit Trust of India. It has been felt that the parents
       or guardian of handicapped dependants may not have to incur
       expenditure on medical treatment of a handicapped dependant
       every year. However, the parent or the guardian would always
       feel the need to provide for the future maintenance of the disabled
12
dependant. The existing provisions do not take such situations
       into account. In order to allow a choice to the parent or the
       guardian to spend either on the medical treatment of or for the
       future need of the handicapped dependant, as the case may be,
       the Bill seeks to provide a new
section 80DD
. With this provision,
       the parent or the guardian could claim a deduction upto
       Rs.40,000/- for the medical treatment and for future needs of the
       handicapped dependant in the manner most suited to his needs.
       The existing
sections 80DD
and
80DDA
would get consequentially
       merged with increase in overall limit of deduction from Rs.35,000
       to Rs.40,000/-.”
13)    Number of judgments were cited by the learned Additional Solicitor

  General appearing for the Union of India to placate the argument of

  discrimination based on
Article 14
of the Constitution.          Insofar as

  respondent No.2/LIC is concerned, its simple answer is that the clause

  in the policy is as per the prescribed norm approved by the CBDT. Of

  course, LIC has also supported the reasons given by Union of India

  behind the aforesaid Circular.
14)    We have considered the respective submissions.
15)    At the outset, it may be observed that
Section 80DD
of the Act is a

  provision made by the Parliament under the Act in order to give incentive

  to the persons whose dependants are persons with disability. Incentive

  is to give such persons concessions in income tax by allowing

  deductions of the amount specified in
Section 80DD
of the Act in case

  such parents/guardians of dependants with disability take insurance

  policies of the nature specified in this provision.         Purpose is to
13
encourage these parents/guardians to make regular payments for the

  benefit of dependants with disability. In that sense, the Legislature, in its

  wisdom thought it appropriate to allow deductions in respect of such

  contribution made by the parent/guardian in the form of premium paid in

  respect of such insurance policies.         Of course, this deduction is

  admissible only when conditions stipulated therein are satisfied.
16)    Insofar as insurance policy is concerned, it incorporates a

  condition (which is impugned in the present writ petition) to the effect

  that the amount shall not be given to he handicapped persons during the

  lifetime of the parent/guardian/life assured. This is in conformity with
Section 80DD(2)(b)
of the Act.
17)    To some extent, the grievance of the petitioner may be justified in

  this behalf in the plea that when there is a need to get these funds even

  for the benefit of handicapped persons, that will not be given to such a

  person only because of the reason that the assured who is a

  parent/guardian is still alive. This would happen even when the entire

  premium towards the said policy has been paid. The policy does not

  have maturity claim. Thus, after making the entire premium for number

  of years, i.e. during the duration of the policy, the amount would still

  remain with the LIC. That may be so. However, the purpose behind

  such a policy is altogether different. As noted from the provisions of
14
Section 80DD
as well as from the explanatory memorandum of the

  Finance Bill, 1998, by which this provision was added, the purpose is to

  secure the future of the persons suffering from disability, namely, after

  the death of the parent/guardian. The presumption is that during his/her

  lifetime, the parent/guardian would take care of his/her handicapped

  child.
18)        Further, such a benefit of deduction from income for the purposes

  of tax is admissible subject to the conditions mentioned in
Section 80DD
of the Act.         The Legislature has provided the condition that

  amount/annuity under the policy is to be released only after the death of

  the person assured.       This is the legislative mandate.   There is no

  challenge to this provision. The prayer is that
Section 80DD
of the Act

  be suitably amended.         This Court cannot give a direction to the

  Parliament to amend or make a statutory provision in a specified

  manner.      The Court can only determine, in exercise of its power of

  judicial review, as to whether such a provision passes the muster of the

  Constitutional Scheme.       Though, there is no specific prayer in this

  behalf, but in the body of writ petition, argument of discrimination is

  raised.      Here, we find that the respondents have been able to

  successfully demonstrate that the main provision is based on

  reasonable classification, which as a valid rational behind it and there is

  a specific objective sought to be achieved thereby.
15
19)     In
State of U.P. and Another v. Kamla Palace
, (2000) 1 SCC 557,

  this Court, while considering a fiscal statute in relation to
Article 14
of the

  Constitution, has stated as under:
"11.
Article 14
does not prohibit reasonable classification of
        persons, objects and transactions by the legislature for the
        purpose of attaining specific ends. To satisfy the test of
        permissible classification, it must not be “arbitrary, artificial or
        evasive” but must be based on some real and substantial
        distinction bearing a just and reasonable relation to the object
        sought to be achieved by the legislature. (See Special Courts Bill,
        1978, Re, seven-Judge Bench;
R.K. Garg v. Union of India
,
        five-Judge Bench.)
It was further held in
R.K. Garg
case that laws
        relating to economic activities or those in the field of taxation
        enjoy a greater latitude than laws touching civil rights such as
        freedom of speech, religion etc. Such a legislation may not be
        struck down merely on account of crudities and inequities
        inasmuch as such legislations are designed to take care of
        complex situations and complex problems which do not admit of
        solutions through any doctrinaire approach or straitjacket
        formulae...”.
20)     Further, in
S.K. Dutta, Income Tax Officer v. Lawrence Singh

  Ingty
, (1968) 2 SCR 165, the Constitution Bench of this court held as

  under:
"8. It is not in dispute that taxation laws must also pass the test of
Article 14.
That has been
laid down by
this Court in
Moopil Nair v.
        State of Kerala
.
But as observed by this Court in
East India
        Tobacco Co. v. State of Andhra Pradesh
, in deciding whether a
        taxation law is discriminatory or not it is necessary to bear in mind
        that the State has a wide discretion in selecting persons or objects
        it will tax, and that a statute is not open to attack on the ground
        that it taxes some persons or objects and not others; it is only
        when within the range of its selection, the law operates unequally,
        and that cannot be justified on the basis of any valid classification,
        that it would be violative of
Article 14.
It is well settled that a State
        does not have to tax everything in order to tax something. It is
        allowed to pick and choose districts, objects, persons, methods
        and even rates for taxation if it does so reasonably.”
16
21)    In
State of A.P. and Others v. Nallamilli Rami Reddi and Others
,

  (2001) 7 SCC 708, this Court held:
"8. What
Article 14
of the Constitution prohibits is “class
       legislation” and not “classification for purpose of legislation”. If the
       legislature reasonably classifies persons for legislative purposes
       so as to bring them under a well-defined class, it is not open to
       challenge on the ground of denial of equal treatment that the law
       does not apply to other persons. The test of permissible
       classification is twofold: (i) that the classification must be founded
       on intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons grouped
       together from others who are left out of the group, and (ii) that
       differentia must have a rational connection to the object sought to
       be achieved.
Article 14
does not insist upon classification, which is
       scientifically perfect or logically complete. A classification would
       be justified unless it is patently arbitrary. If there is equality and
       uniformity in each group, the law will not become discriminatory,
       though due to some fortuitous circumstance arising out of peculiar
       situation some included in a class get an advantage over others
       so long as they are not singled out for special treatment...”
22)    The petitioner may be justified in pointing out that there could be

  harsh cases where handicapped persons may need the payment on

  annuity   or   lumpsum      basis    even    during    the    lifetime   of     their

  parents/guardians. For example, where guardian has become very old

  but is still alive, though he is not able to earn any longer or he may be a

  person who was in service and has retired from the said service and is

  not having any source of income. In such cases, it may be difficult for

  such a parent/guardian to take care of the medical needs of his/her

  disabled child.     Even when he/she has paid full premium, the

  handicapped person is not able to receive any annuity only because the

  parent/guardian of such handicapped person is still alive. There may be

  many other such situations. However, it is for the Legislature to take
17
care of these aspects and to provide suitable provision by making

    necessary amendments in
Section 80DD
of the Act. In fact, the Chief

    Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities has also felt that like other

    police holders, Jeevan Aadhar policy should also be allowed to mature

    after 55 years of age of the proposer and the annuity amount should be

    disbursed through the LLCs or National Trust.
23)    In the aforesaid circumstances, we dispose of this writ petition by

    urging upon respondent No.1 to have a relook into this provision by

    taking into consideration all the aspects, including those highlighted by

    the Court in this judgment, and explore the possibility of making suitable

    amendments.
.............................................J.
                                                                           (A.K. SIKRI)



                                               .............................................J.
                                                             (ASHOK BHUSHAN)



                                               .............................................J.
                                                            (S. ABDUL NAZEER)
NEW DELHI;
JANUARY 03, 2019.