[Cites
14
, Cited by
48
]
Supreme Court of India
Sneh Lata Goel vs Pushplata on 7 January, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 824, 2019 (3) SCC 594, 2019 (2) AJR 46, (2019) 197 ALLINDCAS 233 (SC), (2019) 127 CUT LT 601, (2019) 134 ALL LR 257, (2019) 144 REVDEC 66, (2019) 197 ALLINDCAS 233, (2019) 1 ALL RENTCAS 590, (2019) 1 ANDHLD 158, (2019) 1 CLR 565 (SC), (2019) 1 ICC 1144, 2019 (1) KCCR SN 37 (SC), (2019) 1 ORISSA LR 394, (2019) 1 PAT LJR 454, (2019) 1 RECCIVR 808, (2019) 1 SCALE 536, (2019) 2 CIVILCOURTC 96, (2019) 2 CIVLJ 210, (2019) 2 RAJ LW 1546, (2019) 3 CAL HN 295, (2019) 3 CIVLJ 84, (2020) 1 MAH LJ 147, (2020) 1 MPLJ 67, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 1138, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 55
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
Hemant Gupta
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
1

                                                                                           REPORTABLE


                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 116 OF 2019
                                             (@SLP(C) No(s). 26932/2018)


     SNEH LATA GOEL                                                                   Appellant(s)


                                                         VERSUS



     PUSHPLATA & ORS.                                                             RESPONDENT(s)




                                                     JUDGMENT
DR DHANANJAYA Y CHANDRACHUD, J.
1                   Leave granted.
2                   This appeal arises from a judgment and order of the High Court of Jharkhand at

     Ranchi dated 15/17 July 2018.
3
Signature Not Verified
The facts lie in a narrow compass:
Digitally signed by
MANISH SETHI
Date: 2019.01.19
11:59:36 IST
Reason:
On 9 May 1985, a partition suit 1 was instituted by Smt. Saroja Rani, daughter of Late

     1 154/1985
2
Rai Sri Krishna (since deceased), in respect of her 1/4 th share in the suit property which

comprises of properties at Ranchi and Varanasi. The suit was instituted at Ranchi in

the Court of the Special Subordinate Judge. The defendant in that suit (since deceased)

filed a petition before the High Court of Judicature at Patna questioning the jurisdiction

of the Ranchi Courts. The petition was disposed of by the High Court on 10 May 1989

with the direction that any objection to jurisdiction would be decided by the Special

Subordinate Judge at Ranchi as a preliminary issue. A preliminary decree was passed

ex-parte on 13 June, 1990 granting the Petitioner her extent of 1/4 th share in the

schedule property.     A final decree was passed on 5 April 1991 confirming the

preliminary decree passed on 13 June, 1990.
One of the defendants in the partition suit filed a title suit 2 before the Court of

Subordinate Judge, Ranchi. On 22 July 2003, the suit was dismissed for non-

prosecution. The first respondent filed a title suit 3 before the Court of Subordinate Judge

at Varanasi which was dismissed under
Order VII, Rule 11 of the CPC
on 12 April 2005

on the ground of being barred under
Section 21A
of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908

(“
CPC
”). The first respondent filed an application under Order IX Rule 13 in respect of

the title suit filed at Ranchi which was also dismissed as withdrawn on 19 February

2008.
Since the mother of the appellant was alive when the suit was instituted, the claim was

confined to a 1/4th share. During the pendency of the suit, the mother died. As a result,

there was a modification in the share of the three sisters at 1/3 rd each. On 18 December

2013, the Subordinate Judge at Ranchi passed a supplementary final decree in view of


2 114/1998
3 176/2000
3
the death of the mother of the appellant and the first respondent on 9 February 1996.



4        On 12 May 2014, the appellant filed proceedings for the execution of the final

decree at Ranchi.4 On 1 January 2015, the first respondent filed an objection under
Section 47
of the Code of Civil Procedure contending that the decree dated 13

June 1990, the final decree dated 5 April 1991 and the supplementary final decree

dated 18 December 2013, were without jurisdiction and therefore, a nullity. On 10 March

2015, the first respondent challenged the decree dated 13 June, 1990 in appeal under
Section 96
of the CPC.5 The appeal is pending.
5        On 10 March 2016, the executing court dismissed the objections of the first

respondent under
Section 47
of the CPC with the following observations:
“The decree holder is entitled to get the fruits of the decree
               and the executing court cannot go behind the decree. When a
               decree is made by a court which has no inherent jurisdiction,
               an objection as to its validity may be raised in an execution
               proceeding if the objection appears on the face of the record.
               Where the objection as to the jurisdiction of the court to pass
               the decree does not appear on the face of the record and
               requires examination of the questions raised and decided at
               trial, which could have been but have not been raised, the
               executing court will have no jurisdiction to entertain an
               objection as to the validity of the decree on the ground of
               jurisdiction.”



Aggrieved by the order of the executing court, the first respondent initiated proceedings

under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India. The High Court by its impugned judgment

and order came to the conclusion that the executing court was in error in holding that it

lacked jurisdiction to entertain the objection as to the validity of the decree on ground of

an alleged absence of territorial jurisdiction.
4   5/2014
5   43/2015
4
6      The High Court observed that the plea that the decree could not be executed on

the ground that it had been passed by a court which had no territorial jurisdiction to

entertain the partition suit could have been raised under
Section 47
of the CPC. The

High Court held thus:
“The executing court fell in serious error in law where it has
              observed that the executing court will have no jurisdiction to
              entertain an objection as to the validity of the decree on the
              ground of jurisdiction. Under
Section 47
CPC, the petitioner
              has not challenged the validity of the decree on merits, rather
              the plea taken by her is that the decree cannot be executed
              for it has been passed by a court which had no territorial
              jurisdiction to entertain Partition Suit No.154 of 1985.”



The application raising the objection was hence restored to the file of the executing

court for disposal.
7      Assailing the judgment of the High Court, these proceedings have been

instituted.
Mr Mukul Rohatgi, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant

submitted that an objection to territorial jurisdiction does not relate to the inherent

jurisdiction of the civil court. Such an objection has to be addressed before that court

and in the event that the court rejects such an objection, it must be raised before the

competent court in appeal. Consequently, the High Court was in error in directing the

executing court to deal with such an objection.               Moreover, it was urged that the

respondent was aware of the proceedings which were taking place, which is evident

from the following circumstances:
(i) The respondent had filed a title suit before the Court at Ranchi which was dismissed

    for non-prosecution on 22 July 2003;
(ii) The respondent filed a title suit before the Court at Varanasi which was dismissed
5
under Order VII, Rule 11 of the CPC on 12 April 2005; and
(iii) The respondent filed an application under Order IX Rule 13 in respect of the title

     suit filed at Ranchi which was also dismissed as withdrawn on 19 February 2008.
Based on these circumstances, it was urged that the objection which has been allowed

to be raised in execution is merely an effort to delay and obstruct the implementation of

the decree which has been passed in the suit for partition.



8        On the other hand, Mr. S. R. Singh, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf

of the respondents, has urged the following submissions:
(i) An objection to the lack of territorial jurisdiction is an objection to the subject matter

      of the suit and hence of a nature that can be raised before the executing court.
In

      support, reliance is placed on the decisions of this Court in
Kiran Singh v Chaman

     Paswan6
and
Harshad Chiman Lal Modi v DLF Universal Ltd.7
;
(ii) The impugned order of the High Court is an interlocutory order and hence it is not

      appropriate at this stage to entertain a proceeding under Article 136 of the

      Constitution of India; and
(iii) The case of the respondents all along has been that the property on the basis of

      which jurisdiction was founded at Ranchi did not belong to the common ancestor

      and in which event, the civil court at Ranchi had no jurisdiction to entertain the suit

      for partition.
9        In assessing the merits of the rival submissions, it would, at the outset, be

necessary to advert to the provisions of
Section 21
of the CPC.
“
Section 21(1)
postulates that no objection as to the place of
                 suing shall be allowed by any appellate or revisional court

6   AIR 1954 SC 340
7   (2005) 7 SCC 791
6
unless the objection was taken in the court of first instance at
              the earliest possible opportunity and in all cases where issues
              are settled on or before such settlement, and unless there has
              been a consequent failure of justice.
(2) No objection as to the competence of a Court with
              reference to the pecuniary limits of its jurisdiction shall be
              allowed by any Appellate or Revisional Court unless such
              objection was taken in the Court of first instance at the earliest
              possible opportunity, and in all cases where issues are
              settled, at or before such settlement, and unless there has
              been a consequent failure of justice.
(3) No objection as to the competence of the executing Court
              with reference to the local limits of its jurisdiction shall be
              allowed by any Appellate or Revisional Court unless such
              objection was taken in the executing Court at the earliest
              possible opportunity, and unless there has been a consequent
              failure of justice.”




Sub-section (1) of
Section 21
provides that before raising an objection to territorial

jurisdiction before an appellate or revisional court, two conditions precedent must be

fulfiled:
i) The objection must be taken in the court of first instance at the earliest possible

         opportunity; and
ii) There has been a consequent failure of justice.
This provision which the legislature has designedly adopted would make it abundantly

clear that an objection to the want of territorial jurisdiction does not travel to the root of

or to the inherent lack of jurisdiction of a civil court to entertain the suit. Hence, it has

to be raised before the court of first instance at the earliest opportunity, and in all cases

where issues are settled, on or before such settlement.                   Moreover, it is only where

there is a consequent failure of justice that an objection as to the place of suing can be

entertained. Both these conditions have to be satisfied.


10      The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents has submitted that
7
the objection as to the lack of territorial jurisdiction was raised in the written statement

before the trial court. But evidently the suit was decreed ex-parte after the respondents

failed to participate in the proceedings. The provisions of
Section 21(1)
contain a clear

legislative mandate that an objection of this nature has to be raised at the earliest

possible opportunity, before issues are settled.          Moreover, no such objection can be

allowed to be raised even by an appellate or revisional jurisdiction, unless both sets of

conditions are fulfilled.
11     Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent has placed a

considerable degree of reliance on the judgment of four Judges of this Court in
Kiran

Singh
(supra). In that case, there was a dispute in regard to the valuation of the suit.

The issue would ultimately determine the forum to which the appeal from the judgment

of the trial court would lie. If the valuation of the suit as set out in the plaint was to be

accepted, the appeal would lie to the district court. On the other hand, if the valuation

as determined by the High Court was to be accepted, the appeal would lie before the

High Court and not the District Court. It was in this background that this Court held that

as a fundamental principle, a decree passed by a court without jurisdiction is a nullity

and that its validity could be set up wherever it is sought to be enforced or relied upon,

even at the stage of execution in a collateral proceeding. Moreover, it was held that a

defect of jurisdiction, whether pecuniary or territorial or whether it is in respect of the

subject matter of the action, strikes at the very authority of the court to pass the decree

and cannot be cured even by the consent of the parties.
The Court then proceeded to examine the effect of
Section 11
of the Suit Valuation Act

1887 on this fundamental principle. This Court held thus:
“7.
Section 11
enacts that notwithstanding anything in
Section
              578
of the Code of Civil Procedure, an objection that a court
              which had no jurisdiction over a suit or appeal had exercised
8
it by reason of overvaluation or undervaluation, should not be
             entertained by an appellate court, except as provided in the
             section...a decree passed by a court, which would have had
             no jurisdiction to hear a suit or appeal but for overvaluation or
             undervaluation, is not to be treated as, what it would be but
             for the section, null and void, and that an objection to
             jurisdiction based on overvaluation or undervaluation, should
             be dealt with under that section and not otherwise. The
             reference to Section 578, now
Section 99
CPC, in the
             opening words of the section is significant. That section, while
             providing that no decree shall be reversed or varied in appeal
             on account of the defects mentioned therein when they do not
             affect the merits of the case, excepts from its operation
             defects of jurisdiction. Section 99 therefore gives no
             protection to decrees passed on merits, when the courts
             which passed them lacked jurisdiction as a result of
             overvaluation or undervaluation. It is with a view to avoid this
             result that
Section 11
was enacted. It provides that objections
             to the jurisdiction of a court based on overvaluation or
             undervaluation shall not be entertained by an appellate court
             except in the manner and to the extent mentioned in the
             section. It is a self-contained provision complete in itself, and
             no objection to jurisdiction based on overvaluation or
             undervaluation can be raised otherwise than in accordance
             with it. With reference to objections relating to territorial
             jurisdiction, Section 21 of the Civil Procedure Code enacts
             that no objection to the place of suing should be allowed by
             an appellate or Revisional Court, unless there was a
             consequent failure of justice. It is the same principle that has
             been adopted in
Section 11
of the Suits Valuation Act with
             reference to pecuniary jurisdiction. The policy underlying
             Sections 21 and 99 of the Civil Procedure Code and
Section
             11
of the Suits Valuation Act is the same, namely, that when a
             case had been tried by a court on the merits and judgment
             rendered, it should not be liable to be reversed purely on
             technical grounds, unless it had resulted in failure of justice,
             and the policy of the legislature has been to treat objections
             to jurisdiction both territorial and pecuniary as technical and
             not open to consideration by an appellate court, unless there
             has been a prejudice on the merits.” (Emphasis supplied)




12    Dealing with the question of whether a decree passed on appeal by a court which

had jurisdiction to entertain it only by reason of undervaluation or overvaluation can be

set aside on the ground that on a true valuation that court was not competent to

entertain the appeal, the Court held that a mere change of forum is not ‘prejudice’ within
9
Section 11
of the Suits Valuation Act. This Court held thus:
“12. …it is impossible on the language of the section to come
             to a different conclusion. If the fact of an appeal being heard
             by a Subordinate Court or District Court where the appeal
             would have lain to the High Court if the correct valuation had
             been given is itself a matter of prejudice, then the decree
             passed by the Subordinate Court or the District Court must,
             without more, be liable to be set aside, and the words “unless
             the overvaluation or undervaluation thereof has prejudicially
             affected the disposal of the suit or appeal on its merits” would
             become wholly useless. These words clearly show that the
             decrees passed in such cases are liable to be interfered with
             in an appellate court, not in all cases and as a matter of
             course, but only if prejudice such as is mentioned in the
             section results. And the prejudice envisaged by that section
             therefore must be something other than the appeal being
             heard in a different forum. A contrary conclusion will lead to
             the surprising result that the section was enacted with the
             object of curing defects of jurisdiction arising by reason of
             overvaluation or undervaluation, but that, in fact, this object
             has not been achieved. We are therefore clearly of opinion
             that the prejudice contemplated by the section is something
             different from the fact of the appeal having been heard in a
             forum which would not have been competent to hear it on a
             correct valuation of the suit as ultimately determined.”
                                                      (Emphasis supplied)



The Court disallowed the objection to jurisdiction on the ground that no objection was

raised at the first instance and that the party filing the suit was precluded from raising

an objection to jurisdiction of that court at the appellate stage. This Court concluded

thus:
“16. If the law were that the decree of a court which would
             have had no jurisdiction over the suit or appeal but for the
             overvaluation or undervaluation should be treated as a nullity,
             then of course, they would not be stopped from setting up
             want of jurisdiction in the court by the fact of their having
             themselves invoked it. That, however, is not the position
             under
Section 11
of the Suits Valuation Act.”



Thus, where the defect in jurisdiction is of kind which falls within
Section 21
of the CPC

or
Section 11
of the Suits Valuation Act 1887, an objection to jurisdiction cannot be
10
raised except in the manner and subject to the conditions mentioned thereunder. Far

from helping the case of the respondent, the judgment in
Kiran Singh
(supra) holds

that an objection to territorial jurisdiction and pecuniary jurisdiction is different from an

objection to jurisdiction over the subject matter. An objection to the want of territorial

jurisdiction does not travel to the root of or to the inherent lack of jurisdiction of a civil

court to entertain the suit.
13     In Hiralal v Kalinath8, a person filed a suit on the original side of the High Court

of Judicature at Bombay for recovering commission due to him. The matter was referred

to arbitration and it resulted in an award in favour of the Plaintiff. A decree was passed

in terms of the award and was eventually incorporated in a decree of the High Court. In

execution proceedings, the judgment-debtor resisted it on the ground that no part of the

cause of action had arisen in Bombay, and therefore, the High Court had no jurisdiction

to try the cause and that all proceedings following thereon where wholly without

jurisdiction and thus a nullity. Rejecting this contention, a four judge Bench of this Court

held thus:
“The objection to its [Bombay High Court] territorial
               jurisdiction is one which does not go to the competence of the
               court and can, therefore, be waived. In the instant case, when
               the plaintiff obtained the leave of the Bombay High Court on
               the original side, under clause 12 of the Letters Patent, the
               correctness of the procedure or of the order granting the
               leave could be questioned by the defendant or the objection
               could be waived by him. When he agreed to refer the matter
               to arbitration through court, he would be deemed to have
               waived his objection to the territorial jurisdiction of the court,
               raised by him in his written statement. It is well settled that the
               objection as to local jurisdiction of a court does not stand on
               the same footing as an objection to the competence of a court
               to try a case. Competence of a court to try a case goes to the
               very root of the jurisdiction, and where it is lacking, it is a case
               of inherent lack of jurisdiction. On the other hand, an
               objection as to the local jurisdiction of a court can be waived


8 AIR 1962 SC 199
11
and this principle has been given a statutory recognition by
               enactments like
Section 21
of the Code of Civil Procedure.”
               (Emphasis supplied)



In
Harshad Chiman Lal Modi v DLF Universal Ltd.9
, this Court held that an objection

to territorial and pecuniary jurisdiction has to be taken at the earliest possible

opportunity.     If it is not raised at the earliest, it cannot be allowed to be taken at a

subsequent stage. This Court held thus:
“30. The jurisdiction of a court may be classified into several
               categories. The important categories are (i) territorial or local
               jurisdiction; (ii) pecuniary jurisdiction; and (iii) jurisdiction over
               the subject-matter.       So far as territorial and pecuniary
               jurisdictions are concerned, objection to such jurisdiction has
               to be taken at the earliest possible opportunity and in any
               case at or before settlement of issues.             The law is well
               settled on the point that if such objection is not taken at the
               earliest, it cannot be allowed to be taken at a subsequent
               stage. Jurisdiction as to subject-matter, however, is totally
               distinct and stands on a different footing. Where a court has
               no jurisdiction over the subject-matter of the suit by reason of
               any limitation imposed by statute, charter or commission, it
               cannot take up the cause or matter. An order passed by a
               court having no jurisdiction is a nullity.”




In
Hasham Abbas Sayyad v Usman Abbas Sayyad10
, a two judge Bench of this Court

held thus:
“24. We may, however, hasten to add that a distinction must
               be made between a decree passed by a court which has no
               territorial or pecuniary jurisdiction in the light of
Section 21
of
               the Code of Civil Procedure, and a decree passed by a court
               having no jurisdiction in regard to the subject-matter of the
               suit. Whereas in the former case, the appellate court may not
               interfere with the decree unless prejudice is shown, ordinarily
               the second category of the cases would be interfered with.”



Similarly, in
Mantoo Sarkar v Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd11
, a two judge Bench of this

Court held thus:
9(2005) 7 SCC 791
10 (2007) 2 SCC 355
11 (2009) 2 SCC 244
12
“20. A distinction, however, must be made between a
               jurisdiction with regard to the subject-matter of the suit and
               that of territorial and pecuniary jurisdiction. Whereas in the
               case falling within the former category the judgment would be
               a nullity, in the latter it would not be. It is not a case where the
               Tribunal had no jurisdiction in relation to the subject-matter of
               claim…in our opinion, the court should not have, in the
               absence of any finding of sufferance of any prejudice on the
               part of the first respondent, entertained the appeal.”



14     The objection which was raised in execution in the present case did not relate to

the subject matter of the suit. It was an objection to territorial jurisdiction which does not

travel to the root of or to the inherent lack of jurisdiction of a civil court to entertain the

suit. An executing court cannot go behind the decree and must execute the decree as it

stands.
In
Vasudev Dhanjibhai Modi v Rajabhai Abdul Rehman12
, the Petitioner filed

a suit in the Court of Small Causes, Ahmedabad for ejecting the Defendant-tenant. The

suit was eventually decreed in his favour by this Court. During execution proceedings,

the defendant-tenant raised an objection that the Court of Small Causes had no

jurisdiction to entertain the suit and its decree was a nullity. The court executing the

decree and the Court of Small Causes rejected the contention. The High Court reversed

the order of the Court of Small Causes and dismissed the petition for execution. On

appeal to this Court, a three judge Bench of this Court, reversed the judgment of the

High Court and held thus:
“6. A court executing a decree cannot go behind the decree:
between the parties or their representatives it must take the
               decree according to its tenor, and cannot entertain any
               objection that the decree was incorrect in law or on facts.
               Until it is set aside by an appropriate proceeding in appeal or
               revision, a decree even if it be erroneous is still binding
               between the parties.
8. If the decree is on the face of the record without jurisdiction
               and the question does not relate to the territorial jurisdiction or
               under Section 11 of the Suits Valuation Act, objection to the
12 (1970) 1 SCC 670
13
jurisdiction of the Court to make the decree may be raised;
               where it is necessary to investigate facts in order to determine
               whether the Court which had passed the decree had no
               jurisdiction to entertain and try the suit, the objection cannot
               be raised in the execution proceeding.”



15     In this background, we are of the view that the High Court was manifestly in error

in coming to the conclusion that it was within the jurisdiction of the executing court to

decide whether the decree in the suit for partition was passed in the absence of

territorial jurisdiction.
16     The respondent has filed a first appeal (First Appeal No. 43/2015) where the

issue of jurisdiction has been raised. We must clarify that the findings in the present

judgment shall not affect the rights and contentions of the parties in the first appeal.



17     The High Court has manifestly acted in excess of jurisdiction in reversing the

judgment of the executing court which had correctly declined to entertain the objection

to the execution of the decree on the ground of a want of territorial jurisdiction on the

part of the court which passed the decree.
18     We have also not found merit in the contention that the impugned order of the

High Court, being an order of remand, is in the nature of an interlocutory order which

does not brook any interference. By the impugned order, the High Court has directed

the executing court to entertain an objection to the validity of the decree for want of

territorial jurisdiction. Such an objection would not lie before the executing court.

Moreover, the objection that the property at Ranchi did not belong to the common

ancestor is a matter of merits, which if at all, has to be raised before the appropriate

court in the first appeal.
14
19    For the above reasons, we allow the appeal and set aside the impugned

judgment and order of the High Court. The executing court shall conclude the execution

proceedings expeditiously. There shall be no order as to costs.
….…….....………..….......………………........J.
                                            [DR DHANANJAYA Y CHANDRACHUD]




                                           .….…………....…........……………….…........J.
                                            [HEMANT GUPTA]


New Delhi,
January 7, 2019