[Cites
1
, Cited by
8
]
Supreme Court of India
Rakesh Bakshi vs The State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 22 January, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 662, 2019 (3) SCC 511, 2019 LAB IC 1099, (2019) 162 FACLR 176, (2019) 1 ESC 89, (2019) 1 ORISSA LR 973, (2019) 1 SCALE 570, (2019) 1 SCT 659, (2019) 1 SERVLJ 121, (2019) 2 JCR 142 (SC), (2019) 3 SERVLR 13, 2019 (4) ADJ 31 NOC, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 1265, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 36
Author:
K.M. Joseph
Bench:
K.M. Joseph
,
Ashok Bhushan
NON-REPORTABLE
                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                            CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 235-236 OF 2019

                      (Arising out of SLP(C)Nos.7843-7844 of 2014)
          RAKESH BAKSHI & ANR.                            ...APPELLANT(S)


                                              VERSUS


          STATE OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR & ORS.              ...RESPONDENT(S)

                                               WITH

                              CIVIL APPEAL NO. 237      OF 2019

                         (Arising out of SLP (C)No.14660 of 2014)
          STATE OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR                      ...APPELLANT(S)


                                              VERSUS


          HARVINDER SINGH & ORS.                          ...RESPONDENT(S)

                                             JUDGMENT
K.M. JOSEPH, J.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
1.
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2019.01.22
16:01:49 IST
Leave granted.
Reason:
1
2.          Civil appeals (@ SLP(C) Nos.7843-7844 of 2014)

by Special Leave are filed against the judgment of the

High court of Jammu and Kashmir dated 04.03.2014 by

which it set aside the judgment of the Single Judge and

set     aside     the    selection      and     appointment          of       the

appellants        as    Junior    Engineers.               Civil   appeal       @

SLP(C)No.14660 of 2014 is filed by the State of Jammu &

Kashmir against the impugned judgment.
3.          The    Services      Selection      Board        of    the    State

issued      an     advertisement         on     01.07.1997           inviting

applications for the post of Junior Engineers (Elect)

Grade    II.      The    last    date   fixed        was    31.07.1997        for

receipt of applications through registered post. It is

also provided that the cut-off date for determining the

eligibility       is    31.07.1997.     It     is,    accordingly,            that

party respondent No.3 hereinafter referred to as the

writ petitioner filed SWP No.2186 of 2001 before the

Court. The learned Single Judge, however, dismissed the

petition but the Division Bench reversed the dismissal

of    the   petition     and     set   aside    the    judgment          of   the
2
Single Judge. The selection and the appointment of the

appellants in these appeals arising out of the Special

Leave Petition Nos.7843-7844 of 2014, came to be set

aside.
4.           The short ground on which the Division Bench

set aside the appointment is that the result of the

examination was declared only after the cut-off date

and they were not found eligible.
5.           We    have   heard      the   learned    Counsel   for   the

parties.
6.           Learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of

the appellants whose appointment stand interfered with

made the following submissions. The academic session in

which they studied for the Diploma Course was from 1993

to    1996        and   there     was      some    problem    about    the

institution. The examination, though, it was in 1996,

result came to be declared on 12.10.1997. There is no

dispute that the last date for receipt of applications

was   31.07.1997.         As   far   as    the    first   appellant   i.e.
3
Rakesh Bakshi is concerned, the Board itself considered

him eligible, as the result, was before holding of the

interview. In regard to the second appellant, he was

removed    from       the    interview    list.         This       led   to   the

filing of a writ petition by the second appellant. The

High     Court    took       the   view    that    if     the       Board     has

interpreted       the       eligibility    clause        in    a    particular

manner in the case of first appellant who had cleared

examination along with the second appellant, there is

no justification to give different interpretation. In

the case of second appellant, the petition was allowed

and the second appellant was found entitled to the same

benefit    as    given       to    the   first    appellant.             A    writ

petition        was     filed       challenging          the       appellant’s

appointment on the same ground. The writ petition was

dismissed by the Single Judge.                                                This

Judgment, however, came to be set aside by the Division

Bench and the appointment of the appellants was set

aside.    The    matter       travelled    to     this    Court      and      this

Court set aside the judgment of the Division Bench. The
4
judgment of the Single Judge came to be restored. The

present appeal arises from a writ petition filed by

another     person,          namely,    party-respondent            in   these

appeals Shri Harvinder Singh. The learned Single Judge

dismissed       the    petition      but   as   noticed       the    Division

Bench    allowed       the    writ     petition    reasoning        that   the

result     of    the     examination       of     the    appellants        was

declared    only       after     the     last     date   of    receipt      of

applications.
7.         The Learned Senior Counsel would point out that

the appellants have continued to work for long years

and would further point out that the writ petitioner in

this case did not secure sufficient marks so that he is

not going to get any relief after setting aside the

appointment of the appellants. He drew our attention to

the order passed by this Court dated 14.03.2014. It

reads as follows:-
“Taken on Board.
Mr. P.S. Patwalia, learned senior
         counsel appearing for the petitioners,
         submitted   that   without  disturbing
5
respondent No.3, the claim of the
         petitioners be considered since they
         have been working from 1998 onwards.
Petitioners are directed to serve a
         copy of the SLP brief on the standing
         counsel for the State of Jammu &
         Kashmir, who will seek instructions in
         the matter.
Registry is directed to show the name
         of the standing counsel in the Cause
         List.
Until further orders, the services of
         the petitioners shall not be terminated.
         However, this order will not affect
         respondent No.3.
Put up after three weeks.”
8.        In short, appellants were working for the past

nearly    18   years.      As   already     noticed,    the   earlier

litigation     is   also    enlisted   in    their     support.   Also

support is sought to be drawn from the judgment in
Ashok Kumar Sharma and Others Vs. Chander Shekhar and

Another
1997 (4) SCC 18, Counsel would also submit that

the court may appreciate the plight of the appellants

in that after the 1997 selection, selection was carried

out in the years 2004, 2007 and 2009.                    But as the

appellants were already selected and continued to work,
6
they have not applied pursuant to the selections. They

have become age barred. The learned counsel for the

petitioner,           on    the   other    hand,   points      out    that    the

appellants were not eligible on the cut-off date and

cleared         the        exam    on     the   result       being    declared

subsequently. This is a recurring lapse, he points out.
9.          We proceed on the basis that the appellants

were not possessing the requisite qualification as on

the cut-off date, as such as the result was declared

subsequently. The selection board, itself, had rejected

the eligibility of the second appellant. This led to

the filing of the Writ Petition but the said petition

was allowed on the reason, that there could not be two

yardsticks under the same selection. A writ petition

filed      in    the        meantime,      challenging       the     appellants

appointment was, though, dismissed by a Single Judge,

in appeal the Division Bench set aside the appointment

of   the    appellants            which    in   turn   was    set     aside   by

Hon’ble Court. It is thereafter that the Writ Petition

filed by the present writ petitioner which was filed in
7
2001 came to be taken up and dismissed by the Learned

Single    Judge    and    allowed       by   the   Division       Bench.   In

between,      almost      two    decades,        rolled     by    with     the

appellant’s continuing to work and the writ petitioner

remaining unselected.
10.        There is no argument pressed by the learned

counsel that in law, the decision of Division Bench is

wrong    in   that      the    appellants      were   not    holding       the

requisite qualification as on the cut-off date and the

selection and appointment is bad in law. But the only

point raised is having regard to the efflux of time and

having regard to the equities, in the matter including

the     result    of     the     earlier      litigation,        the     three

selections       held    after       1997,   appellants     not    applying

thereunder       having       been    selected     under    the    impugned

selection and appellant having become age barred and

still further, the claim of the writ petitioner for

appointment being meritless having regard to the Low

Marks scored by him, the services of the appellants

should not be dispensed with.
8
11.        Having regard to the case law cited by the

appellant     i.e.
Ashok       Kumar     Sharma       and    Others     Vs.

Chander Shekhar and Another
; 1997 (4) SCC 18, the facts

may be noticed.            On 01.07.1997, an advertisement was

published     for    the    post    of    Junior     Engineers      (Elect)

Grade II in the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 33 persons

had not passed BE Civil Examination before the last

date and their results were declared after the cut-off

date.    They     came      to     be    interviewed,          pursuant    to

instructions and they were selected. This came to be

challenged. The Writ Petition was dismissed. No appeal

was   filed     against     the    order.    However,          another    Writ

Petition came to be filed questioning the selection of

33    respondents     on    the    very    same    grounds.       The     Writ

Petition    was     dismissed.      However,       the    Division       Bench

took the view that the 33 respondents could not have

been allowed to compete for the post as they did not

possess the requisite qualification. The appointment of

the 33 persons was not set aside and they were ordered

to be treated as junior to those selected candidates
9
who were fully qualified on the prescribed date. In

other words, the candidates who were not qualified on

the prescribed date were to be treated as junior en

block to the fully qualified selected candidates. The

33 respondents appealed before this Court. The majority

held that permitting the 33 candidates to appear for

the interview was not impermissible. The other learned

Judge, however, took the view that the 33 candidates

should     not   have     been    allowed      to     appear.    Even    then,

however,      the      learned    Single      Judge     agreed     with    the

majority that the seniority of the 33 candidates need

not   be      disturbed          in    the     particular        facts     and

circumstances. The result was that three learned Judges

allowed the appeal preferred by the 33 respondents and

set   aside      the    judgment       of    the    Division     Bench.    The

original      writ      petitioners          filed     for     Review.     The

judgment      rendered      in        the    review    is    the   reported

judgment. The Court found that the majority judgment

was unsustainable in law. It is reiterated that the

person who clears the prescribed qualification after
10
the    cut-off date    cannot be     considered qualified      and

their applications ought to have been rejected.
12.       Thereafter, in paragraph 8, the Court addresses

the question relating to the relief to be granted in

the review applications. The learned Counsel for the 33

respondents     in    the   review   petition    who    were   the

appellants before this Court inter alia pointed out the

dismissal of the earlier writ petition and that the

said    order   had   become   final.   Even    the    later   writ

petitioners (filed by four candidates), it was pointed

out, had not sued in a representative capacity. Other

aspects including that the 33 persons had completed 13

years, was pointed out. The Court held as follows: -
“Having given our anxious and earnest
        consideration   to   the  question   and
        keeping in view the fact that we are
        sitting in review jurisdiction and that
        this particular aspect is a matter lying
        within the discretion of the Court, we
        do not think it appropriate to interfere
        with the unanimous opinion of the three
        learned Judges of this Court on this
        aspect. It is true that the Division
        Bench of the High Court had granted the
        relief not only to the four review
11
petitioners/writ petitioners but to all
        the candidates falling in that category
        yet we cannot ignore the fact that even
        Sahai, J. who agreed with the review
        petitioners on the first issue, thought
        it just and proper not to disturb the
        inter-se seniority between these two
        groups of selected candidates. The said
        seniority    was   determined   by    the
        selecting   Authority.   Though   certain
        allegations are made with respect to the
        fairness of the process of selection,
        that issue is not open in these review
        applications nor was it gone into by
        this court in the civil appeals.”
13.          Having heard learned Counsel for the parties,

we    are    inclined       to   grant    relief   to   the    appellants

against their being ousted after serving for nearly two

decades.         We   are    not    for    a   moment     doubting    the

correctness of the reasoning of the Division Bench in

this case, that eligibility of the candidates must be

decided with reference to the qualification possessed

as on the cut-off date and the qualification acquired

later       in    point     of   time     cannot   make    a   candidate

eligible. However, having regard to the facts obtaining

in this case, which we have set out and also the manner

in which this Court has decided the matter culminating
12
in   1997   (4)    SCC    18    the    interests          of   justice    would

require     the    interference         with    the       judgment       of   the

Division bench. We particularly note that as far as the

writ petitioner is concerned more than the efflux of

time,   the   fact       is    that     he   cannot        possibly      secure

selection. Thus having also regard to the fact that the

writ petitioner would not stand to gain if we ousted

the appellants having regard to his position in the

selection,    we    allow       Civil    Appeal       @    SLP    (C)No.7843-

7844/2014 and the judgment of the Division Bench will

stand   set   aside       and    the     writ   petition          will    stand

dismissed.        Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) No.14660/2014 filed

by the State will also stand allowed.                          There shall be

no order as to costs.
…………………………….J.
                                                  (Ashok Bhushan)


                                                   …………………………J.
                                                  (K.M. Joseph)

New Delhi;
January 22, 2019
13