[Cites
5
, Cited by
49
]
Supreme Court of India
Vidarbha Irrigation Development ... vs M/S Anoj Kumar Agarwala on 23 January, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 100, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2396
Author:
Rohinton F. Nariman
Bench:
Navin Sinha
,
R.F. Nariman
REPORTABLE

                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1049 OF 2019
                                      (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 26811 OF 2018)


                         VIDARBHA IRRIGATION DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION                   ...APPELLANT

                                           Versus

                         M/S ANOJ KUMAR GARWALA                                        ...RESPONDENT

                                                              WITH

                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1050 OF 2019
                                      (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 27818 OF 2018)

                                                        J U D G M E N T
ROHINTON F. NARIMAN, J.
1)   Leave granted.
2)   A   Tender    was     called   by    the      appellant    before     us    on

                         06.01.2018 for balance earthwork to be done in a canal.                         The

                         Tender was ultimately replied to by three persons whose bids,

                         respectively,     were     -   Rs.39.53        crores   by    Respondent    No.1,

                         Rs.39.15 crores by Respondent No.2, and Rs.46.81 crores by

                         Respondent    No.3.        There    is    no     dispute     that   the   bid    of

                         Respondent No. 2 was the lowest bid.                At this stage, it is a
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
little important to advert to some of the tender conditions:-
NATARAJAN
Date: 2019.01.25
16:12:46 IST
Reason:
1
“Contract” is defined by the e-tender in question as follows:-
“1.3.9 CONTRACT :-
It shall mean and include following
         documents.
Tender Documents.
Specifications.
Drawings.
Tender document & information/data
         submitted by contractor

         Common set of conditions/Minutes of pre-
         Tender conference.”


Clause 2.15 speaks of “Pre-tender Conference” as follows:-
“1) Pre-tenders conference open to all
         prospective tenderer will      be held in the
         office as stated in this Section, wherein
         the prospective tenderer will have an
         opportunity    to    obtain     clarifications
         regarding   the    work    and    the   tender
         conditions.
2)   The prospective tenderers are free to
         ask for any additional clarification either
         in writing or orally and the reply to the
         same   will    be   given    by    the   Chief
         Engineer/Superintending Engineer in writing
         and these clarifications referred to as
         common set of conditions, shall form part
         of tender documents and which will also be
         common and applicable to all tenderer.
3)   The e-tender submitted by the tenderer
         shall be based on the clarification,
         additional facility issued (if any) by the
         Corporation and this tender shall be
         unconditional.    Conditional tenders will
         summarily be rejected as non-responsive.
4)   All tenderers are cautioned that the
         tenders containing any deviation from the
         contractual     terms     and      conditions,
         specifications or other requirements and
2
conditional Tenders   will   be   rejected   as
    non-responsive.”


Clause 2.22 speaks of “Performance Security” as follows:-
“PERFORMANCE SECURITY    in case of offer
    below the cost put to tender as per PWD
    Circular BDG-2016/BLD-2/Dt.:12/02/2016) &
    corrigendum   on   date   17/03/2016/  WRD
    Corrigendum No. Tender 0316/(189/16) Major
    Projects-1 dated 14.7.16

    Condition Regarding payment of performance
    security (in   place   of   condition   for
    payment of additional security deposit)  if
    offer quoted by the tenderer is below the
    cost put to tender.
i)    If the tenderer quote upto
        1% below the cost put to tender, no
        additional performance     security
        is required.      However, if the
tenderer quote his offer more than
        1% below the     cost put to tender
        to 10% below the cost put to
        tender, tenderer shall submit the
        demand draft or FDR or BG of the
        amount equal to 1% of cost put to
        tender towards           performance
        security   in   Envelope   No.2   of
        tender.
ii)   If the tenderer quote his
        offer more than 10% below (offer
        below than 10%) the cost put     to
        tender, tenderer shall submit the
        demand draft or FDR or BG of the
        cumulative amount which is equal to
        the amount by which offer is more
        than 10 % below plus the amount as
        per (i) above in the Envelop No.2
        of tender. (For example, for 14%
         below rate, 1% + (14%-10%) i.e.
        4%, then total 5% of the cost put
        to tender.
3
iii) The amount of performance
security shall be calculated on
rounding of contractors offer upto
two decimal places.   The offer in
envelop No.2 without demand draft
or     FDR or BG of appropriate
amount   of  performance   security
shall be treated as invalid offer.
iv)   Demand draft/BG/FDR shall be
drawn in the name of Executive
Engineer, Ghodazari Canal Division
Nagbhid.
v)    Demand draft/BG/FDR/shall be
drawn    from    Nationalised   or
scheduled banks.

vi)   The BG/FDR shall be valid
upto   one   month  after   defect
liability period.     Validity of
demand draft shall be minimum 3
months from the date of submission
of tender.
vii) Scanned         copy      of
BG/FDR/demand   draft    shall be
uploaded by the contractor at the
time of e-tendering.
viii) Contractor shall submit the
demand   draft/FDR/BG   in   sealed
envelope in the office of the
Executive Engineer, Ghodazari Canal
Division Nagbhid within 5 working
days from the date of submission
of tender.    Name of work and e-
tender number shall be written on
the envelope.
ix)    On opening the tender, if
papers   in   Envelop  No.1   don’t
fulfill         the       essential
qualification/            documents
requirements,      the    Executive
Engineer shall return the envelope
of Demand Draft/BG/FDR to concerned
4
Contractor within 7 days from the
        date of opening of tender.
x)    The Executive Engineer shall
        refund the amount of performance
        security after completion of work
        successfully.
xi)    Demand draft BG/FDR of the
        second   lowest  tender  shall  be
        returned within 3 days    after
        issuing works order to the lowest
        tender.

        xii) EMD     of   the   contractors
submitting false documents/demand
        draft/BG/FDR in above process shall
        be forfeited and the contractor
        shall be Black listed.
xiii) Executive   Engineer  shall
        issue the work order only after
        encashing the demand draft of the
        lowest tenderer.”


“Important Note”

    “If any of the documents required as per
    Technical-Envelope-1 is not submitted on-
    line or/and Financial Bid: in Envelope-II
    (Commercial) is not properly uploaded,
    or/and    information    given   in   various
    Undertakings, Proform’s, Forms, Formats,
    Appendices etc, in various Sections-II,
    III,       IV,      VI       is      missing,
    incomplete/misleading/false tender of the
    bidder   shall   be   liable   for  out-right
    rejection and shall not be considered for
    further process.”

Clause 2.35 speaks of “Acceptance of Tender” as follows:-
“2.35 x x x
    2.35.1 A substantially responsive Bid is
    one which conforms to all the terms,
    conditions,   and  specifications of   the
    Bidding    documents,   without   material
5
deviation or reservation.       A material
         deviation or reservation is one (a) which
         affects in any substantial way the scope,
         quality, or performance of the Works, (b)
         which   limits   in  any  substantial   way,
         inconsistent with the Bidding documents,
         the employer’s rights or the Bidder’s
         obligations under the Contract; or (c)
         whose rectification would affect unfairly
         the competitive position of other Bidders
         presenting substantially responsive Bids.
         2.35.2 If a Bid is not substantially
         responsive, it will be rejected by the
         Employer, and may not subsequently be made
         responsive by correction or withdrawal of
         the      non-conforming    deviation      or
         reservation.”
3)   On the facts in this case, it is undisputed that the bank

guarantee that was furnished for Rs. 42.14 lakhs by Respondent

No. 2 before us was initially furnished only for a period of

six months on 12.03.2018, in response to the tender.     It is

common ground between the parties that the period ought to have

been 40 (forty) months. The bids were opened on 06.04.2018, and

on 07.04.2018, one day later, Respondent No. 2, sought to make

up this deficiency by adding a period of 34 months to the bank

guarantee which was valid for 6 months only. The aforesaid bid

made by Respondent No. 2 was accepted initially on 03.05.2018.
A Tender Evaluation Committee then evaluated all the bids on

07.07.2018, and finally, the bid of the Respondent No. 2 was

accepted as it was the lowest bidder among the three bids that

had been received.   The bone of contention between the parties
6
is   whether      it    is   possible   for    the    appellant     before       us    to

condone     the        initial   bank      guarantee       being   given     for       an

admittedly incorrect period of 6 months.
4)    Mr. Shekhar Naphade, learned senior counsel appearing on

behalf of the appellant, has taken us through the Government

Resolution (GR) dated 12.4.2017 in order to contend that the

term of bank guarantee, if originally wrongly given, and which

makes   a   tenderer         ineligible,    does     not   disqualify      him    as    a

clarification can be sought from the bidder after which the

term may be extended in conformity with the tender conditions.

Apart from the above, he argued that, ultimately, the moment

the deficiency was pointed out, this deficiency was made good

by Respondent No. 2 and it is only thereafter that the bid of

the Respondent No. 2 was accepted, being the lowest bid.                               He

also added that the difference between the bid of Respondent

No. 1 and Respondent No. 2 would amount to roughly Rs. 37 lakhs

which again would be a saving to the public exchequer.                       He went

on to add that given the parameters of judicial review and that

a bona fide decision has been taken by the authority, this

could not have been interfered with and was wrongly interfered

with by the judgment under appeal.                     Mr. Raju Ramachandran,

learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of Respondent No. 2,

broadly adopted these submissions.
7
5)     Mr. R. Basant, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf

of Respondent No. 1 has taken us through the tender conditions

and    has    argued    that    a     period      of     six      months    for    a    bank

guarantee, which admittedly should have been 40 months, is a

material deviation which cannot be condoned later. He further

pointed out that in point of fact, objections were taken at a

pre-tender      stage   by     certain        would     be     tenderers,        and    after

considering those objections, the authority made it clear that

the PWD Circular dated 12.02.2016, together with corrigenda

issued thereafter, would make it clear that this is a material

condition which cannot be changed.                     He, therefore, argued that

it was known to the Respondent No. 2, right from the beginning,

that this particular condition was both material and has to be

satisfied, and, admittedly, on the facts, it was not satisfied.

He very fairly stated that the impugned judgment could not

stand on its own legs but could be supported with the arguments

that had been made by him.
6)     At    this   stage,     it   is       important       to   analyse    the       tender

conditions. As was correctly pointed out by Mr. Basant, Clause

2.15, as set out hereinabove, makes it clear that it is only at

a     pre-tender    stage      that      a    clarification         may     be    obtained

regarding tender conditions. Sub-clause 4 of Clause 2.15 is

important because all tenderers are cautioned by this Clause
8
that    tenders      containing     any   deviation      from    the   contractual

terms   and    conditions,       specifications      or    other    requirements,

will be rejected as non-responsive.
7)     At this stage, it is important to advert to the pre-tender

meetings      that    took     place   between     the    Chief     Engineer     and

prospective parties on 30.01.2018.                Entry 46 of the document

that is produced by the appellant reads as follows:-
S.No.    Provisions of       Modification/clarifications            Modification/
             Tender              sought by contractor         Clarification sought by
                                                                   the Department
46      2.22 Performance     2.22 Performance Security:      The clause of performance
        Security:            The B.G./F.D.R’s validity       security     is    included
vi)          The     is upto 3 months at the         based     on    G.R.    dt.
B.G./F.D.R.          time of tender submission       12.02.2016     &Corrigendum
        shall be valid       &if work is awarded this        on date 17.03.2016 and
        upto one month       B.G./F.D.R’s         validity   14.07.2016.     As   policy
        after     defect     extended according to the       decision, modification in
        liability            tender    condition.       It   this Clause cannot be
        period.              should be taken after the       made.
award of work as general
                             procedure       in      other
                             departments.
What is important to note is that questions were raised as to

the period of bank guarantee, and the Department specifically

relied upon a GR dated 12.02.2016, together with the corrigenda

thereto, and stated that as a policy decision, modification in

this Clause cannot be made.               It is clear, therefore, that a

modification to this very tender condition was suggested at the

pre-tender stage, and was rejected to the knowledge of all

prospective tenderers.           Sub-clause 4 of Clause 2.15, therefore,

becomes important in this context as the Respondent No. 2 was
9
put on notice from the beginning itself that if there is any

deviation in terms of the period of bank guarantee, its bid

would be treated as non-responsive.
8)    Clause 2.22, extracted herein above, also makes reference

to    the    self-same      PWD   Circular    dated       12.02.2016      with       the

corrigenda.      A reading of this Clause would also show that a

bank guarantee that is to be furnished has to be valid up to

one month after the defect liability period which, admittedly,

is for a period of 40 months.
9)    Mr. Naphade’s argument that had a demand draft been drawn

instead of a bank guarantee, its validity would only be a

minimum of three months from the date of submission of tender,

which would show that a deviation from the 40 months period

would    certainly     be    permissible,     (had    a    demand     draft      given

instead of a bank guarantee), cannot be countenanced. On the

facts of this case, no demand draft was given. Only a bank

guarantee was given, and clearly for a much lesser period then

that mandated by this Clause.
10)   We may now come to Clause 2.35 which makes it clear that a

substantially     responsive       bid   is   one    which    conforms          to   all

terms,      conditions      and   specifications      without       any    material

deviation.     Inter     alia,    a   material      deviation    is       one    which

limits, in any substantial way, or is inconsistent with the
10
bidding     documents   or   the    employer’s    rights      or     bidder's

obligations under the Contract. It cannot be gainsaid that a

bank guarantee, which is for a period of six months and not for

a period of 40 months, would not only be directly inconsistent

with the bidding documents but would also be contrary to the

employers’ right to a bank guarantee for a longer period. This

being the case, since a material deviation from the terms and

conditions of the tender document was made by Respondent No. 2,

when   it   furnished   a    bank   guarantee    for   only    six    months

initially, it would be clear that such bid would have to be

considered as not substantially responsive and ought to have

been rejected by the employer. Clause 2.35.2 also makes it

clear that such a bid would have to be rejected outrightly and

may not be subsequently made responsive by correction.
11)    It is important to note that the Government Resolution

dated 12.04.2017, which applies to the PWD Department, has

superseded the PWD Circular dated 12.02.2016 and corrigenda

dated 17.03.2016 and 14.07.2016.        However, so far as the tender

conditions of the tender in question are concerned, Clause 2.18

is material and is set out hereunder:-
“Earnest Money:
All tenderers shall pay entire E.M.D. & the
            mode of payment is indicated as specified
            at Sr. No. 4, 6, 4 of Section IV.
11
As per GR PWD 12.04.2017 – E.M.D. shall be
          paid online through bank account of own by
          contracts, contractor shall submit the
          undertaking that the EMD has been paid
          through his bank account and he will be
          responsible for any legal action under
IPC
if it is found false.”


As against this, when it comes to performance security, the PWD

Circular of 12.02.2016 and its corrigeneda have alone to be

followed in the case of performance security.    This being the

case, it is not possible to advert to the GR dated 12.04.2017

for the purpose of performance security as it applies only in

respect of earnest money, as is clear from Clause 2.18 of the

Tender.
12)   The fact that a superseded Government Resolution continues

to be utilised for the purpose of performance security may

raise eyebrows. However, insofar as the tendering public is

concerned, they have been put on notice that the performance

security that is to be furnished, will only be as per the GR

dated 12.2.2016 and corrigenda and not as per the GR dated

12.04.2017.
13)   The law on the subject is well settled.
In
Bakshi Security

and Personnel Services Pvt. Ltd. v. Devkishan Computed Pvt.

Ltd. and Ors.
, (2016) 8 SCC 446, this Court held:
“14. The law is settled that an essential
          condition of a tender has to be strictly
          complied with. In Poddar Steel Corpn. v.
12
Ganesh Engg. Works [Poddar Steel Corpn. v.
Ganesh Engg. Works
, (1991) 3 SCC 273] this
Court held as under: (SCC p. 276, para 6)

   “6. … The requirements in a tender
   notice can be classified into two
   categories—those which lay down the
   essential conditions of eligibility
   and the others which are merely
   ancillary or subsidiary with the
   main object to be achieved by the
   condition. In the first case the
   authority issuing the tender may be
   required to enforce them rigidly.
   In the other cases it must be open
   to the authority to deviate from
   and not to insist upon the strict
   literal compliance of the condition
   in appropriate cases.”
15. Similarly in B.S.N. Joshi & Sons Ltd.
v. Nair Coal Services Ltd. [B.S.N. Joshi &
Sons Ltd. v. Nair Coal Services Ltd.,
(2006) 11 SCC 548] this Court held as
under: (SCC pp. 571-72, para 66)

   “(i)   if    there    are  essential
   conditions,    the   same  must    be
   adhered to;
(ii) if there is no power of
   general relaxation, ordinarily the
   same shall not be exercised and the
   principle   of    strict  compliance
   would be applied where it is
   possible for all the parties to
   comply with all such conditions
   fully;
(iii) if, however, a deviation is
   made in relation to all the parties
   in   regard     to   any   of    such
   conditions,    ordinarily   again   a
   power of relaxation may be held to
   be existing;
(iv) the parties who have taken the
   benefit of such relaxation should
   not ordinarily be allowed to take a
   different stand in relation to
   compliance with another part of
13
tender contract, particularly when
                 he was also not in a position to
                 comply with all the conditions of
                 tender fully, unless the court
                 otherwise finds relaxation of a
                 condition which being essential in
                 nature could not be relaxed and
                 thus the same was wholly illegal
                 and without jurisdiction;
(v) when a decision is taken by the
                 appropriate   authority    upon   due
                 consideration    of    the     tender
                 document   submitted   by   all   the
                 tenderers on their own merits and
                 if it is ultimately found that
                 successful bidders had in fact
                 substantially complied with the
                 purport   and   object    for   which
                 essential   conditions    were   laid
                 down, the same may not ordinarily
                 be interfered with;…”
16. We also agree with the contention of
          Shri Raval that the writ jurisdiction
          cannot be utilised to make a fresh bargain
          between parties.”
14)   However,    learned   counsel   appearing    on   behalf   of   the

appellant strongly relied upon
Afcons Infrastructure Ltd. v.

Nagpur   Metro    Rail   Corpn.   Ltd.
,   (2016)   16    SCC   818,   and

paragraphs 14 and 15 in particular, which state:
“14. We must reiterate the words of
          caution that this Court has stated right
          from the time when
Ramana Dayaram Shetty
          v. International Airport Authority of
          India    [Ramana    Dayaram   Shetty
v.
          International Airport Authority of India,
          (1979) 3 SCC 489] was decided almost 40
          years ago, namely, that the words used in
          the tender documents cannot be ignored or
          treated as redundant or superfluous — they
          must be given meaning and their necessary
14
significance. In this context, the use of
          the word “metro” in Clause 4.2(a) of
          Section III of the bid documents and its
          connotation in ordinary parlance cannot be
          overlooked.
15. We may add that the owner or the
          employer of a project, having authored the
          tender documents, is the best person to
          understand and appreciate its requirements
          and    interpret   its    documents.   The
          constitutional courts must defer to this
          understanding and appreciation of the
          tender documents, unless there is mala
          fide or perversity in the understanding or
          appreciation or in the application of the
          terms of the tender conditions. It is
          possible that the owner or employer of a
          project may give an interpretation to the
          tender documents that is not acceptable to
          the constitutional courts but that by
          itself is not a reason for interfering
          with the interpretation given.”
15)   It is clear even on a reading of this judgment that the

words used in the tender document cannot be ignored or treated

as redundant or superfluous – they must be given meaning and

their   necessary   significance.   Given   the   fact   that   in   the

present case, an essential tender condition which had to be

strictly complied with was not so complied with, the appellant

would have no power to condone lack of such strict compliance.

Any such condonation, as has been done in the present case,

would amount to perversity in the understanding or appreciation

of the terms of the tender conditions, which must be interfered

with by a constitutional court.
15
16)   A subsidiary contention has been raised that even the bank

guarantee subsequently furnished was for a period of 39 months

and not for 40 months. This need not be gone into in view of

our finding on the first point.
17)   We may hasten to add that the judgment under appeal leaves

a great deal to be desired. It did not advert to the main point

in question, but instead focused on supposed contradictions

made in an affidavit filed by the appellant in the High Court.

Having   gone   through   the   affidavit,   we   find   no   such

contradiction. It is also necessary to advert to the final

relief given by the High Court. If, for the reason given by the

High Court, the bid of the Respondent No. 2 had to be rejected,

it cannot be understood as to how Respondent No. 2 can be

brought back in the event that Respondent No. 1 does not agree

to carry out the work for the lower bid amount of Respondent

No. 2. For all these reasons, even though the reasoning of the

Division Bench in the impugned judgment does not commend itself

to us, yet, for the reasons contained in this judgment, the

appeal will have to be dismissed.
18)   We may record that Mr. Basant very fairly submitted before

us that he will match the amount of Rs. 39.15 crores that was

the bid of Respondent No. 2 before us. We record this statement

and order, therefore, that the work now be performed by the
16
Respondent No. 1 at this bid amount. The judgment of the High

Court, insofar as para 8 is concerned, is set aside.
19)   With these observations, the civil appeals are disposed

of.
...............J.
                                        (R.F. Nariman)




                                        ...............J.
                                        (Navin Sinha)
New Delhi,
Dated: January 23, 2019
17