[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Birla Institute Of Technology vs The State Of Jharkhand on 7 January, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 6
Author:
Abhay Manohar Sapre
Bench:
Indu Malhotra
,
Abhay Manohar Sapre
REPORTABLE

                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CIVIL APPEAL No.2530 OF 2012


                         Birla Institute of Technology      ….Appellant(s)


                                              VERSUS


                         The State of Jharkhand & Ors.      …Respondent(s)


                                         JUDGMENT
Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.
1.   This appeal is directed against the final judgment

                         and order dated 02.04.2008 passed by the High Court

                         of Jharkhand at Ranchi in LPA No.53 of 2007 whereby

                         the Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the

                         LPA filed by the appellant herein and confirmed the

                         order dated 12.01.2007 passed by the Single Judge of
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
the High Court in W.P. No.2572 of 2005.
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2019.01.07
17:40:00 IST
Reason:
1
2.   The controversy involved in this appeal is a short

one as would be clear from the facts stated infra.
3.   The appellant is a premier technical educational

institute of repute in the country. It is known as “Birla

Institute of Technology” (BIT).
4.   Respondent No.4 joined the appellant­Institute as

Assistant Professor on 16.09.1971 and superannuated

on   30.11.2001      after   attaining   the    age    of

superannuation.
5.   Respondent No.4 then made a representation to

the appellant and prayed therein for payment of

gratuity amount which, according to respondent, was

payable to him by the appellant under the
Payment of

Gratuity Act, 1972
(for short called “
The Act
”).      The

appellant, however, declined to pay the amount of

gratuity as demanded by respondent No.4.
6.   Respondent No.4, therefore, filed an application

before the controlling authority under the Act against
2
the appellant and claimed the amount of gratuity

which, according to him, was payable to him under the

Act.
7.      By   order   dated   07.09.2002,   the   controlling

authority (respondent No.3) allowed the application

filed by respondent No.4 and directed the appellant to

pay a sum of Rs.3,38,796/­ along with interest at the

rate of 10% p.a. towards the gratuity to respondent

No.4.
8.      The appellant felt aggrieved and filed appeal

before the appellate authority under the Act. By order

dated 15.04.2005, the appellate authority dismissed

the appeal. The appellant felt aggrieved and carried the

matter to the High Court in a writ petition. The High

Court (Single Judge) by order dated 12.01.2007

dismissed the writ petition and upheld the orders of

the authorities passed under the Act. The appellant

then filed Letters Patent Appeal before the Division

Bench against the order passed by the Single Judge.
3
The LPA was also dismissed by the impugned order

which has given rise to filing of the present appeal by

way of special leave by the appellant­Institute in this

Court.
9.    The    short   question,   which     arises   for

consideration in this appeal, is whether the Courts

below were justified in holding that respondent No.4

was entitled to claim gratuity amount from the

appellant (employer) under the Act.
10.    Heard Mr. Shambo Nandy, learned counsel for

the appellant and Mr. Anil Kumar Jha, learned

counsel for respondent Nos.1­3 and Mr. Sunil Roy,

learned counsel for respondent No.4.
11.   Having heard the learned counsel for the parties

and on perusal of the record of the case, we find merit

in this appeal.
12.   As rightly argued by the learned counsel for the

appellant, the issue involved in this appeal remains no
4
longer res integra and is decided by this Court in
Ahmadabad Pvt. Primary Teachers Association vs.

Administrative Officer and Others
(2004) 1 SCC 755

in favour of the appellant.
13.   The question arose for consideration in the case

of
Ahmadabad Pvt. Primary Teachers Association
(supra) as to whether “Teacher” could be regarded as

an “employee” under
Section 2(e)
of the Act and, if so,

whether he/she is entitled to claim gratuity amount

from his employer in accordance with the provisions of

the Act.
14.   The two­Judge Bench examined this question in

detail. Justice D.M. Dharmadhikari speaking for the

Bench held that a teacher is not an employee within

the meaning of the expression "employee" as defined

under
Section 2(e)
of the Act and hence he/she is not

entitled to claim any gratuity amount from his

employer under the Act. In other words, it was held
5
that since a teacher is not an employee under
Section

2(e)
of the Act, he has no right to invoke the provisions

of the Act for claiming gratuity under the Act from

his/her employer.
15.   It is apposite to quote the reasoning of Their

Lordships in paras 20 to 26 of the judgment which

reads as under:
“20.    An     educational    institution,
          therefore,    is   an    “establishment”
          notified under
Section 1(3)(c)
of the
          Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972. On
          behalf of the Municipal Corporation, it
          is contended that the only beneficial
          effect of the notification issued under
Section 1(3)(c)
of the Act of 1972, is
          that    such    non­teaching    staff   of
          educational institutions as answer the
          description of any of the employments
          contained in the definition clause 2(e),
          would be covered by the provisions of
          the Act. The teaching staff being not
          covered by the definition of “employee”
          can get no advantage merely because by
          notification “educational institutions”
          as establishments are covered by the
          provisions of the Act.
21. Having thus compared the various
          definition  clauses  of    the   word
          “employee” in different enactments,
          with due regard to the different aims
6
and objects of the various labour
legislations, we are of the view that
even on plain construction of the words
and expression used in the definition
clause 2(e) of the Act, “teachers” who
are mainly employed for imparting
education are not intended to be
covered for extending gratuity benefits
under the Act. Teachers do not answer
description of being employees who are
“skilled”, “semi­skilled” or “unskilled”.
These three words used in association
with each other intend to convey that a
person who is “unskilled” is one who is
not “skilled” and a person who is “semi­
skilled” may be one who falls between
the two categories, meaning he is
neither fully skilled nor unskilled. The
Black’s Law Dictionary defines these
three words as under:
“Semi­skilled work.—Work that
   may require some alertness and
   close     attention,    such     as
   inspecting items or machinery for
   irregularities,     or    guarding
   property or people against loss or
   injury.
Skilled work.—Work requiring the
   worker to use judgment, deal with
   the public, analyze facts and
   figures, or work with abstract
   ideas    at   a   high   level   of
   complexity.
Unskilled work.—Work requiring
   little or no judgment, and
   involving simple tasks that can be
   learned quickly on the job.”
7
22. In construing the abovementioned
three words which are used in
association with each other, the rule of
construction noscitur a sociis may be
applied. The meaning of each of these
words is to be understood by the
company it keeps. It is a legitimate rule
of construction to construe words in an
Act of Parliament with reference to
words found in immediate connection
with them. The actual order of these
three words in juxtaposition indicates
that meaning of one takes colour from
the other. The rule is explained
differently: “that meaning of doubtful
words may be ascertained by reference
to the meaning of words associated
with it”. [See Principles of Statutory
Interpretation by Justice G.P. Singh,
8th Edn., Syn. 8, at p. 379.]
23. The word “unskilled” is opposite of
the word “skilled” and the word “semi­
skilled” seems to describe a person who
falls between the two categories i.e. he
is not fully skilled and also is not
completely unskilled but has some
amount of skill for the work for which
he is employed. The word “unskilled”
cannot,    therefore,   be   understood
dissociated from the word “skilled” and
“semi­skilled” to read and construe it
to include in it all categories of
employees irrespective of the nature of
employment. If the legislature intended
to cover all categories of employees for
extending benefit of gratuity under the
Act, specific mention of categories of
employment in the definition clause
8
was   not    necessary   at   all. Any
construction of definition clause which
renders it superfluous or otiose has to
be avoided.
24. The contention advanced that
teachers should be treated as included
in the expression “unskilled” or
“skilled”    cannot,    therefore,    be
accepted. The teachers might have
been imparted training for teaching or
there may be cases where teachers who
are employed in primary schools are
untrained. A trained teacher is not
described in the industrial field or
service jurisprudence as a “skilled
employee”. Such adjective generally is
used for an employee doing manual or
technical work. Similarly, the words
“semi­skilled” and “unskilled” are not
understood         in       educational
establishments as describing nature of
job of untrained teachers. We do not
attach    much    importance    to   the
arguments advanced on the question as
to whether “skilled”, “semi­skilled” and
“unskilled” qualify the words “manual”,
“supervisory”, “technical” or “clerical”
or the above words qualify the word
“work”. Even if all the words are read
disjunctively or in any other manner,
trained or untrained teachers do not
plainly answer any of the descriptions
of the nature of various employments
given in the definition clause. Trained
or untrained teachers are not “skilled”,
“semi­skilled”, “unskilled”, “manual”,
“supervisory”, “technical” or “clerical”
employees. They are also not employed
9
in “managerial” or “administrative”
capacity. Occasionally, even if they do
some administrative work as part of
their duty with teaching, since their
main job is imparting education, they
cannot     be    held   employed     in
“managerial”     or    “administrative”
capacity. The teachers are clearly not
intended to be covered by the
definition of “employee”.
25. The legislature was alive to various
kinds of definitions of the word
“employee”      contained    in    various
previous labour enactments when the
Act was passed in 1972. If it intended
to cover in the definition of “employee”
all kinds of employees, it could have as
well used such wide language as is
contained in
Section 2(f)
of the
Employees’
Provident Funds Act, 1952
which defines “employee” to mean “any
person who is employed for wages in
any kind of work, manual or otherwise,
in or in connection with the work of an
establishment …”. Non­use of such wide
language     in    the    definition    of
“employee” in
Section 2(e)
of the Act of
1972 reinforces our conclusion that
teachers are clearly not covered in the
definition.
26. Our conclusion should not be
misunderstood that teachers although
engaged in a very noble profession of
educating our young generation should
not be given any gratuity benefit. There
are already in several States separate
statutes, rules and regulations granting
10
gratuity    benefits   to   teachers   in
           educational institutions which are more
           or less beneficial than the gratuity
           benefits provided under the Act. It is
           for the legislature to take cognizance of
           situation of such teachers in various
           establishments where gratuity benefits
           are not available and think of a
           separate legislation for them in this
           regard. That is the subject­matter solely
           of the legislature to consider and
           decide.”             (emphasis supplied)
16.   Reading the aforementioned principle of law
laid

down by
this Court, we have no hesitation in holding

that respondent No.4, who was also a teacher and

worked with the appellant as such, was not eligible to

claim gratuity amount from the appellant (BIT) under

the Act.
17.
In our opinion, the High Court though took note

of the decision rendered in the case of
Ahmadabad

Pvt. Primary Teachers Association
(supra) but erred

in distinguishing it on the ground that it is applicable

only to the primary teachers working in primary
11
schools and since the case at hand is not a case of a

primary teacher, it has no application to this case.
18.   In our view, the High Court failed to read last line

of Para 24 quoted above wherein this Court has held

in clear terms that “teachers” are clearly not intended

to be covered by the definition of “employee”. The High

Court was, therefore, not justified in making a

distinction between the “teachers working in the

primary schools” and the “teachers working in other

educational institutions”.
19.   In other words, the High Court failed to see that

this Court had examined the expression “teacher” qua

the expression “employee” defined in
Section 2(e)
of the

Act and then held that “teacher” is not an employee

within the meaning of
Section 2(e)
of the Act. While

laying down the law, this Court did not make any

distinction between the teachers inter se and nor made

any distinction as to in which type of educational
12
institute the teacher is working for determining his

entitlement to claim the gratuity under the Act.
20.    We cannot, therefore, concur with the view taken

by the High Court, which in our view, is not in

conformity with the law
laid down by
this Court in the

case    of
Ahmadabad      Pvt.     Primary       Teachers

Association
(supra). It is based on incorrect reading of

this Court’s decision and, therefore, it deserves to be

set aside.
21.    We,   however,   make   it   clear   that   we   have

examined the case at hand only in the light of the

provisions of the Act, which were akin to the facts of

the case in
Ahmadabad Pvt. Primary Teachers

Association
(supra).
22.    In case there is any other State Act or Scheme in

force, which extends any benefit to the employees of

the Institute only then respondent No.4 would be at
13
liberty    to   take   benefit   of    such    Act/Scheme         in

accordance with law.
23.   As    a   result,   the    appeal     succeeds       and    is

accordingly allowed. The impugned order is set aside.

As a consequence, the application made by respondent

No.4 before the controlling authority under the Act

against     the    appellant      is     dismissed       as      not

maintainable.
………...................................J.
                             [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]


                           …...……..................................J.
                                    [INDU MALHOTRA]

New Delhi;
January 07, 2019
14