[Cites
7
, Cited by
36
]
Supreme Court of India
Khoday Distilleries Ltd.& Ors vs Mahadeshwara S.S.K.Ltd on 19 October, 2012
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2012 SC 376
Bench:
Dipak Misra
,
K.S. Radhakrishnan
NON-REPORTABLE
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

               SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (Civil) No. 490 of 2012


Khoday Distilleries Ltd. & Ors.                          .. Petitioners
                                   Versus
Mahadeshwara S.S.K. LTD.                           .. Respondent


                                  O R D E R
1.     This special leave petition has been filed against the order  of  the
High Court of Karnataka at Bangalore dated 9.9.2011 in RP No.96/2011 in  RFA
No.427 of 2006.  On  20.1.2012  notice  was  issued  on  the  special  leave
petition as well as on the prayer of interim relief. The respondent  entered
appearance and filed a detailed counter affidavit and raised  a  preliminary
objection about the maintainability of the special leave petition.
2.    Shri Rajesh Mahale,  learned  counsel  appearing  for  the  respondent
submitted that the petitioner had earlier challenged the judgment and  order
dated 12.11.2008 in RFA No.427 of 2006 before this Court.  The same came  up
for hearing before this  Court  on  4.12.2009  and  the  respondent  entered
appearance and opposed the petition.  This Court, while condoning the  delay
in filing SLP, dismissed the SLP on the same  day.   Later  the  petitioners
filed Review Petition  NO.96  of  2011  for  reviewing  the  Judgment  dated
12.11.2008 in RFA No.427 of 2006 before  the  High  Court  of  Karnataka  at
Bangalore.  Review petition was dismissed by the High Court by the  impugned
order dated 9.9.2011.  Learned counsel placed considerable reliance  on  the
three Judge Bench Judgment of this Court in
Abbai Maligai  Partnership  Firm
and another v. K. Santhakumaran and others
(1998) 7 SCC  386  and  contended
that decision would squarely apply to the facts of this case  and  the  High
Court has rightly dismissed the review petition by  holding  that  when  the
Judgment and decree passed by the High Court was confirmed  by  the  Supreme
Court by dismissing the SLP, there  was  no  question  of  entertaining  the
review petition.
3.     Mr.  Gopal  Jain,  learned  counsel  appearing  for  the  petitioners
submitted that the High Court has  committed  an  error  in  dismissing  the
review petition since the  earlier  SLP  was  dismissed  by  this  Court  on
4.12.2009 without stating any reason.    Reliance  was  placed  on  a  three
Judge Bench Judgment of this Court in Kunhay Ammed and others  v.  State  of
Kerala and another (2000) 6 SCC  359.   Learned  counsel  pointed  out  that
since the SLP was dismissed at the admission stage by a  non-speaking  order
it would not constitute res-judicata and does not  culminate  in  merger  of
the impugned judgment and the High Court has  committed  a  grave  error  in
dismissing the review petition.
4.    We notice that large number of review petitions  are  being  filed  by
the parties even after dismissal of the SLPs by this Court, either  by  non-
speaking orders or on merits, and depending upon the out-come of the  review
petitions again SLPs are being filed  before  this  Court  and   both  sides
place reliance on the reasoning of the three Judge Bench Judgment  in
Abbai
Maligai Partnership Firm and another
(supra)  or  Kunhay  Ammed  and  others
(supra), in respect of their rival contentions on maintainability.
5.    We notice applying  the  ratio  of  the  Judgments  in
Abbai  Maligai
Partnership Firm and another
(supra) or  Kunhay  Ammed  and  others  (supra)
conflicting views are being expressed in few of the subsequent judgments  of
this Court.
In
Meghamala and others  v.   G.  Narasimha  Reddy  and  others
(2010) 8 SCC 383, this Court after referring to
Abbai  Maligai  Partnership
Firm and another
(supra) and Kunhay Ammed and others (supra)  expressed  the
following view:
“25. Thus, the law on the issue stands  crystallised  to  the  effect
      that in case a litigant files a  review  petition  before  filing  the
      special leave petition before this Court and it remains  pending  till
      the special leave  petition  stands  dismissed,  the  review  petition
      deserves to be considered. In case it is filed subsequent to dismissal
      of  the  special  leave  petition,  the  process  of   filing   review
      application amounts to abuse of process of the court.
26. In view of the above, we are of the considered opinion that filing
      of such a review application by the respondents  at  a  belated  stage
      amounts to abuse of process of the court and such  an  application  is
      not maintainable. Thus, the High Court ought not to  have  entertained
      the writ petition  against  the  order  of  dismissal  of  the  review
      application by the Special Court and the order of the  High  Court  to
      that extent is liable to be set aside.”
6.    In Palani Raman Catholic Mission v. S. Bagirathi Ammal (2009)  16  SCC
657 this Court has taken the view that review petition can be  filed  if  no
leave has been granted to file an appeal and until there  is  no  appeal  in
the eye of law in the superior court, review can be preferred  in  the  High
Court under Order 47 Rule 1.  This  Court,  in  that  case,  set  aside  the
judgment of the High Court and directed  the  High  Court  to  consider  the
review petition in accordance with law.
7.    Again in
Bhakra  Beas  Management  Board  v.  Krishan  Kumar  Vij  and
another
(2010) 8 SCC 701 this Court  held  that  the  mere  dismissal  of  a
special leave petition at a preliminary stage does not constitute a  binding
precedent, and any order passed  by  the  High  Court  placing  reliance  on
earlier order, can still be challenged subsequently.
8.
In
K. Rajamouli v. A.V.K.N. Swamyi
(2001)  5  SCC  37  following  the
Judgment in
Abbai Maligai Partnership Firm and another
(supra)  and  Kunhay
Ammed and others (supra) this Court further explained the principle of  res-
judicata and held as follows:
“Following the decision in the case of Kunhayammed we are of the  view
      that the dismissal of the special  leave  petition  against  the  main
      judgment of the High Court would not constitute res  judicata  when  a
      special leave petition is filed against the order passed in the review
      petition provided the review petition was filed  prior  to  filing  of
      special leave petition against the main judgment of  the  High  Court.
      The position would be different where after dismissal of  the  special
      leave petition against the  main  judgment  a  party  files  a  review
      petition after  a  long  delay  on  the  ground  that  the  party  was
      prosecuting remedy by  way  of  special  leave  petition.  In  such  a
      situation the filing of review would be an abuse of the process of the
      law. We are  in  agreement  with  the  view  taken  in  Abbai  Maligai
      Partnership Firm1 that if the High Court allows  the  review  petition
      filed after the special leave petition was dismissed  after  condoning
      the delay, it would be treated as an  affront  to  the  order  of  the
      Supreme Court. But this is not the case here. In the present case, the
      review petition was filed  well  within  time  and  since  the  review
      petition was not being decided by the High Court, the appellant  filed
      the special leave petition against  the  main  judgment  of  the  High
      Court. We,  therefore,  overrule  the  preliminary  objection  of  the
      counsel for the respondent and hold that this appeal  arising  out  of
      special leave petition is maintainable.”
9.   A different note was struck  by  this  Court  in
Gangadhara  Palo  v.
Revenue Divisional Officer and another
(2011) 4 SCC 602 and after  referring
to the Judgment in
K. Rajamouli
(supra) held as follows:
“We regret, we cannot agree.  In  our  opinion,  it  will  make  no
      difference whether the review petition was filed  in  the  High  Court
      before the dismissal of  the  special  leave  petition  or  after  the
      dismissal of the special leave petition. The important question really
      is whether the judgment of the High Court has merged into the judgment
      of this Court by the doctrine of merger or not.
When this Court dismisses a special leave petition by giving  some
      reasons, however meagre (it can be even of just one  sentence),  there
      will be a merger of the judgment of the High Court into the  order  of
      the Supreme Court dismissing the special leave petition. According  to
      the doctrine of merger, the judgment of the lower  court  merges  into
      the judgment of the higher court.  Hence,  if  some  reasons,  however
      meagre, are given by this Court while  dismissing  the  special  leave
      petition, then by the doctrine of merger, the  judgment  of  the  High
      Court merges into the judgment of this Court and after merger there is
      no judgment of the High Court.  Hence,  obviously,  there  can  be  no
      review of a judgment which does not even exist.”
10.   We notice that in
K. Rajamouli
(supra) this Court has followed  Kunhay
Ammed and others (supra) and distinguished
Abbai  Maligai  Partnership  Firm
and another
(supra) and in
Gangadhara  Palo
(supra)  later  Bench  did  not
accept the view expressed in
K. Rajamouli
(supra).
To  this  extent,  there
is some conflict between the Judgments in
Gangadhara  Palo
(supra)  and
K.
Rajamouli
(supra) which calls for resolution by a larger Bench.
11.   We may also point out, in this connection, that
Article  136
of  the
Constitution does not confer any  right  of  appeal  on  any  party  but  it
confers a discretionary power on the Supreme Court to interfere in  suitable
cases.   Clause 1 of
Article 136
of the Constitution confers very  wide  and
extensive powers on the  Supreme  Court.   Article  commences  with  a  non-
obstante clause, the words are of over-riding effect  and  clearly  indicate
the intention of the framers of  the  Constitution  that  it  is  a  special
jurisdiction  and  residuary  power  unfettered  by  any  statute  or  other
provisions of Chapter IV of Part V of the  Constitution.   The  jurisdiction
under
Article 136
of the  Constitution,  of  course,  cannot  be  barred  by
statute since it is extraordinary power under
Article 136.
Article  136
is
an extra-ordinary power which cannot be taken away by legislation.
12.   We also notice that  several  statutes  confer  on  aggrieved  parties
right of appeal to the Supreme Court in contra distinction with  the  powers
conferred on the Supreme Court under
Article 136
of  the  Constitution,  for
instance,
Section 15Z
of the Securities and  Exchange  Board  of  India  Act
(SEBI), 1992 confers a right of  appeal  to  any  person  aggrieved  by  any
decision or order of the Securities Appellate Tribunal.    So  also  various
regulatory legislations provide for statutory  right  of  appeal.   To  what
extent, the principle of res-judicata and merger would apply in  respect  of
a decision rendered by this Court while exercising its  statutory  power  of
appeal as well as the one rendered while  entertaining  an  appeal  invoking
Article 136
is not seen considered by  the  larger  bench  either  in  Abbai
Maligai or Kunhay Ammed’ case, which is also, in our view, an  issue  to  be
considered by the larger Bench.
13.   We notice considerable arguments are being raised  before  this  Court
as well as before various High Courts in the country on the  maintainability
of review petitions  after  the  disposal  of  the  special  leave  petition
without granting leave but with or without assigning reasons on  which  also
conflicting views are also being expressed by the two-Judge Benches of  this
Court.  In order to resolve those conflicts and for proper guidance  to  the
High Courts, we feel it would be appropriate that this  matter  be  referred
to a larger bench for an authoritative pronouncement.
……………………………J.
                                       (K.S. Radhakrishnan)




                                       ….…………………………J.
                                       (Dipak Misra)
New Delhi,
October 19, 2012.
ORDER IN THE PROCEEDING PORTION




      Counsel for the petitioner pressed for an interim stay of the judgment
of the High Court.  Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that  he  has
paid the entire amount and the dispute is only with regard to  the  interest
portion which roughly would come to Rs.1.62 crores.  Considering  the  facts
and circumstances of the case we are inclined to give  a  direction  to  the
petitioner to pay Rs.1 crore to the respondent within a period of six  weeks
from today.  There will be stay of realization of balance  amount  till  the
issue is decided finally.