[Cites
12
, Cited by
13
]
Supreme Court of India
Usha Mehata vs Government Of A.P. & Ors on 16 October, 2012
Equivalent citations: AIR 2013 SUPREME COURT 132, 2012 AIR SCW 6107, (2012) 4 SCT 691, (2012) 10 SCALE 468, 2012 (12) SCC 419, (2013) 2 ANDHLD 16, (2013) 1 KCCR 21, AIR 2013 SC (CIVIL) 197
Bench:
G.S. Singhvi
,
Sudhansu Jyoti Mukhopadhaya
NON-REPORTABLE
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                        CIVIL APPEAL NO.3501 OF 2003


    Usha Mehta                                            ..Appellant
                                   versus


    Government of Andhra Pradesh and others               ..Respondents






                                  JUDGMENT
This appeal  is  directed  against  the  judgment  of  the
    Division Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court whereby the writ appeal
    filed by the appellant was  dismissed  and  the  order  passed  by  the
    learned Single Judge declining to interfere with the decision taken  by
    the State Government not to regularize the lease deed executed  in  her
    favour  in  respect  of  land  measuring  413  sq.  yards  was  upheld.
    On an application made by the appellant, the land in question  is  said
    to have been leased out to her vide deed dated  10.1.1972  prepared  by
    Venkat Rao, the then Inspector employed in the  office  of  the  Estate
    Officer, Secunderabad in the name  of  the  Revenue  Secretary  of  the
    State.  After  getting  the  lease  deed,  the  appellant  applied  for
    permission  to  raise  construction.  The  Municipal   Corporation   of
    Hyderabad refused to grant permission on the ground that the  land  was
    earmarked for road and  the  lease  deed  executed  in  favour  of  the
    appellant  appeared  to  be  fictitious.   Thereupon,   the   appellant
    approached  District  Collector  and   other   functionaries   of   the
    Government, who recommended regularization of the lease. However,  vide
    memo dated  16.11.1988,  the  State  Government  finally  rejected  the
    representation of the appellant.  That memo reads as under:
“GOVERNMENT OF ANDHRA PRADESH
                           REVENUE (0) DEPARTMENT
        Memo No.2405/01/86-7               Dated : 16.11.1988.
Sub:- Land - Hyderabad District - Secunderabad Area  Sardar  Patel
         Road - Lease  of  land  measuring  413  Sq.  yards  in  favour  of
         Dr.Mrs.Usha Mehta - Reg.
Ref :- 1. From Dr.(Mrs.) Usha  Mehta  rep.  dt.  NIL  received  on
         13.9.1986.
2. Govt. Memo No.2405/01/86-1 dt. 30.9.86.
3. From the Incharge Jt. Collector, Hyderabad letter No. /6/151
                                 Dt. 7.2.87.
4. From the E.O., Secunderabad and Collector,
                  Hyderabad, Lr.No.DRO/17/87   dt. 13.4.1987.
5. From the C.L.R., Lr.No.BB4/688/87 dt.19.5.87.
Government have carefully examined the representation of  Dr.(Mrs.)
      Usha Mehta 1st cited in consultation with the Collector, Hyderabad and
      Commissioner of Land Revenue. They consider that  the  original  lease
      deed itself was not issued by an authority competent to issue and  the
      said document is reported to be a forged one, and that the  mere  fact
      that the lease amount and property tax were  paid  would  not  make  a
      forged lease document a valid one, and hence, any claim based on  such
      a document cannot and should not be accepted, much  less  acted  upon.
      Therefore her request for  restoration  of  the  above  said  land  is
      rejected accordingly.
The stay granted  in  the  Government  memo  2nd  cited  is  hereby
      vacated.
Sathi Nair,
                                      Secretary to Government.”

                 The  appellant  challenged  the  decision  of  the   State
    Government in Writ Petition No. 17494 of 1988 which was disposed of  by
    the learned Single Judge of the High Court vide order dated  12.03.1991
    with a direction to the State  Government  to  pass  appropriate  order
    after hearing the appellant and respondent Nos. 4 to  6.  The  relevant
    portions of that order are reproduced below:
“A reading of the impugned memo which has been extracted  above,
           does  not  show  whether  the  Government  has  considered   the
           regularisation of the lease on  the  altered  circumstances  and
           conditions  as  suggested  by  the  two  authorities.  When  the
           competent authorities after enquiry  found  that  regularisation
           can be made, it is the duty of the concerned authorities, at the
           time  of  passing  the  impugned  Memo  to  take  note  of   the
           recommendations  made  by  the  competent  authorities.  Without
           taking note  of  the  recommendations  of  the  authorities  and
           without  discussing  the  pros  and  cons  of  the  matter,  the
           Government simply issued the impugned Memo.  The  contention  of
           the petitioner that the Government has passed the order  without
           applying its mind and without taking note of the recommendations
           of the competent authorities, has some  force.  On  that  simple
           ground only, the impugned Memo is quashed  and  the  authorities
           are directed to consider the case of the petitioner in the light
           of  the  recommendations  made  by  the   Collector,   Hyderabad
           District, in the letter dated 13.4.1987 and the  letter  of  the
           Commissioner of Land Revenue dated 19.5.1987.
Respondents 4 and 5 who claims portion  of  the  land  contended
           that they made be given an opportunity to represent  their  case
           before passing the final order. Since respondents 4  and  5  are
           claim rights over the property, this court is  not  prepared  to
           investigate into these facts. As the impugned Memo is set  aside
           on the technical ground, this court feels  that  opportunity  be
           given to the respondents 4 and 5 to represent  their  case.  The
           Government is directed to pass appropriate orders  after  giving
           due opportunity to respondents 4  and  5  as  well  as  the  6th
           respondent who has been impleaded during  the  pendency  of  the
           writ   petition   and   after   considering   their   respective
           contention.”




                 Writ Appeal No.491 of 1991 filed by R.D. Bhoopal and  K.P.
    Rao (respondent Nos. 5 and 6 in the writ petition) against the order of
    the learned Single Judge was dismissed by the  Division  Bench  of  the
    High Court and the State Government was directed  to  pass  appropriate
    order by the end of January, 1992.
In compliance of the direction given by  the  High  Court,
    the  State  Government   re-considered   the   appellant's   plea   for
    regularization of lease, gave opportunity of hearing to the parties and
    passed order dated 31.1.1992, paragraphs 13 and 14  of  which  read  as
    under:
“13.   As  regards  the  claim  of  Dr.(Mrs.)  Usha  Mehta,  the
           Government observe that the grant of lease in favour of  her  is
           unauthorised; that the entire transaction is the result of fraud
           and collusion between her and Sri Venkata Rao, the then Inspecor
           of Estate Officer, Secunderabad; that any claim based on  forged
           document should not be accepted much less acted upon;  and  that
           Sri R.D. Bhoopal, Sri K.P.Rao and Dr. Usha Mehta have  no  locus
           standi to claim the land.  Therefore the  Government  hold  that
           the parties have no claim of any kind of land  in  question  and
           that it is a Government land.  Accordingly their claim petitions
           are dismissed.
14.   The Government further direct that, as the piece  of  land
           in question firstly allotted to Mandal Revenue Officer's  Office
           is subsequently allotted to  A.P.  Women's  Cooperative  Finance
           Corporation which has spent money in protecting  the  land,  the
           land in  question  be  allotted  to  A.P.Women's  Coop.  Finance
           Corporation  permanently  after  excluding  the  area  for  road
           widening, required  in  public  interest  as  requested  by  the
           Collector in his letter 10th read above, is cancellation of  the
           orders issued in the Government Memo 9th read above.”




                 Feeling aggrieved by  the  rejection  of  her  prayer  for
    regularization of the lease, the appellant filed Writ Petition No. 1947
    of 1992.  The learned Single Judge held that the appellant's claim  was
    founded on a forged document and  no  direction  can  be  issued  under
Article 226
of the Constitution for regularisation of  the  lease  deed
    merely because in other cases lease had been regularised on payment  of
    the current market value.
The Division Bench of the High Court examined  the  record
    produced by the parties, referred to
Article 299
of  the  Constitution
    and some of the judgments of this Court and held:
“It is now well settled that the provisions of
Article 299
of
             the Constitution which are mandatory in character require that
             a contract made in the exercise of the executive power of  the
             Union or of a State mush satisfy three conditions viz., i)  it
             must be expressed to be  made  by  the  President  or  by  the
             Governor of the State, as the case may  be;  ii)  it  must  be
             executed on behalf of the President or  the  Governor  as  the
             case may be; and iii) its execution must be by such person and
             in such manner as the President  or  Governor  may  direct  or
             authorize. Failure to comply with these  conditions  nullifies
             the contract and renders it void and unenforceable.”


                  Shri  D.  Ramakrishna  Reddy,  learned  counsel  for  the
    appellant vehemently argued that even if lease deed dated 10.1.1972 was
    forged,  the  High  Court  should  have  issued  a  direction  to   the
    respondents to regularize the same because in 100  similar  cases,  the
    lease deeds executed  by  Venkat  Rao  was  regularized  by  the  State
    Government on payment of market value. Learned counsel  further  argued
    that the impugned judgment is liable to be set  aside  because  neither
    the learned Single Judge nor the Division Bench adverted to and decided
    the plea of discrimination raised by the appellant.
Smt. C.K. Sucharita, learned counsel for the State  argued
    that the High Court did not commit any error by refusing  to  entertain
    the appellant’s plea  for  regularization  of  the  lease  because  the
    initial document prepared in her favour  was  forged.   She  emphasized
    that even though Venkat Rao was not authorised by the State  Government
    to execute lease in favour of  any  person,  he  created  a  fabricated
    documents  purporting  to  transfer  public  land  and   after   taking
    cognizance  of  this  fact,  the  State  Government  had  declined   to
    regularize the deed allegedly executed in favour of  the  appellant  on
    10.1.1972.
Shri P.V. Shetty, learned  senior  counsel  appearing  for
    respondent No.2 submitted that his client’s land has nothing to do with
    the plot in question and that  the  appellant  has  no  right  to  seek
    regularization of the lease deed executed in her favour by Venkat  Rao.
    He also discloses that Venkat Rao has been convicted by  the  competent
    Court for the offence of forgery.
We have considered the arguments of  the  learned  counsel
    and carefully perused the record including additional  affidavit  dated
    22.3.2012 filed by K.V. Suresh  Babu  in  compliance  of  orders  dated
    3.8.2011 and 12.1.2012 passed by this Court.  Paragraphs 2, 3 and 4  of
    that affidavit are extracted hereunder:
“2(a). That upon hearing the above appeal, this  Hon'ble.  Court
           (Coram  Hon'ble  Justice  V.S.  Sirpurkar  and  Hon'ble  Justice
           T.S.Thakur) was pleased to pass the following order on 3.8.2011:-
"During the course of arguments, the question arose as  to
           whether the allotments, which were regularized by the Government
           were  in  pursuance  of  any  definite  policy  of   the   State
           Government. Further the question arose as to  whether  what  was
           the consideration of the State Government in  regularizing  nine
           plots as mentioned in Memo No.6/151 dated 20.3.2003.  Similarly,
           the question arose about the other regularizations made  by  the
           State Government.
Mr. Venkatanarayana,   learned   senior counsel  appearing
           for the State seeks time to clarify all these, issues by  filing
           an additional affidavit, List these matters after four weeks".
(b) That thereafter upon hearing the matter on  12.1.2012,  this
           Hon'ble Court (Coram: Hon'ble Justice Deepak Varma  and  Hon'ble
           Justice Chandramauli Kumar  Prasad)  was  pleased  to  pass  the
           following order-
“Pursuant to  the  order  passed  by  this  Court  on  3.8.2011,
           additional  Affidavit  dated  29/11/2011  has  been   filed   by
           State/Respondent on 30.11.2011. Along with additional Affidavit,
           documents have also been filed. The question  involved  in  this
           Appeal is whether in the disputed piece of land admeasuring  413
           sq.yds. in TSL.R-2, Block-B, Ward -101, Secunderabad, road   has
           been widened and remaining part of land is being used  for  paid
           parking or not or it is yet to be widened.
Learned counsel for Appellant has  seriously  refuted  the  said
           averment and according to him, it is only a  proposal  for  road
           widening, pending since 1975. But till date, no  road  has  been
           widened and no area has been earmarked for paid parking.
In   view   of   this   disputed   position,   we   direct   the
           Respondent/State to file  documents  to  show  and  substantiate
           when the road was widened through  which  Contractor  and  since
           when the paid parking is being used.
Mr.Anoop Choudhary, learned senior counsel for Respondent/State,
           prayed for four weeks' time to clarify the  position  by  filing
           further Affidavit and documents in this regard. While doing  so,
           the previous order passed by this Court  may  also  be  complied
           with.
List these matters after four weeks.
3.    That it is submitted that out of the total extent  of  413
           square yards of land in issue in the present case, an extent  of
           299 square yards is covered by road being part of 150 feet  wide
           heavy traffic road- S.P. Road in Hyderabad city. As  is  evident
           from the letter dated 2.2,2012 of the Executive Engineer, PD-II,
           GHMC the said road was laid long  back.  Hence  no  records  are
           available in the office. A true photocopy  of  the  said  letter
           dated 2.2.2012 of the executive Engineer, PD-II,  GHMC,  Greater
           Hyderabad Municipal Corporation is annexed hereto  as  Annexure-
VII.    Further,    as    is    evident    from    the    tender
           notifications/circulars issued' for the purpose,  the  remaining
           extent of 114 square yards  of  land  is  used  by  the  Greater
           Hyderabad Municipal Corporation since  the  year,.1999  as  paid
           parking site for vehicles.
The photographs of the suit land showing  the  portion  of
           the land in issue (299 square yards) which is  covered  by  road
           and the parking lot are annexed hereto as Annexure-VIII (Colly).
The map of the area clearly showing that the land in issue
           is covered by road and parking lot is annexed hereto as Annexure
           IX.
A  true  photocopy  of  the  tender  notification   dated
           13.3.2000 by the Municipal Corporation of Hyderabad calling  for
           applications for leasing out the right to  collect  parking  fee
           from two wheelers and 4-wheelers on  identified  roads  at  road
           margin including the land in issue (mentioned at S.No.97 of  the
           Annexure there as  Scooter  Parking  on  road  side  from  Ashok
           Bhoopal Chambers to May Fair Complex  on  SP  Road)  is  annexed
           hereto as Annexure X.


                 A true photocopy of circular  dated  13/14.5.2010  of  the
           Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation directing all the  Zonal
           Commissioners to complete the sealed tender-cum-open auction  by
           1.6.2010 for parking lots  mentioned  in  the  Annexure  thereto
           including the land in issue (at S.No.22-Ashok Bhupal Chamber  to
           Reliance Web World, S.P. Road, Secunderabad- is  annexed  hereto
           as Annexure XI.
4.    That it is submitted that the status of the  102  illegal,
           bogus and forged lease-deeds is as follows:-
I. 51) cases were founds to be not fit for filing land  grabbing
           cases. The details of action in these cases are as follows:
i) Assigned  (Sold)  by Government on 9 payment of market value  as
           the lessees had put  up  construction  and  were  in  possession
           thereof (Annexure XII)
ii) Bogus renewal lease deeds cancelled 29  and  fresh  lease  deeds
           issued in lieu thereof to the same persons since  they  were  in
           possession  thereof  and  had  constructed  residential  houses,
           (original leases prior to Bogus renewal leases were  genuine  in
           these cases) -Annexure XIII.
iii) Lease deeds after expiry of (30) years 13 period  bogus  renewal
           deeds issued but families of original lessees  are  residing  in
           old buildings existing thereon and fresh renewal deeds issued as
           the original leases were genuine Annexure XIV.
TOTAL            51
(II) In (45) cases Land Grabbing  cases  were  filed  by  Mandal
           Revenue Officer, Secunderabad.
i) Certain   cases   disposed   off  by   Civil  4  Courts  with  a
           direction to the lessees (Respondents) to pay the  market  value
           as fixed by the Government -lessees were in possession (Annexure
           XV)
ii) Cases   pending   in   the   Civil   Courts 30 (Annexure XVI)
iii) Cases   with   drawn   and   conveyance  10  deeds  were  issued
           since the lease deeds were found to be genuine (Annexure XVII)
iv) Free Hold orders issued by the  Special  1  Chief  Secretary.  &
           Chief  Commissioner  of  Land  Administration,  Andhra  Pradesh,
           Hyderabad as the original lease was genuine and Conveyance  Deed
           not yet executed due to  pendency  of  Civil  Dispute  in  Court
           (Annexure                                                –XVIII)
TOTAL           45
III) Leases not covered by encroachments  and  kept  3  vacant-required  for
     road widening etc and not regularized. (Annexure XIX)

 IV) Under the possession of religious institutions.
i) Church of South India (Civil Suit is pending)
(ii) Mosque New Bhoiguda 1 (Annexure XX)



           V)    The land in issue in the present case  admeasuring  1  413
           square yards which already covered by a 150' wide road and  paid
           parking lot.
Total (I, II, III, IV and V)    102




                 In our opinion, the appeal is wholly meritless and  liable
    to be dismissed for more than one reasons, which are enumerated below:
1.  The finding recorded by the State Government that  the  lease  deed
    allegedly executed on  behalf  of  the  Estate  Officer  was  a  forged
    document and no right much less a vested right was created in favour of
    the appellant on the basis of such document is  based  on  the  correct
    analysis of the documents produced by the parties and  the  High  Court
    did not commit any error by refusing to interfere  with  that  finding.
Learned counsel for the appellant could not  produce  any  document  to
    show that Venkat Rao was authorised by the State Government to  execute
    lease on its behalf in favour of the appellant.  Therefore, it  is  not
    possible to find any fault with G.O.Ms.No.130 dated 31.1.1992.
2.  The plea of discrimination  raised  by  the  appellant  was  wholly
    misconceived and the High Court rightly declined to entertain the same.
Article 14
of the Constitution declares that:
“14. Equality before law.—The State  shall  not  deny  to  any
             person equality before the law or the equal protection of  the
             laws within the territory of India.”


        The concept of equality enshrined in that  article  is  a  positive
    concept. The Court can command the State to  give  equal  treatment  to
    similarly situated persons, but cannot issue a mandate that  the  State
    should commit illegality or pass wrong order because  in  another  case
    such an illegality has been committed or wrong order has  been  passed.
    If any illegality or irregularity has been committed in  favour  of  an
    individual  or  a  group  of  individuals,  others  cannot  invoke  the
    jurisdiction of the High Court or of this Court and  seek  a  direction
    that the same irregularity or illegality be committed in  their  favour
    by the State or its agencies/instrumentalities. In other words,
Article
    14
cannot be invoked for perpetuating irregularities or illegalities.
The question whether
Article  14
can  be  invoked  for  compelling
    public authorities to pass an illegal order or commit an illegality  on
    the ground that in other  cases,  similar  order  has  been  passed  or
    illegality has been committed is no longer res integra and  has  to  be
    answered against the appellant.
In
Chandigarh Administration v.  Jagjit
    Singh
(1995) 1 SCC 745, this Court considered the question whether  the
    High Court was right in invoking
Article 14
of  the  Constitution  for
    compelling the appellant to  pass  an  order  contrary  to  law  merely
    because in another case such an order was passed and answered the  same
    in negative by making the following observations:
“ … We are of the opinion that the basis or the principle, if it
           can be called one, on which the writ petition has  been  allowed
           by the High Court is unsustainable in law  and  indefensible  in
           principle. Since we have come across  many  such  instances,  we
           think it necessary to deal with such pleas at a  little  length.
           Generally speaking, the mere fact that the respondent  Authority
           has passed a particular order in  the  case  of  another  person
           similarly situated can never be the ground for issuing a writ in
           favour of the petitioner on  the  plea  of  discrimination.  The
           order in favour of the other person might be legal and valid  or
           it might not be. That has to be investigated first before it can
           be directed to be followed in the case of the petitioner. If the
           order in favour of the other person is found to be  contrary  to
           law or not warranted in the facts and circumstances of his case,
           it is obvious that such illegal or unwarranted order  cannot  be
           made the basis of  issuing  a  writ  compelling  the  respondent
           Authority  to  repeat  the  illegality  or   to   pass   another
           unwarranted order. (emphasis in original) The extraordinary  and
           discretionary power of the High Court cannot  be  exercised  for
           such a purpose. Merely  because  the  respondent  Authority  has
           passed one illegal/unwarranted order, it does  not  entitle  the
           High Court to compel the authority  to  repeat  that  illegality
           over again and again. The  illegal/unwarranted  action  must  be
           corrected, if it can be done according to  law—indeed,  wherever
           it  is  possible,  the  court  should  direct  the   appropriate
           authority to  correct  such  wrong  orders  in  accordance  with
           law—but even if it cannot be corrected, it is difficult  to  see
           how it can  be  made  a  basis  for  its  repetition.  (emphasis
           supplied) By refusing to  direct  the  respondent  Authority  to
           repeat the illegality, the court is not  condoning  the  earlier
           illegal act/order nor can  such  illegal  order  constitute  the
           basis for  a  legitimate  complaint  of  discrimination.  Giving
           effect to such pleas would be prejudicial to  the  interests  of
           law and will do incalculable mischief  to  public  interest.  It
           will be a negation of law and the rule of law. Of course, if  in
           case the order in favour of the other person is found  to  be  a
           lawful and justified one it can be followed and a similar relief
           can be  given  to  the  petitioner  if  it  is  found  that  the
           petitioner's case is similar to the  other  person's  case.  But
           then why examine another person's case  in  his  absence  rather
           than examining the case of the petitioner who is present  before
           the court and seeking the relief. Is it not more appropriate and
           convenient to examine the entitlement of the  petitioner  before
           the court to the relief asked for in the facts and circumstances
           of his case than to enquire into the correctness  of  the  order
           made or action taken  in  another  person's  case,  which  other
           person is not before the case (sic court) nor is  his  case.  In
           our  considered  opinion,  such  a  course—barring   exceptional
           situations—would neither be advisable nor  desirable.  In  other
           words, the High Court  cannot  ignore  the  law  and  the  well-
           accepted norms governing the  writ  jurisdiction  and  say  that
           because in one case a particular order  has  been  passed  or  a
           particular action has been taken,  the  same  must  be  repeated
           irrespective of the fact whether such  an  order  or  action  is
           contrary to law or otherwise. Each case must be decided  on  its
           own merits, factual and legal, in accordance with relevant legal
           principles. The orders and actions of the authorities cannot  be
           equated to the judgments of the Supreme Court  and  High  Courts
           nor can they be elevated to the  level  of  the  precedents,  as
           understood in the judicial world.”




                Similar is the ratio of the  judgments  of  this  Court  in
    Narain Das v. Improvement Trust, Amritsar (1973) 2 SCC  265;  Gursharan
    Singh v. NDMC (1996) 2 SCC 459, Jaipur Development Authority v.  Daulat
    Mal Jain (1997) 1 SCC 37, Yadu Nandan Garg v. State of Rajasthan (1996)
    1 SCC 334, State of Haryana v. Ram  Kumar  Mann  (1997)  3  SCC  321  ,
    Faridabad CT Scan Centre v. D.G. Health  Services  (1997)  7  SCC  752,
    Style (Dress land) v. UT, Chandigarh (1999) 7 SCC 752, State  of  Bihar
    v.  Kameshwar  Prasad  Singh  (2000)  9  SCC  94,  Union  of  India  v.
International Trading Co. (2003) 5 SCC 437, Ekta Shakti  Foundation  v.
    Govt. of NCT of Delhi (2006) 10 SCC 337, Sanjay Kumar  Manjul  v.  UPSC
    (2006) 8 SCC 42, K.K. Bhalla  v.  State  of  M.P.  (2006)  3  SCC  581,
    National Institute of Technology v. Chandra Shekhar Chaudhary (2007)  1
    SCC 93, Vice-Chancellor, M.D. University v. Jahan Singh  (2007)  5  SCC
    77, State of Kerala v. K. Prasad  (2007)  7  SCC  140,  Punjab  SEB  v.
    Gurmail Singh (2008) 7 SCC 245 and Panchi Devi v.  State  of  Rajasthan
    (2009) 2 SCC 589 and Shanti Sports Club v. Union of India(2009) 15  SCC
705.
                It is also apposite to note that even though the  appellant
    had raised the plea of discrimination, she did not produce any evidence
    to prove that other cases were identical to her case.  In  the  absence
    of such evidence, the High Court could not have relied  upon  the  bald
    statement contained in the writ petition filed  by  the  appellant  and
    quashed the well reasoned decision taken by the State Government not to
    regularise the lease in her favour.
3.         The lease deed executed in favour of the appellant was  ex-
    facie contrary to the doctrine of equality enshrined in
Article  14
of
    the Constitution. It is neither the pleaded case of the  appellant  nor
    any material has been produced by her to show  that  lease  deed  dated
    10.1.1972 was executed after issuing an advertisement so as  to  enable
    other eligible persons to compete for allotment  of  public  land.
In
Akhil Bhartiya Upbhokta Congress v. State of Madhya Pradesh and  others
(2011) 5 SCC 29, this Court considered the question whether  the  State
    Government had the power to allot a piece of land  in  the  name  of  a
    political-cum-social leader for the purpose of establishing a  training
    institute albeit without issuing any advertisement.  After  considering
    the scope of
Article 14
of the Constitution in the matter of  grant  of
    licence, allotment of land, distribution of largesse etc.
and  noticing
    the judgments in
S.G. Jaisinghani v. Union of India
AIR 1967  SC  1427,
    Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport Authority of  India  and
    others
(1979) 3 SCC 489, Kasturi Lal Lakshmi  Reddy  v.  State  of  J&K
    (1980) 4 SCC 1, Common Cause (petrol pumps matter) v. Union  of  India,
    (
1996) 6 SCC 530, Kumari Shrilekha Vidyarthi and  others  V.  State  of
    U.P. and others
(
1991)  1  SCC  212,  LIC  v.  Consumer  Education  and
    Research Centre
(
1995) 5 SCC 482 and New India Public School and others
    v. HUDA and others
(1996) 5 SCC 510, this Court observed:
“What needs to be  emphasised  is  that  the  State  and/or  its
           agencies/instrumentalities cannot give largesse  to  any  person
           according to the sweet will and whims of the political  entities
           and/or officers of the  State.   Every  action/decision  of  the
           State and/or its agencies/instrumentalities to give largesse  or
           confer  benefit  must  be  founded  on  a  sound,   transparent,
           discernible and well-defined policy, which shall be  made  known
           to the public by publication in the Official Gazette  and  other
           recognised  modes  of  publicity  and  such   policy   must   be
           implemented/executed by adopting a non-discriminatory  and  non-
           arbitrary method  irrespective  of  the  class  or  category  of
           persons  proposed  to  be  benefited   by   the   policy.    The
           distribution of largesse like allotment of land, grant of quota,
           permit    licence,    etc.    by    the    State     and     its
           agencies/instrumentalities should always be done in a  fair  and
           equitable manner and the  element  of  favouritism  or  nepotism
           shall  not  influence  the  exercise  of  discretion.   If  any,
           conferred upon the particular functionary  or  officer   of  the
           State.
We may add that there cannot  be  any  policy,  much  less,  a
             rational policy of allotting land on the basis of applications
             made by individuals,  bodies,  organizations  or  institutions
             dehors an invitation or advertisement  by  the  State  or  its
             agency/instrumentality. By entertaining applications  made  by
             individuals, organisations or institutions  for  allotment  of
             land or for grant of any other  type  of  largesse  the  State
             cannot exclude other eligible persons from  lodging  competing
             claim.  Any allotment of  land  or  grant  of  other  form  of
             largesse by the State  or  its  agencies/instrumentalities  by
             treating the exercise as a private venture  is  liable  to  be
             treated as arbitrary, discriminatory and an act of favouritism
             and/or nepotism violating the  soul  of  the  equality  clause
             embodied in
Article 14
of the Constitution.”






                 In the result, the appeal is dismissed and  the  following
    directions are given:
(i) Within two months from today, the State  Government  shall
             take possession of the land and, if necessary, by  demolishing
             the illegal structures which  may  have  been  raised  by  the
             appellant or any other person.
(ii)         Within  next  four  weeks,   a   report   showing
             compliance of the aforesaid  direction  be  submitted  in  the
             Registry of the Andhra Pradesh High Court.
(iii)       The Registrar (Judicial) of the High  Court  shall
             take orders from the Chief Justice and list the case before an
             appropriate  Bench.   If  it   is   found   that   the   State
             functionaries  have  failed  to  comply  with  the   aforesaid
             direction, then the  High  Court  shall  initiate  proceedings
             against the defaulting officers under the
Contempt  of  Courts
             Act, 1971
.
The Registry is directed to send a copy of  this  judgment
    to the Registrar (Judicial), Andhra Pradesh High Court by Fax.
.............................J.
                                 [G.S. SINGHVI]










    NEW DELHI;                   .............................J.
    OCTOBER   16,   2012                [SUDHANSU    JYOTI    MUKHOPADHAYA]








                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                   CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


                     CONTEMPT PETITION(C) NO.360 OF 2002
                                     IN
                        CIVIL APPEAL NO.3501 OF 2003


    Usha Mehta                                            ..Petitioner
                                   versus


    Krishna Paratpar Rao and others               ..Respondents




                                    O R D E R

         In this petition filed under
Article 129
of the  Constitution  read
with Order XLVII of the Supreme Court Rules, 1966  and  Rule-3  (C)  of  the
Rules to regulate proceedings for contempt of the Supreme Court,  1975,  the
petitioner has prayed for punishing  the  respondents  for  violating  order
dated 1.10.2001 passed in SLP (C)No.16383/2001.
Today, we have dismissed  the  appeal  (Civil  Appeal  NO.3501/2003
arising out of SLP (C) No.16383/2001).  Therefore, the Contempt Petition  is
also dismissed.
.............................J.
                                 [G.S. SINGHVI]








    NEW DELHI;                   .............................J.
    OCTOBER   16,   2012                [SUDHANSU    JYOTI    MUKHOPADHAYA]





ITEM NO.102               COURT NO.4             SECTION XIIA

            S U P R E M E   C O U R T   O F   I N D I A
                         RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 3501 OF 2003


USHA MEHTA                                       Appellant (s)

                 VERSUS

GOVERNMENT OF A.P. & ORS.                         Respondent(s)
(With appln(s) for  permission  to  file  additional  documents  and  office
report)
WITH
CONTEMPT PETITION(C) NO. 360 OF 2002 IN CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3501/2003
(with appln(s) for exemption from filing OT and with office report)


Date:  16/10/2012   This  Appeal   and   Petition   were   called   on   for
    hearing today.
CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE G.S. SINGHVI
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDHANSU JYOTI MUKHOPADHAYA


For Appellant(s) Mr. D. Ramakrishna Reddy, Adv.
Mr. M.H. Prasad, Adv.
For Respondent(s)        Ms. C.K. Sucharita,Adv.
(State)
                         Mr. P.V. Shetty, Sr. Adv.
                         Mr. P. Venkat Reddy, Adv.
                         Mr. Vijay Kumar Pardesi, Adv.
UPON hearing counsel the Court made the following
                               O R D E R

                 The appeal is dismissed  in  terms  of  the  Non-Reportable
      Judgement.
As a sequel to this, the contempt  petition  filed  by  the
      appellant is also dismissed.
|(Parveen Kr.Chawla)                    | |(Phoolan Wati Arora)                  |
|Court Master                           | |Court Master                          |
|                                       | |                                      |
[signed Non-Reportable Judgment and order are placed on the file]
-----------------------
19
19