[Cites
5
, Cited by
11
]
Supreme Court of India
Prem Chand vs District Judge, Dehradun & Anr on 23 November, 1976
Equivalent citations: 1977 AIR 364, 1977 SCR (2) 170, AIR 1977 SUPREME COURT 364, 1977 (1) SCC 254, 1977 (1) SCWR 444, 1977 3 ALL LR 15, 1977 9 LAWYER 135, 1977 RENCJ 116, 1977 RENTLR 493, 1977 (1) SCJ 447, 1977 2 SCR 170, 1977 RENCR 471, 1977 U J (SC) 20, 1977 ALL RENT CAS 117
Author:
P.K. Goswami
Bench:
P.K. Goswami
,
Y.V. Chandrachud
,
Syed Murtaza Fazalali
PETITIONER:
PREM CHAND

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DISTRICT JUDGE, DEHRADUN & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT23/11/1976

BENCH:
GOSWAMI, P.K.
BENCH:
GOSWAMI, P.K.
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V.
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA

CITATION:
 1977 AIR  364		  1977 SCR  (2) 170
 1977 SCC  (1) 254


ACT:
U.P.   Urban Buildings  (Regulation	 of  Letting,	Rent
	and Eviction)  Act
1972, s. 21(1) Explanation (iv), presump-
	tion  of bonafide requirement when applicable--Whether	shop
	run  in residential building converts it  into	non-residen-
	tial.



HEADNOTE:
	    The	 appellant was a tenant occupying two rooms  in	 the
	residential house of respondent No. 2.	He used one room for
	living	purposes  and the other as a  tailoring	 shop.	 The
	landlady  brought a suit for his eviction on the  ground  of
	personal  requirement.	but the same was  dismissed  by	 the
	District Magistrate. An appeal to the District Judge  Dehra-
	dun  was  allowed, and Explanation (iv) to
s. 21(1)
of	 the
	U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and  Evic-
	tion) Act, 1972 was held applicable.  The view was upheld by
	the  High Court in petition filed by the appellant who	con-
	tended	that  due to his shop the house	 under	tenancy	 had
	ceased to be a residential building  and  that	 Explanation
	(iv) was not applicable.  The High Court rejected the  peti-
	tion.
	Dismissing the appeal, the Court
	    HELD:  Explanation (iv) provides a conclusive and  irre-
	buttable  presumption  of  bona fide  requirement  once	 the
	conditions mentioned therein are established.  The tests for
	application of Explanation (iv) are as follows:
	   (1) The building should be a residential building; and
	   (2)	The landlord must be in occupation of a part of	 the
	building  for residential purposes, the other part being  in
	the occupation of the tenant.
	    If the above two tests are fulfilled in a case, there is
	no need for the landlord to establish any other requirement.
	[172F-H]
	    (2) The fact that a tailoring shop is run in one of	 the
	rooms  is  not sufficient to convert what otherwise  to	 all
	intents and purposes is a residential building, into a	non-
	residential building. [172E-F]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1043 of 1976.
	    Appeal  by	Special Leave from the	Judgment  and  Order
	dated 9-3-1976 of the Allahabad High Court in  Civil  Misc.,
	Petn.  No. 6938/74.
K.P. Kapur and A.L. Trehan, for the appellant.
	S.C. Agrawal and M.M.D. Srivastava, for respondent No. 2.
	The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
	    GOSWAMI,  J.--This	appeal by special leave	 is  by	 the
	tenant (to be described hereinafter as the appellant) and is
	directed against the judgment of the High Court of Allahabad
	in a writ petition at his
171
instance which was dismissed.  The District Judge, Dehradun,
	who had earlier dismissed his appeal, has been impleaded  as
	respondent No. 1.
The facts may briefly be stated:
The	 appellant  is admittedly the tenant under  the	 2nd
	respondent (to be described herinafter as the respondent) in
	respect of two rooms of House No. 11, Rajput Road, Dehradun.
	This  house has	 four rooms of which only two rooms  are  in
	occupation  of	the appellant. The other two  rooms  are  in
	occupation of the respondent whose two sons stay there;	 the
	eider  one living with his wife.  The respondent is  an	 old
	lady with an ailing husband and wants to have vacant posses-
	sion  of the two rooms so that the entire family can  reside
	at the same place.  With that end in view, on June 22, 1972,
	the  respondent filed an application under section 3 of	 the
	United	Provinces (Temporary) Control of Rent  and  Eviction
	Act, 1947 (U.P. Act No. III of 1947) for permission to bring
	a suit against the appellant for his eviction on the  ground
	of  bona fide personal requirement.  During the pendency  of
	this application before the Rent Control and Eviction  Offi-
	cer,  the
U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting,	Rent
	and Eviction) Act
1972 (U.P. Act No. 13 of 1972)  (hereinaf-
	ter  to	 be  referred to as the Act) came  into	 force	with
	effect from July 15, 1972, repealing the earlier Act of 1947
	with certain savings as mentioned in
section 43
of the	Act.
	As  a consequence of enforcement of the Act the	 proceedings
	under
section	3
that were pending under  the	earlier	 Act
	converted into one under
section 21
of the new Act (U.P. Act
	No.  13 of 1972). The prescribed authority  (The  Additional
	District Magistrate) rejected the application.	The respond-
	ent then preferred an appeal to	 the District Judge,  Dehra-
	dun,  who  allowed the same on the ground of bona  fide	 re-
	quirement  relying on the sole ground that Explanation	(iv)
	to
section 21(1)
of the Act was applicable to the facts  of
	the case. The appellant being aggrieved by the order of 'the
	District  Judge preferred a writ application before the High
	Court which, as stated earlier, was disallowed.
	    Before  we deal with the question of law raised in	this
	appeal	we  may	 note the findings of fact  reached  by	 the
	District Judge.	 The District Judge found as follows :--
"It	 will  appear  that  the  house	  in
		      question	is a residential building.   It	 has
		      been  built  for residential purposes  and  is
		      being primarily used therefor.  Simply because
		      the tenant is also carrying on the business of
		      tailoring in one of the rooms will not convert
		      it   into	  non-residential   building.	 The
		      landlady is admittedly occupying the remaining
		      portion thereof."
Even  the	 prescribed authority at  the  first
		      instance had observed as follows in his  order
		      :--
"I	have inspected the demised  premises
		      situated	at 11, Rajpur Road, Dehradun in	 the
		      presence of both the parties. On inspection it
		      was found that disputed house is one  building
		      fin which one portion is in the possession  of
		      the respondent-
tenant.  The one portion of the building is in
		      the   occupation	 of   the   applicant	 for
		      residential purposes.  The respondent has	 two
		      small  rooms and a very small courtyard.	 Out
		      of  those two rooms each one is about  8	wide
		      and  8 long, there is a tailoring shop of	 the
		      respondent.  The other room is being used	 for
		      residential  purposes.  The applicant has	 two
		      rooms  of	 the same size	and  one  additional
		      courtyard."
The question that arises for consideration
		      is  whether Explanation (iv) of clause (1)  of
section 21
of the Act has been correctly	held
		      to be applicable by the District Judge and the
		      High Court to the facts as found.	 Explanation
(iv) of
section 21 (1)
reads as follows :--
"In the case of a residential building--
(iv)  the  fact  that	the  building  under
		      tenancy is a part of a building the  remaining
		      part  whereof  is	 in the	 occupation  of	 the
		      landlord	for  residential purposes,  shah  be
		      conclusive to prove that the building is	bona
		      fide required by the landlord."
It is submitted by the appellant that the building under
	tenancy	 is not a residential building and,  therefore,	 the
	condition  precedent to the application of Explanation	(iv)
	is  absent  in this case.  According to	 counsel  since	 the
	tenant is admittedly running a tailoring shop in one of	 the
	two  rooms  under his occupation the house ceases  to  be  a
	residential building.
We are unable to accept this submission.  The  appellant
	has only two small rooms in which he resides with his  wife,
	two  young sons and one daughter and although he may have  a
	tailoring  shop in one of his rooms it is not unlikely	that
	that  very room is utilised as bed room for one or two	mem-
	bers  of his family at night.  The fact that he runs a	tai-
	loring shop in one of the rooms is not sufficient to convert
	what otherwise to all intents and purposes is a	 residential
	building  into	a non-residential building.  The  tests	 for
	application of Explanation (iv) are as follows :--
(1)  the building should be  a	 residential
		      building; and
			 (2)  the landlord must be in occupation  of
		      a.part   of  the	building   for	 residential
		      purposes,	  the  other  part  being   in	 the
		      occupation of the tenant.
If  the	 above	two tests are fulfilled in a  case  it	will
	furnish	 under the law a conclusive proof that the  building
	is,  bona fide, required by the Landlord.  There is no	need
	for the landlord to establish any other requirement.  Expla-
	nation (iv) provides a conclusive and irrebuttable  presump-
	tion of bona fide requirement once the conditions  mentioned
	therein	 are established.  The two tests are  fulfil.led  in
	this case on the findings of fact as noted above.  We are of
	opinion that the District
173
Judge  was  right in his finding that  Explanation  (iv)  of
section	 21  (1)
was applicable which view  was	 also  later
	upheld	by  the High Court. The High Court  was,  therefore,
	right in dismissing the writ application.
	    We may observe that we are not required to consider,  in
	this  appeal,  the effect of the Amendment Act 28  of  1976,
	which  came into force on July 5, 1976, whereby	 Explanation
(iv) was omitted; nor has any argument been advanced in that
	connection.
There  is no merit in this appeal which   is  dismissed.
	We  will, however, make no order as to costs.  The appellant
	may  continue in possession of the suit premises  till	30th
	April, 1977.  He shall hand over vacant and peaceful posses-
	sion thereof on May 1, 1977, to the respondent.
M.R.					       Appeal	dis-
	missed.
174