[Cites
15
, Cited by
53
]
Supreme Court of India
Yogiraj Charity Trust vs Commissioner Of Income-Tax, New Delhi on 30 March, 1976
Equivalent citations: 1976 AIR 1836, 1976 SCR (3) 947, AIR 1976 SUPREME COURT 1836, 1976 3 SCC 378, 1976 TAX. L. R. 733, 1976 3 SCR 947, 1976 2 SCJ 357, 103 ITR 777, 1976 43 TAXATION 49, 1976 2 ITJ 269, 1976 SCC (TAX) 294, 1976 UPTC 505, 1976 UJ (SC) 436
Author:
A.N.  Ray
Bench:
A.N.  Ray
,
M. Hameedullah Beg
,
Jaswant Singh
PETITIONER:
YOGIRAJ CHARITY TRUST

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX, NEW DELHI

DATE OF JUDGMENT30/03/1976

BENCH:
RAY, A.N. (CJ)
BENCH:
RAY, A.N. (CJ)
BEG, M. HAMEEDULLAH
SINGH, JASWANT

CITATION:
 1976 AIR 1836		  1976 SCR  (3) 947
 1976 SCC  (3) 378


ACT:
     Exemption	from   Income-tax-Religious  and  charitable
purposes-
Indian Income-tax Act, 1922
-
Section 4(3)(i)
-Intent-
Test for  treating a  Trust income as of a charitable nature
and for entitlement to exemption under
s. 4(3) (i)
ibid.



HEADNOTE:
     Charitable purposes  under
s.  4(3)
of  the Income	 Act
includes relief	 of the	 poor, education, medical relief and
the advancement	 of  any  other	 object	 of  general  public
utility, but  nothing contained in clause (i) and (ii) of
s.
4(3)
applies and shall operate to exempt from the provisions
of the	Act that part of the income from property held under
a trust	 or other  legal obligation  for  private  religious
purposes which	does not  ensure  for  the  benefit  of	 the
public.
     All the  six income-tax  references made by the Income-
tax Appellate  Tribunal, Delhi	Bench under
s. 66 (1)
of the
Indian Income-tax  Act, 1922 as to "whether on the facts and
in the	circumstances of  the case  the income	of the trust
which was  spent on  the religious  and charitable  purposes
within the  taxable territories was exempt under
s. 4(3) (i)
of the	Indian Income  Tax Act,	 1922" were  answered in the
negative and  in favour of Revenue, by the Division Bench of
the Delhi High Court holding "that the property of the trust
cannot be  held to  be wholly  for religious  or  charitable
purposes". The terms of the trust deeds in all the cases are
similar and  the pattern of financial dealing of the various
trusts is also the same as could be seen from the objects of
the trusts  particularly clauses  (5)(a), which	 are,  inter
alia, as follows :-
	  (i)  To open,	 found, construct,  establish  takes
	       over,  equip,   promote,	 conduct,  maintain,
	       support,	 subsidise,   grant  aids  and	make
	       donations to  schools, colleges,	 Pathshalas,
	       boarding houses,	 reading  clubs,  libraries,
	       art, music  or literary	societies and  other
	       institutions   educational    or	  otherwise,
	       associations,  printing	 presses,  journals,
	       newspapers, periodicals, and other religious,
	       commercial,   industrial,   legal,   medical,
	       engineering scientific  or other knowledge or
	       training.
	  (ii) To give	stipends,  scholarships,  travelling
	       expenses	 allowances  and  monetary  aids  to
	       students and  scholars in  India	 and  abroad
	       engaged in any of the pursuits referred to in
	       sub-clause (i).
	  (iii)To  found,   construct,	maintain,   support,
	       assist or  grant	 aids  or  subscriptions  to
	       temples, prayer	or congregational  halls  or
	       other  buildings	  for  cultural,  social  or
	       religious discourses.
	  (iv) To  open,   found   conduct,   maintain,	  or
	       contribute to  the opening and maintaining of
	       such institutions  where work at living wages
	       can be  provided to poor and deserving people
	       and also	 be conducive  to the development of
	       industries and benefit of the poor.
	  (v)  To open,	 found,	 establish,  equip,  finance
	       assist, maintain	 or contribute	to religious
	       commercial technical industrial or commercial
	       concerns,   institutions,   associations	  or
	       bodies imparting	 any  type  of	training  or
	       providing employment to persons.
	  (vi) To   give    donations,	 subscriptions	  or
	       contributions to	 any other  Charitable Trust
	       in Jaipur State or outside.
     Clauses 11	 and 16	 of the	 deed give  an	uncontrolled
discretion to  the trustees  to spend the whole of the trust
fund on	 any of the non-charitable objects of the trust. The
non-charitable objects authorise the opening and maintaining
of commercial institutions where work at living wages can be
provided to the
948
poor  and  also	 to  contribute	 to  commercial,  technical,
industrial or commercial concerns, institutions associations
or bodies  imparting  any  type	 of  training  or  providing
employment to persons.
     Dismissing the appeals by Special Leave, the Court
^
     HELD :
     (1) In order to claim the benefit of exemption under
s.
4(3)(i)
of  the Act the property must be held under trust or
other legal  obligation wholly	for religious  or charitable
purposes. The  only  relaxation	 is  that  all	the  primary
objects of  the trust  must be	of religious  and charitable
nature and  the existence  of  any  ancillary  or  secondary
object which  is not of a religious or charitable nature but
which is  intended to  subserve the religious and charitable
objects may  not prevent  the grant of an exemption. This is
because such  an ancillary  or secondary  object even though
not of	a religious  or charitable  nature  is	intended  to
effectuate the	main and  primary objects  of the  trust.  A
clear distinction  must be  drawn between  the object  of  a
trust  and   the  powers  conferred  upon  the	trustees  as
incidental  to	 the  carrying	 out  of  the  object.	Mere
application of	income to charity on the other hand will not
avail to  secure exemption if under the terms of the will or
deed the  income is applicable in the first instance to non-
charitable objects  and only the residue will go to charity.
[953-A-B, C, D]
     Commissioner  of	Income	Tax  v.	 Andhra	 Chamber  of
Commerce (1965) 55 I.T.R. 722 applied.
     Sole Trustee  Loka Shikshana  Trust v.  Commissioner of
Income-tax, Mysore  [1976] 1  SCR 461;	All India  Spinner's
Association v.	Commissioner of	 Income-tax (1944) 12 I.T.R.
482; C.I.T. v. Krishna Warriar [1964] 8 SCR 36; Commissioner
of Income  Tax v.  Bengal  Home	 Industries  Association  48
I.T.R. 181;  Hyderabad Stock  Exchange	Ltd.  v.  C.I.T.  66
I.T.R. 195;  and Commissioner  of Income  Tax v.  Radhaswami
Satsang Sabha 25 I.T.R. 472, discussed and distinguished.
     (ii) The  test is	that if	 one of	 the objects  of the
trust deed  is not  of a  religious or charitable nature and
the trust  deed confers	 full discretion  on the trustees to
spend the  trust  funds	 for  an  object  other	 than  of  a
religious or  charitable nature, the exemption under
s. 4(3)
(i)
of the Act is not available to the assessee. [955D]
     Lakshmi Narain Nath Trust v. Commissioner of Income Tax
(1969) 73 I.T.R. 402, followed.
     (iii) Where there are several objects of trusts some of
which  are   charitable	 and  some  non-charitable  and	 the
trustees in  their discretion are to apply the income to any
of the	objects, the  whole trust  fails and  no part of the
income is  exempt  from	 the  tax.  Where  the	objects	 are
distributive, each  and every  one of  the objects  must  be
charitable in  order that  the trust  might be	upheld as  a
valid charity.	If no  definite part  of the property or its
income is  allocated to	 charitable purposes and it would be
open to the trustees to apply the whole income to any of the
non-charitable objects no exemption can be claimed [952F-G]
     East   India   Industries	 (Madras)   Pvt.   Ltd.	  v.
Commissioner of Income Tax (1967) 65 I.T.R. 611 and Mohammed
Ibrahim Riza v. C.I.T. 57 I.A., 260 applied.
     (iv) In  the instant  case the  various industrial	 and
commercial concerns  were not  started by Ram Krishna Dalmia
in furtherance	of the	objects of trusts. The concerns were
started for  the purpose of earning profits which were to be
distributed to	the share  holders who	had  invested  share
money in  those concerns.  The trust  property could  not be
said to	 be wholly  for	 religious  or	charitable  purposes
within the meaning of
s. 4(3)(i)
of the Act. [954G-H, 955-C]
Arguments for the appellant.
     (1) The  Trust is	entitled to claim exemption under
s.
4(3) (i)
of the  Act because the trust is for religious and
charitable purposes only.
949
     (2) As to clauses which confer power on the trustees to
establish any  business, undertaking  or industry the income
derived from  such commercial  concern is to be spent wholly
for the	 religious and	charitable  purposes  and  therefore
exemption is permissible under
s. 4(3)(i)
of the Act.
     (3) The dominant purpose of the founder of the trust as
expressed in  the forefront  of the  Deed  is  religious  or
charitable and	even if	 money be  spent  on  non-charitable
purposes it  should not	 be held that the trust is meant for
non-charitable	purposes   and	the  founder  has  expressly
provided in Clause 30 of the Trust deed that the deed should
not become  invalid for the reason that some object might be
considered unlawful.
     (4) If  any income	 from  the  trust  is  utilised	 and
applied wholly	in carrying  out the primary purposes of the
trust, the  Trust  is  entitled	 to  claim  exemption  under
proviso (b)  to
section	 4(3)(i)
of the Act and there was no
bar on the trust to carry on business under the Act provided
the profits  of business  were utilised	 only for charitable
purposes.
Arguments for the respondents :
     (1) The Trust was not entitled to claim exemption under
s. 4(3)	 (i)
of	 the Indian  Income-tax Act,  1922  for	 the
simple reason  that some  of the  object of the Trust gave a
discretion to  the Trustees  to apply the funds of the Trust
to purporses  which could  not be regarded charitable in the
eye of law.
     (2) If out of several objects of the Trust some of them
were found  to be non-charitable, the whole trust would fail
and no part of its income would be exempt from tax.
     (3) It was not a genuine charitable trust as claimed by
the  assessee	but  its   creation  and  existence  were  a
camouflage and	were meant  only as a device for the benefit
of the	settlor Shri  Ram Krishna  Dalmia and the industrial
and commercial concerns controlled by him.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION :  Civil Appeals Nos. 937
to 966 of 1971
     Bishamber Lal,  D. N.  Banerjee, Pramod  Dayal  and  M.
Iyengar, for the appellant.
Hardyal Hardy (In CA 937/71), S. P. Nayar (In CAs. 938-
966) for the respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     RAY, C.J.	These appeals  by special leave are from the
judgment dated 26 May, 1970 of the High Court of Delhi.
The question  referred to	the High Court under
section
66(1)
of the Income Tax Act, 1922 referred to as the Act was
as follows :
"Whether on  the facts and in the circumstances of
     the case the income of the trust which was spent on the
     religious and  charitable purposes	 within the  taxable
     territories was  exempt under
section 4 (3) (i)
of the
     Indian Income Tax Act, 1922".
The main judgment was delivered in Income Tax Reference
No. 40 of 1965.
The High Court answered the question in the negative.
     The trust	in Income  Tax Reference  No. 40 of 1965 was
taken as  typical of  all the cases. The deed of trust dated
12 April, 1948
950
was made  by Ramkrishna Dalmia. The trust was called "Jaipur
Charitable Trust". In Jaipur Charitable Trust Rs. 10,000 was
given on  trust on  the terms  and conditions set out in the
deed.
The objects  of the  trust in  clause 5(a)	 are,  inter
alia, as follows :
(i)  To open,	 found, construct,  establish,	take
	       over,  equip,   promote,	 conduct,  maintain,
	       support,	 subsidise,   grant  aids  and	make
	       donations to  schools, colleges,	 Pathshalas,
	       boarding houses,	 reading  clubs,  libraries,
	       art, music  or literary	societies and  other
	       institutions,   educational   or	  otherwise,
	       associations,  printing	 presses,  journals,
	       newspapers,    periodicals,     and     other
	       publications  for   imparting  or  developing
	       religious,  commercial,	 industrial,   legal
	       medical,	 engineering   scientific  or  other
	       knowledge or training.
(ii) To give	stipends,  scholarships,  travelling
	       expenses	 allowances  and  monetary  aids  to
	       students and  scholars in  India and  abroad,
	       engaged in any of the pursuits referred to in
	       sub-clause (i).
(iii)To  found,   construct,	maintain,   support,
	       assist or  grant	 aids  or  subscriptions  to
	       temples, prayer	or congregational  halls  or
	       other  buildings	  for  cultural,  social  or
	       religious discourses.
(iv) To  open,   found   conduct,   maintain,	  or
	       contribute to  the opening and maintaining of
	       such institutions  where work at living wages
	       can be  provided to poor and deserving people
	       and also	 be conducive  to the development of
	       industries and benefit of the poor.
(v)  To open,	 found, establish,  equip,  finance,
	       assist, maintain	 or contribute to religious,
	       commercial    technical,	   industrial,	  or
	       commercial      concerns,       institutions,
	       associations or	bodies imparting any type of
	       training or providing employment to persons.
(vi) To   give    donations,	 subscriptions	  or
	       contributions to	 any other  Charitable Trust
	       in Jaipur State or outside.
There  are	 other	objects	 to  help  widows,  orphans,
lunatics, indigent  persons and	 to give  relier to the poor
and  distressed,   to  build,  equip,  take  over,  conduct,
maintain and  grant aids  to dispensaries,  maternity homes,
hospitals, lunatic asylums, to construct, erect and maintain
bridges, ghats,	 to give relief by subscription or otherwise
during famines,	 flood, earthquake,  pestilence, to  help or
maintain institutions  for the	cultural, social or economic
advancement of any country or countries.
For the  purpose of carrying out the trust the trustees
are empowered in clause 5(b), inter alia, (a) to purchase or
otherwise acquire  any property,  rights leases, concession;
(b) to	purchase or acquire, start establish, equip or close
any business  undertaking or industry; (c) purchase, acquire
or  undertake	the  whole  or	any  part  of  property	 and
liabilities on any person, firm or company.
951
The property  of the  Trust is  vested in the trustees.
Clause (9)  of the  Trust Deed	provides that  the  Trustees
shall carry  out the  aforesaid objects	 from out of the net
income of  the Trust  left after  meeting  the	expenses  of
management and	all charges  and outgoings  so far  as	such
income shall permit, and shall not utilize the income or any
portion thereof for any other objects or purpose.
Section 4(3) (i)
of the Act is as follows:-
"Any income,	profits or  gains falling within the
     following classes	shall not  be included	in the total
     income of the person receiving them;
(i) Subject  to the  provisions of  clause (c)  of
     sub-section
     (1) of
section 16
,  any income  derived from  property
     held under	 trust or  other legal obligation wholly for
     religious or  charitable purposes,	 in so	far as	such
     income is	applied or  accumulated for  application  to
     such religious  or charitable  purposes  as  relate  to
     anything done  within the	taxable territories,  and in
     the case  of property  so held  in part  only for	such
     purposes, the  income applied  or finally set apart for
     application thereto:
Provided that such income shall be included in the
     total income.
(a) xx   xx    xx
(b)  in the  case	of  income  derived  from  business,
	  carried on  behalf of	 a religious  or  charitable
	  institution, unless  the income  is applied wholly
	  for the purpose of the institutions and either-
(i)  the business  is carried	 on in the course of
	       the actual  carrying out of a primary purpose
	       of the institution, or
(ii) the work	 in connection	with the business is
	       mainly carried  on by  beneficiaries  of	 the
	       institution.
(iii)any  income  of	a  religious  or  charitable
	       institution    derived	  from	   voluntary
	       contributions  and   applicable	 solely	  to
	       religious or charitable purposes."
Charitable	 purpose  under
section  4(3)
of  the	 Act
includes relief	 of the	 poor, education, medical relief and
the advancement	 of  any  other	 object	 of  general  public
utility, but  nothing contained in clause (i) or clause (ii)
of
section 4(3)
applies and shall operate to exempt from the
provisions of  the Act that part of the income from property
held under  trust or  other  legal  obligation	for  private
religious purposes  which does not ensure for the benefit of
the public.
The terms	of the	Trust Deeds  in all  the  cases	 are
similar. The  pattern of  financial dealings  of the various
Trusts is also the same.
The appellant  contends that Trust is entitled to claim
exemption under
section 4(3)  (i)
of  the Act	because	 the
trust is  for religious	 and charitable purposes only. As to
clauses which  confer power  on trustees  to  establish	 any
business, undertaking or industry it is said by
952
the appellant  that the	 income derived from such commercial
concern	 is  to	 be  spent  wholly  for	 the  religious	 and
charitable purposes  and therefore exemption is permissible.
The appellant  contends that  the dominant  purpose  of	 the
founder of  the trust  as expressed  in the forefront of the
Deed is	 religious or  charitable and even if money be spent
on non-charitable  purposes it	should not  be held that the
trust is  meant for  non-charitable purpose.  The  appellant
also relies  on clause 30 of the trust deed where it is said
that the  deed should not become invalid for the reason that
some object might be considered unlawful.
The Revenue  denies the  claim  for  exemption  on	 the
ground that some objects are non-charitable and the trustees
are given  an  unfettered  discretion  with  regard  to	 the
utilisation of	the income. Some of the objects of the Trust
according to  the Revenue  give absolute  discretion to	 the
Trustees to  apply the funds of the Trust for purposes which
cannot be regarded charitable in the eye of law. The Revenue
contends that  if out  of several  objects of the Trust some
are found  to be  non-charitable, the whole trust will fail.
The  Revenue   also  contends  that  it	 is  not  a  genuine
charitable trust  but  its  creation  and  existence  are  a
camouflage and are meant only as a device for the benefit of
the settlor  and  the  industrial  and	commercial  concerns
controlled by him.
Clauses 11	 and 16	 of the	 deed give  an	uncontrolled
discretion to  the trustees  to spend the whole of the trust
fund on	 any of the non-charitable objects of the trust. The
non-charitable objects authorise the opening and maintaining
of commercial institutions where work at living wages can be
provided to  the poor  and also to contribute to commercial,
technical, industrial  or commercial concerns, institutions,
associations or	 bodies imparting  any type  of training  or
providing employment  to persons.  The Revenue contends that
these clauses  are clearly  non-charitable. Each  clause  is
independent and	 distinct, According  to the  Revenue it  is
neither ancillary  nor secondary  to  the  primary  dominant
purpose of  the trust  nor can it be said that these clauses
subserve  the  main  object  of	 the  trust.  Engagement  in
commercial institutions giving employment on wages cannot be
said to	 be charitable	object. Some  of the  objects of the
trust are  non-charitable. The trustees have been authorised
to utilize the income of the trust for any purpose mentioned
in the Trust Deed.
The question  is whether exemption can be granted where
some objects  are charitable  and some non-charitable. Where
there are  several objects  of a  trust, some  of which	 are
charitable and	some non-charitable,  and  the	trustees  in
their discretion  are to  apply the  income to	any  of	 the
objects, the  whole trust fails and no part of the income is
exempt from  tax. Where	 the objects  are distributive, each
and every  one of  the objects	must be	 charitable in order
that the  trust might  be upheld  as a	valid charity. If no
definite part  of the property or of its income is allocated
to charitable  purposes and it would be open to the trustees
to apply  the whole  income to	any  of	 the  non-charitable
objects	 no  exemption	can  be	 claimed.  (See
East  India
Industries (Madras)  Pvt  Ltd.	v.  Commissioner  of  Income
Tax
(
1)and Mohammad Ibrahim Riza v. C.I.T.
(2)
953
In order  to claim	 the benefit  of the exemption under
section 4(3)  (i)
of the Act the property must be held under
trust or  other legal  obligation wholly  for  religious  or
charitable purposes.  The only relaxation which may arise in
some cases is that all the primary objects of the trust must
be of a religious and charitable nature and the existence of
any  ancillary	or  secondary  object  which  is  not  of  a
religious or  charitable nature	 but which  is	intended  to
subserve  the  religious  and  charitable  objects  may	 not
prevent the  grant of  an exemption. This is because such an
ancillary or secondary object even though not of a religious
or charitable  nature is intended to effectuate the main and
primary objects of the trust.
If the  primary or	 dominant  purpose  of	a  trust  is
charitable, another  object  which  by	itself	may  not  be
charitable but	which is  merely ancillary  or incidental to
the primary  or dominant purpose would not prevent the trust
from being  a valid  charity. A	 clear distinction  must  be
drawn between the object of a trust and the powers conferred
upon the  trustees as  incidental to the carrying out of the
object. If  the only  object of	 a turst is the construction
and maintenance	 of a  swimming bath  which is	a purpose of
general public utility, the fact that the trustees are given
the power  to supply  or sell  refreshments to	persons	 who
resort to  the bath would not make the trust any of the less
charitable. Mere  application of  income to  charity on	 the
other hand  will not  avail to secure exemption if under the
terms of  the will  or deed  the income is applicable in the
first  instance	 to  non-charitable  objects  and  only	 the
residue will  go to charity. (See
Commissioner of Income Tax
v. Andhra Chamber of Commerce
(1).
The appellant  contended that  if any  income from	 the
Trust is  utilised and	applied wholly	in carrying  out the
primary purposes  of the  Trust, the  Trust is	entitled  to
claim exemption under proviso (b) to
section 4(3) (i)
of the
Act. The  appellant relied  on the  recent decision  of this
Court in
Sole Trustee	Loka Shikshana Trust v. Commissioner
of Income  Tax, Mysore
(2).  The	 Loka  Shikshana  Trust	 was
engaged in  the business  of  printing	and  publication  of
newspaper  and	journals  and  the  further  fact  that	 the
activity yielded  profit and  there were  no restrictions on
the trust earning profits in the course of its business went
to show	 that the  purpose of  the trust did not satisfy the
requirement that it was one not involving the carrying on of
any activity  for profit.
This Court relied on the decision
in
All India Spinners' Association v. Commissioner of Income
Tax
(3) namely,	that the charitable purposes exclude objects
of private gain.
The appellant  contended that  there was  no bar on the
trust to  carry on  business  under  the  Act  provided	 the
profits	 of  business  were  utilized  only  for  charitable
purpose. The  appellant relied on the decision of this Court
in
C.I.T.  v. Krishna  Warriar
(4) In
Krishna Warriar
's case
the trustees  were directed  to apply  60 per  cent  of	 the
income of  the business vested in the trustees to charitable
purposes and  40 per cent for the benefit of the family. The
question was whether 60 per cent of the
954
income was  liable to  tax under proviso (b) to
section 4(3)
(i) of	the Act on the ground that the entire income was not
applied for  charitable purposes. The question that arose
in
that case
dealt with the meaning of the expression "part" as
used in
section 4(3)  (i)
of  the Act	that "in the case of
profit so  held in  part only  for such	 purposes the income
applied or  finally set	 apart for application thereto shall
not  be	  included  in	 the  total  income  of	 the  person
receiving'.
Krishna  Warriar
's (supra)	case does  not	deal
with the  effect of  a deed  which has charitable as well as
non-charitable objects	and the trustees have been given the
power to  apply	 the  whole  of	 the  trust  fund  for	non-
charitable objects excluding charitable objects.
The  decision  in
C.I.T.	v.  Bengal  Home  Industries
Association
(
1)	 Hyderabad Stock  Exchange Ltd. v. C.I.T.
(
2)
C.I.T. v. Radhaswami Satsang Sabha
(3) on which the appellant
relied are  all applications  of the  ruling  in
All  India
Spinners' Association
(supra) case that what has to be found
out is	whether the  object clause  has	 any  non-charitable
object.
In  the
Bengal	Home Industries
(supra)  case,	 the
object was  to promote and develop home industries, arts and
crafts. The  income of	the Association	 was to	 be  applied
solely towards	the promotion  of and  carrying out  of	 its
objects.  No   portion	of  the	 income	 could	be  paid  or
transferred directly  or indirectly  by way  of dividends to
the members. In the case of winding up the surplus could not
be distributed	to the members but were to be transferred to
the institution.
In the
Hyderabad Stock Exchange
(supra) case, the aims
and objects  were not  only  to	 further  the  interests  of
brokars and dealers but also to assist, regulate and control
the trade  in securities,  to  maintain	 high  standards  of
commercial honour  and integrity,  to discharge and suppress
mal-practices to  settle disputes and decide all question of
usage, custom  or  courtesy  in	 the  conduct  of  trade  or
business. The  objects were found beneficial to a section of
the public  and of  general public  utility. The profit were
not to be distributed to the members but were to be utilized
for the promotion of the objects of the Exchange. Therefore,
the object  was charitable and the income was applied wholly
for charitable purposes.
In
Radhaswami  Satsang  Sabha
(supra),  case  several
industrial and	commercial concerns  were  started  for	 the
benefit of the Satsanghis. Those were not run for individual
profits nor  were the profits distributed among the members.
The concerns  were started  in furtherance of its objects of
religious and charitable nature.
In the  present case,  the Income Tax Authorities found
that the various industrial and commercial concerns were not
started by  Ram Krishna Dalmia in furtherance of the objects
of the	trusts. The concerns were started for the purpose of
earning profits	 which were  to be distributed to the share-
holders who had invested share money in those concerns
955
This Court	 in
East  India Industries  (Madras) Private
Limited v.  C.I.T.
(1) found  that one  of the objects of the
trust was  not for  charitable or  religious  purposes.	 The
object was  to	manufacture,  buy,  sell  and  distribute  a
pharmaceutical medicinal,  chemical and	 other preparations.
The other  objects were charitable in nature.
The Trust Deed
in
East	 India Industries (Madras) Pvt. Limited
(supra) case
conferred power	 on the	 trustees to  apply the whole or any
part of	 the trust  property or	 fund for  all or  any other
purposes of  the trust.	 This Court  found that there was no
special trust  and no  particular item	of property had been
burndened with the performance of any specific object of the
trust. It was open to the trustees to utilize the income for
any one	 of the objects of the trust to the exclusion of all
other objects.	It would  not be a violation of the trust if
the trustees devoted the entire income to the carrying on of
a  business   of  manufacture,	 sale  and  distribution  of
pharmaceutical, medicinal and other preparations. This Court
held that  the trust property could not be said to be wholly
for religious  or charitable  purposes within the meaning of
section 4(3)  (i)
of the Act.
The present appeals are all of
the type  of
East  India Industries (Madras) Private Limited
(supra) case and fall within the ruling
in that case
.
The test  is that	if one	of the	objects of the trust
deed is	 not of	 a religious  or charitable  nature and	 the
trust deed  confers full discretion on the trustees to spend
the trust  funds for  an object other than of a religious or
charitable nature,  the exemption  under
section 4(3) (i)
of
the Act	 is not	 available to  the  assessee.  (See
Lakshmi
Narain Nath Trust v. Commissioner of Income Tax
(2).
For these reasons the appeals are dismissed. In view of
the fact  that the High Court directed that the parties will
bear their own costs, the same order is made as to costs.
S.R.					  Appeals dismissed.
956