[Cites
12
, Cited by
8
]
Supreme Court of India
Damodar Valley Corporation vs State Of Bihar & Ors on 5 August, 1976
Equivalent citations: 1976 AIR 1956, 1977 SCR (1) 118, AIR 1976 SUPREME COURT 1956, 1976 3 SCC 710, 1976 SCC (TAX) 389, 1977 (1) SCR 118, 1977 PATLJR 166, 1976 UJ (SC) 740
Author:
Hans Raj Khanna
Bench:
Hans Raj Khanna
,
N.L. Untwalia
,
Jaswant Singh
PETITIONER:
DAMODAR VALLEY CORPORATION

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF BIHAR & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT05/08/1976

BENCH:
KHANNA, HANS RAJ
BENCH:
KHANNA, HANS RAJ
UNTWALIA, N.L.
SINGH, JASWANT

CITATION:
 1976 AIR 1956		  1977 SCR  (1) 118
 1976 SCC  (3) 710


ACT:
	Constitution of India, 1950---Art. 288(2)--Scope of.
Bihar	Electricity   Duty  Act,  1948
(as   amended)
S.
	3(2)(e)
--Scope of



HEADNOTE:
	    The proviso (v) to
s. 3(1)
of the Bihar Electricity Duty
	Act,  1948 provided that no duty shall be leviable on  units
	of  energy consumed by, or in respect of, or sold  for	con-
	sumption  in  any mine or industrial undertaking  except  to
	the  extent specified in the Second Schedule.  In 1963
s.  3
of  the Act was amended and a new
s. 3
was. substituted	 for
	the old
s. 3
.  Sub-section (2)(e) of the new section  states
	that  no duty shall be leviable on units of energy  consumed
	by the Damodar Valley Corporation for the generation, trans-
	mission or distribution of electricity by that	Corporation.
	Item A of the First Schedule, as amended in 1963 states that
	for  a mine or an industrial undertaking the  duty  leviable
	shall  be at such rate or rates not exceeding 2	 naya  paise
	per  unit of energy fixed by the State Government with,	 the
	previous  consent  of the president.
The Amending  Act
re-
	ceived the assent of the President.
	    In	response to notices issued by the Superintendent  of
	Commercial   Taxes calling upon the appellant to  pay  elec-
	tricity	 duty  under  the Act  as   amended,  the  appellant
	contended that it enjoyed immunity from payment of tax under
	cl.  (1) of
Art. 288
of the Constitution, no law  satisfying
	the  requirement of cl. (2) of Art. 288. having	 been  made.
	warranting the levy of such duty.
	The High Court dismissed the appellant's writ petition.
	Dismissing the appeal to this Court,
	    HELD:  (1)	What is required by cl. (2) of
Art.  288
is
	that the law made by the State legislature for imposing,  or
	authorising the imposition of tax mentioned in cl. (1) shall
	have effect only if (i) after having been  reserved  for the
	consideration of the President, it receives his assent,	 and
	(ii) that if such law provides for the fixation of the rates
	and other incidents of such tax by means of rules or  orders
	to  be	made under the law by any authority, the  law  shall
	provide	 for ,the previous consent of the,  President  being
	obtained  to the making of any such rule or order.   It	 is,
	however,  not the effect of that clause that even  if  these
	two requirements are satisfied, the provisions which  merely
	deal  with  the mode and manner of the payment	of  the	 tax
	should also receive the assent of the President and that  in
	the absence of such, assent, the provisions dealing with the
	incidence of tax, which have  received	the  assent  of	 the
	President, would remain unenforceable. [123 H; 124 A-B]	 (2)
	The  contention of the appellant that the amending  Act	 did
	not  contemplate  or contain any indication  regarding	the,
	imposition of electricity duty upon the appellant is  plain-
	ly, untenable, for it would have the effect of rendering  s.
	3(2)(e)	 to  be wholly redundant.  Under proviso (v)  to  s.
	3(1) of the Principal Act, mines and industrial undertakings
	were  exempt from levy of duty.	 This exemption stood  with-
	drawn  as a result of substitution of new
s. 3
for  the	 old
	section by the amending Act.  The new charging
s. 3(1)
roped
	in all industrial undertakings, including the Damodar Valley
	Corporation,  for  the	purpose of levy	 of  duty.
Section
	3(2)(e)
,  introduced by the
Amending Act
of 1963,  expressly
	granted exemption from levy of electricity  duty  on   units
	of  energy  consumed by the appellant for  the,	 generation,
	transmission or distribution of electricity by that Corpora-
	tion.	This provision, containing express reference to	 the
	appellant  Corporation, dearly warrants the inference	that
	in respect of units of energy not covered by
s. 3(2)(e)
the
	exemption would not be available to the appellant.  [123  A-
	B]
	119
	    (3) There is no substance in the contention that  unless
	s.  4  of  the principal Act was also  re-enacted  with	 the
	assent	of the President, the liability for payment of	duty
	cannot	be  fastened upon the appellant.
Section 3
of	 the
	Amending Act which deals with the incidence of duty makes it
	clear that such duty has to, be paid on the units of  energy
	consumed  or sold and at the rate or rates specified in	 the
	schedule.   As	the duty is to be levied on  the  units	  of
	energy consumed or sold, it would follow that the duty would
	have  to be paid by the consumer or seller as the  case	 may
	be.
Section 4
of the. principal Act merely provides for the
	manner and mode of payment of the duty. [123 F-G]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 104 of 1970.
	    (From  the	Judgment and Order dated 23-10-1967  of	 the
	Patna  High  Court  in	Civil  Writ  Jurisdiction  Case	 No.
	299/66).
L.M. Singhvi, U.P. Singh and S.N. Jha, for the Appellant.
	Sarjoo Prasad and U.S. Prasad, for the Respondent.
	The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
	    KHANNA, J.	The short question which arises for determi-
	nation	in  this  appeal on certificate	 by  Damodar  Valley
	Corporation  against the judgment of Patna High	 Court	dis-
	missing the writ petition filed by the appellant is  whether
	the appellant is liable to pay electricity duty under
Bihar
	Electricity Duty Act
,, 1948 as amended by Bihar	 Electricity
	Duty  (Amendment) Act, 1963.  The High Court  answered	 the
	question in the affirmative against the appellant.
	    The	 appellant  is a corporation established  under	 the
Damodar Valley Corporation Act, 1948
for the development  of
	the  Damodar Valley in the States of Bihar and West  Bengal.
	One  of the functions of the appellant is the promotion	 and
	operation of schemes  for  the generation, transmission	 and
	distribution of hydroelectric and thermal electrical energy.
Bihar  Electricity  Duty Act, 1948
(Bihar Act  36  of  1948)
	(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) was published
	in the Bihar gazette; on October 1, 1948.  It was an Act for
	the levy of duty on the sales and consumption of  electrical
	energy	 in  the province of Bihar.  Material part  of	sec-
	tions. 3 and 4,. as they stood before the amendment made  in
	1963, read as under:
"3.	Incidence  of  duty.---(1)  There  shall  be
		 levied and
		   paid	 to  the: State Government on the  units  of
		 energy consumed or sold, excluding losses of energy
		 in the transmission and  transformation, a duty  at
		 the rates specified in	 the  First   Schedule:
Provided that no	 duty  shall be leviable  on
		 units	of energy :--
(i) ........
(ii)  ....
(iii) ......
(iv) .....
120
(v) consumed by, or in respect of, or sold	 for
		 consumption in any-
(a) mine, as defined in the Indian Mines Act, 1923:
(b) industrial undertaking;
except	 to  the  extent  specified  in	 the  Second
		 Schedule:
(vi)......
(2)  ....
4.  Payment  of duty.--( I )  Every  licensee
		 shall	pay every month to the State  Government  at
		 the   time   and   in	the  manner  prescribed	 the
		 proper duty payable under
section 3
on the units of
		 energy	 consumed by him or sold by him to the	con-
		 sumer.
(2)  Every  licensee  may  recover  from	 the
		 amount	 which falls to be paid by the	licensee  as
		 duty in respect of energy sold to the consumer.
			(3).......
(4)  ....
(4a)  ....
(5)  ....
The principal Act was amended by Bihar	 Electricity
		 Duty (Amendment) Act, 1963 (Bihar Act 20. of  1963)
		 (hereafter  referred to as the amending Act).	 The
		 amending  Act received the assent of the  President
		 on  December 4, 1963 and was published on  December
		 17,  1963.  By
section 2
of the amending  Act,	 new
section  3
was substituted for the old
section  3
.
		 Material part of new
section 3
read  as under:
"3.  Incidence  of duty.(1)  Subject  to	 the
		 provision of sub-section (2), there shall be levied
		 and  paid to the State Government on the  units  of
		 energy	 consumed  or  sold,   excluding  losses  of
		 energy	 in transmission and transformation, a	duty
		 at the rate or rates specified in the Schedule.
		 (2) No duty shall be leviable on units of energy-
(a)	 ....
(b)	 ....
(c)	 ....
(d)	 ....
(e)	consumed by the Damodar	 Valley	 Corporation
		 for the generation, transmission or distribution of
		 electricity by that Corporation;
(f)	....
(3)	....
121
Amendment  was also made in the First	Schedule  of
		 the principal Act. The relevant part of the  sched-
		 ule read as 'under  :
THE SCHEDULE
			  (See
section 3
.)
	RATES OF DUTY
	A. For a mine or an industrial under-	   Such rateor rates
	taking,	 save in  respect  of its	not exceeding 2 naya
	premises used for residential or   paisa per unit of  office
	purpose				      energy  as  may,	from
					      time to time, be fixed
					     by	 the  State   Govern
					     ment  with	 the   previ
					     ous   consent  of	 the
					     President,	  by   order
					     in this  behalf".
In	the writ petition the appellant	 prayed	 for
		 quashing  three  notices dated	 February  10,	1965
		 issued	 by the Superintendent of  Commercial  Taxes
		 Giridih  as also his orders dated March 24 and	 29,
		 1966.	 By the impugned notices the  Superintendent
		 of  Commercial Taxes called upon the  appellant  to
		 show cause as to why penal action under the princi-
		 pal  Act as amended,, should not be  taken  against
		 the  appellant	 for  having failed  to	 get  itself
		 registered under that Act.  The appellant was	also
		 called	 upon  to apply for  registration.   By	 the
		 impugned  orders the Superintendent  of  Commercial
		 Taxes	directed. the appellant to  pay	 electricity
		 duty  under the: Act as amended.  The case  of	 the
		 appellant was that it enjoyed immunity from payment
		 of  tax  under	 clause (1) of
article	288
of	 the
		 Constitution.	No law satisfying the requirement of
		 clause	 (2) of
article 288
, it was  contended,	 had
		 been made warranting the levy of such a duty.	 The
		 High Court repelled this contention, and we find no
		 sufficient ground to take a different view.
Article 288
of the Constitution reads as under:
"288(1)	Save in so far as the President	 may
		 by  order otherwise provide, no law of a  State  in
		 force	immediately before the comencement  of	this
		 Constitution shall impose, or authorise the imposi-
		 tion of, a tax in respect of any water or electric-
		 ity  stored,  generated, consumed,  distributed  or
		 sold by any authority established by any   existing
		 law  made by Parliament for regulating or  develop-
		 ing any inter-State river or river-valley.
Explanation.--The	 expression 'law of a  State
		 in  force' in this clause shall include a law of  a
		 State	passed	or made before the  commencement  of
		 this  Constitution  and not  previously  repealed,,
		 notwithstanding that it or parts of it may not	 be,
		 then  in operation either at all or  in  particular
		 areas.
(2)  The  Legislature  of a State	may  by	 law
		 impose or authorise the imposition of, any such tax
		 as  is mentioned in clause ( 1 ), but no  such	 law
		 shall	have any effect unless it has, after  having
		 been  reserved	 for  the   consideration   of	 the
		 President, received his assent; and if any such law
		 provides  for the fixation of the rates  and  other
		 incidents  of such tax by means of rules or  orders
		 to be made under the law by any authority, the	 law
		 shall	provide	 for  the previous  consent  of	 the
		 President  being  obtained to the  making  of	 any
		 such rule or order."
10--1003 SCI/76
122
Article 288
grants exemption from tax under any law of a
	State in respect of any water or electricity stored,  gener-
	ated,  consumed, distributed or sold by any authority estab-
	lished by any existing law or any law made by Parliament for
	regulating  or	developing  any inter-State river or  river-
	valley,	 except in certain  cases.  According to clause	 (1)
	of  the	 article, this exemption would not be  available  in
	respect	 of  such tax imposed under any law of	a  State  in
	force  immediately before the commencement of the  Constitu-
	tion  if the: President by order so provides.  Although	 the
	principal  Act	is a pre-Constitution law, being an  Act  of
	1948,  no order was admittedly made  by the President  with-
	drawing the exemption in respect of the appellant from	levy
	of such, tax under the principal Act.  Indeed, there was  no
	question  of issue of any such order because  the  principal
	Act  did not provide for the imposition of electricity	duty
	upon  a corporation like the appellant.	 Clause (v)  of	 the
	proviso.  to sub-section (1 ) of
section 3
of the  principal
	Act expressly stated that no duty shall be leviable on units
	of  energy consumed by, or in respect of, or. sold for	con-
	sumption  in any mine, as defined in the Indian Mines	Act,
	or  industrial undertakings, except to the extent  specified
	in  the	 Second Schedule.  The appellant  is  admittedly  an
	industrial undertaking, and as such, was not liable. to	 pay
	electricity duty under	the- principal Act.
	    The case of the respondentS is that the bar to the	levy
	of the said duty was removed and the levy of the duty on the
	appellant was, put on a sound legal basis as a result of the
	amendment  made.  in  the principal Act by the amending	 Act
	of 1963.  The amending Act, we find, satisfies the  require-
	ments  of  clause  (2) of
article 288.
According  to	that
	clause,	 the  legislature of a State may by law	 impose,  or
	authorise the imposition of, any tax mentioned in clause (1)
	of  that  article,  but no such law shall  have	 any  effect
	unless it has,	after having been reserved for the consider-
	ation of the President, received his assent; and if any such
	law  provides for the fixation of the rates and other  inci-
	dents  of such tax by means of rules or orders to.  be	made
	under  the law by any authority,, the law shall provide	 for
	the previous consent of the President being obtained to	 the
	making of any such rule or order.  The amending Act of 1963,
	as  already mentioned, received the assent of the  President
	before its  publication. The exemption which was granted  to
	mines  and  industrial	undertakings from payment  of  elec-
	tricity duty under the principal Act was withdrawn under the
	amending Act, except to	 some  extent  with which we are not
	concerned.  The new schedule, substituted for the old sched-
	ule  by the amending Act, prescribed the rates of  duty	 for
	mines and industrial undertakings, and it was provided	that
	the rate of duty shall be such rate or rates not exceeding 2
	naya paise per unit of energy as may, from time to time,  be
	fixed  by the State Government with the previous consent  of
	the President, by order in this behalf.
It	 has  been argued by Dr. Singhvi on  behalf  of	 the
	appellant that the scheme of
article 288
is to grant general
	exemption  from the levy of tax in respect of any  water  or
	electricity  stored,  generated,  consumed,  distributed  or
	sold' by any authority established by any, existing
123
law or any law made by Parliament for regulating or develop-
	ing any inter-State river or river-valley.  If any law	made
	by  a State legislature, according to the submission,  seeks
	the  imposition	 of any such tax, such	law  should  contain
	clear  indication  to  that effect before  it  receives	 the
	assent	of the President.  The amending Act of	 1963,	:ac-
	cording	 to  the learned counsel, did not contain  any	such
	indication.  This  contention,	in our	opinion,  is  wholly
	devoid of  force.  Under proviso (v) to
section 3(1)
of	 the
	principal Act, mines and industrial undertakings were exempt
	from  levy  of duty.  This exemption stood  withdrawn  as  a
	result	of, substitution of new
section 3
for the  old	sec-
	tion  by the amending Act.  The new charging
section 3
(1  )
	roped in all industrial undertakings, including the  Damodar
	Valley Corporation, for the purpose of levy of duty.  Clause
(e) of sub-section (2) of new
section 3
which was introduced
	by  the	 amending Act of 1963. expressly  granted  exemption
	from levy of electricity duty on units of energy consumed by
	the appellant corporation for  the  generation, transmission
	or  distribution of electricity by that	 corporation.	This
	provision.  containing	express reference to  the  appellant
	corporation, clearly warrants the inference that in  respect
	of units of energy not covered by clause (e) of	 sub-section
	(2) of
section 3
the exemption would not be available to the
	appellant.  The contention advanced on behalf of the  appel-
	lant  that the amending Act did not contemplate	 or  contain
	indication regarding the imposition of electricity duty upon
	the  appellant is plainly untenable, for it would  have	 the
	effect	 of Tendering clause (e) of sub-section (2) of	sec-
	tion  3	 to be wholly redundant.  The courts,  it  is  well-
	settled,  should be loath to accept an argument which  would
	have  the effect of rendering redundant the provision  of  a
	statute.
Lastly, it has been argued that though there has been an
	amendment of
section 3
of the principal Act by its substitu-
	tion by a new section under the amending Act of 196.3, there
	has  been no amendment of
section 4
with the assent  of	 the
	President.   As such,  no liability to pay electricity	duty
	can  be fastened upon the appellant. This submission too  is
	bereft	of force.
Section 3
, as inserted by  the  'amending
	Act of 19'63, is the charging section.	According to  clause
	(1) of that section, subject to the provision of sub-section
	(2), there shall be: levied and paid to the State Government
	on the: 'units	of energy consumed or sold, excluding losses
	of energy in transmission and transformation, a duty at	 the
	rate  or rates specified in the Schedule.  The section	thus
	deals  with the incidence of duty, and makes it	 clear	that
	such  duty h.as. to be paid on the units of energy  consumed
	or sold and at the rate or rates specified in the  schedule.
	It  is further made clear by the section that the duty is to
	be levied and -paid to the State Government.  As the duty is
	to.  be levied on the units of energy consumed or  sold,  it
	would  follow  that the duty would have to be  paid  by	 the
	consumer or seller,, as the case may be.
Section 4-
of	 the
	principal  Act	merely provides for the manner and  mode  of
	payment of the duty, and we find no substance in the conten-
	tion  that  unless
section 4
of the principal Act  was	also
	re-enacted  with the assent of the President, the  liability
	for payment of duty cannot be fastened upon the appellant.
124
What  is required by clause (2) of
article 288
is	that
	the   law  made	 by the State legislature  for	imposing  or
	authorising  the imposition of tax mentioned in	 clause	 (1)
	shall have effect only if after having been reserved for the
	consideration  of  the President, it  receives	his  assent.
	Another	 requirement  of that clause is that  if  such	 law
	provides  for the fixation of the rates and other  incidents
	of such tax by means of rules or orders to be made under the
	law by any authority, the law shall.. provide for the previ-
	ous  consent of the  President being obtained to the  making
	of  any such rule or order.  It is, however, not the  effect
	of that Clause that even if the above mentioned two require-
	ments  are satisfied, the provisions which merely deal	with
	the  mode  and manner of the payment of	 the  aforesaid	 tax
	should also receive the assent of the President and that  in
	the absence of such assent, the provisions. dealing with the
	incidence   of	tax, which have	 received  the	 assent	  of
	the  President,	 would	remain unenforceable.
	    Some  other	 aspects were also dealt with  by  the	High
	Court,	but  in the light of the view we have taken  in	 the
	matter, it is not necessary to deal with those aspects.
	    The	 appeal consequently fails and is dismissed  but  in
	the circumstances without costs.
P.B.R.					       Appeal	dis-
	missed.
125