[Cites
8
, Cited by
8
]
Supreme Court of India
Cheran Transport Co. Ltd vs Kanan Lorry Service And Another on 10 December, 1976
Equivalent citations: 1977 AIR 1564, 1977 SCR (2) 389, AIR 1977 SUPREME COURT 1564, 1977 (1) SCC 604, 1977 2 SCR 389, 1977 2 SCJ 66, 1977 (1) SCWR 378, 1977 9 LAWYER 97, 1977 TAC 118, 1977 U J (SC) 49
Author:
V.R. Krishnaiyer
Bench:
V.R. Krishnaiyer
,
A.N.  Ray
,
M. Hameedullah Beg
PETITIONER:
CHERAN TRANSPORT CO. LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
KANAN LORRY SERVICE AND ANOTHER

DATE OF JUDGMENT10/12/1976

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
RAY, A.N. (CJ)
BEG, M. HAMEEDULLAH

CITATION:
 1977 AIR 1564		  1977 SCR  (2) 389
 1977 SCC  (1) 604
 CITATOR INFO :
 RF	    1980 SC2044	 (7)
 R	    1992 SC 180	 (4)


ACT:
Motor  Vehicle Act
-- Secs. 58,68--C 68D(3),  68F(1D)--Stage
	carriage operator--Permit--Renewal--Renewal application made
	within time-- Whether can be defeated by Publication Scheme.



HEADNOTE:
	The respondent was Stage Carriage Operator whose two permits
	were  to  expire in January and March 1976.   In  the  usual
	course	and  in	 compliance  with
section 58
of  the  Motor
	Vehicles  Act,	1939, he applied for renewal more  than	 120
	days  ahead but at the time of the actual date of expiry  of
	the  permits  a draft scheme under part IV-A had  been	pub-
	lished.	 The State withdrew the draft scheme under part IV-A
	for  some  technical reasons and republished in	 July  1975,
	after the appellants' permits had expired.  Section  68F(1D)
	provides  that no permit shall be granted or renewal  during
	the period intervening between the date of publication under
	s.  68C	 of any scheme and the date of	publication  of	 the
	approved  or modified scheme.  The proviso to the said	sec-
	tion provides that if a permit expires after the publication
	of  the	  scheme  such permit may be renewed for  a  limited
	period	but the renewed permit	shall cease to be  effective
	on  the publication of the scheme under s. 68D(3).  Applying
	the  prohibition  contained  in	 s.  68F(1D)  the   Regional
	Transport   Authority rejected the prayer for renewal.	 The
	High  Court set aside that order directed the grant  of	 the
	renewal.
	Dismissing the appeals,
	    HELD:  1. At the time the respondents' permit expired  a
	draft  scheme  had already been published but  the  approved
	scheme	had  not been, published. Any  permit  holder  whose
	permit	expires during this spell is eligible for a  renewal
	as specified in the proviso.  The fact that the draft scheme
	was  later withdrawn ca.not affect the rights to a  renewal.
	Renewal of the permit however would be to the extent contem-
	plated by section 68F(1D).  [390G-H]
	    2.	 (a) No permit or renewal except to the	 extent	 ex-
	pressly	 saved	by  section 68F(1D) can be  granted  by	 the
	Regional  Transport Authority during the period between	 the
	date of publication of any scheme and  the  date  of  publi-
	cation of the approved scheme. [391C]
	    (b)	 If  a permit expires after the publication  of	 any
	draft	scheme	 such permit is eligible for renewal  for  a
	limited period as set out in the proviso. The special provi-
	sion  contained in that proviso cannot be stretched  on	 the
	ground of possible anomalies or unjust consequences to cover
	permits	 expiring even before the publication of  the  draft
	scheme.	  Where language is plain the interpretation  cannot
	take  the  shape of addition  or  interstitial	legislation.
	[391C-D]
	    3.	If a permit holder whose permit is about  to  expire
	diligently does in the normal course, all that he needs	 and
	all  that he can, that is to say, if he sets in	 motion	 the
	legal  machinery  for the grant of renewal as laid  down  in
section	 58
, the fact that a scheme is published before	 the
	actual	 grant	of renewal will not intercept or  extinguish
	the  process  of law set in motion by  the  application	 for
	renewal.  If for reasons beyond the control of the applicant
	the renewal process gets delayed or prolonged he. cannot  be
	penalised.   Renewal  is a legal process and not  the  final
	act.  Save in this category of cases all other permits which
	have  expired before the draft scheme is  published,  suffer
	the ban of s. 68F(1D).	However, no permit can ensure beyond
	the time of the publication of the approved scheme.   [391D-
	F]
	390



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION:  Civil  Appeal  Nos. 1349-
	1350/76.
Appeals  by Special Leave from the Judgment	 and  Decree
	dated the 12th October 1976 of the Madras High Court in Writ
	Petition Nos. 5881 and 5884 of 1975.
V.P. Raman, Addl. Sol, General of lndia, (Mrs.) N. G,
	Krishna	 Iyengar, Shri Narain, K.J.' John, D.N.	 Mishra	 for
	the Appellant.
F.S.  Nariman,  M. N.  Rangachari,  A.R.	 Ramanathan,
	Jayaraman,M.M.L. Srivastava and A.T.M. Sarapath for Respond-
	ent No. 1.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by--
	    KRISHNA IYER, J. The short ,question, involving a  point
	of  construction  of  s. 68-F(1D), has been  raised  by	 the
	Additional  Solicitor  General in these appeals	 by  Special
	Leave.
The	 respondent was a stage carriage operator whose	 two
	permits ,were to expire in January and. March 1976.  In	 the
	usual  course  and in compliance with
s. 58
.  of  the
Motor
	Vehicles  Act,	1939
(for short, '
The Act
') he	applied	 for
	renewal	 more  than 120 days ahead but at the  time  of	 the
	actual	date of expiry of the permits a-draft  scheme  under
	part  IV-A had been published.	This fulfilled the  require-
	ments of the proviso to
s. 68-F(1D)
and entitled the  appel-
	lant  to renewal for the limited period stated in  the	said
	proviso.   But the State withdrew the draft scheme for	some
	technical reasons and republished it in July 1975, after the
	appellant's  permit had expired.  Applying  the	 prohibition
	contained  in
s. 68-F(1D)
the Regional Transport  Authority
	(for  short the 'R.T.A.') rejected the prayer  for  renewal.
	However,  the High Court set aside that order  and  directed
	the grant of renewal, on a certain view of the section which
	the  Additional Solicitor General contends goes	 beyond	 the
	limits	of  the plain words used.  The aggrieved  State	 ap-
	peals.
While  we are satisfied that on the peculiar  facts.  of
	this  case the respondent can sustain the permits the  legal
	position canvassed by the appellant appears to be correct.
	    At	the  time the respondent's permit  expired  a  draft
	scheme	had already been published but the  approved  scheme
	had  not  been published.  Any permit  holder  whose  permit
	expires	 during	 this  spell is eligible for  a	 renewal  as
	specified  in the proviso.  The fact that the  draft  scheme
	was  later withdrawn cannot affect the right to	 a  renewal.
	We, therefore, hold that the renewal of permit shall  remain
	to the extent contemplated in the proviso to
s. 68-F(1D)
.
	Before	we  consider the legal question we may read  s.	 68-
	F(1D).
"(1D) Save as otherwise provided in	sub-
sectiOn  (1A) or sub-section (1G),  no  permit
		      shall be granted or renewed during the  period
		      intervening  between the date of	publication,
		      under
Section 68-
(2 of any scheme and the date
		      of  publication  of the approved	or  modified
		      scheme, in favour of
391
any  person  for any class or  road  transport
		      service  in  relation to an area or  route  or
		      portion  thereof covered	by such scheme.
			    Provided that where the period of opera-
		      tion  of	a permit in relation  to  any  area,
		      route,  or  portion  thereof  specified  in  a
		      scheme  published under
Section  68-C
expires
		      after  such  publication, such permit  may  be
		      renewed  for a limited period, but the  permit
		      so renewed shall cease to be effective on	 the
		      publication  of the scheme  under	 sub-section
		      (3) of Seetion 68-D."
Three propositions plainly emerge.
No	permit	or renewal, except to the  extent  expressly
	saved  by
s. 68-F(ID)
, can be granted by the  R.T.A.  during
	the period between the date of publication of any scheme and
	the  date of publication of the approved scheme.  (2)  If  a
	permit	expires	 after the publication of any  draft  scheme
	such permit is eligible for renewal for a limited period  as
	set  out in the proviso.  This special provision  cannot  be
	stretched,  on	the ground of possible anomalies  or  unjust
	consequences,  to  cover permits expiring  even	 before	 the
	publication  of	 the draft scheme.  Where  the	language  is
	plain,	interpretation cannot take the shape of addition  or
	interstitial legislation.  (3) A rider to proposition No.  2
	has  to be added.  If a permit holder whose permit is  about
	to  expire, diligently does, in the normal course, all	that
	he  need  and  all that he can, that is to  say,  apply	 for
	renewal before 120 days, in the manner laid down in
s. 58
of
	the Act, he sets in motion the legal machinery for the grant
	of  renewal  which  must ordinarily  culminate.	 in  renewal
	within	120  days.   The fact that a  scheme   is  published
	before	the  actual grant of renewal will not  intercept  or
	extinguish the process of law set in motion by the  applica-
	tion  for  renewal.   In such cases the R.T.A.	has  to	 act
	promptly and if the application for renewal is in conformity
	with  the  law	it has to consider it and  grant  or  reject
	according  to merit.  If, for reasons beyond the control  of
	the  applicant,	  the renewal process gets delayed  or	pro-
	longed he cannot be penalised.	Renewal is a legal  process,
	not  the  final act.  Save in this category of	cases,	 all
	other permits which have expired before the draft scheme  is
	published,  suffer  the	 ban of
s.  68-F(1D)
.	However,  no
	permit can ensure beyond the time of the publication of	 the
	approved scheme.  This saves cases of bona-fide applications
	for  renewal of permits, not calculated to thwart a  scheme,
	and helps the travelling public during the interregnum	when
	the scheme is under scrutiny.  The wider proposition accept-
	ed  by	the High Court that all permits which  have  expired
	before the draft scheme is published can be renewal does not
	appear to be correct and does not have our approval.
	    With this declaration of the law we dismiss the appeals.
	No order as to costs.
P.H.P.				       Appeals dismissed.
	9--1546SCI/76
392