[Cites
9
, Cited by
32
]
Supreme Court of India
Bhagwan Dass vs State Of U.P. And Ors on 24 March, 1976
Equivalent citations: 1976 AIR 1393, 1976 SCR (3) 869, AIR 1976 SUPREME COURT 1393, 1976 3 SCC 784, 1976 3 SCR 869, 1976 REVDEC 177, 1976 2 SCJ 428, 1976 UJ (SC) 418
Author:
Y.V. Chandrachud
Bench:
Y.V. Chandrachud
,
V.R. Krishnaiyer
,
N.L. Untwalia
PETITIONER:
BHAGWAN DASS

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF U.P. AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT24/03/1976

BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V.
BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V.
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
UNTWALIA, N.L.

CITATION:
 1976 AIR 1393		  1976 SCR  (3) 869
 1976 SCC  (3) 784
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1978 SC1587	 (4)
 R	    1979 SC1669	 (14)


ACT:
Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act
67,
1957
S.	 3(e)
r/w  Rule 2(7)  of  the  Uttar  Pradesh  Mines
Minerals (Concession) Rules, 1963 and Rule 6(a) (i) and 6(a)
(ii) of	 the
U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act
I
of 1951-Scope  of-Riparian owners  do not  have any title or
right over  the	 "sand,	 gravel,  bajris  etc"	carried	 and
deposited on  their land  due to  the fluvial  action of the
river, superior	 to that  of the State, the rightful owners-
Minerals need  not be subterranean. Practice-Art. 136 of the
Constitution-Arguments not  advanced in	 courts below,	will
not be acceded to in this Court.



HEADNOTE:
     The Mining	 and Minerals  Departments of  the State  of
U.P. have  been selling	 by auction  from  1965	 onwards  as
"minor minerals"  the deposits	left on	 the surface  of the
appellant's lands,  of the  sand, gravel, bajris etc. due to
the fluvial  action of	the receding  floods of	 the  Jamuna
river. In  1970, the  appellants objected  to  the  proposed
auction laying	claim to the deposits, contending that since
he is a riparian owner of the lands or is otherwise entitled
to an  unrestricted user  of the lands, he would be entitled
to appropriate	the deposits,  to the  exclusion of  others.
Since  his   objection	was   not  accepted,  the  appellant
challenged the order by a writ petition under
Article 226
in
the Allahabad  High Court  which was dismissed following its
earlier decision in "Sultan and Anr. v. State of U.P. (Civil
Misc. Writ No. 8268/71 dated 28-9-73) to the effect that the
sand, gravel,  boulders,  bajris  etc.	deposited  on  lands
abutting on rivers. as a result of fluvial action of a river
vest in	 the State  Government". The  appeal to the Division
Bench was also dismissed.
     Dismissing the appeal by certificate, the Court
^
     HELD :  (i) The contention that some of the lands being
still zamindari lands, the right to mines and minerals which
the zamindars  originally had  did not cease and, therefore,
the Government	had no	right to  the mines  and minerals on
such lands,  cannot be	acceded to,  since no  such argument
whatsoever was	made in	 the High  Court either	 before	 the
single judge  or before the Division Bench, though there was
an averment  to	 that  effect  in  the	writ  petition.	 The
contention in  regard to  a part  of the  property raises at
best a	dispute between	 the Zamindari	and  the  Government
which the  appealing has  no right  to raise.  It is for the
zamindars, if  so advised, to take an appropriate proceeding
for recognition	 of their  claims as against the Government.
The appellant  cannot be  heard to  say in  a Writ  Petition
filed for  the assertion  of his  own individual rights that
the action  of the  Government is  calculated  to  prejudice
somebody else's	 rights and  should therefore be struck down
[871 G.H, 872 A-C]
     (2) The  deposits in  the nature of ordinary sand other
than sand  used for  prescribed purposes,  gravel,  building
stores and  bajri squarely  fall within	 the provision of
s.
3(e)
of	 the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development)
Act 67	of 1957	 and the rules 2(5), 2(7) and 3 of the Uttar
Pradesh Minor  Mineral (Concession)  Rules,  1963  and	are,
therefore, 'minor  minerals'. In  equity, prior to the point
of time	 when the flood waters of the river carried the sand
and gravel to private lands, the title thereto was vested in
the State  Government. The  rivers, the	 river beds  and the
sand, bajris  and building  stones lying  in the river water
are of	state ownership.  Nature carries  these deposits  to
lands abutting	on rivers and what the Act and Rules provide
for is	to enable  the Government  to reclaim  what is	lost
without any  fault of  its own. The sand and gravel deposits
left by the receding waters of the river are truly a part of
the soil of the river bed and therefore belong to the State.
The fluvial  action of	the river  carries them	 to riparian
lands but  such shifting  cannot  erase	 the  title  of	 the
rightful owner. [872 H, 873 A, C to G]
870
     Sultan and	 Anr. v. The State of U.P. (Civil Misc. Writ
Petition  No.	8268/71	 decided   on  28-9-73)	 [approved];
Halsbury's Laws	 of England 3rd Edn. Vol. 39 p. 559 para 775
[quoted with approval].
     (3) In the instant case, the minor minerals while under
the the	 river water  belonged to  the State and the Statute
answers the  question whether  the  natural  action  of	 the
flooding river	destroys the  title of,	 the state. The 1951
Act has vested the zamindaris right to mines and minerals in
the State  Government rendering	 it of	secondary  relevance
whether prior to flood caused migration the ownership of the
minerals was vested in the State. [874 C-D]
     Norman S.	Wear v.	 State of  Kansas 62  Law Edn. 214 @
219; Halsbury's	 Laws of  England 3rd  Edn. Vol. 39 para 801
(page 568);  Blewett v.	 Trigonning (1835)  3  Adolphus	 and
Ellis' Reports 554 (distinguished).
     (4) It  is wrong to assume that mines and minerals must
always be  sub soil and that there can be no minerals on the
surface of  the earth.	The definition	of mining operations
and minor  minerals in
section 3(d)
and (e)  of the Act of
1957 and Rule 2(5) and (7) of the Rules of 1963, states that
minerals need not be subterranean and that mining operations
cover  every   operation  undertaken   for  the	 purpose  of
"winning" any  minor minerals.	Winning	 does  not  imply  a
hazardous  or  perilous	 activity.  The	 words	simply	mean
'extracting a mineral' and is used generally to indicate any
activity by  which minerals  is secured.  Extracting in turn
means drawing out or obtaining. [874 E-F]
     [In view  of the  specific concessions  in the  counter
affidavit by  the Government  the Court	 expressed its	full
confidence that	 in cases  where it becomes necessary to fix
the compensation  under rule  67 the State would have regard
to  all	  relevant  factors   particularly  the	  length  of
deprivation entailed  by the  conduct of  mining operation.]
[875 A-C]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 1044 of
1975.
From the  Judgment and  Order dated  20-9-1974  of	 the
Allahabad High Court in Special Appeal No. 145 of 1974.
J. P. Goyal and Shree Pal Singh for the appellant.
     G. N. Dikshit and O. P. Rana for the respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHANDRACHUD, J.-Certain  lands situated in Usmanpur and
Dariyabad in the district of Allahabad are in the possession
of the	appellant, some as a Bhumidhar, some as a Sirdar and
some as	 a hereditary  tenant. The  lands abut on the Jamuna
river and are submerged by the river water when the river is
in flood.  When the  flood recedes large quantities of sand,
gravel, boulders  and bajris are deposited on the surface of
the lands.  The appellant  lays claim  to the  deposits left
behind by  the fluvial	action of  the river contending that
since he  is the owner of the lands or is otherwise entitled
to an  unrestricted user  of the lands, he would be entitled
to appropriate the deposits to the exclusion of all others.
The Mines	and Minerals Department, Government of Uttar
Pradesh, took  steps in	 about 1970  to sell  by auction the
right to remove the sand, gravel and bajris deposited on the
appellant's lands. On October 13, 1970 the appellant made an
application to	the  Officer  in-charge,  Mines,  Allahabad,
objecting to  the proposed  auction on	the ground  that the
Government had	no right  to deal  with his  property  in  a
manner detrimental  to his  title. On  February 18, 1971 the
Department of  Mines passed  an order directing the disposal
of the deposits by an auction-sale.
In October,  1971 the  appellant filed  a writ petition
under
article  226
of the Constitution in the Allahabad High
Court  asking	that  the   aforesaid  order  of  the  State
Government be quashed and that the State
871
Government be  restrained from bringing the fluvial deposits
to  sale   by  auction	 or  otherwise.	 On  behalf  of	 the
respondents, the  Naib Tehsildar  (Mines) Allahabad, filed a
counter-affidavit stating that the appellant had no right of
any kind to utilise the deposits left by the flood waters on
his land, that the State Government had sold the deposits by
auction from  1965 to 1969 to which the appellant had raised
no objection, that the deposits of sand, gravel, bajris etc.
were 'minor minerals' to which the title vested in the State
Government and	that the  only right of the appellant was to
receive damages	 which the  State Government  always awarded
under  rule   67  of   the  Uttar   Pradesh  Minor  Minerals
(Concession) Rules, 1963.
The writ  petition came up for hearing before a learned
Single Judge who dismissed it by his judgment dated April 2,
1974, following	 a previous  decision of  the Allahabad High
Court in  Sultan and Anr. v. State of U.P. (Civil Misc. Writ
No. 8268  of 1971  decided on  28th  September,	 1973).	 The
appellant filed	 an appeal  before a  Division Bench  of the
High Court  which was  dismissed on  September 20, 1974. The
Division Bench merely followed the decision in Sultan's case
which had taken the view that sand, gravel, boulders, bajris
etc. deposited	on lands  abutting on rivers, as a result of
fluvial action	of a river vest in the State Government. The
High Court has, however, granted a certificate of fitness to
the appellant to appeal to this Court.
Under section  4 of  the U.P.  Zamindari Abolition	 and
Land Reforms  Act, 1  of 1951,	all estates situated in U.P.
vested in  the State  Government free from all encumbrances,
with effect  from the  date specified by the Government in a
notification issued  for that  purpose.
Section 6
of the Act
of 1951	 deals with  the consequences  of such	vesting	 and
provides that  on the  publication of  a notification  under
section 4
,  all	 rights,  title	 and  interest	of  all	 the
intermediaries shall  cease and	 be vested  in the  State of
U.P., free  from all  encumbrances. Clause  (a) of
section 6
which brings  about this result consists of two sub-clauses:
(i) and	 (ii). Under
section 6(a)(i)
, "all rights, title and
interest of  all the  intermediaries in every estate" ceased
and became  vested in the State of U.P., while under
section
6(a)  (ii)
,   "all  rights,   title  and   interest  of	 all
intermediaries in  all sub-soil	 in such  estates  including
rights, if  any, in  mines and	minerals" ceased  and became
vested in the State of U.P. These provisions of the 1951 Act
leave no doubt that whatever rights, inclusive of the rights
to  mines   and	 minerals,  which  the	erstwhile  Zamindars
possessed, stood extinguished and became vested in the State
Government.
The appellant's writ petition contains an averment that
two out	 of the	 four plots  of land which were the subject-
matter of  the writ  petition were  in his  possession under
Zamindars whose	 Zamindari rights were not yet abolished, as
the 1951  Act was  not extended	 to the areas in which those
lands were  situated. Mr.  Goel appearing  on behalf  of the
appellant repeated  the same  contention and  argued that in
respect of  those lands	 to which  the Act  of 1951  did not
apply, the  Zamindar's right  to mines and minerals remained
unaffected, and therefore the Government had no right to the
deposits left  on those	 lands by the waters of the receding
river, even  on the assumption that the deposits were 'minor
minerals'. We cannot accede to this contention for the
872
simple reason  that though  the writ  petition contained  an
averment in  terms of  the contention no argument whatsoever
was made  in the  High Court, either before the single Judge
or before  the Division	 Bench, that some of the lands being
still Zamindari	 lands the right to mines and minerals which
the Zamindars originally had did not cease and therefore the
Government had	no right  to the  mines and minerals on such
lands. Apart  from this	 the contention urged by Mr. Goel in
regard to  a part  of the  property  involved  in  the	writ
petition, raises  at best a dispute between the Zamindar and
the Government which the appellant has no right to raise. If
the title  to the  mines and minerals in respect of lands to
which the Act of 1951 is not extended vests in the Zamindars
and not in the Government, the Zamindars may, if so advised,
take an	 appropriate proceeding	 for  recognition  of  their
claims as  against the	Government. The	 appellant cannot be
heard to  say in  a writ petition filed for the assertion of
his own	 individual rights that the action of the Government
is calculated to prejudice somebody else's rights and should
therefore be  struck down.  The	 appeal	 must  therefore  be
disposed of  on the  basis that	 the rights of the erstwhile
Zamindars over the lands in dispute stood extinguished under
the Act	 of 1951  and that  those rights  are vested  in the
State Government under
section 6
of that Act.
We are concerned in this appeal with the interpretation
of  the	 relevant  provisions  of  the	Mines  and  Minerals
(Regulation and	 Development) Act,  67 of 1957 and the Uttar
Pradesh Minor  Minerals (Concession)  Rules, 1963.  We	will
refer to  them respectively as the Act of 1957 and the Rules
of 1963.
Section 3(e)
of the	Act of	1957 defines  (minor
mineral" to  mean "building  stones, gravel,  ordinary clay,
ordinary sand  other than sand used for prescribed purposes,
and any	 other mineral	which the Central Government may, by
notification in	 the Official Gazette, declare to be a minor
mineral".
Section  15
confers  power on the State Government
to make	 rules for regulating the grant of quarry leases, or
other mineral  concessions in  respect of minor minerals and
for purposes connected therewith.
The Government of Uttar Pradesh framed Rules of 1963 in
exercise of the power conferred upon it by
section 15
of the
Act of	1957.  Rule  2(5)  defines  "Mining  operations"  as
meaning any operations undertaken for the purpose of winning
any  minor  mineral.  Rule  2(7)  defines  "minor  minerals"
substantially in  the same  terms as
section 3(e)
of the Act
of 1957. By Rule 3, no person can within the State undertake
any mining  operation of  any minor mineral except under and
in accordance  with the	 terms and  conditions of  a  mining
lease or mining permit granted under the Rules.
These provisions  of the  Act of  1957 and the Rules of
1963 are  clear and  explicit,	admitting  of  no  doubt  or
difficulty. If	the deposits  left by the receding waters of
the river  are of the description, mentioned in
section 3(e)
of the	Act or Rule 2(7) of the Rules, Rule 3 must come into
full play  with the  result  that  no  mining  operation  in
respect of  the deposits  can be undertaken except under and
in accordance  with the	 terms and  conditions of a lease or
permit granted by the Government under the Rules of 1963. We
are concerned  in this appeal with deposits in the nature of
ordinary sand other than sand used for pres-
873
cribed purposes,  gravel, building  stones and bajris. These
fall squarely  within the above-quoted provisions of the Act
of 1957	 and the  Rules of  1963  and  are  therefore  minor
minerals. Accordingly,	the appellant  cannot undertake	 any
mining operation, even on the lands now belonging to him for
the purpose  of winning	 these minor minerals except under a
lease or  permit granted  by the State Government. The right
of  the	  former  Zamindars   to  mines	  and  minerals	 was
extinguished by	 the Act  of 1951  and became  vested in the
State Government.  So long  as the  proprietary right to the
lands was  vested in  the Zamindar  he was entitled to mines
and minerals.  With the	 abolition of  Zamindari by the 1951
Act, that  right has  passed on	 not to the appellant but to
the State Government. The appellant's writ petition filed to
restrain the  State Government	from auctioning the right to
undertake mining operations must therefore fail.
Evidently,	 the   appellant  finds	  it  difficult	  to
reconcile himself  with position  that what  nature and good
fortune	 have  bounteously  left  on  his  lands  should  be
permitted to be taken away by the Government which has not a
vestige of title to the lands. The answer to this difficulty
is  two-fold.	In  the	 first	place  the  deposits,  by  a
definition contained  in a competent legislation, are 'minor
minerals' and it is of no relevance that the Act of 1957 and
the Rules  of 1963  bring within  their compass	 even  those
deposits which	are left  behind by  the fluvial  action  of
rivers. If  that is the policy and the intendment of law, it
is unprofitable	 to explore  whether the  statute could	 not
have been more generous or less grudging to riparian owners.
Secondly, and  that bears  on equity,  prior to the point of
time when the flood waters of the river carried the sand and
gravel to private lands, the title thereto was vested in the
State Government.  The rivers,	the river beds and the sand,
bajris and  building stones  lying in the river water are of
State ownership.  Nature carries  those	 deposits  to  lands
abutting on  rivers and	 what the  Act and the Rules provide
for is	to enable  the Government  to reclaim  what it	lost
without and  fault of  its own.	 Halsbury's Laws  of England
(3rd Ed.,  Vol. 39,  p. 559,  paragraph 775)  says that "The
soil of	 the seashore,	and of the bed of estuaries and arms
of the	sea and of tidal rivers, so far as the tide ebbs and
flows, is  prima facie	vested of common right in the Crown,
unless it  has passed  to a  subject by	 grant or possessory
title." Paragraph  768 (p.  556) says that the Crown is also
"entitled to  the mines	 and minerals  under the soil of the
seas" within  certain limits.  The sand	 gravel deposited by
the receding  waters of	 the river  are truly  a part of the
soil of the river bed and therefore belong to the State. The
fluvial action	of the	river carries them to ripanian lands
but such  shifting cannot  erase the  title of	the rightful
owner.
The judgment  of Justice  Holmes in  Norman S.  Wear v.
State of  Kansas(1), turned  on another	 point and  involved
different considerations  altogether but  the basis  of that
decision is  instructive: The fact that sand in the bed of a
river is  migratory and liable to be shifted does not change
its character so as to entitle the public to remove the sand
as against the State, which owns the bed of the stream.
874
In the High Court, reliance appears to have been placed
by the appellant on a passage in Halsbury's Laws of England,
3rd Ed.,  Vol. 39, paragraph 801 (p. 568) where it is stated
that gravel,  stones and  sand, even  when washed  up by the
seas on the foreshore are part of the freehold and belong to
the owner  of the  foreshore who  may deal  with them  as he
pleases. This  passage is based upon the decision in Blewett
v. Tregonning  (1835) 3	 Adolphus and  Ellis'  Reports	554,
where the  defendant was  a rank  trespasser who  pleaded  a
custom entitling  him to  take the sand blown by the wind on
to a land situated on the foreshore. The Court negatived the
plea  of   custom  both	 on  the  ground  that	it  was	 not
established and	 on the	 ground that  if the  custom were to
receive a legal recognition it would place the whole soil at
the mercy of any person claiming under the so-called custom.
Besides, there is no parallel between that case and our case
because here,  the 'minor  minerals' while  under the  river
water belonged	to the	State and  the statute	answers	 the
question whether  the natural  action of  the flooding river
destroys the  title of the State. Secondly, the 1951 Act has
vested the  Zamindar's right  to mines	and minerals  in the
State Government rendering it of secondary relevance whether
prior to  flood	 caused	 migration,  the  ownership  of	 the
minerals was vested in the State.
Only one  more argument made on behalf of the appellant
requires to  be noticed.  It was  urged that  the  sand	 and
gravel are  deposited on  the surface  of the  land and	 not
under the  surface of  the soil and therefore they cannot be
called minerals	 and equally so, any operation by which they
are collected or gathered cannot properly be called a mining
operation. It  is in  the first	 place wrong  to assume that
mines and  minerals must  always be  sub-soil and that there
can be	no minerals  on the  surface of	 the earth.  Such an
assumption is  contrary to informed experience. In any case,
the definition	of mining  operations and  minor minerals in
section 3(d)
and (e)  of the  Act of 1957 and Rule 2(5) and
(7) of	the Rules  of 1963  shows that	minerals need not be
sub-terranean  and   that  mining   operations	cover  every
operation undertaken  for the purpose of "winning" any minor
mineral. "Winning"  does not  imply a  hazardous or perilous
activity. The  word simply  means "extracting a mineral" and
is used	 generally to  indicate	 any  activity	by  which  a
mineral is secured. "Extracting", in turn, means drawing out
or obtaining.  A tooth	is 'extracted'	as much	 as it fruit
juice and as much as a mineral. Only, that the effort varies
from tooth to tooth, from fruit to fruit and from mineral to
mineral.
We	 would	 like  before  closing	to  invite  especial
attention to  Rule 67  of the  Rules of	 1963 under  which a
"person having	a right	 in any capacity in the land covered
by a  mining lease  or mining permit ..... shall be entitled
to get	compensation" from  the holder	of a mining lease or
mining permit of such land for the use of the surface, which
may be	agreed upon  between the  parties. In  case  of	 any
dispute, the  amount of compensation has to be determined by
the District  Officer  whose  order  assumes  finality.	 The
counter-affidavit filed	 by the State Government in the High
Court concedes	expressly, as it ought, that considering the
fact that the person entitled to the use of a land may
875
be prevented  from using  it by	 reason of a mining lease or
permit, Rule  67 provides for the payment of compensation to
him for such deprivation. When the right to conduct a mining
operation is  auctioned by  the Government the person who is
otherwise  entitled  to	 the  user  of	the  land,  say	 for
agricultural purposes,	is deprived  of	 its  user  and	 the
object of Rule 67 is to ensure that he should be compensated
adequately for	the deprivation	 of such  user. We  have  no
doubt that  in cases  where it	becomes	 necessary  for	 the
District Officer  to fix  the compensation under Rule 67, he
would  be   having  due	 regard	 to  all  relevant  factors,
particularly the  length  of  deprivation  entailed  by	 the
conduct of mining operations.
For these	reasons, we confirm the judgment of the High
Court and dismiss the appeal with costs.
S.R.					   Appeal dismissed.
876