[Cites
8
, Cited by
11
]
Supreme Court of India
Pandurang Dnyanoba Lad vs Dada Rama Methe & Ors on 24 February, 1976
Equivalent citations: 1976 AIR 1910, 1976 SCR (3) 493, AIR 1976 SUPREME COURT 1910, 1976 2 SCC 850, 1976 2 SCJ 418, 1976 3 SCR 493, 1976 2 SCC 236, 1976 UJ (SC) 373
Author:
Y.V. Chandrachud
Bench:
Y.V. Chandrachud
,
V.R. Krishnaiyer
,
A.C. Gupta
PETITIONER:
PANDURANG DNYANOBA LAD

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DADA RAMA METHE & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT24/02/1976

BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V.
BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V.
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
GUPTA, A.C.

CITATION:
 1976 AIR 1910		  1976 SCR  (3) 493
 1976 SCC  (2) 236


ACT:
Bombay Tenancy  & Agricultural  Lands Act
1948-
Section
32G(6)
-32(o)  -
Bombay	Merged	 Territories   Miscellaneous
Alienations Abolition Act, 1955
- Secs. 6, 7, 8 9. 28-Whether
on abolition  of Inams	the  relationship  of  landlord	 and
tenant comes  to an  end-Whether tenant's  right to purchase
land under tenancy act affected by abolition act.



HEADNOTE:
     The appellant  owned a  land which	 was held for the of
miscellaneous inferior	services and  was  classified  as  a
Huzur Sanadi  Inam land.  The respondents were in possession
of the	land as	 tenarlts and  were declared  as  purchasers
under the
Bombay Tenancy & Agricultural Lands Act, 1948
.
The
Tenancy Act
provides by
section 32
that on 1st April, 1957,
every tenant  subject to  certain conditions shall be deemed
to have	 purchased from his landlord the land held by him as
a tenant.  The Bombay  Legislature passed  the
Bombay Merged
Territories Miscellaneous Alienations Abolition Act
of 1955.
The appellant  contended that  in view	of the provisions of
the Abolition  Act, the	 relationship of landlord and tenant
came to an end between the appellant and the respondents and
that, therefore,  respondents have  no right to purchase the
land. The  contention of  the appellant was negatived by the
Agricultural Lands Tribunal which was confirmed in appeal by
the  special   Deputy  Collector  and  in  revision  by	 the
Maharashtra Revenue  Tribunal. A  writ petition filed by the
appellant  in	the  High  Court  of  Bombay  was  summarily
dismissed
     Dismissing the appeal by Special Leave,
^
     HELD: 1.  By  section  4  of  the	Abolition  Act,	 all
alienations in	the Merged  Territories were  abolished with
effect from  the appointed  date. Sections  6, 7, 8 and 9 of
the Abolition  Act provide for the grant of occupancy rights
hl  respect  of	 the  erstwhile	 Inam  Iands.  There  is  no
provision in that Act by virtue of which the relationship of
landlord and  tenant between  the ex-lnamdar  and his tenant
would  stand  extinguished.  On	 the  contrary,
section  28
Provides that  nothing contained in the Act shall in any way
be deemed to effect the application of any of the provisions
of the
Tenancy Act
to any  alienated land  or	 the  mutual
rights and obligations of a landlord and his tenants save in
so far	as the	said provisions	 are in any way inconsistent
with the  express provisions  of the  Act. The provisions of
the
Tenancy  Act
contained  in section	32  are	 in  no	 way
inconsistent with  any of  the	express	 provisions  of	 the
Abolition Act. [495-A, B-C, & D]
     2.
Section	 32(O)
of  the Tenancy	Act applies  only to
tenancies created after the tiller's day. [495E]
     3. The  object of the Abolition Act was the elimination
of Inamdars  as intermediaries	and not	 the eviction of the
tillers of the soil. [495G]
     4.
Section 32G(6)
of the Tenancy Act shows that nothing
contained in the Abolition Act can affect the tenant's right
of Purchase  under section 32, even if any land is regranted
to the	holder under  the Abolition Act on condition that it
was not transferable. [496A-B]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil  Appeal No. 475 of
l973.
(Appeal by	 Special Leave	from the  Judgment and order
dated the  26-4-1972 of	 the Bombay  High Court	 in  Special
Civil Application No. 165 of 1972)
17-L522 SCI/76
494
S.B. Wad and M. S. Ganesh, for the appellant.
     P.H. Parekh, for the respondent.
The judgment of the Court was delivered by
     CHANDRACHUD, J.  The appellant  owned  a  land,  Survey
No.72, at  Shiroli in the district of Kolhapur. The land was
held by	 the appellant	for the performance of miscellaneous
inferior services  and was classified as a Huzur Sanadi Inam
land. Respondents  have been  in possession  of a portion of
the land  as tenants  and were	declared as purchasers under
the
Bombay  Tenancy and	 Agricultural Lands  Act
,  LXVII  of
1948, (hereinafter  called the
Tenancy Act
). Consequent upon
the   declaration,    the   Agricultural   Lands   Tribunal,
Hatkanagale, fixed  the price  of the land under
section 32G
of the Tenancy Act. That decision was confirmed in appeal by
the Special  Deputy Collector,	Kolhapur, and in revision by
the Maharashtra	 Revenue Tribunal.  The	 appellant  filed  a
petition in  the Bombay	 High Court under
article 227
of the
Constitution  to  challenge  the  decision  of	the  Revenue
Tribunal bu  that petition  was	 dismissed  summarily  by  a
learned Single	judge.	This  appeal  by  special  leave  is
directed against the order of the High Court.
The Tenancy Act
provides by section 32 that on April 1,
1957, called  the "tillers day", every tenant shall, subject
to certain  conditions, be deemed to have purchased from his
landlord the  land held	 by him	 as a  tenant.	Section	 32G
requires the  Agricultural   land Tribunal  to determine the
purchase price	of the	land in	 accordance with a statutory
formula. The  dispute  before  us  is  not  as	regards	 the
arithmetic of  the price fixation but as regards whether the
respondents are	 qualified ar all to purchase the land under
section 32
of the Tenancy Act. The right of a tenant to opt
for a  compulsory purchase  of the agricultural land held by
him is no longer open to constitutional doubt or difficulty.
But, the  respondents  '  right	 to  purchase  the  land  is
questioned by  the appellant  on the ground that they ceased
to be tenants and have therefore no right of purchase.
This plea	is founded  on the  provisions of the
Bombay
Merged Territories  Miscellaneous Alienations Abolition Act
,
XVII of	 1955 (hereinafter  called the Alienations Abolition
Act). It is argued that with the abolition of Inams effected
under that  Act, the old relationship of landlord and tenant
between the  appellant and  respondents came to an end, that
with the re-grant of occupancy rights to the appellant a new
relationship of	 landlord and  tenant came  intro  existence
between them  and since	 the respondents  did  not  exercise
their  right  to  repurchase  the  land	 within	 the  period
prescribed by
section 32-O
of the  Tenancy Act,  they have
forfeited  that	 right.	 According  to	the  appellant,	 the
provisions of  the Tenancy Act and the Alienations Abolition
Act  are   in  a   material  respect  inconsistent  and	 the
inconsistency has to be resolved by giving precedence to the
latter Act.
The  merit	  of  these  contentions  depends  upon	 the
validity of the basic that with the abolition of Inams which
the   Alienations   Abolition	act   brought	about,	 the
relationship of landlord and tenant
495
between the appellant and the respondents came to an end. We
see no warrant for this premise.
By section	 4 of  the Alienations	Abolition  Act,	 all
alienations in	the merged  territories were  abolished with
effect from the appointed date. As a result of the abolition
of Inams  effected by
section 4
, all alienated lands became
liable under  section S	 to the	 payment of  land revenue in
accordance with	 the provisions	 of the	 Bombay Land Revenue
Code, 1879.  Sections 6,  7, 8	and  9	of  the	 Alienations
Abolition Act  provide for  the grant of occupancy rights in
respect of  the erstwhile  Inam lands. There is no provision
in that	 Act by virtue of which the relationship of landlord
and tenant between the ex Inamdar and his tenant would stand
extinguished. On  the contrary,	 section  28  provides	that
nothing contained  in the  Act shall in any way be deemed to
affect the  application of  any of  the	 provisions  of	 the
Tenancy Act
to any alienated land or, "the mutual rights and
obligations of	a landlord and his tenants save in so far as
the said provisions are not in any way inconsistent with the
express provisions  of this  Act". None of the provisions of
the
Tenancy  Act
, particularly	the provision  contained  in
section 32
of the  Tenancy Act	 under which  tenants became
entitled to purchase the lands held by them in that capacity
on the	tillers' day, is in any way inconsistent with any of
the express  provisions of  the Alienations  Abolition	Act.
Section 32
of the  Tenancy Act	 must therefore	 govern	 the
rights of the ex-Inamdar and his tenants notwithstanding the
abolition of  the Inams	 brought about	by  the	 Alienations
Abolition Act.	Since the  respondents did  not cease  to be
tenants	 of   the  appellant  on  the  introduction  of	 the
Alienations Abolition Act, they are entitled to purchase the
land under section 32. Consequently, it was competent to the
Agricultural Lands  Tribunal to	 commence the price fixation
proceedings under
section 32G
of the Tenancy Act.
Section  32-o
of	the  Tenancy  Act  applies  only  to
tenancies created  after the  tillers' day. It provides that
in  respect   of  such	 tenancies,  a	tenant	desirous  of
exercising the	right of purchase must give an intimation to
the landlord  and the  Tribunal within	one  year  from	 the
commencement  of   his	tenancy.  As  observed	by  us,	 the
relationship of	 landlord and  tenant between  the appellant
and respondents	 did not  come to an end on the introduction
of the	Alienations Abolition  Act nor	indeed is  there any
legal justification  for the  theory that  on the  cesser of
that relationship  a new relationship of landlord and tenant
came into existence between the parties so as to attract the
application of	section 32G.  The object  of the Alienations
Abolition  Act	 was  "to   abolish  ....   alienations	  of
miscellaneous  character   2  prevailing   in	the   merged
territories", that  is to  say, to  abolish the	 Inam grants
prevailing in those territories. The elimination of Inamdars
as intermediaries,  not the  eviction of  the tillers of the
soil, was  the object  of that	Act. By
section 4
, what was
abolished was all alienations, all rights legally subsisting
in respect  of a1ienations  and all  other incidents of such
alienations. A	tenancy created by an Inamdar is not a right
in  respect  of	 the  alienation  nor  an  incident  of	 the
alienation. In	simple words,  a11 rights  of  the  Inamdars
stood determined on the
496
introduction of the Alienations Abolition Act; the rights of
tenants continued  to exist  and were expressly protected by
section 28 of the Alienations Abolition Act.
The  provision  contained	in
section  32G(6)
of	 the
Tenancy Act  shows that nothing contained in the Alienations
Abolition Act  can affect  the tenant's	 right	of  purchase
under section  32. Section  32G(6) provides that if any land
is re-granted  to the  holder under the provisions of any of
the Land  Tenures Abolition Acts referred to in
Schedule IlI
of  the	  Tenancy  Act
on  condition	 that  it   was	 not
transferable, such  condition shall  not be deemed to affect
the right  of any  person holding  the land on lease created
before the  re-grant and  such person shall, as a tenant, be
deemed to  have purchased  the land  under section 32G as if
the condition  that it	was not	 transferable  was  not	 the
condition of  re-grant. The  Alienations  Abolition  Act  is
included in
Schedule III of the Tenancy Act
as item No. 21.
Thus, even  if the  land, after	 the abolition	of the	Inam
effected under the Alienations Abolition Act, was re-granted
to the	appellant on condition that it was not transferable,
such a	condition cannot  affect the right of the respondent
to purchase the land under
section 32
and
32G
of the Tenancy
Act. In	 other words,  the statutory purchase of a land by a
tenant under  the provisions  of the
Tenancy Act
is excepted
from the  restraint of	nontransferability. It is undisputed
that the  respondents were  holding the	 land  on.  a  lease
created before	the occupancy  rights were re-granted to the
appellant on the abolition of the Inam.
The  questions  raised  before  us	 on  behalf  of	 the
appellant merited  careful consideration  and we  would have
been happy  to have  the benefit of a considered judgment by
the High  Court. But  the Revenue  Tribunal was right in its
decision and  so the  summary dismissal of the Writ Petition
by the High Court has not caused any failure of justice.
In the  result, the  appeal fails	and is dismissed. We
are thankfuI  to Shri Parekh for assisting us in the case as
amicus.
P.H.P.					   Appeal dismissed.
497