[Cites
18
, Cited by
28
]
Supreme Court of India
Ramji Prasad Singh vs Ram Bilas Jha & Four Ors on 24 September, 1976
Equivalent citations: 1976 AIR 2573, 1977 SCR (1) 741, AIR 1976 SUPREME COURT 2573, 1977 (1) SCC 260, 1977 (1) SCR 741, 1977 PATLJR 230, 1976 2 SCWR 430
Author:
Y.V. Chandrachud
Bench:
Y.V. Chandrachud
,
P.K. Goswami
,
A.C. Gupta
PETITIONER:
RAMJI PRASAD SINGH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
RAM BILAS JHA & FOUR ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT24/09/1976

BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V.
BENCH:
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V.
GOSWAMI, P.K.
GUPTA, A.C.

CITATION:
 1976 AIR 2573		  1977 SCR  (1) 741
 1977 SCC  (1) 260
 CITATOR INFO :
 RF	    1977 SC1992	 (30)
 RF	    1977 SC2171	 (23)
 R	    1978 SC 351	 (5)
 R	    1978 SC1162	 (8)
 R	    1985 SC  89	 (20)
 C	    1991 SC2001	 (5,24)


ACT:
Representation of the People Act
1950--
Sec. 15
,
21
,
22
,
23-
-Preparation	 and revision of electoral  roll--Amendment,
	transposition	or   deletion  of   entries   in   electoral
	roll--Provision of
Sec. 23
if mandatory--
Representation	  of
	the People Act
1951---Every person on electoral roll whether
	entitled to vote even if name not brought in accordance with
	law---Sec.  100 ( 1 ) b--Sec. 123 ( 1 )	 (A)b-Bribery--Proof
	of--Quasi-criminal in nature  Interference with appreciation
	of evidence by High Court.
	Bihar and Orissa municipal Act 1922--S. 389.



HEADNOTE:
	    In March, 1972, the Election Commission issued a notifi-
	cation	calling upon the Muzaffarpur Local Authorities	Con-
	stituency  to  elect  one member to  the  Bihar	 Legislative
	Council.   One of the constituencies was the  notified	area
	committee  of Dumra.  The. last date for  filing  nomination
	was 5-4-1972.  The poll was held on 30-4-1972 and the result
	was declared on 1st May, 1972. Respondent no. 1 an-independ-
	ent candidate secured the  highest  number of  votes, namely
	61,  whereas his nearest rival respondent no. 5	 secured  36
	votes..	 The appellant Ramji Prasad Singh, a voter, filed an
	election petition challenging the election of respondent no.
	1 inter alia on the following two grounds:
		    (1) 40 voters of the Dumra Notified Ares Commit-
		 tee were  illegally prevented from exercising their
		 franchise  which  materially affected the result of
		 the election.
		 (2) Respondent no. 1 attempted to bribe two voters.
	    The	 Government of Bihar had nominated 40 persons to  be
	the  members  of the Dumra notified Area  Committee  by	 its
	notification dated 5-5-1971.  All of them were duly enrolled
	as  voters  in the electoral roll.  On	4-4-1972  the  State
	Government issued a notification cancelling the notification
	dated  5-5-1971	 and nominating 40 other  persons  mentioned
	therein as members of the Dumra Notified Area Committee.  In
	a  Writ Petition filed by some of the sitting  members,	 the
	High Court passed an interim order staying the operation  of
	the  notification dated 5-5-1971.  The names of the 40	per-
	sons who were nominated earlier were removed from the  elec-
	toral  roll  and  it was alleged that the names	 of  40	 new
	members	 were included.	 The old members were not  permitted
	to  vote  on  the ground that their names were	not  on	 the
	electoral  roll	 and the new members were not  permitted  to
	vote  on the ground that the High Court had issued the	stay
	order.
Section 389
of the Bihar & Orissa Municipal Act 7 of
	1922  empowers the State Government to make appointments  to
	Notified  Area Committee.
Section 151of
the  Representation,
	of the People Act 1950 provides that for every	constituency
	there shall be an electoral roll which shall be prepared  in
	accordance with the provisions of the Act.
Section 21
deals
	with  the  preparation and revision of the  electoral  roll.
Section 22
provides the procedure for correction of  entries
	in  electoral rolls.
Section 23(3)
provides that no  amend-
	ment,  transposition,  or  deletion of any entry   shall  be
	made under
section 22
and no direction for the inclusion of
	a  name	 in the electroal roll of a  constituency  shall  be
	given  after  the last date for making nominations  for	 the
	election.
	The High Court dismissed the election petition.
	The appellant contended:
	    1.
Section 62(1)
of the Representation of	People	Act,
	1951  provides that no person who is not and except  as	 ex-
	pressly provided by this Act every person
	742
	who is, for the time being entered in the electoral roll  of
	any constituency shall be entitled to vote in that constitu-
	ency  and, therefore, since the names of the 40 new  persons
	were  in the electoral roll and since' they  were  illegally
	prevented     from voting which has materially affected	 the
	result of the election, the election  must be set aside.
	    2.	The elected candidate attempted to bribe two  voters
	and thereby rendered his election void under sec. 100 (1)(b)
	read  with sec. 123 (a)(A)(b) of the Representation  of	 the
	People,Act 1951.
	Dismissing the appeal,
	    HELD:  1. It is implicit in section 62(1) that the	name
	of  the person who claims  to be entitled to vote in a	con-
	stituency  must have been entered in the electoral  roll  of
	that particular constituency in accordance with law.  If the
	name of a person is entered in the electoral roll in  viola-
	tion of
section 23(3)
he can have no right to vote by reason
	merely of the entitlement conferred  by section 62(1).	[749
	A--C]
	    Kabul Singh v. Kundan Singh & Ors. [1970] v.S.C.R.	845;
	B.M.  Ramaswamy	 v.  B.M. Krishnamurthy and  Ors.  [1963]  3
	S.C.R. 479 explained.
	Baidyanath, Panliar v. Sitaram Matho & Ors. [1970] 1 SCR 839
	followed.
	    2. The electoral roll was amended after 5th April, which
	was the last date for filing the nomination. [745 G]
	3.  The	 provisions  of
section 23(3)
are  mandatory.	 The
	Election  Commission of India was within its right in  with-
	drawing	 the polling booth at the Dumra Committee office  in
	order  that  the new members may not vote at  the  election.
	[750 B, C]
	    4. The charge of bribery is quasi-criminal in nature and
	in a series of cases this Court has held that such a  charge
	must be proved not by a more  preponderance of probabilities
	but  beyond a reasonable doubt.	 In the absence of any	evi-
	dence  of unimpeachable nature and particularly in  the	 ab-
	sence  of  any contemporaneous complaint in  regard  to	 the
	allegation of bribery it would be unsafe to accept the	bare
	word  of  the appellant and his witness on  such  a  serious
	charge.	  The High Court having considered the	evidence  on
	the question of bribery fully and carefully, this Court	 did
	not  find  any reason to depart from  the  well	 established
	practice  that	except for substantial reasons.	 this  Court
	does  not embark on a detailed assessment of oral  evidence.
	[751 B--C]



JUDGMENT:
Civil Appeal No. 1147 of .1974
	    (From the Judgment and Order dated 9.5.1974 of the Patna
	High Court in Election Petition No. 42/72).
D. Goburdhan and L.R. Sinha, for the Appellant
	    D.V.  Patel,  U.P. Singh, R.P. Singh and S.N.  Jha,	 for
	respondent No. 1.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
	    CHANDRACHUD, J.--This is an appeal under
section 116A
of
	the Representation of the People Act, 1951 from the judgment
	of the Patna High Court dated May 9, 1974 in Election  Peti-
	tion No. 42 of 1972.
On	March  29.  1972 the Election  Commission  issued  a
	notification calling upon the Muzaffarpur Local	 Authorities
	Constituency  to elect one member to the  Bihar	 Legislative
	Council..  That Constituency consists of the  Municipalities
	of Muzaffarpur, Sitamarhi, Hajipur and
743
Lalganj	 and  the  Notified Area Committees  of	 Mahnur	 and
	Dumra.	We  are concerned in this appeal with  the  Notified
	Area  Committee of Dumra only.	According to  the  programme
	notified  by  the  Election Commission, the  last  date	 for
	filing	nominations was April 5, 1972. The poll was held  on
	April 30 and the result of the election was declare,5 on May
	1, 1972.  Respondent 1 Ram Bilas Jha, an independent  candi-
	date, secured the highest number of votes, namely 61 whereas
	his  nearest  rival respondent 5, Mahanth Raghunath  Das,  a
	Congress (R) candidate, secured 36 votes..  Respondent 1 was
	accordingly declared elected.
The	 appellant  Ramji Prasad Singh was a voter  for	 the
	election  being	 a member or commissioner of  the  Sitamarhi
	Municipality.	On June 14, 1972 he filed an election  peti-
	tion  in  the Patna High Court challenging the	election  of
	respondent  1  on  various grounds.   Before  us,  appellant
	restricted his challenge to the following two grounds :--
(1)  Forty	 voters of the Dumra  Notified	Area
		 Committee were illegally prevented from  exercising
		 their	franchise,  which  materially  affected	 the
		 result of the election; and
		     (2)  Respondent  1	 attempted  to	bribe	 two
		 voters,   Sri	Narain	Prasad	and    Ram   Swarath
		 Raut  thereby	  rendering his election void  under
		 section    100(1)(b)	     read    with
section
		 123(1)(A)(b)
of  the  Act of	  1951.
The  High Court having rejected these contentions the  elec-
	tion petitioner has filed this appeal.
It	is necessary to state certain important facts for  a
	proper appreciation of the question involved in the first of
	the  two  points  mentioned  above.   By  Notification	 No.
	2708/LSG  dated	 May  5, 1971 the Government  of  Bihar	 had
	nominated  40 persons to be members or commissioners of	 the
	Dumra  Notified	 Area  Committee.  All	of  them  were	duly
	enrolled as voters in the electoral roll of the	 Muzaffarpur
	Local Authorities constituency.	 On April 4, 1972 the  State
	Government  issued a Notification, No. 2934, cancelling	 the
	notification  dated May 5, 1971.  By  another  notification,
	No.  2935, of even date, viz., April 4, 1972 the State	Gov-
	ernment nominated 40 other persons named therein as  members
	of the Dumra Notified Area Committee.
Immediately after the issuance of the two  notifications
	of  April 4, 1972 some of the sitting members of  the  Dumra
	N.A. Committee, who ceased to be members by reason of  these
	notifications,	filed writ petition No. 150 of 1972  in	 the
	Patna  High Court challenging the validity of the  notifica-
	tions.	A rule was issued in that writ petition on April 14,
	1972 and by an interim order, the operation of	notification
	No.  2934 by which the notification of May 5, 1971 was	can-
	celled, was stayed till the disposal of the writ petition.
744
After  the High Court issued the stay order, a  petition
	was moved before Shri A.M. Bose, the District Magistrate  of
	Muzaffarpur,  asking that the names of the 40 members  which
	were removed from the electoral roll pursuant to the notifi-
	cation	 issued	  by   the  State   Government	 should	  be
	reincorporated	therein.  Shri Bose who was functioning	 ex-
	officio	  as  the  District  Election	Officer,   Electoral
	Registration  Officer  and  the Returning  Officer  for	 the
	purposes  of  the  particular election	sent  a	 Teleprinter
	message	 (Ex.  7) On April 21, 1972 to the  Chief  Electoral
	Officer,  Patna,  stating that since the  last	date  filing
	nominations  was  long	since past, the	 names	of  the	 old
	members	 which were already removed from the electoral	roll
	could not be reincorporated therein but that it would be  in
	contempt  of the High Court if elections were to be held  on
	the basis of the amended roll, as the High COurt had  stayed
	the  operation of the notification issued by the  Government
	on April 4, 1972 cancelling the notification of May 5, 1971.
"In  this  anomalous situation", Shri Bose asked  the  Chief
	Electoral  Officer to seek the instructions of the  ELection
	Commission of India.  By his Telex message (Ex.8), the Chief
	Electoral  Officer  sought the directions  of  the  Election
	Commission which opined that since the old members could not
	vote as their names were not on the electoral roll and since
	the  new  members also could not vote because  of  the	stay
	order  issued by the High Court, the polling station at	 the
	Dumra Notified Area Committee office should be withdrawn and
	cancelled.  Pursuant to this directive, there was no polling
	booth  where the members of the Dumra Committee	 could	cast
	their votes. Consequently, neither the old 40 members  whose
	names  were removed from the electoral roll nor the  new  40
	members	 whose names were included therein could cast  their
	votes  in  the	election held on April 30.  It	is  on	this
	background  that  the election petitioner raised  the  point
	that  the  new	40 members  were  illegally  prevented	from
	exercising  their  franchise and that  such  prevention	 had
	materially  affected  the result of the	 election  as  those
	members would have voted  for respondent 5, the Congress (R)
	candidate.
It may, we think, be accepted that the 40 newly enrolled
	members, had they been permitted to cast their votes,  would
	have mostly voted for respondent 5.  Thirty-four out of	 the
	40  were  examined  as witnesses and  they  protested  their
	loyalty to respondent 5.  Out of these 34 witnesses, 27	 are
	members	 of  Congress (R) and though  defections  cannot  be
	totally	 ruled	out,  there is no reason  to  discard  their
	evidence that they were pledged to support respondent 5	 who
	was  their party candidate.  It may be assumed that  members
	of the party would not have disobeyed the mandate issued  by
	the  Provincial	 and District  Congress	 Committees  through
	circular  letters, Exs. 3 and 3/a, that they must  vote	 for
	the  party candidate, respondent 5. The remaining 7  out  of
	the 34 may be taken at their word that they would have voted
	for  respondent	 5 since they thought that he was  the	most
	eligible  candidate amongst the contestants.  There is	also
	evidence showing that the newly enrolled members had gone to
	the  polling station to cast their votes but had  to  return
	without	 exercising  their franchise as there was  no  booth
	where they could cast their votes.
745
The	 question  which then remains to  be  considered  is
	whether	 the newly enrolled members of the  Dumra  Committee
	were  prevented	 illegally from casting their votes  in	 the
	poll  of  30th	April.	The power to  make  appointments  to
	Notified Area Committee's is derived by the State Government
	under  section 389 of the Bihar and Orissa Municipal Act,  7
	of 1922.  That section provides by clause (c) that the State
	Government  may by notification appoint a Committee or	make
	rules  for  the appointment or election of a  Committee	 for
	carrying out the purposes of the
Municipal Act
in the  Noti-
	fied  Area.  The notifications of May 5, 1971 and  April  4,
	1972  nominating 40 persons as members or  commissioners  of
	the Dumra Notified Area Committee were issued by the Govern-
	ment of Bihar in exercise of the power conferred by  section
	389(c).	  The State Government did have the power  to  issue
	the  2nd notification as much as the first and their  juris-
	diction in that behalf has not been questioned.
	    An interesting question however arises by reason of	 the
	provisions  contained  in the Representation of	 the  People
	Act,  43 of 1950.
Section 15
of that Act provides that	 for
	every  constituency there shall be an electoral	 roll  which
	shall  be prepared in accordance with the provisions of	 the
	Act under the superintendence, direction and control of	 the
	Election  Commission.
Section 16
prescribes  disqualifica-
	tions  for  registration in an electoral roll.
Section  21
dels  with  the preparation and revision  of  the  electoral
	roll.
Section 22
prescribes a procedure for correction  of
	entries	 in electoral rolls and
section 24
provides  for  an
	appeal from any order passed under
section 22
.
Section 23(3)
which has an important bearing on the point raised behalf of
	the election petitioner reads thus :--
"23.  (3)  No  amendment,  transposition	  or
		 deletion  of any entry shall be made under
section
		 22
and no direction for the inclusion of a name  in
		 the electoral roll of a constituency shah be  given
		 under this section, after the last date for  making
		 nominations for an election in that constituency or
		 in the parliamentary constituency within which that
		 constituency is comprised and before the completion
		 of 'that election."
As	mentioned.  above the State  Government	 issued	 two
	notifica'lions	on April 4, 1972, one by which	the  earlier
	notification  of  May 5, 1971 was cancelled  and  the  other
	making	fresh appointments of 40 members to the Dumra  Noti-
	fied  Area  Committee.	As a result of	these  notifications
	(Exs. 10A and 10 respectively), it became necessary for	 the
	Electoral Registration Officer to delete from the  electoral
	roll  the names of 40 persons who were appointed  under	 the
	notification  of May 5, 1971 and to. include in their  place
	the  names of the 40 new members who were appointed  to	 the
	Committee under	 the Notification (Ex. 10) of April 4, 1972.
	But these corrections or amendments could not, by reason  of
section	 23(3)
,	 be made after April 5, 1972 which  was	 the
	last date for making nominations to the election.  No direc-
	tion  also could have been given for the inclusion of  these
	names in the electoral roll, after the last date for  making
	nominations.   The  point,  thus,   for	  consideration	  is
	whether	 the
746
amendment to the electoral roll was made in the instant case
	by incorporating the names of the 40 new members therein  on
	or  before  the 5th April or whether the  roll	was  amended
	after  the  expiry of that date.  If the  roll	was  amended
	after the 5th April, the inclusion of the new names would be
	clearly in breach of the mandate contained in
section  23(3)
of the Act of 1950 and therefore beyond the jurisdiction  of
	the  Electoral Registration Officer.  The best	evidence  on
	this  question would of course be of Shri Bose himself	who,
	being the District Magistrate of Muzaffarpur, was  function-
	ing ex-officio as the Electoral Registration Officer.
	    Ex.	 1  is the electoral roll for 1972 on the  basis  of
	which the biennial election to the Bihar Legislative  Assem-
	bly from the Muzaffarpur Local Authorities constituency	 was
	held in this case.  The names of the 40 members of the Dumra
	Notified  Area Committee who were appointed under  Notifica-
	tion  No. 2935 (Ex. 10) dated April 4, 1972 are included  in
	that  roll at Serial Nos. 31 to 70.  These names,  according
	to  the	 learned counsel of the	 election  petitioner,	were
	entered	 in the roll soon after the  Electoral	Registration
	Officer	 received  the two notifications (Exs. 10  and	10A)
	which  was  at about 8-15 a.m. on. the 5th  April.   On	 the
	other  hand, learned counsel for respondent 1 says  that  in
	the  very  nature of things the names could  not  have	been
	entered	 in  the  electoral roll before the  expiry  of	 the
	crucial	 date,	5th April.  At best, according to  him,	 the
	names might have been entered in the roll on the 6th.
It	 seems to us impossible to accept the contention  of
	the  election petitioner that the names of the	new  members
	were  entered in the electoral roll immediately	 after	Shri
	Bose,  the  Electoral  Registration  Officer,  received	 the
	notifications Exs. 10 and 10A dated April 4. It is true that
	Shri  Bose  received these notifications through  a  special
	messenger  on the 5th at about 8-15 a.m. But he says in	 his
	evidence that immediately after receiving the notifications,
	he endorsed them to the Assistant District Electoral Officer
	and  then to the Deputy Collector in charge of	the  General
	Section for necessary action.  He has further stated that he
	could  not have taken any action for including the names  of
	the new members in the electoral roll on the strength of the
	notifications because, in so far as he knew, an amendment in
	the  electoral roll could not be made unless a list of	mem-
	bers for inclusion in the electoral roll was received by him
	from the Chairman of the local body concerned.	That unques-
	tionably  is the true legal position because  under
section
	27(2)(d)
of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 it is
	the  duty  of  the Chief Executive Officer  of	every  local
	authority  (by	whatever  designation he may  be  known)  to
	inform the Electoral Registration Officer immediately  about
	every  change in the membership of the local  authority,  in
	order to enable the Electoral Registration Officer to  main-
	tain the electoral roll corrected up-to-date.	The  section
	further	 provides  that on receipt of such  information	 the
	Electoral  Registration	 Officer shall strike off  from	 the
	electoral  roll the names of persons who have ceased  to  be
	and  include therein the names of persons who  have  become,
	members of  the
747
particular local authority.  Shri Bose, therefore, could not
	have included the new names in the electoral roll merely  on
	the  strength of the Government notifications which  he	 re-
	ceived	on the morning of the 5th.  For doing so, he had  to
	await  an  official communication from the  Chief  Executive
	Officer of the Dumra Notified Area Committee.
	    At	the relevant time Shri Durga Prasad,  the  Sub-Divi-
	sional	Officer	 of  Sitamarhi,	 District  Muzaffarpur,	 was
	functioning ex-officio as the Chairman of the Dumra Notified
	Area Committee and was therefore the "Chief executive  offi-
	cer" of that local authority, within the meaning of
section
	27(2)(d)
of the Act of 1950.  Just as Shri Bose had received
	the  two  Government notifications on the 5th, so  had	Shri
	Durga Prasad.  On receiving the notifications he convened an
	'emergent  meeting'  of the newly nominated members  of	 the
	Dumra  Committee which, as shown by the proceedings  Ex.  E,
	was  held in  the Committee's office at 8 p.m. on  the	5th.
	Shri Durga Prasad has stated in his evidence that after	 the
	meeting	 was  over he sent a letter (No. 62)  to  Shri	Bose
	stating	 that the old list of members should be	 treated  as
	cancelled and the names of members mentioned in the new list
	should	be  included in the electoral roll.  Shri  Bose	 has
	stated	in  his evidence that he received that	letter	(Ex.
	A/3) at 11-30 p.m. through a special messenger and in  token
	thereof	 made  an appropriate endorsement on it.   That	 en-
	dorsement is Ex. J which shows that the letter was  received
	at 11-30 p.m. on the 5th April, Shri Bose also made  another
	endorsement  (Ex. K) on that letter saying that in  the	 new
	list  of  members sent along with the letter  Ex.  A/3,	 the
	addresses members at Serial Nos. 8, 16 and 29 to 37 were not
	noted.	  Shri Bose has testified to these  endorsements  in
	his own evidence.
Column No. 5 of the Electoral Roll requires the specifi-
	cation	of the authority on the basis of which the names  of
	voters are incorporated in the Electoral Roll.	In regard to
	the names of the 40 new members with which we are  concerned
	in this appeal, the authorisation for including their  names
	in  the roll is stated as letter No. 62 dated April 5,	1972
	of the Chairman of the Dumra Notified  Area Committee.	That
	letter,	 as  stated  above, was received  by  the  Electoral
	Registration Officer at 11-30 p.m. on the 5th.
	    The fact of the receipt of Shri Durga Prasad's letter by
	Shri Bose at 11-30 p.m. on the 5th and the entry in column 5
	of  the Electoral roll that the new names were	incorporated
	therein	 on the authority of that letter make it  impossible
	to  accept the half-hearted claim  of Shri Bose that he	 had
	passed	orders	for inclusion of the new names	on  the	 5th
	itself.	  Time	was running fast and only half an  hour	 was
	left  for the last date to expire for making  amendments  in
	the  electoral roll.. The endorsement, Ex. K, made  by	Shri
	Bose  on  letter No. 62 Ex. A/3, shows that he	treated	 the
	list of members as incomplete in necessary particulars since
	the  addresses of certain members were not mentioned in	 the
	list.  Shri Bose did not make any endorsement on the letter,
	which he would in the normal course of business	 do, direct-
	ing  that  the names of new members contained  in  the	list
	accompanying  the   letter should be   incorporated  in	 the
	roll.  In fact
	16--1234SCI/76
748
the letter was "diarised" by Shri Bose's office on the	6th.
	Even on the 6th, when an endorsement was made on the  letter
	regarding  its diarisation in the relevant office file,	 the
	letter did not bear any direction of the Electoral Registra-
	tion  Officer that the new names should be included  in	 the
	electoral  roll.  The fact of the matter seems to   be	that
	the  notifications of the 4th April came too late for  being
	acted upon before the dead-line, which was the 5th.  The red
	tape  moved slowly, the due date expired and then every	 one
	awoke  to the necessity of curing the infirmity by  hurrying
	with  the implementation of the notifications.	But  it	 was
	too  late and the law had already put its seal on the  elec-
	toral roll as it existed on the 5th April.  It could not  be
	touched thereafter, until the completion of the election.
	    The	 entry	at Serial No. 33 in the letter,	 Ex.  M,  on
	which  the appellant relies to show that orders were  issued
	on the 5th itself for inclusion of new names in the elector-
	al roll is ambiguous and relates, in all probability, to the
	superseded  list  of May 5, 1971.   The	 Assistant  District
	Election  Officer  who is the author of the letter  was	 not
	examined  in the case and Shri Bose to whom the	 letter	 was
	addressed  has	admitted very fairly that  he  is  "doubtful
	about serial No. 33" in Ex. M.
	    Coupled  with these facts is the evidence  of  witnesses
	from  the Government Printing Press showing that the notifi-
	cation, Ex. 10, by which the appointment of new members	 was
	made was printed and published on April 7, 1972.  Evidently,
	there was inadequate response to the urgency of the  proces-
	sual matters governing the electoral process.
	    We	must,  however, make it clear in  fairness  to	Shri
	Durga  Prasad and Shri Bose, that neither of them is  to  be
	blamed for non-inclusion of the names in the electoral	roll
	within the appointed time.   They acted with the promptitude
	possible in the circumstances and the mishap occurred mainly
	because	 of  the last-minute decision of the  Government  to
	cancel	the previous notification and to issue a new one  in
	its  place.   The new notification, Ex. 10, was	 lacking  in
	essential  particulars	and  in	 transposing  some  of	 the
	not  so	 easily	 identifiable names of new  members  to	 the
	electoral  roll,  whether  it was done on the  6th,  7th  or
	later, the Electoral Officers did the best of a bad bargain.
	    We	see no substance in the argument that since the	 new
	names  have  found their way into the  electoral  roll,	 the
	entries are conclusive of the right of those members to vote
	at  the election and accordingly, the Court has no power  or
	jurisdiction to go behind the entries and inquire into their
	validity.   In	support	 of this  argument  the	 appellant's
	counsel relies principally on section 62(1) of the Represen-
	tation	of  the
People Act, 1951
which	 provides  that	 "No
	person who is not, and except as expressly provided by	this
	Act, every person who is, for the time being entered in	 the
	electoral roll of any constituency shall be entitled to vote
	in  that  constituency."  This sub-section may be  split  up
	into.  two  parts so as to make its meaning  and  intendment
	clear.	It provides, in the first ..place, that a person Who
	is not entered in an electoral roll of a constituency  shall
	not be entitled to vote in
749
that  constituency.   Secondly it provides that,  except  as
	expressly  provided by the Act, every person who is for	 the
	time being entered in the electoral roll of any constituency
	shall  be  entitled  to vote in that  constituency.   It  is
	implicit in these provisions that the name of the person who
	claims	to be entitled to vote in a constituency  must	have
	been  entered in the electoral roll of that particular	con-
	stituency  in  accordance with law.
Section  23(3)
of	 the
	Representation	of   the People Act, 1950 provides  that  no
	amendment,  transposition or deletion of any entry shall  be
	made  and  no direction for the inclusion of a name  in	 the
	electoral  roll of a constituency shall be given  after	 the
	last  date  for making nominations for an election  in	that
	constituency and before the completion of the election.	  If
	the  name  of a person is entered in the electoral  roll  in
	violation  of the mandate contained in this section, he	 can
	have  no right to vote by reason merely of  the	 entitlement
	conferred  by
section 62(1)
of the Act of 1951.	 Putting  it
	briefly, the words "for the time being entered in the  elec-
	toral  roll" in section 62( 1 ) of the Act of 1951  must  be
	taken  to mean "for the time being entered in the  electoral
	roll in accordance with law."
Learned counsel for the appellant invited our  attention
	to a decision of this Court in
Kabul Singh v. Kundan Singh &
	Ors.
(1) which says that in view of
section 30
of the Act of
	1950, entries found in the electoral roll are final and that
	no civil court has jurisdiction	 to entertain or  adjudicate
	upon  any  question as to whether any person is	 or  is	 not
	entitled  to be registered in an electoral roll for  a	con-
	stituency or to question the legality of any action taken by
	or under the authority of an Electoral Registration  Officer
	or  of any decision given by any authority  appointed  under
	the Act for the revision of any such roll.  In B.M. Ramaswa-
	my  v.	B.M. Krishnamurthy and Ors.(2) also this  Court	 had
	come  to the conclusion that the finality of  the  electoral
	roll  cannot  be challenged in a proceeding  in	 which	 the
	validity  of  the election is questioned.   These  decisions
	cannot	assist the appellant for two reasons.  Firstly,	 the
	question  which	 arises for consideration before us  is	 not
	whether	 any one or more of the 40 members whose  names	 are
	included  in  Ex. 10 are entitled to be	 registered  in	 the
	electoral roll.	 The question is, assuming that they are  so
	entitled,  were their named entered in the roll	 within	 the
	time  limited by law?  Secondly, the legality of the  action
	taken by the Electoral Registration Officer in entering	 the
	new names in the roll after the expiry of the last date	 for
	making	nominations, was in issue before High Court  in	 the
	Election  Petition  itself  filed by  the  appellant,  under
section	 81
of the Act of 1951,
Section 30(b)
of the Act  of
	1950 cannot affect the jurisdiction of the High Court, while
	dealing with an election petition, to set aside an  election
	on  the	 grounds mentioned in
section 100(1)
of the  Act  of
	1951,  one of which is that the result of the  election	 was
	materially  affected by the improper reception,	 refusal  or
	rejection of any vote.	There is a clear distinction between
	a  challenge to the right of a voter to be registered in  an
	electoral roll and the jurisdiction of an authority appoint-
	ed  under  the Act to enter a name in  the  electoral  roll.
	That jurisdiction has perforce to be exercised.
	(1) [1970] 1 S.C.R. 845.     (2) [1963] 3 S.C.R. 479.
750
consistently  with the provisions of the law  governing	 the
	election  and in case there is failure to do so, the  action
	of  the officer would be open to challenge on the ground  of
	want  of  jurisdiction. If, as here, the electoral  roll  is
	amended	 after the time-limit set down in
section  23(3)
of
	the Act of 1950, the amendment would be without jurisdiction
	conferring  no right to vote on the persons whose names	 are
	thus included in the roll.  As held by this Court in Baidya-
	nath
Panjiar  v.  Sitaram Mahto & Ors.,  C
)  the  provision
	contained in
section 23 (3)
is mandatory not merely  because
	of the language employed in that sub-section but more so  in
	view  of the purpose behind the particular  provision.	 The
	sub-section does not deal with any mode or procedure in	 the
	matter	of registering voters.	It interdicts the  concerned
	officer	 from interfering with the electoral  process  under
	the  prescribed	 circumstances. Therefore, when there  is  a
	breach of
section 23(3)
, the question is not  of an  irregu-
	lar exercise of power but of the lack of power itself.
	    It	is thus clear that the Election Commission of  India
	was  within its rights in withdrawing the polling  booth  at
	the Dumra Committee office in order that the new members may
	not vote at the election. The reason which weighed with	 the
	Election  Commission were evidently different but its  ulti-
	mate  decision	can seek its justification in what  we	have
	stated	above.	 It  is unfortunate  that  the	existing  40
	members of the Committee also were prevented from voting but
	they did not complain of the deprivation of their franchise,
	probably   because   they thought that their names,  in	 any
	case, were deleted from the roll on the 5th itself.
	    It	is a sad reflection that the sitting members of	 the
	Dumra  Committee should have been dismembered on the eve  of
	the  elections,	 apparently without rhyme  or  reason.	 The
	State  Government  undoubtedly	possesses  the	power  under
	section 389(c) of the Bihar and Orissa Municipal Act,  1922,
	to  make  appointments to the Notified Area  Committees	 but
	that  power, it ought to be remembered, must  be  exercised'
	for carrying out the purposes of that Act, not for defeating
	them. The issuance of the two notifications on the  penulti-
	mate day, the feverish activity following in their wake	 and
	the unseemly haste and hurry with which the enrolment of new
	members	 was attempted to be rushed through on the  eventful
	evening of the 5th April lend great weight to the contention
	of  respondent 1's counsel that the cancellation of the	 old
	members and their replacement by the new ones was  motivated
	by considerations foreign to the good governance of the Area
	Committee.  We feel greatly uneasy that	 local	machinations
	should	have eventually led in this case to a denial of	 the
	valuable right of franchise to the whole body of 40  members
	who  constituted  the Area Committee. Such  occurrences,  we
	hope, will not happen once too often.  If they do, the power
	of  the State Governments to make appointments to Area	Com-
	mittees	 will  itself become suspect,  sapping	thereby	 the
	faith  of the people in the working of what are believed  to
	be the nurseries of democracies.
That  leaves  the second of the two	 contentions  to  be
	considered,  namely, that respondent s election is  vitiated
	because he attempted to
	(1) [1970] 1 S.C.R. 839.
751
bribe  the  voters Sri Narain Prasad and Ram  Swarath  Raut.
	Having	considered the evidence of these two  witnesses	 who
	are  respectively  P.Ws. 11 and 71 and the evidence  of	 the
	appellant  himself, it seems to us impossible to accept	 the
	allegation of bribery.	The two witnesses, P.Ws. 11 and	 71,
	are members of a local authority and it is unlikely that  an
	attempt	 would be made to bribe them. In the absence of	 any
	evidence  of  unimpeachable nature and particularly  in	 the
	absence	 of any contemporaneous complaint in regard  to	 the
	allegation of bribery, it would be unsafe to accept the bare
	word  of the appellant and his witnesses on such  a  serious
	charge.	 The  charge of	 bribery is  quasicriminal in nature
	and  in	 a series of cases this Court has held that  such  a
	charge must be proved not by a mere preponderance,of  proba-
	bilities  but  beyond  a reasonable doubt.   That  proof  is
	tacking	 here.	Besides, the High Court has  considered	 the
	evidence on the question of bribery fully and carefully	 and
	we do not see any reason for departing from our	 established
	practice  that, except for substantial reasons,	 this  Court
	will not embark upon a detailed assessment of oral evidence.
	    In	the result, the appeal fails and is  dismissed	with
	costs in favour of respondent 1.
P.H.P.					       Appeal	dis-
	missed.
752