[Cites
5
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
Ikram Khan vs State Transport Appellate Tribunal And ... on 31 August, 1976
Equivalent citations: 1976 AIR 2333, 1977 SCR (1) 459, AIR 1976 SUPREME COURT 2333, 1976 TAC 46, 1977 (1) SCR 459, 1976 2 ALL LR 606, 1976 4 SCC 1, 1976 UJ (SC) 756
Author:
P.K. Goswami
Bench:
P.K. Goswami
,
Y.V. Chandrachud
PETITIONER:
IKRAM KHAN

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE TRANSPORT APPELLATE TRIBUNAL AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT31/08/1976

BENCH:
GOSWAMI, P.K.
BENCH:
GOSWAMI, P.K.
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V.

CITATION:
 1976 AIR 2333		  1977 SCR  (1) 459
 1976 SCC  (4)	 1


ACT:
Motor  Vehicles  Act,  1939
--
Sec.  47-
-Rajasthan   Motor
	Vehicles Rules, 1951 Rule 108(c)--Whether considerations  in
Sec.  47
for grant of stage permits to be mentioned  in	 the
	order.



HEADNOTE:
	    The	 appellant and respondents No. 3 and 4	applied	 for
	the  grant   of nontemporary stage  carriage  permits.	 The
	Regional  Transport  Authority granted the  permits  to	 the
	appellant and respondent No. 4 and rejected the	 application
	of  respondent No. 3.  Respondent No. 3 filed an  appeal  to
	the  State  Transport  Appellate Tribunal.   The  notice  of
	appeal was served upon the appellant where the date and time
	were  mentioned but the place was not mentioned.  Since	 the
	appellant did not appear the appeal was heard ex-parte.	 The
	Tribunal set aside the order of the Transport Authority	 and
	granted the  permit  in	 favour	 of respondent No. 3. A writ
	petition  filed	 by the appellant against the order  of	 the
	Tribunal was dismissed summarily by the learned Single Judge
	by  a  long speaking order. A Division Bench  dismissed	 the
	appeal filed by the appellant.
	In an appeal by Special Leave the appellant contended:
		   1.  The notice as required by rule 108(c) of	 the
		 Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Rules, 1951 served on	 the
		 appellant  was not proper notice since it  did	 not
		 mention the place of the hearing of the appeal.
		   2.  The  Tribunal did not consider  the  relevant
		 matters as mentioned in
section 47(a)
to (f).
	HELD:  1.  The omission to mention the place is	 not  fatal.
	The appellant is a resident of Jaipur where also the  office
	of the Tribunal is situated. He was a Stage Carriage  permit
	holder and not a stranger to the Transport authorities.	  In
	fact,  hearing of the appeal was adjourned twice even  after
	the date mentioned in the notice.  [460 F]
	    2.	The Regional Transport Authority did not  make	 any
	reference   to the relevant considerations under
section  47
of  the Act.  The Tribunal on the other hand has  considered
	various	 aspects  of the matter as required  by
section  47
although  without a reference to that section. The  Tribunal
	and  the  learned  Single Judge duly  considered  the  whole
	matter	and  the Division Bench was justified  in  summarily
	rejecting the special appeal.  [461 B--D]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 874 of 1975.
	    Appeal  by	Special Leave from the	Judgment  and  Order
	dated  5-3-75  of  the Rajasthan High Court  in	 D.B.  Civil
	Appeal No. 18 of 1975.
M.C. Bhandare, S.M. Jain, S.K. Jain and Mohd. Fasiuddin,
	for the Appellant.
P.C. Bhartari, for Respondent No. 3.
K.J. John, for Respondent No. 4.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
	    GOSWAMI,  J.--The appellant and the respondents 3 and  4
	were   the  former  existing  stage-carriage  operators	  of
	Jaipur-Sainthal route which was nationalised on January	 25,
	1973.	All of them applied for the grant  of  non-temporary
	stage carriage permits of Jaipur-Padampura route as alterna-
	tive  route  permits.	The  Regional  Transport  Authority,
	Jaipur	(briefly  the RTA) by it's order of July  22,  1974,
	granted nontemporary permits to the appellant and respondent
	No.  4	and rejected the application of	 respondent  No.  3.
	That  led  to  an appeal to the	 State	Transport  AppeLlate
	Tribunal at Jaipur, Rajasthan, by respondent
460
No.  3.	 The notice of appeal was served upon the  appellant
	but  since he did not appear the appeal was  heard  ex-parte
	and  by its order dated December 17, 1974, the State  Trans-
	port  Appellate Tribunal set aside the order of the RTA	 and
	granted	 the  permit  in favour of respondent  No.  3.	 The
	appellant filed a writ application under
Article 226
of	 the
	Constitution before the Rajasthan High Court and the learned
	single	Judge by a rather long speaking order dismissed	 the
	same  summarily.  A further appeal by the appellant  to	 the
	Division Bench met with the same fate.	The High Court	also
	refused to grant certificate to appeal to this Court.  Hence
	this appeal by special leave.
Mr.	 Bhandare,  the	 learned counsel on  behalf  of	 the
	appellant,  submits  that the order of the  State  Transport
	Appellate  Tribunal (briefly the Tribunal) is invalid  inas-
	much  as  the appeal was heard in the absence  of  a  proper
	notice	of  appeal as required under the law. He  draws	 our
	attention  to  rule 108(c) of the Rajasthan  Motor  Vehicles
	Rules. 1951, which reads as follows :---
"Upon  receipt  of  an  appeal  preferred  in
		 accordance with sub-rule (b) the Appellate Tribunal
		 may appoint a	date, time and place for hearing  of
		 the  Appeal, giving the State Transport  Authority,
		 or  the Regional Transport Authority, as  the	case
		 may  be,  and the appellant. not less	than  thirty
		 days notice thereof".
Although  the above rule does not contain any provision	 for
	service of notice on the respondent, it is, however, implic-
	it that a notice similar     to one intended under the	rule
	for  service  on the appellant must also be  served  on	 the
	respondent.  Mr.  Bhandare  could not  dispute	the  factual
	service of notice on the appellant in view of the Tribunal's
	finding.  He  however,	submits that the  notice  which	 was
	served	on  the appellant did not recite the place  for	 the
	hearing of the appeal although the date and time were  noted
	therein.  It  is true that the Tribunal could not,  in	law,
	hear the appeal without intimating the respondent. about the
	date, time and place for hearing of the appeal but since the
	appellant had received the notice from the Tribunal indicat-
	ing  the date and time for hearing of the appeal, the  omis-
	sion in the notice to describe the place where the appeal is
	to be heard is not fatal enough to make the appeal  proceed-
	ing invalid before the Tribunal.  The appellant, admittedly,
	is a resident of Jaipur where also the office of the  Tribu-
	nal is situated.  He was also a stage carriage permit-holder
	and  not a stranger to the office of the Transport  Authori-
	ties.  Besides, although the notice of the appeal fixed	 the
	date of hearing on October 8, 1974, the appeal was adjourned
	on  that day to October 21, 1974 and again to  November	 12,
	1974  and  it was only on December 12, 1974 that  the  final
	hearing	 of the appeal took place.  It is, therefore,  clear
	that  the appellant was duly notified about the	 hearing  of
	the appeal and in view of the fact that he did not make	 any
	effort	to  be present during this entire period,  when	 the
	appeal	was pending, he could not be allowed to take  advan-
	tage  of  the mere omission of the place of hearing  of	 the
	appeal	in  the	 notice.  Besides, the RTA  was	 present  as
	provided for under
section 64(1)
of the Motor Vehicles	Act,
	1939 (briefly the Act) before the Tribunal to defend its own
	order.	The submission of the appellant is, therefore, of no
	avail.
461
Mr.	 Bhandare next submits that the Tribunal  failed  to
	comply with
section 47
of the Act and did not at all consid-
	er the relevant matters (a) to (f) provided therein.  It  is
	well settled that in considering an application for a  stage
	carriage  permit  the RTA shall have regard to	the  matters
	described in
section 47
.  Before we go to consider about the
	submission  of	the learned counsel with  reference  to	 the
	order  of  the Tribunal it is manifest, on the face  of	 the
	order  of  the RTA, that  Authority, even at the  first	 in-
	stance, did not make any reference to the relevant consider-
	ations	under
section 47
of the Act.  The only reason  given
	by the RTA in rejecting the application of respondent No.  3
	is  that "there is no other vacancy".  There is	 nothing  to
	show that the case of respondent No. 3 was at all considered
	by  the RTA on merits. The Tribunal, on the other hand,	 has
	considered various aspects of the matter although without  a
	reference to
section 47
as such.  For example, the condition
	of  the vehicles of the two parties was duly  considered  by
	the  Tribunal.	The fact that the respondent 3 had  a  later
	model of vehicle being 1965 model whereas the appellant	 had
	only  a 1962 model vehicle tilted the balance in  favour  of
	the  respondent	 No.  3. This aspect can  well	arise  under
	clauses (a) and (b) of
section 47
. We are unable to say that
	the  relevant considerations under
section 47
, on the  facts
	and  circumstances  of the grant of the	 particular  permit,
	were  not  kept in view by the Tribunal in  considering	 the
	appeal.	  The  Tribunal and the learned	 single	 Judge	duly
	considered  the	 whole	matter and the	Division  Bench	 was
	justified  in  summarily rejecting the special	appeal.	 The
	second submission of the learned counsel also fails.
	    In	the result the appeal is dismissed but we will	make
	no order as to costs.
P.H.P.					  Appeal dismissed.
462