[Cites
4
, Cited by
9
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Maharashtra vs Narayan Vyankatesh Deshpande on 31 March, 1976
Equivalent citations: 1976 AIR 1204, 1976 SCR (3) 980, AIR 1976 SUPREME COURT 1204, 1976 3 SCC 404 1975 SCC (CRI) 30, 1975 SCC (CRI) 30
Author:
P.N. Bhagwati
Bench:
P.N. Bhagwati
,
A.C. Gupta
,
Syed Murtaza Fazalali
PETITIONER:
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
NARAYAN VYANKATESH DESHPANDE

DATE OF JUDGMENT31/03/1976

BENCH:
BHAGWATI, P.N.
BENCH:
BHAGWATI, P.N.
GUPTA, A.C.
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA

CITATION:
 1976 AIR 1204		  1976 SCR  (3) 980
 1976 SCC  (3) 404


ACT:
     Bombay Paragana  and Kulkarni  Watans (Abolition)	Ac),
1950-Compensation payable  on resumption  of land  under  s.
6(21-Whether the  "watan" was  in respect of the soil or the
watan was of land revenue Construction of "Sanad" granted by
the British  Government in  terms "The	Exemption From	Land
Revenue (No. 1)
Bombay Act
2 of 1863.



HEADNOTE:
     The respondent  by virtue	of the	sanad granted to his
ancestors by  the British Government, claimed, in respect of
certain lands  situated in village Shiramba Taluka Koregaon,
District North	Satara, compensation  under
s.	6(2)
of	 the
Bombay Paragana	 and Kulkarni  Watans (Abolition) Act. 1950,
for the	 resumption of	the lands by the appellant. The suit
claim of  Rs. 15,074-4-0 being "a sum equal to ten times the
amount of such land revenue" was decreed by the trial court.
On appeal  by the  State, the  High Court affirmed the same.
after construing the sanad granted by the British Government
in favour  of the  respondents' ancestors and other relevant
records, as  it was  a watan  of land  revenue	and  not  in
respect of the soil.
     Dismissing the  State's appeal by special leave to this
Court,
^
     HELD: (1)	The High Court was right in holding that the
grant in  favour of  the ancestors  of the  respondent was a
grant of  land revenue	only and not a grant of the soil and
since the  watan held  by the  respondent at the date of the
coming into force of the Act was a watan of land revenue the
respondent was	entitled to  compensation in  the sum of Rs.
15,074-4-0 under
s. 6(2)
of the Bombay Paragana and Kulkarni
Watan (Abolition) Act, 1950. [982B-C]
     (2) The  sanad undoubtedly	 used the  words "lands"  to
describe the  subject matter  of the  grant,  but  the	word
"land" is  defined in
Bombay Act
II of 1863 [The Exemption
From Land  Revenue (No.	 1 )  Act 1863], to include share of
land  revenue	and  this   meaning  would   apply  in	 the
construction of the word "land" in the sanad since the sanad
was apparently	granted pursuant  to the  enquiry made under
Bombay Act
II of 1863. The description of the subject matter
would not,  therefore, necessarily  indicate that  it was  a
grant of  the soil. In fact, this description standing alone
would rather  indicate that  it was  a grant of land revenue
only,  since   grant  of   the	soil   would  ordinarily  be
accompanied by	words such  as 'Darobast'  or 'Jal', 'Taru',
'Truna', 'Kastha' and 'Pashan'. [981F-H]
     [Their  lordships	deprecated  the	 litigious  approach
adopted	 by   the  State   Government  and  observed  "State
Governments which  have public	accountability in respect of
their actions  should not  lightly rush	 to  this  Court  to
challenge a  judgment of the High Court which is plainly and
manifestly  correct   and  drag	  the  opposite	  party	  in
unnecessary expense.]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1381 of
1968.
(Appeal by	 Special Leave	from the Judgment and Decree
dated the 22-2-1967 of the Bombay High Court in First Appeal
No. 12/1960).
M. N.  Phadke, M.	N. Shroff  and S.  P. Nayar, for the
appellant.
V. S. Desai and D. Goburdhan, for the respondent.
981
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     BHAGWATI, J.-This	appeal by  special  leave  raises  a
short  question	  as  to  whether  the	Watan  held  by	 the
respondent at  the date	 of coming  into force of the
Bombay
Paragana and  Kulkarni Watans  (Abolition) Act,	 1950
was  a
Watan of  the soil,  or a  Watan of  land revenue  only,  in
respect of certain lands situate in village shirambe, Taluka
Koregaon, District  North  Statara.  If	 the  Watan  was  in
respect of the soil, the respondent would not be entitled to
any compensation  for the resumption of the Watan lands, but
if it was a Watan of land revenue only, the respondent would
have a	claim for  compensation for  a "a  sum equal  to ten
times the  amount of such land revenue" under
s. 6(2)
of the
Act. The  respondent claimed  that the	Watan  was  of	land
revenue only  and not  of the  soil and	 he was,  therefore,
entitled to  compensation as  provided in
s. 6(2)
of the Act
and filed  a suit  for recovery	 of Rs. 15,074-4-0 by way of
compensation against  the State	 of Maharashtra in the Court
of Civil  Judge, Senior	 Division,  Satara.  The  claim	 was
decreed by  the learned	 Civil Judge, Senior Division and on
appeal by  the State  of Maharashtra the High Court affirmed
the view  taken by the learned Civil Judge, Senior Division.
The High  Court construed  the Sanad  granted by the British
government in  favour of  the ancestors of the respondent in
the light  of the surrounding circumstances and particularly
the  entries   contemporaneously  made	 in  the  alienation
register and  came to the conclusion that the grant embodied
in the	Sanad was  not a  grant of the soil but was merely a
grant of  land revenue	and the	 respondent was,  therefore,
entitled to  claim compensation	 the basis  laid down  in
s.
6(2)
of the Act. The State of Maharashtra being aggrieved by
the  decree  passed  by	 the  learned  Civil  Judge,  Senior
Division and  affirmed	by  the	 High  Court  preferred	 the
present appeal with special leave obtained from this Court.
We have carefully gone through the judgment of the High
Court and we find ourselves completely in agreement with the
conclusion reached  there. The judgment of the High Court is
a well	reasoned judgment  and the learned counsel appearing
on behalf  of the  State of Maharashtra has not been able to
show any  infirmity in	it. The	 opening part  of the  Sanad
clearly shows  that it	was issued in recognition of a grant
which was  already made	 in favour  of the  ancestors of the
respondent. The	 Sanad undoubtedly  used the word 'lands' to
describe the  subject-matter of	 the  grant,  but  the	word
'land' is  defined in
Bombay Act
2 of 1863 to include share
of land	 revenue  and  this  meaning  should  apply  in	 the
construction of	 the word  'land' in  the Sanad,  since	 the
Sanad was  apparently granted  pursuant to  the enquiry made
under
Bombay  Act
2  of 1863. The description of the subject
matter of  the grant  as 'lands'  in the  Sanad	 would	not,
therefore, necessarily	indicate that  it was a grant of the
soil. In  fact, this description standing alone would rather
indicate that  it was  a grant	of land	 revenue only, since
grant of  the soil  would ordinarily be accompanied by words
such as	 'Darobast' or	'Jal', 'Taru', 'Truna', 'Kastha' and
'Pashan.' Moreover,  the entries  contemporaneously made  in
the alienation	register also showed that the grant referred
to in  the Sanad  was a grant of land revenue only and not a
grant of the soil. The High
982
Court has  discussed these  entries and	 it is not necessary
for us	to reiterate  what has been so ably said by the High
Court. The  earlier documents  relied upon by the respondent
have also  been referred  to by	 the  High  Court  and	they
clearly go  to show  that the  grant was of land revenue and
not of	the soil.  This position was in fact accepted by the
Revenue officers all throughout and that is evident from the
order of  the District	Deputy Collector,  Satara dated 19th
August, 1937  (Ex. 28) and the decision dated 28th February,
1951 (Ex.  331) given  by  the	Collector  of  North  Satara
allowing  an   appeal  filed  by  the  respondent.  We	are,
therefore, of  the view	 that the  High Court  was right  in
holding that  the grant	 in favour  of the  ancestors of the
respondent was	a grant of land revenue only and not a grant
of the	soil and  since the  Watan held by the respondent at
the date  of the coming into force of the Act was a Watan of
land revenue, the respondent was entitled to compensation in
the sum of Rs. 15,074-4-0 under
s. 6(2)
of the Act.
It is  indeed difficult  to understand  as to  why	 the
State of  Maharashtra  should  have  preferred	the  present
appeal at  all. The  judgment of  the High  Court  was	pre-
eminently a correct judgment based on a careful appreciation
of the	evidence on  record and	 it did no more than adopt a
construction of the grant which had throughout been accepted
as the correct construction by the Revenue officers over the
last 75	 years. The  learned counsel  appearing on behalf of
the State  of Maharashtra  in fact  found it  impossible  to
assail the reasoning of the judgment. It is evident that the
appeal was  filed by the State of Maharashtra without giving
much thought  to the  question and caring to enquire whether
the judgment  of the  High Court  suffered from	 any  errors
requiring to  be corrected  by a  superior court.  We do not
think it  is right  that State	Governments  should  lightly
prefer an  appeal in  this Court against a decision given by
the  High  Court  unless  they	are  satisfied,	 on  careful
consideration and  proper scrutiny,  that  the	decision  is
erroneous and  public interest	requires that  it should  be
brought before	a superior  court for  being corrected.	 The
State Governments  should not adopt a litigious approach and
waste public  revenues on  fruitless and  futile  litigation
where there - are no chances of success. It is unfortunately
a fact	that it	 costs quite a large sum of money to come to
this  Court  and  this	Court  has  become  untouchable	 and
unapproachable by  many litigants  who can  not	 afford	 the
large expense  involved in  fighting a	litigation  in	this
Court. It  is, therefore,  all the more necessary that State
Governments, which  have public accountability in respect of
their actions,	should not  lightly rush  to this  Court  to
challenge a  judgment of the High Court which is plainly and
manifestly  correct   and  drag	  the  opposite	  party	  in
unnecessary expense,  part of which would, in any event, not
be compensated	by award  of cost.  The present appeal is an
instance of  the kind  of unnecessary  and futile litigation
which the State Governments can and should avoid.
We accordingly dismiss the appeal with costs.
S.R. Appeal dismissed.
983