[Cites
7
, Cited by
75
]
Supreme Court of India
Shantilal Thakordas & Ors vs Chimanlal Maganlal Telwala on 23 August, 1976
Equivalent citations: 1976 AIR 2358, 1977 SCR (1) 341, AIR 1976 SUPREME COURT 2358, 1976 4 SCC 417, 1976 (18) GUJLR 215, 1976 RENCJ 811, 1977 (1) SCR 341, 1976 RENCR 828, 1977 (1) SCWR 41, 1976 UJ (SC) 780
Author:
N.L. Untwalia
Bench:
N.L. Untwalia
,
A.N.  Ray
,
P.N. Shingal
PETITIONER:
SHANTILAL THAKORDAS & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
CHIMANLAL MAGANLAL TELWALA

DATE OF JUDGMENT23/08/1976

BENCH:
UNTWALIA, N.L.
BENCH:
UNTWALIA, N.L.
RAY, A.N. (CJ)
SHINGAL, P.N.

CITATION:
 1976 AIR 2358		  1977 SCR  (1) 341
 1976 SCC  (4) 417
 CITATOR INFO :
 E	    1987 SC2199	 (2)
 R	    1990 SC1133	 (6)


ACT:
Bombay	Rents,	Hotel and Lodging House	 Rates	Control	 Act
1947--
Section 13(1) (b)
--Suit for eviction on the ground  of
	bona fide and personal need of a landlord--Whether right  to
	sue  survives  to his heirs--Requirement of  firm  in  which
	landlord  is  a	 partner  whether  his	requirement--Whether
	decree	passed in favour of landlord can be disturbed on his
	death.



HEADNOTE:
	    Thakordas, father of 3 appellants, was the owner of	 the
	suit  premises.	  He was a partner in a firm  which.  had  3
	other  partners.  One of the partners was appellant  No.  1,
	the  son  of Thakordas and two partners were  outsiders.   A
	suit  for eviction was filed against the respondent  on	 the
	ground	that  Thakordas required the premises for  the	said
	firm  reasonably and  bona fide	 within	 the meaning  of  s.
	13(1)(g)  of  the Bombay Rent Act, 1947.   The	trial  court
	passed	a decree for eviction in respect of a	portion	  of
	the  premises.	 Thereafter, Thakordas died and the  present
	appellants  who are his sons filed an appeal.  Likewise	 the
	tenant also filed an appeal.  Appellants No. 1 and 2 togeth-
	er with some outsiders continued the firm.  However,  appel-
	lant No. 3 a minor son of Thakordas was not admitted to	 the
	benefit	 of  the  partnership.	The  First  Appellate  Court
	confirmed  the	decree	of the trial  court.   The  revision
	application filed by the tenant was allowed and one filed by
	the  appellants was dismissed by the High Court	 relying  on
	the  decision  of  this	 Court	in  Phul  Rani	&   Ors.  v.
	Naubat Rai Ahluwalia [19731 3 SCR 679.
	In an appeal by special leave, the appellants contended:
	   1.  Phul  Rahi's case was not correctly decided  and	 the
	right of Thakordas survived in favour of the appellants.
	   2. The requirement of the firm in which the landlord is a
	partner will be the requirement of the landlord.
	   3.  Since the decree had already been  passed in   favour
	of  Thakordas before his death it could not be disturbed  on
	his death either in appeall  or in revision.
	Dismissing the appeal,
	    HELD: (1) Phul Rani's case was wrongly decided.  If	 the
	law  permitted the eviction of the tenant for  the  require-
	ments  of  the landlord "for occupation as a  residence	 for
	himself and members of his family" then the requirement	 was
	both of the landlord and the members of his family.  On	 his
	death, the right to '.sue did survive to the members of	 the
	family	of  the deceased landlord.  After the death  of	 the
	original landlord the senior member of his family takes	 his
	place, and is well competent to continue the suit for  evic-
	tion  for  his occupation and the occupation  of  the  other
	members of the family. [343 H, 344 A--B]
	    (2) It is doubtful whether the requirement of the  prem-
	ises by the landlord for occupation by the firm in which  he
	is a partner will tantamount to occupation by himself.	Even
	if  it is assumed that it will amount to occupation  by	 the
	landlord,  since in the new firm the minor son of  Thakordas
	was  not admitted to the benefits of the partnership he	 had
	no interest in the said firm. Therefore, as far as appellant
	No. 3 is concerned, he could in no sense be said to  require
	the premises. [344 C---G]
	    (3) The conclusion in Phul Rani's case that if a  decree
	had  been  already passed in favour of	the  plaintiff	that
	could not be disturbed on his death is not correctly  decid-
	ed.  In fact, no final opinion was expressed in Phul, Rani's
	case on that question. [344 H, 345 A]
	342
	Phul  Rani  & Ors. v. Naubat Rai Ahluwalia [1973]  3  S.C.R.
	679, overruled.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION:  Civil Appeals Nos. 487-488 of
	1976.
(Appeal  by Special Leave from the Judgment and   Order
	19.12.1973  of	the  Gujarat High Court	 in  Civil  Revision
	Application  No. 540 and 678 of 1970).
S.K. Dholakia and R.C. Bhatia, for the appellants.
	R.P.  Bhatt and H.S. Parihar for 1. N. Shroff, for  the	 re-
	spondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
	  UNTWALIA, J. In these appeals by special leave  the  ques-
	tion which fails for our determination is whether the  deci-
	sion  of  a Bench of this Court consisting  of	two  learned
	Judges	in
Phul Rani & Ors. v. Naubat Rai  Ahluwalia
(1)  is
	correct.  If not, whether the appellants are entitled to get
	a  decree  for	eviction in respect of	the   suit  premises
	against	   the defendant respondent.
Thakordas Bhagwandas--the father of the three appellants was
	owner of the suit premises.  He was a partner in a  partner-
	ship firm styled as Jai Hind Silk Weaving Works.  There were
	three	more partners in the firm-one of whom was  Shantilal
	Thakordas,  appellant  No. 1, son of  Thakordas	 Bhagwandas.
	The  other two	were outsiders.	 The suit was filed  against
	respondent Chimanlal Maganlal Telwala for his eviction	from
	the premises on several grounds.  The only ground which need
	to  be	mentioned for the purpose of the  disposal  of	this
	appeal	is  Thakordas's claim of  requiring   the   premise.
	reasonably  and bona-fide for occupation by  himself  within
	the  meaning of
section 13(1)(g)
of the Bombay Rents,  Hotel
	and  Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947.   The  necessity
	pleaded	 by the original plaintiff was that he required	 the
	premises for the use  of  the partnership firm aforesaid  in
	which he  was a	 partner.  The	Trial Court decreed the suit
	in  part on April 30, 1965 and passed a decree for  eviction
	of  the	 tenant from a portion of the suit  premises.	Both
	sides  went up in appeal before the First  Appellate  Court.
	Thakordas was dead and his heirs, namely, the present appel-
	lants  were the appellants in one appeal and respondents  in
	the other.  The first Appellate Court by its judgment  dated
	November 10, 2966 maintained  the partial decree made by the
	Trial Court with slight modification. Both the parties	went
	in  revision before the Gujarat High Court. The	 High  Court
	set  aside the decree dated November 10, 1966 of the   First
	Appellate  Court  and remanded the case to it  for  a  fresh
	disposal of the appeal after trying out an additional  issue
	of  comparative hardship of the landlord and the  tenant  as
	also the question as to whether the substituted heirs of the
	original  plaintiff  required the  premises  reasonably	 and
	bona-fide for their occupation.
The	 first Appellate Court after remand again  passed  a
	decree	for eviction from a portion of the suit premises  on
	March 31, 1970. Two
	(1) (1973) 3 S.C.R. 679.
343
revisions  were taken to the High Court--one by	 the  appel-
	lants	and  the  other by the	respondent.   Following	 the
	decision of this  Court in
Phul Rani
's case (supra) the High
	Court  allowed the respondent's revision, rejected  that  of
	the  appellants	 and dismissed their suit  for	eviction  in
	toto.  Hence these appeals.
The	 foremost and the first question urged before us  by
	Mr.  Dholakia  was that
Phul Rani
's case was  not  correctly
	decided. We agree with this contention and say with  respect
	that we do not subscribe to the view expressed by the  Bench
	of  this   Court
in that case
.	The  original  plaintiff
in
	that  case
had filed the application  for   eviction  under
section	 14(1)(e)
of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958.	 The
	application  was  dismissed  in the first  instance  by	 the
	Additional  Rent  Controller, Delhi on the ground  that	 the
	notices to quit were  not valid.  Plaintiff filed an  appeal
	but  died  during  its	pendency.  His widow,  son  and	 two
	married	 daughters and two children of a  deceased  daughter
	were allowed to be substituted by  the	Rent  Control Tribu-
	nal where the appeal was pending.  The case was remanded  by
	the Tribunal and after remand the Additional Rent Controller
	held that some of the substituted persons require the  prem-
	ises   bona-fide for their occupation.	The tenant's  appeal
	to  the Tribunal  failed. The High Court of Delhi on a	fur-
	ther  appeal by the tenant took the view that the  right  to
	sue  did  not survive to the heirs of the plaintiff  and  on
	that ground it dismissed the ejectment application. The case
	came  up  to  this Court.  The view of the  High  Court	 was
	affirmed. The relevant words of personal requirement of	 the
	premises  in
section 14(1)(e)
of the Delhi  Act  are:	"for
	occupation  as	a residence for himself and members  of	 his
	family."  The  original	 plaintiff  had pleaded:
"The  premises are required bonafide by	 the
		 petitioner  for occupation as a residence for	him-
		 self  and members of his family and that the  peti-
		 tioner has no other reasonably suitable residential
		 accommodation."
This Court took the view:
"Thus, the requirement pleaded in the  eject-
		 ment  application  and on which the  plaintiff	 has
		 rounded his right to relief is his requirement,  or
		 to  use an expression which will effectively  bring
		 out the real point, his personal  requirement.	  If
		 the ejectment application succeeds--we will  forget
		 for a moment that the plaintiff is dead  the  prem-
		 ises  in the possession of the tenant may  come  to
		 be occupied by the plaintiff and the members of his
		 family	 but   that does not  make  the	 requirement
		 pleaded in the application any the less a  personal
		 requirement of the plaintiff.	That the members  of
		 his family must reside with him is his requirement,
		 not  theirs.  Such a personal cause of action
		 must perish with the plaintiff."
In our considered opinion in face of the wordings of
section
	14(1)(e)
of the Delhi Act, the view expressed in Phul Rani's
	case, as stated
	6-114SCI/76
344
above,	is not correct.	 If the law permitted the   eviction
	of   the  tenant for the requirement of	 the  landlord	"for
	occupation  as	a residence for himself and members  of	 his
	family",' then the requirement was both of the landlord	 and
	the  members of his family.  On his death the right  to	 sue
	did  survive  to the members of the family of  the  deceased
	landlord.  We are unable to take the view that the  require-
	ment  Of the occupation of the members of the family of	 the
	original  landlord was his requirement and ceased to be	 the
	requirement  of	 the  members of his family  on	 his  death.
	'After the death of the original landlord the senior  member
	of  his	 family	 takes his place and is	 well  competent  to
	continue  the suit for eviction for his occupation  and	 the
	occupation of the other members of the family.	Many of	 the
	substituted heirs of the deceased landlord were	 undoubtedly
	the members of his family and the two married daughters	 and
	the  children  of a deceased daughter in  the  circumstances
	could  not  be held to be not members of the family  of	 the
	deceased landlord.
But	 even so the appellants cannot succeed in  this	 ap-
	peal.  Firstly it is doubtful whether the requirement of the
	premises  by the landlord for occupation by the	 partnership
	firm in which he is a partner will be tantamount to "occupa-
	tion by himself" i.e. by  the landlord. Certain decisions of
	some High Courts were brought to our notice taking the	view
	that  it is so.	 We refrain from expressing our	 opinion  in
	that  regard.  We assume, as seems to have been the view  of
	the  High  Court in this case, that the requirement  of	 the
	premises  for the use of a partnership firm by the  landlord
	in which he is a partner  is covered by
section 13(1)(g)
of
	the Bombay Act.	 Yet on the facts of this case there is	 'an
	insurmountable	difficulty  in the way	of  the	 appellants.
	From  the judgment dated March 31, 1970 of the First  Appel-
	late Court it would appear that on the death of Thakordas in
	June,  1965  a new partnership was constituted. One  of	 his
	sons Shantilal who was a partner from before was taken as  a
	partner in the new partnership alongwith Thakordas's another
	son Dhanvantlal Thakordas, appellant No. 2.  There were some
	outsider  partners.   Harish Thakordas, appellant No.  3,  a
	minor son of Thakordas had not been admitted to the benefits
	of  the partnership.  He had, therefore, no interest in	 the
	partnership firm Jai Hind Silk Weaving Works.  The Appellate
	Court took the view that the .substituted plaintiffs  wanted
	to  use	 the suit premises for ,the purpose  of	 godown	 for
	keeping the yarn clothes and machinery articles and also for
	a retail shop  and show room of the partnership.  This in no
	sense  could  be the requirement of  appellant	Harish	even
	assuming that it could be said tO be the requirement of	 his
	two  cider brothers  appellants 1  and 2.
In that  view  of
	the  matter we have got to dismiss the appeal  although	 Mr.
	Dholakia,  learned counsel for the appellants  succeeded  in
	persuading  us to differ from the ratio of
Phul Rani
's case.
Counsel  for the appellants endeavoured to	bring  their
	case within one of the exceptions noted in
Phul Rani
's case.
	He submitted that a decree had already been passed in favour
	of the original plaintiff by the Trial Court and that  could
	not be disturbed on his death either in appeal or  revision.
	We do not accept the contention as sound or
345
correct.
In
Phul Rani
's case no final opinion was expressed
	on  this  question.  Moreover, we find that on	the  earlier
	occasion   the High Court had set aside the decree  and	 re-
	manded	the  suit to the First Appellate Court for  a  fresh
	decision.   There was, therefore, no decree in existence  to
	attract the exception.
In the result the appeals fail and are dismissed but without
	costs.
P.H.P.					       Appeals	dis-
	missed.
346