[Cites
6
, Cited by
10
]
Supreme Court of India
Commissioner, Lucknow Division And Ors vs Kumari Prem Lata Misra on 26 October, 1976
Equivalent citations: 1977 AIR 334, 1977 SCR (1) 957, AIR 1977 SUPREME COURT 334, 1976 4 SCC 486, 1977 LAB. I. C. 169, 1977 (1) SCWR 301, 1977 3 ALL LR 58, 1977 9 LAWYER 85, 1977 (1) SCR 957, 1977 (1) SERVLR 188, 1976 U J (SC) 916
Author:
A.C. Gupta
Bench:
A.C. Gupta
,
Y.V. Chandrachud
,
P.K. Goswami
PETITIONER:
COMMISSIONER, LUCKNOW DIVISION AND ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
KUMARI PREM LATA MISRA

DATE OF JUDGMENT26/10/1976

BENCH:
GUPTA, A.C.
BENCH:
GUPTA, A.C.
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V.
GOSWAMI, P.K.

CITATION:
 1977 AIR  334		  1977 SCR  (1) 957
 1976 SCC  (4) 486


ACT:
U.P.  Intermediate	Education  Act,	 1921
,--Whether	 the
	basic section of a college is within the scope of.



HEADNOTE:
	    The	 respondent, an assistant teacher in the basic	sec-
	tion of the Colvin Taluqdar's college, Lucknow, was suspend-
	ed and then removed from service, by the managing  committee
	of the college.	 She flied a writ petition in the High Court
	challenging her dismissal order, contending that it violated
	the regulations framed under the (U.P.) Intermediate  Educa-
	tion  Act, 1921. The appellants	 contended  that  the	col-
	lege   was   running  the  basic Section  independently	 and
	without	 any affiliation or grants  from the  Government  or
	any local body, and that the said Act did not apply.
	    The	 Single Judge of the High Court dismissed  the	Writ
	petition  as none of the opposite parties was a	 public	 au-
	thority.   An appeal  was allowed by a Division Bench of the
	High  Court  on	 the ground that the basic  Section  was  an
	integral  part	of  the college and was run  by	 a  Managing
	Committee constituted under the
Intermediate Education Act
.
	Allowing the appeal the Court,
	    HELD:  The	provisions of the Act relate  to  recognized
	institutions; recognition is by the Board for the purpose of
	preparing  candidates for admission to the Board's  examina-
	tion; Board means the  Board of High School  and  lntermedi-
	ate Education.	The basic section of a college cannot there-
	fore be part of a recognised institution.  It is not correct
	to  think  that	 since
Section 16A
of the  Act	 requires  a
	college	 to  have a committee of  management,	 a  managing
	committee that looks after the affairs of the basic  section
	of the college must also be functioning as a statutory	body
	discharging duties under the Act and governed by the regula-
	tions  framed thereunder.  An institution by  extending	 its
	operation  to fields beyond that covered by the Act   cannot
	extend	the ambit of the Act to include in its sweep,  these
	new  fields of education which are. outside its scope.	[959
	C-G]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 343 of 1974.
	    (Appeal  by	 special leave from the Judgment  and  Order
	dated  11-9-1973  of  the  Allahabad  High  Court   (Lucknow
	Bench) in Spl. Appeal No. 118/71).
D. Mukherjee and C.P. Lal for the appellant.
Akhtar  Hussain,  S.N. Prasad and D.N.  Misra,  for	 the
	respondent
	The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
	    GUPTA, J.--Colvin Taluqdars' College  in Lucknow, run by
	a  society registered under the
Societies Registration	Act
,
	imparts education at the following different stages:
(i) Pre-basic i.e., nursery classes.
(ii) Junior basic, called primary stage, from class I to V.
(iii)  Senior basic i.e., Junior high  school	stage	from
	class VI to VIII, and
958
(iv)  Higher   secondary  stage, called high  school  stage-
	classes IX and X.
(b) Intermediate stage--Classes XI and XII
	    In the beginning the college had no pre-basic or  junior
	basic classes and started with class VI; classes I to V	 and
	nursery	 classes    were opened later.	The  respondent	 was
	appointed  an assistant teacher in the basic section of	 the
	college	 in  1961.   Following certain	incidents  involving
	her,  she  was suspended on or about August  20,  1970.	 and
	ultimately  her	 services were terminated  by  the  managing
	committee  of the college some time in October	1970.	 She
	flied  a writ petition in the High Court at Allahabad  (Luc-
know  Bench) alleging inter alia that the order	 terminating
	her  services was mala fide and made   in violation  of	 the
	regulations  framed under the (U.P.)
Intermediate  Education
	Act, 1921
.  She asked for a writ of certiorari	quashing the
	order of suspension and the order terminating her  services,
	and a writ of mandamus directing the opposite parties to pay
	the  full salary and emoluments due to her.   The  president
	of the managing committee of the college, the principal, the
	head  mistress	of the basic section and  the  committee  of
	management were impleaded as opposite parties 1, 2, 3, and 4
	respectively.	 The  writ  petition was  dismissed  by	   a
	single Judge of the High Court on a preliminary ground	that
	none of the opposite parties was a public authority and	 the
	impugned orders suspending her and terminating her  services
	were  not made in   the exercise of any statutory  function.
	On appeal a Division Bench  of the High Court took the	view
	that  the basic section of the college was an integral	part
	of  the college and held that the managing committee of	 the
	college was a statutory body constituted under the  Interme-
	diate
Education Act
and governed by the regulations  framed
	thereunder.    The Division Bench therefore found  the	writ
	petition  maintainable and remanded the case to	 the  single
	Judge to be decided on merits.
The	 Intermediate  Education  Act,	1921
,  as  its	long
	title-shows,  is an Act for the establishment of a Board  of
	High  School and Intermediate Education.  The preamble	says
	that it was enacted because it was expedient to establish  a
	Board  to  take	 the place of the  Allahabad  University  in
	regulating and supervising  the	 system	 of  High school and
	Intermediate   education  in the United	 Provinces,  and  to
	prescribe courses therefore.
Section 2
of the Act  defines,
	among  other terms, Board.   Institution,  and	Recognition.
	Board  means	the Board of High  School  and	Intermediate
	Education.  Institution means the whole of an institution or
	a  part	 thereof,  as the case may   be.  Recognition  means
	recognition  for  the purpose of  preparing  candidates	 for
	admission  to the Board's examination.	 Admittedly,  Colvin
	Taluqdars'  College is a recognised institution.
Section  7
which	defines the powers of the Board,  after	 enumerating
	certain specific powers, states that the Board will have the
	power "to do all such other acts and things as may be requi-
	site in order to further the objects of the Board as a	body
	constituted  for regulating and supervising High School	 and
	Intermediate Education".   The powers mentioned in
section 7
all  relate to High school and Intermediate classes.	Sec-
	tion 16-A lays
	down that for every recognised institution there shall be  a
	scheme	of  administration which must provide,	among  other
	matters, for the constitution of a committee of	 management.
	Section	 16-B and section 16-C deal with the preparation  of
	the  scheme of administration.	Section 16-D authorises	 the
	Director  of Uttar Pradesh to cause inspection of  a  recog-
	nized  institution from time to time and order	the  removal
	of any defect found on inspection. Sections 16E, 16F and 16G
	provide for the qualifications and the conditions of service
	of  the	 teachers Of  a recognized institution.	   Thus	 all
	these  sections are confined in their application to  recog-
	nized  institutions  only.   Regulations have	been  framed
	under the Act in respect of matters covered by section	16-A
	to  section 16-G.   Regulations 31 to 45 in Chapter  III  of
	the Regulations deal with the subject of punishment, enquiry
	and suspension of the employees of a recognized institution.
	It is said that the suspension and dismissal of the respond-
	ent was not in accordance with these regulations.
	    It	seems clear from the provisions set out	 above	that
	they  all relate to recognized institutions; recognition  is
	by  the	 Board for the purpose of preparing  candidates	 for
	admission to the Board's   examination, and Board means	 the
	Board of High School and Intermediate Education.  The  basic
	section of a school cannot therefore be part of a recognized
	institution.	We are unable to agree with the	 view  taken
	by  the	 Division  Bench of the High Court  that  the  basic
	section	 is  an integral part of the institution and  there-
	fore must be governed by the provisions of the
Intermediate
	Education  Act, 1921
.	A school by extending its  operation
	to  fields beyond that covered by the Act cannot extend	 the
	ambit of the Act to include in its sweep these new fields of
	education  which  are outside its scope.  The  case  of	 the
	appellants on this point appears from the  counter-affidavit
	filed  by them in answer to the writ petition.	 It is	said
	that "the college is running the Basic Section independently
	and  is neither registered by the Government nor  affiliated
	by  any	 local body-and neither any grant in  aid  is  being
	taken  by  the department to run this  section	accordingly.
	The college has its own rules and regulations to conduct the
	Basic Section."	  It is not correct to think that since	 the
	college has to have a committee of management as required by
	section	 16-A,	a managing committee that  looks  after	 the
	affairs	 of  the Basic Section of the college must  also  be
	functioning as a statutory body discharging duties under the
Intermediate  Education Act
and governed by the	 Regulations
	framed	thereunder.   The Division Bench sought support	 for
	the view it had taken from some provisions in the Education-
	al  Code  of Uttar Pradesh but, as pointed  by	the  learned
	single Judge, the Code is only a compilation of the  various
	administrative	rules  and orders  relating  to	 educational
	institutions in the State and has no statutory force.	 For
	the  reasons stated above, it must be held that	 the  appel-
	lants were not discharging any statutory function in  making
	the  impugned orders affecting the respondent.	 The  appeal
	is accordingly allowed, the Judgment of	 the Division  Bench
	is set aside and that of the Single Judge   restored.  There
	will be no order as to costs.
M.R.						Appeal	 al-
	lowed.
960