[Cites
6
, Cited by
57
]
Supreme Court of India
Narendra Bahadur Singh And Anr vs State Of U.P. And Ors on 26 November, 1976
Equivalent citations: 1977 AIR 660, 1977 SCR (2) 226, AIR 1977 SUPREME COURT 660, 1977 (1) SCC 216 1977 2 SCR 226, 1977 2 SCR 226, 1977 2 SCR 226 1977 (1) SCC 216, 1977 (1) SCC 216
Author:
Hans Raj Khanna
Bench:
Hans Raj Khanna
,
V.R. Krishnaiyer
PETITIONER:
NARENDRA BAHADUR SINGH AND ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF U.P. AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT26/11/1976

BENCH:
KHANNA, HANS RAJ
BENCH:
KHANNA, HANS RAJ
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.

CITATION:
 1977 AIR  660		  1977 SCR  (2) 226
 1977 SCC  (1) 216
 CITATOR INFO :
 F	    1985 SC1622	 (13,15)


ACT:
	    U.P.  Land Acquisition (Rehabilitation of Refugees)	 Act
	1948 Sec. 2(7), 6, 7(1)--Notification for acquiring land for
	a  society of refugees from Pakistan  --Whether	 acquisition
	notification can be struck down on hypertechnical grounds or
	whether substantial compliance sufficient--In the absence of
	averments  in a writ petition on a question of fact  whether
	petitioner can be allowed to raise a ground based on assump-
	tion of such facts.



HEADNOTE:
	    U.P. Government issued a notification under Section 7(1)
	of  the U.P. Land Acquisition (Rehabilitation  of  Refugees)
	Act,  1948 for acquiring the land belonging to the appellant
	for  the purpose of Sufferers Cooperative  Housing  Society.
	The  Society entered into an agreement with  the  Government
	under  section 6 of the Act.  The Land	Acquisition  Officer
	determined the amount of compensation for the acquired land.
	The appellants challenged the validity of the said notifica-
	tion on the following grounds:
			 1. The notification did not properly speci-
		      fy  the  land sought  to	be acquired.
			 2. The notification was ultra vires the Act
		      because  it  sought to acquire  land  for	 the
		      rehabilitation  of displaced persons  and	 not
		      for the rehabilitation of refugees.
			3.  The notification was not  in  accordance
		      with  the	 provisions of section 7(1)  of	 the
		      Act.
	    The	 single Judge of the High Court did not go into	 the
	first  ground but accepted the second and third grounds	 and
	quashed	 the  notification.  He held that according  to	 the
	definition of refugees in section 2(7) a refugee is a person
	who has migrated from Pakistan to any place in the U.P.	 and
	has  been  since then residing in U.P. and  that  there	 was
	nothing	 to  show  that the displaced persons  who  are	 the
	members of the Society had settled in U.P.  While  accepting
	the  third ground the learned Judge held that  section	7(1)
	requires  to indicate in the notification that it had decid-
	ed  to acquire the land.  However, the notification did	 not
	mention the expression "decided".
	    On	an  appeal, the Division Bench	disagreed  with	 the
	conclusions of the Single Judge and allowed the appeal.	 The
	Division Bench held that the notification was  substantially
	in accordance with the sect.ion 7( 1 ) and that the  members
	of  the Society consisted of refugees.	The  Division  Bench
	also held that the notification was not vague and it proper-
	ly specified the land sought to be acquired.
	In an appeal by Special Leave the appellants repeated the  3
	grounds.
	Dismissing the appeal
		      HELD:  1. The ground about the members of	 the
		      Society not being refugees has not been  taken
		      in  the Writ  Petition at all.   The  question
		      whether those members have settled in U.P.  is
		      essentially  one of fact.	 In the	 absence  of
		      any   averment  in  the	writ   petition	 the
		      material	facts  having bearing on  the  point
		      could  not  be  brought on  record.   A  party
		      seeking to challenge the validity of a notifi-
		      cation on a ground involving questions of fact
		      should make necessary averments of fact before
		      it can assail the notification on that ground.
		      [229 F-H]
		      227
			 2.  The recital in the earlier part of	 the
		      notification as well as the operative part  of
		      the notification that the land shall be deemed
		      to  have been acquired permanently  and  shall
		      vest  in	the State   Government	lends  clear
		      support  to  the	conclusion  that  the  State
		      Government decided to acquire the land and the
		      order of acquisition was merely an implementa-
		      tion of that decision.  The fact that the word
		      decided has not been used in the	notification
		      would not prove fatal when the entire tenor of
		      the  notification reveals the decision of	 the
		      State Govt. to acquire land.  The court  would
		      not strike down a notification for acquisition
		      on  hypertechnicality; what is needed is	sub-
		      stantial compliance with law and	the impugned
		      notification  clearly satisfies that  require-
		      ment.  [230 D-F]
			 3. The contention that the notification  in
		      question	is vague is not substantiated.	 The
		      notification makes an express reference to the
		      site plan. [230 G-231 A]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 297 of 1976.
	    Appeal  by	Special Leave from the	Judgment  and  Order
	dated  the 16-10-74 of the Allahabad High Court	 in  Special
	Appeal No. 169/72.
S.T. Desai, M.K. Garg, K.B. Rohtagi, V.K. Jain and	M.M.
	Kashyap, for the Appellant.
O.P. Rana for Respondents 1-4.
V.M. Tarkunde, Pramod Swarup and R.S. Verma for Respond-
	ent No. 5.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
	    KHANNA, J.-- This appeal by special leave is against the
	judgment  of a Division Bench of the Allahabad	High  Court,
	reversing  on appeal the decision of learned  single  Judge,
	whereby	 notification  dated April 23, 1966  issued  by	 the
	State Government under section 7(1) of the U.P. Land  Acqui-
	sition
(Rehabilitation of Refugees) Act, 1948
(hereinafter
	referred  to as the Act) had been quashed.  As a  result  of
	the decision of the Division Bench, the writ petition  filed
	by   the  appellants to quash that notification	 stood	dis-
	missed.
The	 Sufferers' Co-operative Housing  Society,  Jaunpur,
	respondent, applied to the Uttar Pradesh Government in	1955
	for acquiring four acres of land for the purpose of erecting
	houses,	 shops and workshops for the rehabilitation  of	 the
	refugees-who were members of that society.  At the  instance
	of  the	 State Government, the society deposited  a  sum  of
	Rs.15,000  towards the cost of the land to be  acquired.  In
	1964,  the society entered into an agreement with the  State
	Government under
section 6
of the Act.	The State Government
	thereafter published on April 23, 1966, the impugned notifi-
	cation and the same reads as under:
"Under sub-section (1 ) of section 7  of
		      the U.P.	Land Acquisition (Rehabilitation  of
		      Refugees)	 Act No. XXVI of 1948, the  Governor
		      of Uttar Pradesh is pleased to declare that he
		      is  satisfied that the land mentioned  in	 the
		      Schedule	is  needed and is suitable  for	 the
		      erection of houses, shops and
228
workshops for the rehabilitation of  displaced
		      persons and/ or for the provision of amenities
		      directly connected therewith.
	All  the  persons interested in the land  in  question	are,
	therefore,  required to appear personally or by duly  autho-
	rised agent before the Compensation Officer of the Distt. at
	Jaunpur on the twenty seventh day of April 1966, with neces-
	sary documentary or other evidence for the determination  of
	the amount of compensation under
section 11
of the Act.
	    The Collector of Jaunpur is directed to take  possession
	of   the aforesaid land fourteen days after the	 publication
	of this notice in the official gazette.
	    Upon the publication of this notice, the aforesaid	land
	shall be deemed to have been acquired permanently and  shall
	vest absolutely in the State Government free from all encum-
	brances	 from. the beginning of the day on which the  notice
	is so published.
SCHEDULE
	 Distt.Pargana	  Mauza	       Municipality    PlotNo.	Area
				       Cantonment,
				       Town area or
				       Notified area	154
	 Mohalla Diwan Shah Kabir alias			152/1	1,00
			 Tartala
Pargana Haveli, Tahsil				152/2
Jaunpur Municipal Area				149
	Jaunpur						153
2 shops No. 6 and 7
For	 what  purpose required: for the  rehabilitation  of
	displaced persons.
Note: A copy of the site plan may be inspected at the office
	of the Collector, Jaunpur."
Subsequent to that notification, the Land Acquisition  Offi-
	cer  determined the amount of compensation for the land	 and
	shops	to   be acquired at a little over rupees  forty	 one
	thousand.  The balance of the amount to be paid as compensa-
	tion was thereafter deposited by the society.
	    On	April  10, 1970 the appellants, claiming to  be	 the
	owners	of a part of the land sought to be  acquired,  fried
	petition  under
article 226
of the Constitution of India  in
	the  Allahabad	High Court with	 a prayer for  quashing	 the
	impugned notification.	The notification was assailed on the
	following three grounds:
(1)  The  notification  did  not  properly
		      specify the lands sought to be acquired;
			  (2)  The notification was ultra vires	 the
		      Act inasmuch as it sought to acquire lands for
		      the  rehabilitation  of the displaced  persons
		      and  not for the rehabilitation  of  refugees;
		      and
			  (3) The notification was not in accordance
		      with  the	 provisions of
section 7(1)
of	 the
		      Act.
229
The learned single Judge, while allowing the writ  peti-
	tion,  did  not	 go into the first  ground.    He,  however,
	accepted  the  second  and third grounds and in	 the  result
	quashed	 the  notification.   On   the	second	ground,	 the
	learned Judge referred to the definition in
section 2(7)
of
	the Act, according to which refugee means any person who was
	a resident in any place forming part of Pakistan and who, on
	account	 of partition of civil disturbances or the  fear  of
	such  disturbance,  has on or after the first day  of  March
	1947  migrated to any place in the U.P. and has	 been  since
	residing  there.  It was observed that there was nothing  to
	show  that the displaced persons for whose benefit the	land
	in question was being acquired had settled in Uttar Pradesh.
	Regarding the third ground, the learned Judge expressed	 the
	view  that  the notification under
section 7(1)
of  the	 Act
	required  that the State Government should indicate  in	 the
	notification  that it had decided to acquire the  land.	  As
	the  word "decided" was not mentioned in  the  notification,
	the notification was held to be not  in accordance with law.
	On  appeal, the Division Bench of the High  Court  disagreed
	with  the learned single Judge on both the grounds on  which
	he  had	 quashed  the notification.  It was  held  that	 the
	notification  was substantially in accordance  with
section
	7(1)
of the Act. It was further observed that	the  society
	for whose benefit the  land was being acquired consisted  of
	refugees.  Dealing with the  first ground, namely, that	 the
	notification  was vague as it did not properly	specify	 the
	land sought to be acquired, the Division Bench held that all
	the  necessary particulars in respect of the land sought  to
	be  acquired had been given.  In the result, the appeal	 was
	allowed and the writ petition was dismissed.
	    In appeal before us, Mr. Desai has assailed the decision
	of   the  Division Bench on all the three  grounds  and	 has
	urged  that   the  impugned notification  is  liable  to  be
	quashed on each of those grounds. We shall accordingly	deal
	with those grounds.
So	far as the ground is concerned that the persons	 for
	whose  rehabilitation the land is sought to be acquired	 are
	not   refugees,	 Mr. Desai could not in spite of  our  query
	refer  us to any paragraph in the writ petition wherein	 the
	above  ground had been taken.	All the same,  he  submitted
	that as the question had been allowed to be agitated  before
	the  High  Court, we should not debar the  appellants	from
	advancing  arguments on that score.  The submission made  by
	the learned counsel in this behalf is that there is  nothing
	to show that the persons for whose benefit the land is being
	acquired arc settled  in Uttar Pradesh.	 In this respect  we
	are  of the view that the question as to whether those	per-
	sons are settled in Uttar Pradesh or not  is essentially one
	of  fact.  In the absence of any averment in the writ  peti-
	tion  that  the person concerned were not settled  in  Uttar
	Pradesh, it is obvious that the material facts having  bear-
	ing  on this point could not be brought on record.  A  party
	seeking	 to  challenge the validity of a notification  on  a
	ground	involving  questions of fact should  make  necessary
	averments of fact before it can assail the notification	  on
	that  ground.  As such we find it difficult to	sustain	 the
	contention  of Mr. Desai that the persons for whose  benefit
	the  land is being acquired were not settled in	 Uttar	Pra-
	desh.  Apart from that, we find that
230
ground	No. 13 taken in the writ petition proceeds upon	 the
	assumption  that the persons for whose benefit the land	 was
	being  acquired were in fact refugees.	It  further  appears
	from  the  judgment of	the Division Bench  that  there	 was
	hardly	any dispute before the Division Bench on  the  point
	that  the respondent society, namely,  Sufferers'  Co-opera-
	tive Housing Society, consists of refugees and has  refugees
	as its members.
Coming to the second ground taken by the appellants that
	the notification was not in conformity with
section 7(1)
of
	the   Act inasmuch. as it did not state that the State	Gov-
	ernment	 had decided to acquire the land in dispute, we	 are
	of the opinion that a reading of the notification which	 has
	been  reproduced  above leaves no manner of doubt  that	 the
	State  Government  had decided to acquire the  land.  It  is
	stated	in the notification that the Governor of Uttar	Pra-
	desh  is  pleased to declare that he is satisfied  that	 the
	land mentioned in the schedule is needed and is suitable for
	the erection of houses, shops and workshops for the rehabil-
	itation	 of  displaced persons and/or for the  provision  of
	amenities  directly connected therewith.   The	notification
	further proceeds to state that the land in question shall be
	deemed	to  have been acquired permanently  and	 shall	vest
	absolutely  in	the State Government free  from	 all  encum-
	brances	 from the date of the notification.  The recital  in
	the  earlier part of the notification as well as the  opera-
	tive part of the notification that the land shall  be deemed
	to  have  been acquired permanently and shall vest  in	 the
	State Government lend clear support for the conclusion	that
	the  State  Government decided to acquire the land  and	 the
	order  of acquisition was merely an implementation  of	that
	decision.   The	 fact that the word "decided" has  not	been
	used  in  the notification would  not prove fatal  when	 the
	entire	tenor of the notification  reveals the	decision  of
	the  State Government to acquire the land and is  consistent
	only  with  the hypothesis of such a  decision	having	been
	arrived	 at.  The courts should be averse to strike  down  a
	notification  for  acquisition of land on  fanciful  grounds
	based  on hypertechnicality. What is needed  is	 substantial
	compliance  with  law.	The impugned  notification,  in	 our
	opinion, clearly satisfies that requirement.
	    Lastly,  we	 may deal with the  contention	advanced  on
	behalf	of the appellants that the notification in  question
	is vague. It is pointed out by Mr. Desai that the total area
	of  the	 land comprised in field numbers  mentioned  in	 the
	notification  is 1.26 acres, while the actual area which  is
	sought	to  be acquired is one acre.   The  learned  counsel
	accordingly  urges that it is not possible to find  out	 the
	particular portions of	those fields which are sought to  be
	acquired.   As such, the notification is stated to be  vague
	and thus not in conformity with law.  Our attention has also
	been invited by Mr. Desaid to the report dated June 23, 1971
	of  the Tehsildar, who was deputed to deliver possession  of
	the  acquired land to the society.   In the said report	 the
	Tehsildar  stated that he found it difficult to find out  as
	to  which part of the fields mentioned in  the	notification
	were acquired.	 In this respect we find that the report  of
	the Tehsilder itself indicates that when he went to the spot
	to deliver possession of the acquired
231
land, he did not take with, him the correct plan of the said
	land.The impugned notification makes an express reference to
	the site-plan.	An affidavit has been filed on behalf of the
	society	 and that affidavit makes it plain that the area  of
	the land which has been acquired comes to exactly one  acre.
	There appears to be no cogent ground  to  interfere with the
	finding	 of the Division Bench of the High Court   that	 the
	impugned notification has not been shown to be vague.
We,  therefore,  find  no infirmity  in  the  impugned
	notification.  The appeal fails and is dismissed but in	 the
	circumstances with no order  as to costs.
Before  we conclude, we would like to observe  that	 the
	case before us tells a sad tale of delays in a matter  which
	on sheer humanitarian grounds needed to be attended to	with
	expedition.    The  case,  as would appear from	 the  above,
	pertains to the acquisition of land with a view to rehabili-
	tate refugees who were uprooted from their hearths and homes
	in areas now in Pakistan because of disturbances and fear of
	disturbances  which  marred the partition  of  the  country.
	The refugees for this purpose formed a society, and  applied
	to  the	 administration in 1955 for acquisition of  land  so
	that they could erect shops and workshops on that land	with
	a  view to earn their livelihood.   It took the	 administra-
	tion 11 years thereafter to issue necessary notification for
	the  acquisition of the land in dispute.   Four	 years	were
	thereafter spent because possession of the land could not be
	delivered.  The	 only  attempt made  to	 deliver  possession
	proved infructuous as the Tehsildar entrusted with this task
	took  a wrong plan.   From 1970 till today the	delivery  of
	possession  remained stayed because of the writ	 proceedings
	initiated  by  the appellants.	One can only hope  that	 now
	that the final curtain has been dropped, the matter would be
	attended to with the necessary promptitude.
P.H.P.						      Appeal
	dismissed.
232