[Cites
6
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
G. A. Galiakotwala & Co. (P) Ltd., Madras vs The State Of Madras on 22 March, 1976
Equivalent citations: 1976 AIR 2084, 1976 SCR (3) 717, AIR 1976 SUPREME COURT 2084, 1976 3 SCC 14, 1976 TAX. L. R. 1627, 1976 SCC (TAX) 245, 1976 UPTC 519, 1976 3 SCR 717, 37 STC 536, (1976) S T A 88, 1976 UJ (SC) 365
Author:
A.N.  Ray
Bench:
A.N.  Ray
,
M. Hameedullah Beg
,
Jaswant Singh
PETITIONER:
G. A. GALIAKOTWALA & CO. (P) LTD., MADRAS

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE STATE OF MADRAS

DATE OF JUDGMENT22/03/1976

BENCH:
RAY, A.N. (CJ)
BENCH:
RAY, A.N. (CJ)
BEG, M. HAMEEDULLAH
SINGH, JASWANT

CITATION:
 1976 AIR 2084		  1976 SCR  (3) 717
 1976 SCC  (3)	14


ACT:
Central Sales  Tax Act
Ss. 3, 6(2), 8(3) and 8(5)-Scope
of-Goods despatched  by "S"  in Bombay	to "B" in Madras who
has an	agreement to  purchase	with  "A"  to  whom  Railway
Receipts were  sent by	"S' as	per directions	and separate
agreement-Transaction is  an 'Inter  state' sales  within
S.
3(b)
of	 the C.S.T.  between "S"  and "A"-Exemption
u/s 8(5)
applies only  to cases	where the  claimant paid tax himself
under the  State Act-Exemption
u/s 6(2)
is  applicable  on
proof that the buyer is a "registered dealer".



HEADNOTE:
     As per  the directions  of the appellant and on receipt
of the	requisite licence  under the  cotton  Transport	 Act
1923, for  transport of cotton, the Bombay seller despatched
cotton to  the ultimate	 buyer mills at Madurai and sent the
Railway Receipts  to the  appellant who endorsed the same in
favour of  the Mills  after collection	of  the	 substantial
portion of the sale price. The sales Tax authorities treated
the transaction as intra sales and assessed the Mills as the
last purchaser	under  the  Madras  General  Sales  Tax	 and
assessed the appellant
u/s 3(b)
of the Central Sales Tax Act
1956. The  question is	whether	 in  the  circumstances	 the
transaction is	one of inter state sales falling
u/s 3(a)
or
second sales under state sales
u/s 3(b)
of the Central Sales
Tax Act.
     The contentions  of the  appellant in  this court were:
(1) The	 sale of  cotton by  the appellant  assessee to	 the
buyer mill  fell within	 the scope of S. 3(a) of the Central
Act as	there was movement of goods from Bombay to Madras as
a result  of covenant  in or  incidental to  the contract of
sale and  therefore
u/s	 9(1)
of  the Central  Sales Tax the
jurisdiction lay  with Bombay  state from  where  the  goods
moved from  and (ii)  Since the	 sale being  in	 respect  of
declared goods,	 is exempt  by the  terms of notification of
Order No.  3602 dated 28-12-63 issued
u/s 8(5)
of the C.S.T.
and (ii) the turnover was exempt
u/s 6(2)
of C.S.T.
     Dismissing the appeal the court,
^
     HELD: (1)	The significant	 feature of  the transaction
viz. sending of the Railway Receipts by the Bombay seller to
the appellant who thereafter endorsed the same to the mills,
shows  that   (a)  there  could	 not  be  any  unconditional
appropriation of  the goods  at Bombay	towards the contract
entered into  between the  appellant; (b)  It was  an  inter
state sales  to the  appellant and the sale by the appellant
to the mills is an intra-state sales in as much as, the mere
fact that  the goods  were consigned by the Bombay seller to
the mills in accordance with the direction will not make the
transaction inter state sales. [718G-H, 719A-B]
     (ii) The  State sales Tax authorities, (respondent) had
jurisdiction to	 assess the  transaction  for  sale  by	 the
appellant to the mills u/s 3(b) of the Central Act. [719C]
     (iii) The	exemption
u/s  8(5)
applies  only  to  cases
where the  claimant had paid tax himself u/s 4 of the Madras
Act in	respect of  local sales	 preceding the	inter  state
transactions. In  the instant case, as the appellant did not
pay tax	 u/s 4	of the	Madras Act,  he was  not entitled to
claim exemption under the Government order. [719 E-F]
     (iv) A  dealer claiming  exemption for  subsequent sale
during the  movement of	 goods from  one state to another is
required by  s. 6(2)  of the  Central Act  to furnish to the
prescribed authority in the prescribed manner a certificate
718
duly filled  and signed by the registered dealer by whom the
goods were  purchased containing  the  particulars.  In	 the
instant case,  the appellant  produced	the  form  from	 the
Bombay seller  but did	not  prove  that  his  buyer  was  a
registered  dealer   in	 cotton	 which	disentitled  him  to
exemption
u/s 6(2)
of the Act. [720 B-C]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1191 of
1973.
Appeal by	special leave  from the	 Judgment and  Order
dated 7-11-72 of the High Court of Madras in T.C. No. 197 of
1968.
C. K.  Viswanatha Iyer,  Mrs. S. Gopalakrishnan for the
Appellant.
S. T.  Desai, A.  V. Rangam  and Miss A. Subhashini for
the respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     RAY, C.  J.-This appeal  by special  leave is  from the
judgment dated 7 November, 1972 of the High Court of Madras.
The principal  question in	 this appeal  is whether the
sales of cotton by the appellant to the mills at Tirunelveli
and Karur  were inter-State  sales under
section 3(a)
of the
Central Sales  Tax Act	called the Central Act or are second
sales under  State Sales  under section	 3(b) of the Central
Act.
The appellant  has its place of business at Coimbatore.
The Mills are situated within the State of Madras. The Mills
entered into an agreement with the appellant for purchase of
cotton. The appellant in turn placed orders with its sellers
at Bombay for purchase of cotton. The appellant directed its
Bombay sellers	to  despatch  the  goods  to  the  mills  as
consignees. The	 Bombay seller	sent the  consignment to the
mills but  the railway	receipts were  sent  by	 the  Bombay
seller to  the appellant.  The appellant  then endorsed	 the
same  in  favour  of  the  mills  after	 collection  of	 the
substantial portion of the sale price.
The appellant contended that the consignments were sent
directly by  the Bombay seller to the mills, and, therefore,
these were  direct inter-State sales by the Bombay seller to
the mills  and that  the property in the goods passed to the
mills when  the goods  were loaded  at Bombay. The Sales Tax
Authorities found that the Mills were the last purchaser and
therefore these were inter-State sales between the Appellant
and the Mills.
A most significant feature is that the railway receipts
were sent  by the  Bombay seller  to the  appellant, and the
appellant thereafter  endorsed the same to the mills. It is,
therefore,   apparent	that   there   could   not   be	  an
unconditional, appropriation  of the goods at Bombay towards
the contract  entered into  between the	 appellant  and	 the
mills. The  property in the goods passed only when the mills
took delivery  of the  railway receipts	 from the appellant.
The Bombay  seller dealt with the railway receipts in such a
way that it is proved that the intention of the appellant to
part with  the goods  in any  event is not until substantial
payment is  made by  the mills.	 The Bombay  seller  had  no
privity of contract with the Mills. The
719
Bombay seller  sold the	 goods to the appellant. The sale by
the Bombay  seller to the appellant was an inter-State sale.
The sale  by the  appellant to	the mills  cannot be said to
have caused  the interState movement of goods. The mere fact
that the  goods were  consigned by  the Bombay seller to the
mills in accordance with the direction of the appellant will
not make the transactions inter-State sales. The sale by the
Bombay seller  to the  appellant occasioned  the movement of
goods. The  High Court	was correct in holding that the sale
by the Bombay seller to the appellant is an inter-State sale
and the	 sale by the appellant to the mills is not an inter-
State sale.  Therefore, the  State Sales Tax Authorities had
jurisdiction to	 assess the  transaction  for  sale  by	 the
appellant to  the mills	 under section	3(b) of	 the Central
Act.
The appellant  raised  a  second  contention  that	 the
appellant is entitled to the benefit of Government Order No.
3602 which exempts from sales tax declared goods sold in the
course of  inter-State trade  or commerce where tax has been
levied or  collected in respect of sales or purchase of such
declared goods	under section  4 of the Madras General Sales
Tax Act,  1959 called  the Madras  Act. The Government Order
No. 3602  was issued  in exercise  of  powers  conferred  by
section 8(5)  of the  Central Act.  The appellant  contended
that the mills paid the tax on their purchases of cotton and
the same  transaction could  not be brought to charge in the
hands  of   the	 appellant   as	 inter-State  sale.  If	 the
transaction attracts levy of tax under the Central Act it is
not taxable  under the Madras Act. If the mills had paid tax
under the  impression that their purchases are taxable under
the Madras  Act that  will not enable the appellant to claim
the benefit  of the exemption. The exemption applies only to
cases where  the claimant has paid tax himself under section
4 of  the Madras Act in respect of local sales preceding the
inter-State transactions.  The appellant in the present case
did not	 pay tax under section 4 of the Madras Act. The High
Court, therefore,  correctly held that the appellant was not
entitled to claim exemption under the Government Order.
The third	contention of  the appellant  was  that	 the
appellant was  entitled to  exemption in respect of turnover
under section  6(2) of	the Central Act. Section 6(2) of the
Central Act  lays down	that where  a sale  in the course of
inter-State trade  or commerce	of goods  of the description
referred  to   in  section  8(3)  of  the  Central  Act	 has
occasioned the	movement of  goods from one State to another
or has	been effected by a transfer of documents of title to
such goods  during their movement from one State to another,
any subsequent
720
sale to a registered dealer during such movement effected by
a transfer  of documents of title to such goods shall not be
subject to  tax under  the Act.	 A dealer claiming exemption
for subsequent	sale during  the movement  of goods from one
State to  another is required by section 6(2) of the Central
Act to furnish to the prescribed authority in the prescribed
manner	a   certificate	 duly	filled	and  signed  by	 the
registered  dealer   by	 whom	the  goods   were  purchased
containing  the	  particulars.	In  the	 present  case,	 the
appellant would	 be entitled  to exemption  in production of
appropriate form  by the  Bombay seller	 and by showing that
the buyer is a registered dealer. The appellant produced the
form from Bombay seller but did not prove that his buyer was
a registered  dealer  in  cotton.  Therefore,  the  Tribunal
rightly	 held	that  the  appellant  was  not	entitled  to
exemption under
section 6(2)
of the Act.
The appeal is, therefore, dismissed with costs.
S.R.					   Appeal dismissed.
721