[Cites
5
, Cited by
14
]
Supreme Court of India
Dewan Singh vs State Of Haryana & Another on 7 May, 1976
Equivalent citations: 1976 AIR 1921, 1976 SCR 630, AIR 1976 SUPREME COURT 1921, 1976 (1) SCC 46, 1976 LAB. I. C. 1207, 1976 2 SERVLR 229, 1976 2 SCWR 89, 1976 3 SCC 638, 1976 SERVLJ 501, (1977) 1 S C J 149, 1976 2 LABLJ 321, 1976 UJ (SC) 662
Author:
P.K. Goswami
Bench:
P.K. Goswami
,
Hans Raj Khanna
,
V.R. Krishnaiyer
PETITIONER:
DEWAN SINGH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF HARYANA & ANOTHER

DATE OF JUDGMENT07/05/1976

BENCH:
GOSWAMI, P.K.
BENCH:
GOSWAMI, P.K.
KHANNA, HANS RAJ
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.

CITATION:
 1976 AIR 1921		  1976 SCR  630
 1977 SCC  (1)	46


ACT:
     Natural	jusitce-Meaning	   of-If    mandatory-Punjab
Panchayat Samitis  and Zilla  Parishad Act 1961-Sec. 124(2)-
Reasonable opportunity before dismissing an employee.



HEADNOTE:
     The appellant was a Veterinary Compounder serving under
the Panehayat  Samiti, Hansi.  The Zilla  Parishad Tribunaul
tranferred him	from Hansi  to Singhani. The Chairman of the
Panchayat Samiti.  Hansi requested  the	 Chairman  of  Zilla
Parishad Tribunal  served a  notice on the appellant to show
cause why  he should  not be dismissed for not having handed
over the  charge of  the dispensary  to the  person who	 was
appointed in  his place and also on the ground that when the
Secretary of  the Zilla	 Parishaod Tribunal with the help of
the compounder,	 who was  directed to  take charge  from the
appellant, was prepaering a list of stock, the appellant and
others entered	the office and one of the persons out of the
appellant's group  snatched the papers from the Secretry and
manhandled  him.   The	appellant   submitted	an   interim
explanation and	 reserved his  right to submit a final reply
after inspection  of certain  records was  given to him. The
Zilla Parishad	Tribunal did not give any opportunity to the
appellant  for	 inspecation  of   record   nor	  sent	 any
communication  to  him	rejecting  the	request	 giving	 any
justifiable reasons.  However, the appellant was served with
a letter dismissisng him from service. Section 124(2) of the
Punjab Panchayat.  Samitis  &  Zilla  Parishad.	 Act,  1961,
authorises the	 Tribunal to impose any punishment including
the punishment	of dismissal on any servant of the Panchayat
Samiti or Zilla Parishad. The proviso,howvever. requires the
Tribunal before passing any order of dismissal or removal to
give a	notice to  the servant	to show	 cause	against	 the
action proposed to be taken against him
     The appellant  filed a  writ petition in the High Court
challengaing the  dismissal order.  The High Court dismissed
the writ petition.
     Allowing the appeal by special leave,
^
     HELD: (1)	A perusal  of s.  124(2) goes  to show	that
before any  action is  taken for  dismissal or removal of an
employee the  Tribunal	has  to	 enquire  into	his  conduct
justifying such	 action. This  enquiry must  necessarily  be
made  in   the	presence  of  the  employee  giving  him  an
opportunity to rebut the allegations made against him. It is
only after  affourding him a reasonable opportunity to rebut
the allegations	 in the	 charge and  after the	Tribunal  is
satisfied that	the misconduct	is established, the question
of final  punitive action either of dismissal or removal has
to be  considered. The	employee must  be given	 a full	 and
fair. reasonable opportunity to meet the charges. [633D-E]
     (2) In  the instant  case apart  from giving  the	show
cause  notice	no  other  communication  was  made  to	 the
appellant except  the order  of dismissal.  This is  a clear
case where  the reasonable  opportunity envisaged  under  s.
124(2) has  not been afforded to the appellant for making an
effective   representation to  establish his innocence. Even
in respect  of the  incident of 15-8-1967, the appellant was
acquitted in  a criminal  case lodged  against him.  In	 the
instant case  the provisions  of s.  124(2) which embody the
principles of  natural justice	and which are of a mandatory
character  have	  been	violated   vitiating  the  order  of
dismissal. [633G. 634A-C]
     (3) In  the ordinary  course it would have been open to
the  authority	to  institute  a  fresh	 enquiry  after	 the
reinstatement. But  in this  case, that	 procedure  was	 not
permitted because  the appellant  was dismissed in December,
1967, and
631
has been  out of  employment for  over 8 years. Secondly, he
does not  have many  years to  serve. Thirdly,	the  serious
allegations regarding  the incident  of 15-8-1967  have	 not
been found to be established in a judicial trial. The Court,
therefore, quashed  the order of dismissal and directed that
the appellant  should be  treated on  leave without  pay and
further	 directed   that  no   further	enquiry	  into	 the
allegations forming  the subject  matter of charge should be
made. [634C-E]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil  Appeal No.  27 of
1971.
(Appeal by	 special leave	from the  judgment and order
dated 21st  May 1970  of the  Punjab & Haryana High Court at
Chandigarh in civil writ No. 197 of 1968)
     J. Ramamurthi, for the appellant..
Naunit Lal	 and R.	 N. Sachthey, for respondents Nos. 1
and 2.
Bishamber Lal, for respondent No. 3.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     GOSWAMI, J.-This  appeal by  special leave	 is directed
against the judgment of the Division Bench of the Punjab and
Haryana High  Court by	which  the  appellant's	 application
under
article 226
of the Constitution was rejected.
The appellant  was a  veterinary compounder  serving at
the material  time under  the  Chairman,  Panchayat  Samiti,
Hansi-I. The  Zila Parishad  Trihunal transferred  him	from
Hansi-I Block  to Singhani  (Loharu Block) by its resolution
of June 30, 1967. The order appear to be transmitted by Memo
No. 3201-A  of July 6, 1967. On July 27, 1967,	the Chairman
of the	Panchayat Samiti, Hansi-I, requested the Chairman of
the Zila  Parishad, Hissar,  to reconsider  the decision  of
transfer and to allow him to continue at his village Umra in
public interest.  A copy  of this  letter writen to the Zila
Parishad was forwarded to the appellant. Since the appellant
did not	 comply with  the order	 of transfer,  the Chairman,
Zila Parishad  mal, served  a notice  upon him on August 13,
1967., to  show cause  as to  why he should not be dismissed
from service  on the  grounds mentioned in the notice. It is
mentioned in  the notice  that this  action has	 been  taken
under
section  124
of  the Punjab Panchayat Samitis and Zila
Parishads Act,1961 (briefly the Act).
The particulars  of charge	 described in the show cause
notice are briefly as under:-
(1)  You did	not hand  over charge  of veterinary
	       dispensary  to	Balwan	 Singh,	  Veterinary
	       Compounder, on  25-7-1967. in compliance with
	       the transfer order dated 6-7-1967.
(2)  You also	 did not  hand over  charge  to	 the
	       District Animal	Husbandry  officer  who	 was
	       ordered to  personally take over charge	from
	       you on 26-7-1967.
(3)  You were	 again asked  by letter dated 2-8-67
	       to  hand	  over	charge	 to   Balwan   Singh
	       Veterinary Compounder,  but you	did not hand
	       over the charge.
632
(4)  When Ch.	 Bir Singh  Lamba,  Secretary,	Zila
	       Parishad Tribunal,  along with  Balwan  Singh
	       reached Umra on 10-8-67 between 4.30 and 5.00
	       P.M. in	order to  take charge  from you they
	       found you absent and the dispensary locked.
	  (5)  That on	15-8-67	 at  about  4.00  P.M.	when
	       Balwan Singh  went to  take charge  from	 him
	       along with  Ch. Bir  Singh Lamba,  Secretary,
	       Zila Parishad Tribunal, along with Ch. Balbir
	       Singh, Chairman,	 Zila Parishad,	 Hissar	 and
	       Kali Ram,  Member, Panchayat  Samiti, Hissar,
	       you refused  to hand  over charge  to  Balwan
	       Singh Veterinary Compounder.
(6)  When  on	  15-8-67  Ch.	 Bir  Singh   Lamba,
	       Secretary Zila  Parishad Tribunal,  with	 the
	       help of Balwan Singh, was preparing a list of
	       stock in	 the presence  of the  Chairman	 and
	       others, you with Rattan Singh, Sarpanch, Gram
	       Panchayat,  Umra,   Giani  Ram	of   village
	       Majahadpur and  three or	 four other  unknown
	       villagers entered  the office.  Giani Ram out
	       of your group snatched the paper from Ch. Bir
	       Singh   Secretary, Zila Parishad Tribunal and
	       threatened  them	  to  leave  the  dispensary
	       before they  manhandled him.  You are thus at
	       the root of all this incident.
The appellant  submitted a reply on September 13, 1967,
describing it  as an  interim explanation  and reserving his
right to  submit a  final reply	 after inspection of certain
records and  he requested  for a  date for inspection of the
records. In  this reply	 he admitted  to have  received	 the
transfer order	and pleaded that he did not hand over charge
to Balwan  Singh on  25-7-1967 under  instructions from	 the
Chairman, Panchayat  Samiti, who,  according to him, was the
appointing authority  and he was carrying out his orders. He
particularly denied  the incident  of August  15, 1967,	 for
which he  was held principally responsible in the show cause
notice.
It does not appear that the Zila Parishad Tribunal gave
any opportunity	 to the appellant for inspection of records,
nor sent  any communication  to him  rejecting	the  request
giving any  justifiable reason. The appellant seemed to have
been waiting  for some communication to his interim reply in
order to  submit final	explanation when on December 5, 1967
he  received   the  order  of  the  Zila  Parishad  Tribunal
dismissing  him	  from	service	 with  immediate  effect  in
pursuance  of  its  resolution	of  December  1,  1967.	 The
resolution states:
"The Tribunal	 has come  to a conclusion that your
     reply is  not a  satisfactory one.	 And the allegations
     made against him (sic) seemed to be correct".
That led  to the  appellant's writ  application in  the High
Court resulting in the impugned order.
The short	question that arises for decision is whether
the order  of dismissal is in conformity with
section 124
of
the Act, or, in
633
other words,  whether  the  same  is  in  violation  of	 the
principles of natural justice.
We may,  therefore, read  the material  provision under
section 124(2)
of the Act:
124(2): "The	tribunal may suo motu or on the move
     of the  Panchayat Samiti or the Zila Parishad or on the
     application of  any servant  of a	Panchayat Samiti  or
     Zila Parishad other than a government servant placed at
     their disposal  enquire into the conduct of any servant
     of the  Panchayat Samiti or the Zila Parishad and after
     making such enquiry as it may deem fit pass such orders
     imposing any  punishment including dismissal or removal
     as it may deem proper;
Provided that the tribunal shall not pass any such
     order in  respect of a servant having a right of appeal
     under
section 116
;
Provided further  that the  tribunal shall  before
     passing any order of dismissal or removal give a notice
     to	 the  servant  to  show	 cause	against	 the  action
     proposed to be taken against him".
A persual	of
section  124(2)
goes	 to show that before
any action  is taken for dismissal or removal of an employee
the Tribunal has to enquire into his conduct justifying such
action. This enquiry must necessarily have to be made in the
presence of  the employee giving him an opportunity to rebut
the allegations	 mentioned against  him. It  is	 only  after
affording  him	 a  reasonable	 opportunity  to  rebut	 the
allegations in the charge and the Tribunal is satisfied that
the misconduct is established the question of final punitive
action either of dismissal or removal has to be considered.
Unlike as	in
article  311
of the Constitution,
section
124(2)
does   not  in	 terms	mention	  two  stages  of  a
departmental enquiry  for misconduct  against  an  employee.
Even so,  the nature of an enquiry with an object to dismiss
an  employee  is  such	that  a	 full  and  fair  reasonable
opportunity must  be given  to him  to meet the charges. The
second proviso	to
section  124(2)
provides  in unmistakable
terms that  before passing any order of dismissal or removal
a notice  has To  he given  to the  employee to	 show  cause
against the  proposed action.  The action  of  dismissal  or
removal cannot	be proposed,  in all  fairness,	 unless	 the
Tribunal had  reached a	 conclusion about  the	guilt  after
making a  proper enquiry  giving the  employee a  reasonable
opportunity to defend.
In the  instant case,  apart from giving the show cause
notice, no  other communication	 was made  to the  appellant
except the  order of  sal. This	 is a  clear case  where the
reasonable opportunity	envisaged under
section 124(2)
has
not been  afforded to the appellant far marking an effective
representation to establish his innocence. It is easy to see
that  the   summary  order   of	 dismissal  must  have	been
influenced by  the allegations appreciation  to the incident
of August
634
15,1967 for  which, we	understand, even a criminal case was
instituted against the appellant. That criminal case, we are
told, ended in acquittal of the appellant and others on June
10, 1970.  At any  rate the  said incident being included in
the articles of charge against the appellant he did not have
any opportunity	 whatsoever to	establish his innocence when
he had	clearly denied	the allegations	 even in his interim
reply.
The principles of natural justice are clearly ingrained
in the	provisions of
section 124(2)
.	It is  a clear	case
where the  provisions of
section 124(2)
,  which  are  of  a
mandatory character  in a  departmental enquiries  have been
violated vitiating  the order  of dismissal. The High Court,
therefore,  should   have  accepted   the  petition  of	 the
appellant under
article 226
of the Constitution and quashed
the order of dismissal.
Although in the ordinary course it would have been open
to  the	  authority  to	  institute  a	 fresh	enquiry	 his
reinstatement, after  the order	 of dismissal  has been	 set
aside, we  are clearly	of opinion  that this  is not a case
where that procedure should be permitted. For one reason the
appellant was dismissed in December 1967 and he had been out
of employment  for over	 eight years.  He has  also not many
years to  serve. Besides,  the serious allegations regarding
the incident  of August	 15, 1967,  which, according  to us,
must have  influenced the  authority to	 pass the  order  of
dismissal, have	 not been  found  to  be  established  in  a
judicial trial.	 While,	 therefore,  quashing  the  impugned
order of  dismissal, which  we hereby do, we direct that the
appellant shall	 be reinstated	in  service  with  immediate
effect	and  there  shall  be  no  further  enquiry  to	 the
allegations forming  the subject  matter of  charge  against
him. The period of absence shall be treated as leave without
pay so	that the  appellant will  not lose continuity of his
service.
In the  result the	 judgment of  the High	Court is set
aside and the appeal is allowed with costs.
P.H.P.					     Appeal allowed.
635