[Cites
4
, Cited by
293
]
Supreme Court of India
Paryavaran Suraksha Samiti & Anr vs Union Of India & Ors on 22 February, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 SC 245
Author:
Jagdish Singh Khehar
Bench:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
,
D.Y. Chandrachud
,
Jagdish Singh Khehar
REPORTABLE

                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                       CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                       WRIT PETITION(C) NO. 375 OF 2012


Paryavaran Suraksha Samiti and another                  ..Petitioners

                            versus

Union of India and others                               ..Respondents


                                  J U D G M E N T
JAGDISH SINGH KHEHAR, CJI


            The petitioners have approached this Court, seeking  a  writ  in
the nature of mandamus, for a direction to the respondents, (which  includes
the Union Government, all the State Governments and the  Union  Territories)
to ensure, that no industry which requires “consent  to  operate”  from  the
concerned Pollution Control Board, is permitted to function, unless  it  has
a functional  effluent  treatment  plant,  which  is  capable  to  meet  the
prescribed norms for removing the pollutants from the  effluent,  before  it
is discharged.
2.          The Union of India, and the  State  Governments  (including  the
Union  Territories)  have  filed  counter   affidavits,   expressing   their
individual  positions.   During  the  course  of  hearing,  learned  counsel
representing the respondents, also made some  suggestions,  which  could  be
highly beneficial, in carrying forward the process of  removing  pollutants,
from the discharged effluent, in a systematic and co-ordinated manner.
3.          During the course of hearing, it was not  disputed  between  the
rival parties, that  the  initiation  of  the  process  has  to  be  at  the
individual level  of  the  industry  itself.  It  was  suggested  that  each
industry which requires “consent to operate” from  the  concerned  Pollution
Control Board, should be mandated to set up a  functional  primary  effluent
treatment  plant.   We  are  informed,  that  only  when  such  an  effluent
treatment plant has been set  up,  the  concerned  Pollution  Control  Board
grants a “no  objection”  to  the  industry,  and  accordingly  “consent  to
operate”, so  as  to  allow  the  industry  to  become  functional.   It  is
therefore  apparent,  that  all  running  industrial  units,  which  require
“consent to operate” from the concerned  Pollution  Control  Board,  have  a
functional primary effluent treatment plant, in place.
4.          The question that arises for our consideration is,  whether  the
same is maintained in good order,  after  the  industry  itself  has  become
functional. The industry requiring “consent to operate”,  can  be  permitted
to run, only if its primary effluent  treatment  plant,  is  functional.  We
therefore consider it just and appropriate, to direct  the  concerned  State
Pollution Control Boards, to issue notices to all  industrial  units,  which
require “consent to operate”, by way of a  common  advertisement,  requiring
them to make their primary  effluent  treatment  plants  fully  operational,
within three months from today. On the expiry of the notice period of  three
months, the concerned State  Pollution  Control  Board(s)  are  mandated  to
carry out inspections, to verify,  whether  or  not,  each  industrial  unit
requiring “consent to operate”, has a functional primary effluent  treatment
plant.  Such of the industrial units, which  have  not  been  able  to  make
their primary effluent treatment plant fully operational, within the  notice
period, shall be restrained from  any  further  industrial  activity.   This
direction may be implemented by requiring the concerned  electricity  supply
and distribution agency, to disconnect the  electricity  connection  of  the
defaulting industry.  We therefore hereby further direct, that in  case  the
concerned State Pollution  Control  Boards  make  a  recommendation  to  the
concerned electrical supply and distribution agency/company,  to  disconnect
electricity supply to an industry, for the reason that its primary  effluent
treatment plant is not functional, it shall honour such recommendation,  and
shall disconnect  the  electricity  supply  to  such  defaulting  industrial
concern, forthwith.
5.          Such  an  industrial  concern,  which  has  been  disabled  from
carrying on  its  industrial  activities,  as  has  been  indicated  in  the
foregoing paragraph,  is  granted  liberty  to  make  its  primary  effluent
treatment plant functional to the required capacity, and thereupon,  seek  a
fresh “consent to operate”  from  the  concerned  Pollution  Control  Board.
Only after the receipt of such fresh “consent to  operate”,  the  industrial
activities of the disabled industry, can be permitted  to  be  resumed.   In
carrying out the above exercise, we consider  it  just  and  appropriate  to
require,  the  Pollution  Control  Boards  to  carry  out  inspections,   by
prioritizing inspections of severely and critically polluted industries,  so
that visible results emerge at the earliest.
6.           Liberty  is  hereby  granted  to  private   individual(s)   and
organizations, to address complaints  to  the  concerned  Pollution  Control
Board, if any industry is in default. On the receipt of any such  complaint,
the concerned Pollution Control Board, shall be obliged to verify the  same,
and take such action against the defaulting industry, as may be  permissible
in law.  Such action,  would  be  in  addition  to  the  discontinuation  of
industrial activity forthwith, in the manner directed hereinabove (but  only
after verification).
7.          Having effectuated the  directions  recorded  in  the  foregoing
paragraphs, the next step would be, to  set  up  common  effluent  treatment
plants. We are informed, that  for  the  aforesaid  purpose,  the  financial
contribution of the Central Government is to the  extent  of  50  per  cent,
that of the  concerned  State  Government  (including  the  concerned  Union
Territory) is 25 per cent.  The balance 25 per cent, is to  be  arranged  by
way of loans from  banks.  The  above  loans,  are  to  be  repaid,  by  the
industrial areas, and/or industrial clusters.  We are  also  informed,  that
the setting up of a common effluent treatment plant, would  ordinarily  take
approximately  two  years  (in  cases  where  the  process  has  yet  to  be
commenced).  The reason for the  above  prolonged  period,  for  setting  up
“common effluent treatment plants”, according to  learned  counsel,  is  not
only financial, but also, the  requirement  of  land  acquisition,  for  the
same.
8.          In view of the fact, that the financial position has been  taken
care of, as has been expressed above, we are of the view, that  the  setting
up of “common effluent treatment plants”, should be taken up  as  an  urgent
mission.  With reference to common  effluent  treatment  plants,  which  are
already under implementation,  we  hope  and  expect,  that  they  would  be
completed within the time  lines  already  postulated.   With  reference  to
common effluent treatment plants, which are yet to be set  up,  we  consider
it  just  and  appropriate  to  direct,  the  concerned  State   Governments
(including, the concerned Union Territories) to complete the same  within  a
period of three years, from today.  We are also  of  the  view,  that  while
acquiring land for the 'common effluent  treatment  plants',  the  concerned
State Governments (including, the concerned Union Territories) will  acquire
such additional land, as  may  be  required  for  setting  up  “zero  liquid
discharge plants”, if and when required in the future.
9.          During the course  of  hearing,  we  were  informed  by  learned
counsel, that the running of 'common effluent treatment plants',  which  are
in place, is also a matter of serious  concern.   In  this  behalf,  it  was
submitted, that some of  the  common  effluent  treatment  plants  are  dis-
functional, because of  lack  of  finances,  whilst  some  others  are  dis-
functional, because of the requirement  of  repairs,  which  have  not  been
carried out, again because of lack of financial resources.
10.         Given the responsibility vested in Municipalities under
Article
243W
of the Constitution, as also, in item 6 of the 12th  Schedule,  wherein
the aforesaid obligation, pointedly extends to  “public  health,  sanitation
conservancy and solid waste management”, we are of the view, that  the  onus
to  operate  the  existing  common  effluent  treatment  plants,  rests   on
municipalities (and/or local bodies).  Given the  aforesaid  responsibility,
the concerned municipalities (and/or local bodies), cannot be  permitted  to
shy away, from discharging this onerous duty.  In  case  there  are  further
financial constraints, the remedy lies in
Articles  243X
and
243Y
of  the
Constitution.  It will be open to the concerned municipalities(and/or  local
bodies), to evolve norms to recover funds, for  the  purpose  of  generating
finances to install and run, all the  “common  effluent  treatment  plants”,
within the purview of the provisions referred to hereinabove.   Needless  to
mention, that  such  norms  as  may  be  evolved  for  generating  financial
resources, may include  all  or  any,  of  the  commercial,  industrial  and
domestic beneficiaries, of the facility. The process of evolving  the  above
norms,  shall  be  supervised  by  the  concerned  State  Government  (Union
Territory), through the Secretaries,  Urban  Development  and  Local  Bodies
respectively, (depending on the location of the respective  common  effluent
treatment plant). The norms for generating  funds,  for  setting  up  and/or
operating the 'common effluent treatment plant' shall be  finalized,  on  or
before 31.03.2017, so as  to  be  implemented  with  effect  from  the  next
financial  year.   In  case,  such  norms  are  not  in  place,  before  the
commencement of the next financial year,  the  concerned  State  Governments
(or the Union Territories), shall cater to the  financial  requirements,  of
running the “common effluent treatment plants”,  which  are  presently  dis-
functional, from their own financial resources.
11.         Just in the manner suggested hereinabove,  for  the  purpose  of
setting up of  “common  effluent  treatment  plants”,  the  concerned  State
Governments (including, the concerned  Union  Territories)  will  prioritize
such cities, towns and villages, which discharge industrial  pollutants  and
sewer, directly into rivers and water bodies.
12.         We are of the view, that in  the  manner  suggested  above,  the
malady of sewer treatment, should also be  dealt  with  simultaneously.   We
therefore hereby direct, that 'sewage treatment plants' shall  also  be  set
up and made functional, within the time  lines  and  the  format,  expressed
hereinabove.
13.         We are of the view, that mere  directions  are  inconsequential,
unless a rigid implementation mechanism is laid down.  We  therefore  hereby
provide, that  the  directions  pertaining  to  continuation  of  industrial
activity only when  there  is  in  place  a  functional   “primary  effluent
treatment plants”,  and  the  setting  up  of  functional  “common  effluent
treatment plants” within the time lines, expressed above, shall  be  of  the
Member  Secretaries  of  the  concerned  Pollution  Control   Boards.    The
Secretary  of  the  Department  of  Environment,  of  the  concerned   State
Government (and the concerned Union Territory), shall be answerable in  case
of  default.  The  concerned  Secretaries  to  the   Government   shall   be
responsible of monitoring the progress, and issuing necessary directions  to
the  concerned  Pollution  Control  Board,  as  may  be  required,  for  the
implementation of the above directions. They shall be also  responsible  for
collecting and maintaining records of data, in  respect  of  the  directions
contained in this order.  The said data shall be furnished  to  the  Central
Ground Water Authority, which shall evaluate the  data,  and  shall  furnish
the same to the Bench of the jurisdictional National Green Tribunal.
14.         To supervise complaints of  non-implementation  of  the  instant
directions, the concerned Benches  of  the  National  Green  Tribunal,  will
maintain running and numbered case files,  by  dividing  the  jurisdictional
area  into  units.   The  above  mentioned  case  files,  will   be   listed
periodically.   The  concerned  Pollution  Control  Board  is  also   hereby
directed, to initiate such civil or criminal action, as may  be  permissible
in law, against all or any of the defaulters.
15.         Liberty is granted to private  individuals,  and  organizations,
to approach  the  concerned  Bench  of  the  jurisdictional  National  Green
Tribunal,  for  appropriate  orders,  by  pointing  out   deficiencies,   in
implementation of the above directions.
16.         It however needs to be clarified, that  the  instant  directions
and time lines, shall not in any way dilute any time  lines  and  directions
issued by Courts  or  Benches  of  the  National  Green  Tribunal,  hitherto
before, wherein the postulated time  lines  would  expire  before  the  ones
expressed through the directions recorded above. It is clarified,  that  the
time lines, expressed  hereinabove will  be  relevant,  only  in  situations
where there are no prevalent time line(s), and also, where a longer  period,
has been provided for.
17.         It would be in the interest of implementation of  the  objective
sought to be achieved,  to  also  require  each  concerned  State(and  each,
concerned Union  Territory)  to  make  provision  for  “online,  real  time,
continuous monitoring system” to display  emission  levels,  in  the  public
domain, on the portal of the concerned State  Pollution  Control  Board.  We
are informed, that at least  three  State  Governments have already  adopted
the aforesaid

measures.  Such measures shall be put in place by all  the  concerned  State
Governments( including, the concerned Union Territories), within six  months
from today.
18.         The instant writ petition stands disposed of, in  the  aforesaid
terms.
…..................CJI
                                                  [JAGDISH SINGH KHEHAR]


                                                  …....................J.
                                                  [Dr. D.Y. CHANDRACHUD]


NEW DELHI;                                   …....................J.
FEBRUARY 22, 2017.                                [SANJAY KISHAN KAUL]


ITEM NO.10               COURT NO.1               SECTION PIL(W)

               S U P R E M E  C O U R T  O F  I N D I A
                       RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

Writ Petition(s)(Civil) No(s).  375/2012

PARYAVARAN SURAKSHA SAMITI & ANR                   Petitioner(s)

                                VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                              Respondent(s)
(with appln(s) for directions and exemption from filing OT and permission
to file synopsis and list of dates and office report)

Date : 22/02/2017 This petition was called on for hearing today.
CORAM :
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
         HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE D.Y. CHANDRACHUD
         HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL


For Petitioner(s)      Mr. Colin Gonsalves, Sr. Adv
                       Mr. Gunjan Singh, Adv.
for Ms. Jyoti Mendiratta,AOR

For Respondent(s)      Ms. Pinky Anand, ASG
(UOI)            Mr. S.W.A. Qadri, Adv.
                       Mr. Ajay Sharma, Adv.
                       Mr. Balendu Shekhar, Adv.
                       Mr. Ansh Singh Luthra, Adv.
                       Mr. Hemant Arya, Adv.
                       for Mr. G.S. Makker, AOR

State of Haryana Mr. Anil Grover, AAG
                       Mr. Satish Kumar, Adv.
                       Mr. Sanjay Kr. Visen, AOR

State of Rajasthan     Mr. S.S. Shamshery, AAG
                       Mr. Amit Sharma, Adv.
                       Mr. Ankit Raj, Adv.
                       for Ms. Ruchi Kohli, AOR

State of MP      Mr. Purushaindra Kaurav, AAG
                       Mr. Mishra Saurabh, Adv.
                       Mr. Ankit Kr. Lal, Adv.
                       Ms. Vanshuja Shukla, Adv.
                       Ms. Anuradha Mishra, Adv.

State of Gujarat Ms. Hemantika Wahi, Adv.
                       Ms. Jesal Wahi, Adv.
                       Ms. Mamta Singh, Adv.
State of               Ms. Bhuvneshwari Pathak Kaushik, Adv.
Uttarakhand      Ms. Shilpi Satya Priya Satyam, Adv.
                       Mr. Rahul Kaushik, Adv.
                       Mr. Ashutosh Kr. Sharma, Adv.

State of Jharkhand     Mr. Tapesh Kumar Singh, Adv.
                       Mr. Mohd. Waquas, Adv.
                       Mr. Sukant Vikram, Adv.
                       Mr. Aditya Pratap Singh, Adv.

State of Telangana     Mr. S.Udaya Kumar Sagar, Adv.
                       Mr. Mrityunjai Singh, Adv.

State of AP      Mr. Guntur Prabhakar, Adv.
                       Ms. Prerna Singh, Adv.

State of UP      Mr. M.R. Shamshad, Adv.
                       Mr. Rajat Singh, Adv.
                       Mr. Aditya Samaddar, Adv.
                       Ms. Harshita Deshwal, Adv.

State of Tamil Nadu    Mr. Paramasivam, Adv.
                       Mr. B. Balaji, Adv.
                       Mr. Muthuvel palani, Adv.
                       Mr. S. Kumar, Adv.

For
CPC
B               Mr. Vijay Panjwani, Adv.

State of Bihar         Ms. Varsha Poddar, Adv.
                       for Mr. Gopal Singh, AOR

State of West          Mr. Joydeep Mazumdar, adv.
Bangal                 Mr. Debojyoti Bhattacharya, Adv.
                       for Mr. Parijat Sinha, AOR

State of Odisha  Mr. Krishnayan Sen,Adv.
                       Mr. Himanshu Bhushan, Adv.
                       Mr. Uddyam Mukherjee, Adv.

State of               Ms. Sakshi Kakkar, Adv.
Chhatisgarh      for Mr. C. D. Singh,AOR

                       Mr. Mohit Kumar Shah, Adv.
                       Mr. Gaurav Kanth, Adv.
                       Mr. Pushkar Taimni, Adv.

State of               Mr. V. N. Raghupathy,Adv.
Karnataka              Mr. Lagnesh Mishra, Adv.
                       Mr. Parikshit P. Angadi, Adv.
                       Mr. Prakash Jadhav, Adv.

State of Punjab  Mr. Saurabh Ajay Gupta, Adv.
                       Mr. Nishant Bishnoi, Adv.
                       for Mr. Kuldeep Singh, AOR

                       Mr. C. K. Sasi,AOR

                       Mr. Varinder Kumar Sharma,AOR

                       Ms. Sunita Sharma,AOR
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                             O R D E R

      The writ petition stands disposed  of,  in  terms  of  the  reportable
judgment.
(Renuka Sadana)                            (Parveen Kumar)
Assistant Registrar                       AR-cum-PS
[Reportable signed judgment is placed on the file]