[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Cisf vs Santosh Kumar Pandey on 16 December, 2022
Author:
J.K. Maheshwari
Bench:
J.K. Maheshwari
NON-REPORTABLE

                                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8671 OF 2015

                          CISF AND OTHERS                                       ...   APPELLANTS

                                                         VERSUS

                          SANTOSH KUMAR PANDEY                                  ...   RESPONDENT

                                                         JUDGMENT
SANJIV KHANNA, J.
This appeal, which has been preferred by Central Industrial

                                 Security Force1 and two others, takes exception to the judgment

                                 dated 16.12.2014 in Special Civil Application No. 13718 of 2004,

                                 whereby the High Court of Gujarat has allowed the writ petition

                                 preferred by Respondent No.1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey and

                                 directed his reinstatement in service with 50% back wages from the

                                 date of his removal.
2.      Respondent No. 1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey, who was working as

                                 a constable with the CISF, was posted at the Greenbelt Area of the
IPC
L Township, Vadodara, Gujarat, where he was charge-sheeted

                                 vide memorandum dated 28.10.2001 on allegations of misconduct,
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NIRMALA NEGI
Date: 2022.12.16
17:34:29 IST
which allegations we shall refer to in some detail subsequently.
Reason:
1 For short, “CISF”.
Civil Appeal No. 8671 of 2015                                     Page 1 of 14
Respondent No.1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey having denied the

       allegations, Deputy Commandant - N.K. Bharadwaj was appointed

       as the Inquiry Officer, who vide his report dated 28.01.2002 held

       that the charges levelled against Respondent No.1 – Santosh

       Kumar Pandey stand proven. Respondent No.1 – Santosh Kumar

       Pandey made a representation, and thereby questioned the inquiry

       report and claimed that he should be exonerated of the charges.

       The disciplinary authority, however, vide order dated 23.02.2002,

       agreed that the charges were proved and penalty of removing

       Respondent No. 1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey from service was

       imposed.        Respondent No.1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey had

       preferred an appeal that was rejected by the appellate authority

       vide order dated 08.05.2002. Revision petition filed by the

       Respondent No.1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey was rejected vide

       order dated 08.04.2003.
3.     These orders, including the inquiry report, were challenged by

       Respondent No.1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey vide Special Civil

       Application No. 13718 of 2004, which, vide impugned judgment,

       has been allowed, as per the directions set out above.
4.     The reasoning given by the High Court for allowing the Writ Petition

       is to be found in paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 of the impugned judgment,

       which for convenience, are reproduced below:
Civil Appeal No. 8671 of 2015                                    Page 2 of 14
“8. We have gone through the evidence came on
                   record. Mahesh B. Chaudhry who is the
                   complainant gave his statement on 27.10.2001
                   before the CISF Officer. In his examination, the
                   complainant has narrated the aforesaid story, but
                   in the cross examination, he had admitted that the
                   petitioner has returned the watch and he has got
                   his article back and he does not want to take any
                   action against the petitioner. He has also admitted
                   in the question put by the Inquiry Officer as
                   regards to the illicit demand to spend some time
                   with his fiancée as his fiancée has also seen the
                   incident.
9. (X)2 who is fiancée of complainant Mahesh B.
                   Chaudhry has also been examined and she has
                   clearly and categorically stated that she was little
                   aware, but what was told to his fiancée Mahesh,
                   she has not heard. Of course, she saw him giving
                   watch to the petitioner.
10. Indisputably, on going through the entire
                   evidence available on record, entire case against
                   the petitioner rests only on the sole testimony of
                   Mahesh B. Chaudhry-complainant. In our
                   evaluation of evidence of the complainant, his
                   evidence is also not consistent. As per his say, his
                   fiancée has also seen the incident, but his fiancée
                   has clearly stated before the Inquiry Officer that
                   she has not seen the incident. Now, only question
                   remains as regards snatching/taking away watch
                   from the complainant Mahesh B. Chaudhry. In
                   respect of the said allegation also, the evidence
                   on record clearly reveals that watch was already
                   returned and, therefore, even the complainant has
                   given in writing to the official of CISF that his
                   watch is already returned by the present petitioner
                   and, therefore, he does not want to take any
                   action against him and he withdrew the
                   complaint.”
5.      In our opinion the reasoning given by the High Court is faulty on

        both facts and law. To avoid prolixity, as there is a short issue that


2 Identity suppressed to maintain privacy.
Civil Appeal No. 8671 of 2015                                             Page 3 of 14
arises for consideration, we are not separately referring to the

       arguments by both sides, as these have been considered during

       the course of our reasoning.
6.     We begin by referring to the allegation of misconduct by

       Respondent No.1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey, on the intervening

       night between 26.10.2001 and 27.10.2001, when he was posted as

       a Constable on night duty at the Greenbelt Area of the
IPC
L

       Township, Vadodara, Gujarat. As per the chargesheet, on

       27.10.2001 at about 1:00 a.m., Mahesh B. Chaudhry and his

       fiancée had passed through the area on motorcycle and had

       stopped in the corner, which is when Respondent No.1 – Santosh

       Kumar Pandey had come forward and had questioned them.

       Respondent No.1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey taking advantage had

       told Mahesh B. Chaudhry that he would like to spend some time

       with his fiancée. When Mahesh B. Chaudhry had protested and

       did not agree, Respondent No.1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey had

       asked Mahesh B. Chaudhry to give something to him. Mahesh B.

       Chaudhry had then given the watch he was wearing to Respondent

       No.1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey. On the next day, i.e. 27.10.2001,

       at about 8:00 p.m., Mahesh B. Chaudhry came back to the P.T.

       Gate with his friend Pradip Raghavan and had reported the

       incident. Senior officers took notice. Mahesh B. Chaudhry wrote a
Civil Appeal No. 8671 of 2015                                 Page 4 of 14
written complaint stating the facts. Respondent No.1 – Santosh

       Kumar Pandey was called and confronted. What transpired has

       been recorded and noted in the inquiry report, and the same will be

       noticed below, when we refer to the statements of the witnesses.
7.     Mahesh B. Chaudhry in his statement has affirmed that on

       26.10.2001, he and his fiancée had proceeded to see/play Navratri

       Garba. The P.T. Gate was closed and they consequently decided

       to return home. On their way back, they had stopped, which is when

       Respondent No.1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey had questioned them

       about their presence at that place at that time. Mahesh B. Chaudhry

       had informed Respondent No.1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey that the

       girl with him was his fiancée, and that they had come there to play

       Garba. Respondent No.1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey was not

       satisfied, and in spite of repeated pleas by Mahesh B. Chaudhry,

       he would not let them go home. Respondent No.1 – Santosh Kumar

       Pandey told Mahesh B. Chaudhry that he wanted to spend time with

       his fiancée. Mahesh B. Chaudhry did not agree. Then Respondent

       No.1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey had insisted that Mahesh B.

       Chaudhry must give something to him to allow them to go.

       Thereupon, Mahesh B. Chaudhry had told Respondent No.1 –

       Santosh Kumar Pandey that he has a watch which, in the

       circumstances, he was forced to hand over to Respondent No.1 –
Civil Appeal No. 8671 of 2015                                   Page 5 of 14
Santosh Kumar Pandey. Thereafter, Mahesh B. Chaudhry and his

       fiancée were allowed to leave and they returned home. The next

       day, Mahesh B. Chaudhry, along with his friend Pradip Raghavan,

       to whom he had narrated the incident, came back to the P.T. Gate

       to retrieve the watch. At the P.T. Gate, they had interacted with the

       constable on duty who was posted there at that time. The constable

       had then called the officers on duty from the CISF Office to whom

       he recounted the entire incident. Respondent No. 1 – Santosh

       Kumar Pandey was called and questioned by the officers. He was

       asked whether he had taken Mahesh B. Chaudhry’s watch. Initially,

       Respondent No. 1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey denied having taken

       the watch.        Mahesh B. Chaudhry and Pradip Raghavan went

       outside. After some time, Respondent No. 1 – Santosh Kumar

       Pandey had asked Mahesh B. Chaudhry and Pradip Raghavan to

       wait. Respondent No. 1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey came back and

       returned the watch to Mahesh B. Chaudhry. Mahesh B. Chaudhry

       had, accordingly, informed the officers and gave in writing that he

       would not like to take any action against Respondent No. 1 –

       Santosh Kumar Pandey. In response to the questions put by the

       Inquiry Officer, Mahesh B. Chaudhry admitted that the watch was

       returned at Undera Chowk in the presence of Pradip Raghavan.

       Further, he was afraid and had therefore given his watch to
Civil Appeal No. 8671 of 2015                                     Page 6 of 14
Respondent No. 1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey. Lastly, his fiancée

       had seen him give the watch to Respondent No. 1 – Santosh Kumar

       Pandey.
8.     These facts, as stated by Mahesh B. Chaudhry, and as the events

       had unfolded on 27.10.2001, stand affirmed in the statements made

       before the Inquiry Officer by Kamaljit Singh, R.K. Das, V.K. Gautam

       and R.C. Savita. They have confirmed that Respondent No. 1 –

       Santosh Kumar Pandey was posted on night duty during the

       intervening night between 26.10.2001 and 27.10.2001. On

       27.10.2001 Mahesh B. Choudhry had come to the P.T. Gate and

       made the complaint that was recorded in writing. Mahesh B.

       Choudhry had identified Respondent No. 1 – Santosh Kumar

       Pandey as the person who had harassed and stalked them, stated

       that he wanted to spend time with his fiancée and, upon refusal had

       asked Mahesh B. Chaudhry to give something to him. Respondent

       No. 1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey had taken the watch from Mahesh

       B. Chaudhry. Later on, Mahesh B. Chaudhry had returned to the

       CISF Office and had informed the officers that Respondent No. 1 –

       Santosh Kumar Pandey had returned the watch.
9.     On behalf of Respondent No. 1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey, our

       attention was drawn to the statement made by Pradip Raghavan

       who had oscillated and did not, in our opinion, depose truthfully.
Civil Appeal No. 8671 of 2015                                   Page 7 of 14
When confronted and questioned by the Inquiry Officer, Pradip

       Raghavan did accept that he and Mahesh B. Chaudhry had

       proceeded to the CISF Office to make the complaint, that was

       written by Mahesh B. Chaudhry and was signed by him at the

       bottom. Further, he had signed his statement recorded on

       27.10.2001. His claim that the statements had not been read to and

       heard by him is unreal and farcical. Equally, the pretence that he

       did not know the conversation that had taken place in the CISF

       Office is unbelievable and unworthy of any credence. On being

       questioned, Pradip Raghavan had accepted that, thereafter, he and

       Mahesh B. Chaudhry along with Respondent No. 1 – Santosh

       Kumar Pandey had gone to Undera Chowk.
10.    Our attention was also drawn to the statement of the fiancée, whose

       identity has been suppressed to protect her privacy. She did accept

       having gone with Mahesh B. Chaudhry to see Garba on the night

       of 26.10.2001 at
IPC
L Township, but as the gate was closed, they

       decided to go back home. On their way, when they stopped and

       were talking to each other, Respondent No. 1 – Santosh Kumar

       Pandey came there and spoke to Mahesh B. Chaudhry for some

       time. She claimed that she had not heard the conversation between

       Mahesh B. Chaudhry and Respondent No. 1 – Santosh Kumar

       Pandey but had seen Mahesh B. Chaudhry giving the watch to
Civil Appeal No. 8671 of 2015                                   Page 8 of 14
Respondent No. 1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey. On being questioned

       by the Inquiry Officer, her explanation was that she could not hear

       anything because she was asked to stand at some distance and

       that she was frightened and was crying. We would not read her

       statement as exonerating, or even contradicting to the version given

       by Mahesh B. Chaudhry. She was a young girl and it is obvious

       would have felt anxious and awkward. It is understandable as she

       would not have liked being subjected to personal and private

       questions. These are facts of life that have to be accounted for

       when we evaluate and pass judgments. A holistic and pragmatic

       approach is required, especially when the
Evidence Act
is not

       applicable; and even where the
Evidence Act
applies, the

       enactment gives discretion on matters of evaluation, analysis and

       appraisal of evidence.
11.    Learned counsel for Respondent No. 1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey

       had drawn our attention to the statement given by Abdul Ghani, who

       was present when the inquiries were made from Respondent No. 1

       – Santosh Kumar Pandey on 27.10.2001. He had stated that

       Respondent No. 1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey, on being questioned

       by the Company Commander, had accepted that he had seen

       Mahesh B. Chaudhry and his fiancée, who had stopped their

       motorcycle at the corner of the road. Respondent No. 1 – Santosh
Civil Appeal No. 8671 of 2015                                    Page 9 of 14
Kumar Pandey claimed that he had seen both of them cuddling

       each other and he had gone near them and asked what they were

       doing. Mahesh B. Chaudhry and his fiancée had replied normally

       and stated that they had stopped there. Abdul Ghani had also

       confirmed that, on being further questioned by the Company

       Commander, Respondent No. 1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey had

       accepted that he had asked for the watch from Mahesh B.

       Chaudhry. Respondent No. 1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey had

       admitted to the Company Commander that he had made a mistake

       and that he was sorry.
12.    Respondent No. 1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey had appeared as a

       defence witness wherein he had accepted that he was posted on

       night duty on the intervening night of 26.10.2001 and 27.10.2001

       and that at about 01:00 a.m., one girl and one boy stopped their

       motorcycle and were doing something wrong. Thereafter, he had

       questioned them. He had also scolded them. Respondent No. 1 –

       Santosh Kumar Pandey claimed that they, out of anger had

       complained against him at the P.T. Gate on 27.10.2001. He denied

       the allegations and stated that the facts were false and fabricated.
13.    The Inquiry Officer, in his report, has elaborately marshalled and

       evaluated the entire evidence regarding the incident on the

       intervening night of 26.10.2001 and 27.10.2001 and the
Civil Appeal No. 8671 of 2015                                   Page 10 of 14
happenings on 27.10.2001 after Mahesh B. Chaudhry and Pradip

       Raghavan had made a complaint. The watch was subsequently

       returned by Respondent No. 1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey to Mahesh

       B. Chaudhry.
14.    The order passed by the disciplinary authority considers the

       objections raised by Respondent No. 1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey,

       and refers to the statements and evidence on record to hold that

       the charges were proven. On the question of withdrawal of the

       complaint, he elaborated that Respondent No. 1 – Santosh Kumar

       Pandey had returned the watch and thereupon, Mahesh B.

       Chaudhry had returned to the CISF Office and made a written

       request stating that he would like to withdraw the complaint. We

       agree that the letter to withdraw the complaint will not nullify or

       exonerate Respondent No. 1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey of the

       charges.       Respondent No. 1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey had

       accepted he had taken the watch from Mahesh B. Chaudhry on the

       intervening night of 26.10.2001 and 27.10.2001, which was

       returned after Mahesh B. Chaudhry had made a written complaint

       on 27.10.2001. On return of the watch, Mahesh B. Chaudhry had

       made a written request to withdraw the complaint.
15.    Paragraph 8 of the impugned judgment only partially records and

       refers to the facts stated by Mahesh B. Chaudhry, but does not refer
Civil Appeal No. 8671 of 2015                                   Page 11 of 14
the background, including the incident on the intervening night of

       26.10.2001 and 27.10.2001. Significantly, the High Court did accept

       that Respondent No. 1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey had returned the

       watch that he had taken from Mahesh B. Chaudhry. The last portion

       of the said paragraph, in fact, admits that Mahesh B. Chaudhry, on

       being questioned, had stated that Respondent No. 1 – Santosh

       Kumar Pandey had made a demand of spending time with his

       fiancée.
16.    Paragraph 9 of the impugned judgment refers to the statement

       made by the fiancée of Mahesh B. Chaudhry but fails to notice the

       fact that the fiancée had got engaged the very next day after the

       incident to Mahesh B. Chaudhry. We have already referred to her

       statement. It would have been traumatic and agonising for her to

       narrate the incident before the officers and that too in the presence

       of Respondent No. 1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey. She, therefore,

       while accepting her presence, had preferred to state that she had

       not heard anything as she was standing at a distance and had seen

       Mahesh B. Chaudhry giving the watch to Respondent No. 1 –

       Santosh Kumar Pandey.
17.    We have reservations regarding the reasoning given in paragraph

       10 of the impugned judgment as it fails to take notice and properly

       apply the law of judicial review. Judicial review is not akin to
Civil Appeal No. 8671 of 2015                                    Page 12 of 14
adjudication of the case on merits, and adequacy or inadequacy of

        evidence, unless the court finds that the findings recorded are

        based on no evidence, perverse or are legally untenable in the

        sense that it fails to pass the muster of the Wednesbury principles3.

        Power of the High Court under
Articles 226
and
227
of the

        Constitution of India enables exercise of judicial review to correct

        errors of law, including procedural law, leading to manifest injustice

        or violation of principles of fairness, without normally venturing into

        reappreciation of evidence4. The writ court, when disciplinary action

        is challenged, is primarily concerned with examination of the

        decision making process, which requires satisfaction that the

        competent authorities have held inquiry as per the prescribed

        procedure, and have duly applied their mind to the evidence and

        material placed on record, without extraneous matters being given

        undue consideration, and the relevant factors have been cogitated.

        The conclusions of fact, which are based upon evaluation and

        appreciation of evidence, when meticulously reached by the

        authorities, should not be interfered with merely because the court

        may have reached at a different conclusion. Thus, error of law, is




3 See Paragraph 14 in
Central Industrial Security Force and Others v. Abrar Ali
, (2017) 4 SCC 507.
4 See Paragraphs 12-16 in
Union of India and Others v. P.Gunasekaran
, (2015) 2 SCC 610.
Civil Appeal No. 8671 of 2015                                                         Page 13 of 14
apparent in the reasoning vide paragraph 10 of the impugned

       judgment.
18.    On the question of proportionality of punishment, we have to

       observe that the facts in the present case are startling and

       distressing. Respondent No. 1 – Santosh Kumar Pandey is not a

       police officer, and even police officers are not required to do moral

       policing, ask for physical favour or material goods.
19.    In view of the aforesaid factual and legal position, we accept the

       appeal and set aside the impugned judgment. Accordingly, Special

       Civil Application No. 13718 of 2004 filed by Respondent No. 1 –

       Santosh Kumar Pandey before the High Court will be treated as

       dismissed. The order of removal from service passed by the

       disciplinary authority is upheld. In the facts of the case, there shall

       be no order as to costs.
......................................J.
                                                           (SANJIV KHANNA)



                                                  ......................................J.
                                                        (J.K. MAHESHWARI)

NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 16, 2022.
Civil Appeal No. 8671 of 2015                                            Page 14 of 14