[Cites
4
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Uttar Pradesh vs Rajmati Singh on 7 December, 2022
Author:
Surya Kant
Bench:
J.K. Maheshwari
,
Surya Kant
1

                                                                                         REPORTABLE

                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL No.9329 OF 2022
                                   (Arising out of SLP(C)No.28128 of 2017)

     THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ORS.                                                … APPELLANTS

                                                          Versus

     RAJMATI SINGH                                                                    … RESPONDENT

                                                     J U D G M E N T
1.                  Delay condoned.
2.                  Leave granted.
3.                  The   State   of    Uttar    Pradesh     and   its    authorities   in    the

     Education Department are aggrieved by the judgment dated 24.01.2017

     passed by a Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature at

     Allahabad, Lucknow Bench whereby the respondent was declared to

     have continued in service, thus, entitling her to all consequential

     benefits including salary. The State of Uttar Pradesh has been

     permitted to hold an enquiry to find out the officers in the Basic

     Education Department responsible for the situation which led to

     order of                  reinstatement       with all consequential benefits, and to

     effect                recovery    of    the     entire   amount    from   the   officers     found

     responsible.
Signature Not Verified
4.
Digitally signed by      The facts may be briefly recounted.
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2023.01.02
17:16:06 IST
Reason:
5.                  The respondent was appointed as an untrained Assistant Teacher

     on 28.01.1971 in Kanya Karmottar Junior High School, Gaura, Rai­
2
Bareli. She was relieved from the aforesaid post on 04.08.1973 to

undergo the Basic Training Course (for short `BTC’).                                 Completion of

this course was a necessity as per Department Instructions, in

order to continue on the post on which the respondent was appointed

on tenure basis. The respondent did not furnish a BTC Training

Certificate        but      appears       to     have     produced       a    B.Ed     Certificate

instead, on the basis of which she was not permitted to resume her

duties in the year 1974. No formal order terminating the services

of respondent was passed but considering the fact that she was an

untrained teacher and was admittedly relieved from her duties, her

contractual employment came to an end.
6.     The respondent appears to have made representations, which

were seemingly ignored by the authorities.                            For the next several

decades, respondent continued to make her representations, but did

not    approach        a    judicial/quasi­judicial                forum      for     relief.      She

eventually        filed       a     complaint          before      the       State     Information

Commission, Uttar Pradesh, after the enactment of the
Right to

Information Act, 2005
, somewhere in the year 2009, and based on her

complaint,        the       Commission         passed      an     order       dated       05.03.2009

directing        the    District      Basic       Education       Officer,      Rai­Bareily         to

communicate the decision to the respondent on her representations.
7.     The   aforesaid            order    of     the     State     Information           Commission

compelled        the       District       Basic        Education     Officer         to    issue     a

communication dated 04.06.2009 (P­2) which contains a brief history

as    to   how    the      respondent          failed    to     produce      the     required      BTC
3
Certificate and was not permitted to resume her duties.                              This

order,     in     no    way,     amounts     to     fresh      consideration    of     the

representations made           by the respondent            or rejection thereof on

merits. It simply communicated the history regarding the events of

1973­1974 when the respondent had worked for a short duration.
8.   Claiming that the communication dated 04.06.2009 amounted to

denial of reinstatement to her, the respondent approached the State

Public Services Tribunal (in short, `the Tribunal’) on 03.06.2010

but her Claim Petition was dismissed on 11.06.2010 as being barred

by limitation. The respondent filed a Review Petition but it was

dismissed on 13.08.2010. Thereafter, the respondent approached the

High Court which vide order dated 02.07.2012 directed the Tribunal

to consider the matter afresh on merits. The Tribunal then passed

an order dated 13.12.2013 directing the appellant­authorities to

consider        and    dispose    of   the        representations       filed   by     the

respondent. In compliance with these directions, the District Basic

Education       Officer   considered       and    rejected      the   representation(s)

moved by the respondent, on 05.04.2014. In substance, this was

actually    the       first    communication       sent   to    the   respondent     which

explicitly rejected her claim for reinstatement/rejoining, as the

prior communication had not provided any determination on merits.
9.   The respondent again approached the High Court challenging the

communication dated 05.04.2014 as well as the order of the Tribunal

dated 13.12.2013. The High Court vide the impugned judgment, as

stated earlier, has modified the Tribunal’s order dated 13.12.2013
4
and declared the respondent to have continued in service with all

consequential benefits including the salary.
10.    The question that falls for our consideration is whether the

claim of the respondent was inordinately delayed, obsolete, stale,

and barred by the principle of delay and laches and as a civil

claim, whether it was barred by law of limitation?
11.    To trace out the answer to the question formulated above, some

facts need to be repeated. The respondent was apparently relieved

on    04­08­1973    to   undergo   the       required   BTC     courses.     She   was

allegedly not permitted to resume duties in the year 1974 after she

had completed B.Ed. degree. She made several representations, one

after the other, but did not deem it appropriate to approach any

judicial or quasi­judicial forum. It was only after the enactment

of
Right to Information Act, 2005
, whereunder the State Information

Commission came to be constituted, that the respondent moved before

the said Commission to issue a directive to discover the fate of

her representations. The Commission passed an Order on 05.03.2009

asking the appellant ­ authorities to communicate the decision on

the representations of the respondent and it was in this backdrop

that the communication dated 04.06.2009 was issued by the District

Basic Education Officer, which according to the respondent revived

her pending claim.
12.    In   our   considered   view,    the    respondent     like     any   vigilant

citizen, especially given that she does not belong to economically

or    socially    backward   segments    of    the   society,    was    expected    to
5
assert her rights before an appropriate forum within a reasonable

time. Repeated representations neither give rise nor revive the

cause of action, if it had already arisen in the past. Respondent’s

difficulties do not end there, given that her services were brought

to an end when she was denied to resume her duties in the year

1974.    She   was,      thus,      required       to     seek   a   declaration    of   her

continuity or have a writ of mandamus issued for her reinstatement.

She did not do either. The Information Commission is not a forum to

adjudicate service disputes. It was not a forum which either could

declare the rights of the respondent or grant any service benefits.

The respondent’s move before the State Information Commission was

thus an exercise in futility. It leaves no room for doubt that the

respondent slept over her rights and allowed the grass to grow

under her feet for a long duration of over 33 years.
13.   We are of the considered opinion that the respondent waived

her rights to raise objections in this regard and is deemed to have

abandoned her employment.
14.   The next question which falls for consideration is whether a

deemed      order   of     termination         of        services    or   abandonment     of

employment     could      be     challenged         by    the    respondent   before     the

Tribunal in the year 2010? There can be no quarrel that such a

challenge was hopelessly time­barred under Section 5 of U.P. Public

Services (Tribunal) Act, 1976.
15.   The    view   taken      by    the   Tribunal        on    11.06.2010   was   legally

correct and tenable.           The High Court nevertheless vide Order dated
6
02.07.2012 passed in the respondent’s Writ Petition set aside the

Tribunal’s order. A perusal of the High Court’s order reveals that

neither    the   principles    of   delay   and    latches   nor    the    law   of

limitation were considered, with reference to the facts of the case

in hand. The High Court blissfully ignored the proposition of law

and proceeded on the premise that there was no fault on the part of

the respondent to file the claim petition before the Tribunal as

“the impugned order was passed on 04.06.2009 xx xx xx”.                   The High

Court completely overlooked the fact that it was not an order

passed on the representations made by the respondent but was a

communication sent to her under compulsion due to the directions

issued by the State Information Commission. The said communication

in no way revived the cause of action in favour of the respondent.
16.
In all fairness and faced with the situation, learned Senior

counsel appearing for the respondent relies upon a decision of this

Court in
“Basic Shiksha Parishad And Another vs. Sugna Devi (Smt.)

And Others”
(2004) 9 SCC 68.
17.   In   Sugna   Devi’s     case,   the   only    issue    that    arose       for

consideration was whether or not she was appointed as an Assistant

Teacher and if so, whether her services were terminated illegally.

This Court upheld the finding of fact returned by the High Court

which, upon consideration of the record regarding the payment of

salary, transfer orders, joining reports and letter of authority

asking her to present her testimonials etc., proceeded to hold that

Sugna Devi was actually working as a Teacher. It was further held
7
that her services could not be terminated without passing a formal

order. Consequently, this Court upheld the directions issued by the

High Court to grant “compensation equivalent to the salary for the

last three preceding years before the date of her superannuation”.
18.
In
“Union of India and Ors. vs. Tarsem Singh”
(2008) 8 SCC

652, this Court summarized the settled principles in the following

manner:­

      “7.    To   summarise,        normally,       a    belated      service          related
      claim will be rejected on the ground of delay and laches
      (where      remedy     is    sought     is    sought       by    filing          a     writ
      petition) or limitation (where remedy is sought by an
      application to the Administrative Tribunal). One of the
      exceptions        to   the    said     rule       is   cases     relating            to    a
      continuing wrong.            Where a service related claim is based
      on a continuing wrong, relief can be granted even if
      there is a long delay in seeking remedy, with reference
      to the date on which the continuing wrong commenced, if
      such    continuing       wrong    creates         a    continuing              source     of
      injury. But there is an exception to the exception. If
      the     grievance        is     in     respect          of      any            order      or
      administrative         decision       which       related       to        or    affected
      several others also, and if the reopening of the issue
      would affect the settled rights of third parties, then
      the claim will not be entertained. For example, if the
      issue relates to payment or refixation of pay or pension,
      relief may be granted in spite of delay as it does not
      affect the rights of third parties. But if the claim
      involved      issues        relating    to        seniority          or     promotion,
      etc..,      affecting       others,    delay       would     render            the   claim
      stale and doctrine of laches/limitation will be applied.
      Insofar      as    the      consequential          relief       of        recovery        of
8
arrears for a past period is concerned, the principles
      relating to recurring/successive wrongs will apply. As                          a
      consequence,           the    High        Courts         will    restrict      the
      consequential relief relating to arrears normally to a
      period of three years prior to the date of filing of the
      writ petition.”
19.   Close to the facts of this case, in
“C. Jacob versus Director

of Geology and Mining And Other”
(2008) 10 SCC 115, this Court,

having found that the employee suddenly brought up a challenge to

the order of termination of his services after 20 years and claimed

all consequential benefits, held that the relief sought for was

inadmissible. The legal position in this regard was laid out in the

following terms:
“10. Every representation of the Government for relief,
      may not be applied on merits. Representations relating to
      matters which have become stale or barred by limitation,
      can be rejected on that ground alone, without examining
      the merits of the claim. In regard to representations
      unrelated to the Department, the reply may be only to
      inform that the matter did not concern the Department or
      to    inform     the    appropriate           Department.       Representations
      with   incomplete        particulars          may   be    replied    by   seeking
      relevant         particulars.             The        replies         to       such
      representations, cannot furnish a fresh cause of action
      or revive a stale or dead claim.
11.    When a decision is issued by a court/tribunal to
      consider    or    deal       with   the       representation,       usually   the
      directee (person directed) examines the matter on merits,
      being under the impression that failure to do so may
      amount     to     disobedience.           When      an     order     is    passed
9
considering and rejecting the claim or representation, in
compliance with direction of the court or tribunal, such
an order does not revive the stale claim, nor amount to
some kind of “acknowledgement of a jural relationship” to
give rise to a fresh cause of action.
12.    When     a     government           abandons          service        to     take
alternative employment or to attend to personal affairs,
and does not bother to send any letter seeking leave or
letter of resignation or letter of voluntary retirement,
and the records do not show that he is treated as being
in service, he cannot after two decades, represent that
he should be taken back to duty. Nor can such employee be
treated as having continued in service, thereby deeming
the entire period as qualifying service for the purpose
of pension. That will be a travesty of justice.
13. Where an employee unauthorisedly absents himself and
suddenly      appears       after    20       years    and     demands         that   he
should    be    taken       back    and       approaches          the     court,      the
department naturally will not or may not have any record
relating to the employee at that distance of time. In
such    cases,       when    the    employer          fails       to    produce       the
records        of      the         enquiry           and      the         order       of
dismissal/removal, court cannot draw an adverse inference
against       the    employer       for    not       producing          records,      nor
direct     reinstatement           with       back    wages       for     20     years,
ignoring       the    cessation       of       service       or     the    lucrative
alternative          employment       of       the         employee.       Misplaced
sympathy in such matters will encourage discipline, lead
to unjust enrichment of the employee at fault and result
in drain of public exchequer. Many a time there is also
no application of mind as to the extent of financial
burden, as a result of a routine order for back wages.”
10
20.    Taking into consideration the cumulative effect of the facts

in this case, coupled with the legal principles cited above, we are

satisfied     that     the   claim      of    the    respondent        is     stale,     highly

belated,     time      barred,    and    the       same   ought       not   to    have    been

entertained by the Tribunal or the High Court after a span of over

three decades.
21.    We   reiterate     that    undue       sympathy      and   a    perceived       liberal

approach     by    a   judicial    forum       can   lead    to   significant          adverse

consequences. It not only gives rise to illegitimate expectations

in the mind of fence sitting employees, but also leads to undue

burdens on the public exchequer. Not only this, the indulgence

shown by a Court solely on equitable considerations, dehors the

law,    breeds      indiscipline        in    public      services      and      incorrigible

employees start looking for a dividend on the period of their

absence or for dereliction of duty. While there is no evidence to

suggest     that    the   respondent         deliberately     absented         herself    from

duty, the facts speak for themselves in that she failed to take any

recourse provided under law for more than three decades. We may say

at the cost of repetition that the respondent had hardly served as

an untrained teacher on temporary basis for a period of 2½ years

and in terms of the impugned judgment of the High Court, she has

been held entitled to get arrears of pay of more than 40 years,

besides all the retiral benefits. We are, therefore, of the view

that the High Court ought not to have drawn adverse inferences

against the appellants or put the entire onus on them to prove that
11
the respondent was unjustifiably denied the resumption of duties.

The    approach     of     the   High    Court       in   this    regard        is    completely

erroneous     and    contrary      to    the    settled       principles         of       law.   The

impugned Judgment thus cannot sustain and is liable to be set

aside.
22.    Having held so, let us look into the conduct of the appellants

as well. It is true that the State Information Commission had no

authority     to     intrude      into     a        service      dispute        and       pass   an

inappropriate order like dated 05.03.2009. The Tribunal, however,

corrected that error and turned down the respondent’s claims being

barred by limitation. That order was nullified by the High Court

vide impugned Judgment dated 02.07.2012. The appellants sat silent

and accepted that verdict without any murmur. The said Judgment

has,     in   a     way,     attained      finality,          though       it        is    legally

unsustainable. Having accepted that Judgment, the appellants ought

to have been prepared to face the next consequence which fell on

them when the Tribunal directed them to decide the respondent’s

representations afresh. This led to the revival of a ghost claim

after over 30 years. The appellants were expected to immediately

understand    the implications and consequences of events                                  as they

unfolded but they remained silent on the judgment dated 02.07.2012.

Under    these      circumstances,        the       appellants      are    also           partially

responsible for engendering hope in respondent at a juncture when

she was nearing the age of superannuation.
23.    Taking into consideration the cumulative effects of all the
12
facts and circumstances, while we set aside the impugned Judgment

dated 24.01.2017 of the High Court and reject the claim of the

respondent for reinstatement, retiral benefits or arrears of pay

etc., we direct the appellants to pay a lump­sum compensation of a

sum of Rs.5,00,000/­ (Five Lakh) within a period of two months from

the date of receipt of a copy of this Order to the respondent.
24.   The appeal stands allowed in the above terms.
.......………………..J.
                                             (SURYA KANT)




                                             …………………………………….J.
                                             (J.K. MAHESHWARI)

NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 07, 2022.