[Cites
17
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Chandi Puliya vs The State Of West Bengal on 12 December, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
C.T. Ravikumar
,
M.R. Shah
REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.               OF 2022
                                    (Arising from SLP(Criminal) No. 9897/2022)

          Chandi Puliya                                                 …Appellant

                                          Versus

          The State of West Bengal                                      …Respondent



                                          JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.             Leave granted.
2.             Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

          and order dated 27.06.2022 passed by the High Court at Calcutta in

          Revision Application No. 1328/2022, by which the High Court has

          dismissed the said revision application preferred by the appellant –

          accused and has confirmed the order passed by the learned Special

          Court, West Bengal (MP & MLA case), Bidharnagar dated 4.3.2022

          passed in Special Case No. 120 of 2018, the appellant-accused has

          preferred the present appeal.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Neetu Sachdeva
3.
Date: 2022.12.12
16:57:11 IST
Reason:
The facts leading to the present appeal in nutshell are as under:
1
That the appellant herein was tried earlier for the offences

punishable under
Sections 148
,
149
,
448
,
364
&
506
of the Indian Penal

Code (
IPC
) in FIR No. 61/2002 dated 26.09.2002 of Keshpur Police

Station. The appellant came to be acquitted by the learned Sessions

Court vide judgment and order of acquittal dated 21.05.2010.         That

thereafter on 6.6.2011, after a period of nine years from the date of

registration of the first FIR and one year from the date of acquittal, a

second FIR came to be lodged against the appellant and others alleging

inter alia that the appellant and other co-accused had caused the death

of Ajay Acharya, i.e., father of the first informant, the same person that

they had alleged to have kidnapped and were acquitted of.

3.1   It appears that the second FIR was registered on the basis of the

discovery of the skeleton and identification of the clothes and teeth of

the skeleton, by the son of the deceased, 11 years after the alleged

incident.
3.2   The appellant-accused approached the High Court seeking

quashing of the entire criminal proceedings emanating out of the second

FIR vide order dated 29.04.2016.          While dismissing the       said

proceedings, the High Court granted liberty to take up all the points of

law at the time of framing of charge. While dismissing the special leave

petitions, this Court granted liberty to the accused – appellant to avail

the remedy at the stage of framing of the charge.         Accordingly, a
2
discharge application under
Section 227
r/w
Section 300(1)
Cr.P.C. was

filed by the appellant before the learned trial Court. The learned trial

Court dismissed the said application by observing that such an objection

can be raised at the stage of framing of charge and not discharge. The

order passed by the learned trial Court has been confirmed by the High

Court, by the impugned judgment and order. Hence, the present appeal.
4.    It is vehemently submitted by Shri Siddhartha Dave, learned senior

counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant – accused that the courts

below have erred in not considering the application for discharge filed by

the appellant at the stage of discharge. It is submitted that the stage of

discharge under Section 227 Cr.P.C. is a stage prior to charge and it is

at this stage alone that the court can consider an application under

Section 300 Cr.P.C.     It is submitted that once the court rejects the

discharge application, it would proceed to framing of charge under

Section 228 Cr.P.C. and the only question before it would be as to the

nature of the offence, and not that the appellant has not committed an

offence, or that he cannot be tried on account of the bar under Section

300 Cr.P.C.
4.1   It is further submitted that the courts below have failed to

appreciate that the present proceedings arise from the discharge

proceedings and that the stage of discharge under
Section 227
Cr.P.C.

precedes the stage of framing of charge under
Section 228
Cr.P.C. It is
3
submitted that as observed and held by this Court in the case of
Ratilal

Bhanji Mithani v. State of Maharashtra
, (1979) 2 SCC 179, once the

charges are framed, the accused is disentitled from praying for

discharge.
4.2   It is further submitted that it is true that the judgment of acquittal

dated 21.05.2010 has been challenged by the State before the High

Court, but the same has not been admitted by the High Court.

4.3   It is further submitted that the appellant has already been acquitted

of the offence of kidnapping.     On the basis of the same facts, the

appellant is now being sought to be prosecuted for the offence under
Section 302
IPC, without invoking
Section 346
IPC, only to circumvent

the bar under
Section 300(1)
Cr.P.C. It is submitted that the bar under
Section 300(1)
Cr.P.C. also applies to prosecution for same facts for any

other offence for which a different charge from the one made against the

accused might have been made under sub-section (1) of
Section 221
, or

for which the accused might have been convicted under sub-section (2)

thereof.
4.4   It is further submitted that in the case of
State v. Nalini
, (1999) 5

SCC 253, this Court while discussing the principle of autrefois convict

and autrefois acquit held that
Section 300
Cr.P.C. has widened the

protective wings by debarring a second trial against the same accused

on the same facts even for a different offence.
4
4.5   Making above submissions and relying upon the aforesaid

decisions, it is prayed to allow the present appeal and discharge the

appellant from the subsequent second FIR No. 36/2011, in terms of

Section 300(1) Cr.P.C.
5.    While opposing the present appeal, Shri Sunil Fernandes, learned

counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent – State has vehemently

submitted that as such the order of acquittal in relation to first FIR is the

subject matter of appeal before the High Court. It is submitted that even

otherwise in the first FIR the appellant and other co-accused were tried

for the offences under
Sections 148
,
149
,
448
,
364
&
506
IPC in FIR No.

61/2002. It is submitted that at the relevant time, the dead body of the

deceased was not found. It is submitted that the appellant and other co-

accused were tried and as such acquitted for the offence of kidnapping

etc. and not for the offence under
Section 302
IPC, as now to be tried

pursuant to the subsequent FIR, which was lodged after the discovery of

the skeleton and identification of the clothes and teeth of the skeleton. It

is submitted that therefore, as such,
Section 300
Cr.P.C. shall not be

attracted at all.
5.1   It is further submitted that earlier the application submitted by the

appellant under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. to quash the subsequent criminal

proceedings emanating out of the second FIR came to be dismissed by

the High Court and the appellant was relegated to avail the remedy at
5
the stage of framing of the charge.         It is submitted that the very

plea/defence under
Section 300
Cr.P.C. was pressed into service but the

High Court refused to quash the criminal proceedings arising of the

subsequent second FIR.        It is submitted that thereafter when the

accused had filed the discharge application, the learned trial Court

rejected the said application by observing that the appellant-accused is

entitled to raise all the points as mentioned in the petition under
Section

300(1)
Cr.P.C. at the time of framing of charge. It is submitted that as

such the discharge application under
Section 227
Cr.P.C. is yet to be

considered by the learned trial Court.
5.2   Making the above submissions, it is prayed to dismiss the present

appeal.
6.    We have heard learned counsel for the respective parties at

length.
At the outset, it is required to be noted that pursuant to the liberty

reserved by the High Court while dismissing the petition under
Section

482
Cr.P.C., the appellant accused filed an application for discharge

under
Section 227
r/w
Section 300(1)
Cr.P.C.              Out of the said

application, application under
Section 300(1)
Cr.P.C. has been

dismissed by the learned trial Court by observing that the appellant-

accused shall be entitled to raise all the points including the applicability

of
Section 300(1)
Cr.P.C. at the time of hearing on framing of charge.
6
The application under
Section 227
Cr.P.C. filed by the accused is yet to

be considered by the learned trial Court.           At this stage,
Section 227
Cr.P.C. is required to be referred to, which reads as under:
“227. Discharge – If, upon consideration of the record of the case and the
     documents submitted therewith, and after hearing the submissions of the
     accused and the prosecution in this behalf, the Judge considers that there
     is not sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused, he shall
     discharge the accused and record his reasons for so doing.”
7.    On a fair reading of
Section 227
Cr.P.C, if, upon consideration of

the record of the case and the documents submitted therewith, and after

hearing the submissions of the accused and the prosecution in this

behalf, the Judge considers that there is not sufficient ground for

proceeding against the accused, he shall discharge the accused and

record his reasons for doing so.           As per
Section 228
Cr.P.C. only

thereafter and if, after such consideration and hearing as aforesaid, the

Judge is of the opinion that there is ground for presuming that the

accused has committed an offence, the trial Court shall frame the

charge. Therefore, as rightly submitted by Shri Siddhartha Dave, learned

senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant-accused that the

stage of discharge under
Section 227
Cr.P.C. is a stage prior to framing

of the charge (under
Section 228
Cr.P.C.) and it is at that stage alone

that the court can consider the application under Section 300 Cr.P.C.
Once the court rejects the discharge application, it would proceed to

framing of charge under Section 228 Cr.P.C.
7
8.   Under the circumstances, the learned trial Court has erred in not

considering the application under
Section 300(1)
Cr.P.C. at the time of

framing of charge and/or prior to framing of the charge. As observed

hereinabove, the trial Court had observed that the appellant-accused

shall be entitled to raise all points as mentioned in his application under
Section 300(1)
Cr.P.C. at the time of hearing on framing of charge.

However, as observed hereinabove, such exercise was required to be

done at a stage prior to framing of charge and if ultimately the court

comes to the conclusion overruling the objection of
Section 300(1)
Cr.P.C. and on facts satisfies then it may frame the charge as provided

under
Section 228
Cr.P.C. The High Court has not at all appreciated

and/or considered the aforesaid aspect.         Therefore, the matter is

required to be remanded to the learned trial Court to consider the plea of

the accused on applicability of Section 300(1) Cr.P.C. at the stage of

discharge under Section 227 Cr.P.C., which is a stage prior to framing of

the charge under Section 228 Cr.P.C.
9.   Now so far as the prayer on behalf of the appellant to discharge the

accused in view of the bar under
Section 300(1)
Cr.P.C. is concerned,

the same may not be granted at this stage in view of the earlier order

passed by the High Court dismissing the petition under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. to quash the criminal proceedings which were sought to be
8
quashed on the very ground and the accused was relegated to avail

remedy at the time of discharge. It is to be noted that the earlier order

passed by the High Court had attained finality and even thereafter the

appellant-accused had filed the discharge application under Section 227

r/w Section 300(1) Cr.P.C.
10.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the

impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court is hereby

quashed and set aside. The matter is remitted to the learned trial Court

to consider the application under
Section 300(1)
Cr.P.C. filed by the

appellant – accused along with the application for discharge under
Section 227
Cr.P.C., which is a stage prior to framing of the charge and

thereafter to pass appropriate orders on framing of the charge under
Section 228
Cr.P.C., in case the objection/defence of the accused under
Section 300(1)
is overruled and the trial Court is satisfied that there is

sufficient grounds for framing of charge against the accused.         The

aforesaid exercise shall be completed within a period of six weeks from

the date of receipt of the present order.     Needless to say, that the

learned trial Court shall decide the said application in accordance with

law and on its own merits, without being influenced by any of the

observations made by the High Court in the impugned order or by this

Court in the present order.
9
11.   The present appeal stands disposed of with the aforesaid

observations.
……………………………………J.
                              [M.R. SHAH]


NEW DELHI;                    ……………………………………J.
DECEMBER 12, 2022.            [C.T. RAVIKUMAR]
10