[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Lakhan Singh vs Amarjeet Singh on 6 December, 2022
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
,
Dinesh Maheshwari
REPORTABLE
                                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
2022 INSC 1327


                                           CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2191/2022
                                [Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.) No(s). 6533/2022]


           LAKHAN SINGH                                                           Appellant

                                                                VERSUS

           AMARJEET SINGH & ANR.                                                  Respondents


                                                             O R D E R
Dinesh Maheshwari, J.
Leave granted.
2.                      By way of this appeal, complainant of the criminal case

           arising from FIR No. 211 of 2011 has questioned the order

           dated 29.03.2022 passed by the High Court of Delhi at New

           Delhi in Crl.M.A. No. 1828 of 2020 in Criminal Appeal No. 453

           of 2019, whereby the High Court allowed an application moved

           by the accused-applicant (appellant before the High Court-

           respondent No.1 herein) with reference to
Sections 311
and
391
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19731 and directed the

           Trial Court to take on record the additional evidence and

           documents, as mentioned in the subject application; and to

           send the file back along with additional evidence.
3.
Signature Not Verified
The relevant background aspects of the matter are that
Digitally signed by
Ashwani Kumar
Date: 2022.12.17
the said appeal bearing No.453 of 2019 has been filed by the
      13:15:31 IST
      Reason:
1                   ‘
CrPC
’, for short.
1
applicant-respondent No.1 against the judgment of conviction

dated 15.12.2018 and order on sentence dated 19.12.2018, as

passed by the Additional Sessions Judge, Tis Hazari Courts,

West Delhi in relation to FIR No. 211 of 2011, whereby he was

convicted of the offence punishable under
Section 302
of the

Indian Penal Code, 18602 and was sentenced to imprisonment for

life with fine of Rs.1 lakh.
4.         Looking to the nature of order passed by the High Court

and the order proposed to be passed by us herein, narration of

all the factual aspects is not necessary. Suffice it to notice

for the present purpose that while challenging the judgment

and     order        leading       to   his    conviction      and   sentence,      the

applicant-respondent No. 1 submitted before the High Court

that on the date of incident, he was of unsound mind and

hence, could not have been tried and convicted in this matter;

and such a relevant fact had not been considered by the Trial

Court.      In support of this plea, the applicant sought to rely

upon, amongst others, the OPD Reports dated 12.07.2011 and

19.07.2011 along with the Medical Store Bill dated 12.07.2011;

and   to       examine      the     doctor     who    had   attended    on    him   and

prescribed the medicines as also the chemist who had supplied

such medicines.             The applicant also made the submission that

he wanted to examine the Director, IHBAS, Dilshad Garden,

Delhi     or     any      doctor    from      IHBAS   to    ascertain   his   medical

2     ‘
IPC
’, for short.
2
condition on the day of incident, as also his father, who was

having the original record of the said OPD Reports and Bill of

medicines.
5.       After taking note of the contents of application and

the provisions of
Section 391
CrPC3, the High Court noticed

that on behalf of the State, there was no objection to the

recording of evidence in respect of the plea of unsoundness of

mind, which the applicant intended to raise and which was not

considered    in    the    trial;     and    also    observed         that    the

contentions sought to be urged were going to the root of the

matter. On these considerations and with reference to the

General Exception provided in
Section 84
IPC4, the High Court

deemed   it   appropriate      to    allow     the   applicant         to    lead

additional evidence before the Trial Court. Though the High

Court expressed that the appeal was remanded back but, issued
 3
Section 391
CrPC reads as under: -
“391. Appellate Court may take further evidence or
        direct it to be taken.- (1) In dealing with any appeal
        under this Chapter, the Appellate Court, if it thinks
        additional evidence to be necessary, shall record its
        reasons and may either take such evidence itself, or direct
        it to be taken by a Magistrate, or when the Appellate Court
        is a High Court, by a Court of Session or a Magistrate.
          (2) When the additional evidence is taken by the Court
        of Session or the Magistrate, it or he shall certify such
        evidence to the Appellate Court, and such Court shall
        thereupon proceed to dispose of the appeal.
          (3) The accused or his pleader shall have the right to
        be present when the additional evidence is taken.
          (4) The taking of evidence under this section shall be
        subject to the provisions of Chapter XXIII, as if it were
        an inquiry.”
4
Section 84
IPC reads as under: -
“84.Act of a person of unsound mind.- Nothing is an
        offence which is done by a person who, at the time of doing
        it, by reason of unsoundness of mind, is incapable of
        knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is
        either wrong or contrary to law.”
3
directions   that   the   Trial   Court   shall   get   the   evidence

recorded after giving shortest possible dates and thereafter,

the file shall be returned along with additional evidence.
6.     The relevant observations and directions of the High

Court read as under: -
“9.Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of
         the case before us and also the fact that the
         state has accorded no objection to the recording
         of the evidence in respect of the plea of
         insanity, which the appellant now intends to
         raise, as the same were not considered during the
         course of the trial, and also the circumstance
         that the contention raised at this stage by the
         appellant does go to the root of the matter; the
         appellant wants to place on record documents
         pertaining to his mental condition as well as
         wanting to examine the witnesses in support of
         his contention; and the same in our considered
         opinion does not amount to filling up the lacuna
         in the present case.      The plea of insanity is
         covered under general exceptions under
Section 84
of the Indian Penal Code and the same would
         definitely have a bearing on this case.       Even
         otherwise it is pertinent to observe that the
         Applicant/Appellant had in fact raised the issue
         of his being of unsound mind at the stage of
         trial before the learned Additional Sessions
         Judge which was dismissed and declined vide order
         dated 20.02.2014.     Thus, in this view of the
         matter, and in the interest of justice, we
         consider      it      appropriate     to     allow
         applicant/appellant to lead additional evidence
         before the learned Trial Court.
10. Appeal is remanded back with the directions
         to learned Trial Court to take on record the
         additional evidence and documents as mentioned in
         the subject application, under
Section 311
of
         Code   of    Criminal    Procedure,   1973   dated
         23.01.2020.   Let the file be placed before the
         learned District Judge – Tis Hazari Courts to
         mark the case to the concerned Trial Court and
         the concerned Trial Court shall fix a shortest
         possible date for recording of the evidence. The
         Trial Court shall not give more than one
         opportunity to the applicant/appellant to lead
         the additional evidence as prayed for and shall
         not    give    any     unnecessary   adjournments.
4
Thereafter, the file shall be sent back to this
           Court along with additional evidence recorded.”
7.        Seeking      to   challenge    the    order   aforesaid,     learned

counsel    for    the     complainant-appellant     has    argued     that   the

order dated 20.02.2014, as referred to by the High Court in

the order impugned, was indeed considered and affirmed by this

Court in the order dated 12.10.2015 in Criminal Appeal Nos.

1345-1346/2015; and the impugned order, as passed by the High

Court, does not stand in conformity with the order so passed

by this Court.
7.1.      Learned counsel has further submitted that during the

course    of     trial,     two-fold    submissions     were   made    in    the

application dated 17.11.2011 moved on behalf of the accused-

applicant:       one    about   his    mental   illness   at   the    time    of

incident and another about his unsoundness of mind during the

trial; and sought relief in terms of
Section 330
CrPC. Learned

counsel would submit that in the order dated 20.02.2014, the

application so made was duly considered by the Trial Court and

then, the same was dismissed with reference to the deposition

of witnesses examined for the purpose.                  Learned counsel has

pointed out that in the order dated 20.02.2014, the Trial

Court, inter alia, found and held as under:-
“18. I am of the view that in view of medical board
           report dated 06.02.2013, the deposition of CW-1 & CW-
           2 and in view of further report dated 01.01.2014 of
           IHBAS, the accused is fit to face trial. The accused
           is not incapable of making his defence.           The
           application under
Section 330
CrPC filed by Sunehera
5
Singh father of the accused is without any merits and
         same is hereby dismissed.   With this application is
         disposed off.”

7.2.   Learned counsel has further submitted that the said

order came to be specifically affirmed by this Court in the

order dated 12.10.2015, that reads as under: -
“Leave granted.
The instant appeal has been filed by the father-
         in-law of the deceased, assailing the orders passed
         by the High Court, suspending the trial of the
         respondent-Amarjeet Singh.   The question which came
         to be considered by the High Court, related to the
         mental fitness of the respondents to face trial.
         Insofar as the instant aspect of the matter is
         concerned, the High Court relied on the first medical
         evaluation   conducted   by   a   Medical  Board   on
         06.02.2013.   It also relied on the statement of two
         Court witnesses examined by the Trial Court, namely,
         CW-1 on 20.07.2013 and CW-2 on 11.10.2013.
In addition to the above, the High Court also
         took into consideration a second report of the
         Medical Board dated 01.01.2014.       In both the
         aforementioned   Medical  Reports, and   also,  the
         statement made before the trial court by the two
         court witnesses, respondents had been considered to
         be fit to face the trial.
In the above view of the matter and keeping in
         mind the opinion/statements of experts on the
         subject, we are satisfied that the direction issued
         by the High Court on 04.09.2014, to suspend the
         trial, was not justified. The impugned order passed
         by the High Court is accordingly set aside.     The
         order passed by the trial court dated 20.02.2014,
         affirming the fitness of the respondents to face
         trial, is confirmed.
In the above circumstances, the appeals stand
         allowed.”

7.3.   Learned counsel would submit that both the issues as

regards mental capacity of the applicant-respondent No.1 at

the time of incident as also during the course of trial stand
6
concluded by the aforesaid orders; and the High Court has not

been justified in granting opportunity for further evidence on

the very same aspects.
8.        Per contra, learned counsel for respondent No.1 has

submitted that in the order dated 20.02.2014 passed by the

Trial Court as also the order dated 12.10.2015 passed by this

Court, only the aspect as regards the mental capacity of the

applicant–respondent           No.1       to       face   the    trial    came        to     be

considered and pronounced upon but, his mental capacity at the

time of incident and his capacity to know the nature of his

acts   definitely       remains       a    question        for    consideration             and

hence, the High Court has not committed any error in allowing

evidence to be adduced in that regard before the Trial Court.

8.1.      Learned   counsel      would          further       submit    that     the       High

Court having taken a particular view which remains just and

proper and serves the cause of justice, no interference is

called for.
9.        Learned ASG appearing for the State has duly assisted

us with reference to the provisions of
Sections 311
,
391
and
330
CrPC.
10.       Having       given     thoughtful               consideration          to         the

submissions      made    and    having             examined     the    record,    we        are

clearly     of   the    view     that          the    order     impugned       cannot        be

sustained for more than one reason.
7
11.       Insofar as the question of unsoundness of mind of the

respondent No. 1 is concerned, it is noticed that in the

application       moved   before      the       Trial   Court    in   reference    to
Section    330
CrPC,   it    was       precisely     the   contention    on    his

behalf that he was suffering from mental illness during the

period    of   incident.       It    was    also     submitted    that    being    of

unsound mind, he was incapable of making his defence. It is

also noticed that in the earlier round of proceedings, the

High Court set aside the order dated 23.02.2012 passed by the

Trial     Court     and   issued          directions      for     examination      of

respondent No.1 from the specialist/medical board.                       Thereupon,

the file was sent to the concerned Magistrate to get the

applicant      examined    by       the    medical      board.   After    receiving

report from the medical board that respondent No. 1 was fit to

stand trial, the Trial Court posted the matter for examination

of witnesses and in fact, examined two Doctors as CW-1 and CW-

2 respectively. After taking note of the entire evidence on

record, the Court found that the respondent No. 1 was fit to

face the trial and was not incapable of making his defence.

Thus, the application was rejected. This Court approved the

order so passed by the Trial Court, particularly in view of

the     opinion/statement            of     the     experts      and     found     no

justification in the High Court interfering with the matter.
12.       In the given set of facts and circumstances, when the
8
evidence was indeed taken for the purpose of dealing with the

plea put forward on behalf of the applicant-respondent No.1;

and a specific view was taken by the Trial Court, which was

affirmed    by     this     Court    with     reference          to     the     evidence

available     on   record,    we    find    it    difficult       to        approve    the

approach of the High Court in permitting further evidence of

the same nature to be adduced and for that purpose, sending

the matter to the Trial Court.
13.     The    procedure      as    adopted      in   the   present           matter    is

difficult     to   be   approved,     more       particularly          when    specific

evidence    as     regards     mental       condition       of        the     applicant–

respondent No.1 is already on record and then, it is also seen

that the aspect of his mental incapacity was sought to be put

forward by respondent No.1 himself by entering into witness-

box   and   getting       himself   examined       as   DW-2.         The     facts    and

conclusions in the orders passed by the Trial Court and by

this Court are available before the High Court. The High Court

dealing with the appeal ought to have examined the material on

record before taking a decision as to whether any further

evidence was required in the matter or not. Secondly, if at

all any further evidence was considered requisite, in the

totality of circumstances of the present case and nature of

plea sought to be raised, such evidence could have been taken

by the High Court itself or by directing the registry to do
9
the     same,   of   course,    after     recording     specific      reasons

therefor.
13.1.    Put in a nutshell, it is apparent that while passing

the order dated 29.03.2022, neither the order passed by this

Court on 12.10.2015 has been taken note of by the High Court

nor even the evidence already available on record has been

examined by the High Court.
14.      The    proposition    of   taking    additional     evidence    in   a

criminal appeal cannot be adopted as a matter of course by the

Appellate Court and in fact, the occasion for the Appellate

Court to take a considered decision on the prayer for adducing

additional evidence in appeal could arrive only after the

appeal itself has been heard on merits and not before.                  Taking

up an application moved in the appeal for permission to lead

additional evidence and deciding the same without hearing the

parties on merits of the appeal and without examining record

of the case and the reasoning that has prevailed in the Trial

Court, in our view, cannot be countenanced.
15.      In the aforesaid view of the matter, the impugned order

dated 29.03.2022 deserves to be and is hereby set aside and

the   appeal    i.e.,   Criminal     Appeal    No.453   of    2019,     stands

restored for reconsideration of the High Court in accordance

with law.
10
16.     Having regard to the circumstances of the case, though

we are not approving the order dated 29.03.2022 but, while

restoring the appeal for consideration on merits, we would

also restore the said application, Cr.M.A. 1828 of 2020, as

moved   by    the     applicant-respondent        No.1,       which    may     be

considered    at     an   appropriate     stage   by   the    High    Court    in

accordance with law; and appropriate orders may be passed, as

deemed fit and necessary in the facts and circumstances of the

case.
17.     The    parties     through   their    respective       counsel   shall

stand at notice to appear before the High Court in Criminal

Appeal No.453 of 2019 on 10.01.2023.
18.     In the totality of the circumstances of the case, the

interim arrangement made by the High Court in its order dated

15.09.2022 during the pendency of the appeal shall continue

until the first date of appearance of the parties before the

High Court i.e., 10.01.2023.
19.     It    goes    without   saying     that   we   have    not    made    any

comments on merits of the case either way; and all the aspects

relating to the merits remain open to be argued by the parties

before the High Court.
11
20.    With   the   observations,    relaxations   and   requirements

foregoing, the appeal stands allowed.
……………………………………………J.
                                               [DINESH MAHESHWARI]


                                               ……………………………………………J.
                                               [SUDHANSHU DHULIA]
New Delhi;
December 6, 2022.
12
ITEM NO.30               COURT NO.7                 SECTION II-C
               S U P R E M E C O U R T O F      I N D I A
                       RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.)    No(s).   6533/2022
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 29-03-2022
in CRLMA No. 1828/2020 in Crl.A. No. 453/2019 passed by the High
Court Of Delhi At New Delhi)

LAKHAN SINGH                                         Petitioner(s)

                                 VERSUS

AMARJEET SINGH & ANR.                           Respondent(s)
( IA No. 90524/2022 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED
JUDGMENT and IA No. 96392/2022 - PERMISSION TO FILE ADDITIONAL
DOCUMENTS/FACTS/ANNEXURES)

Date : 06-12-2022   This matter was called on for hearing today.

CORAM :             HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE DINESH MAHESHWARI
                    HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDHANSHU DHULIA

For Petitioner(s)   Mr. Tanmay Mehta, Adv.
Mr. Lakshya Gupta, Adv.
Mr. V. K. Sidharthan, AOR

For Respondent(s)   Mr. Roshan Santhalia, AOR
                    MS. Suruchi Jaiswal, Adv.
Mr. Vikramjeet Banerjee, ASG
                    Mr. P.V. Yogeswaran, AOR
                    Ms. Vishakha, Adv.
Mr. Raghav Sharma, Adv.
Mr. Akshit Pradhan, Adv.
Ms. Shruti Agarwal, Adv.
Ms. Janhvi Prakash, Adv.
Mr. Kartik Dey, Adv.
Mr. Gurmeet Singh Makker, AOR

          UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                              O R D E R

     Leave granted.
The appeal stands allowed in terms of the signed reportable
order.
Pending applications also stand disposed of.
(MEENAKSHI KOHLI)                               (VIDYA NEGI)
ASTT. REGISTRAR-cum-PS                        ASSISTANT REGISTRAR
[Signed reportable order is placed on the file]
13