[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Boro vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh Home ... on 7 December, 2022
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
NON-REPORTABLE
2022 INSC 1259



                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                          CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                                           CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.162 of 2010



                            Ramcharan (Dead) & Anr.                          …..Appellants

                                                          Versus

                            State of Madhya Pradesh                          …..Respondent

                                                         WITH


                                          CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1716 OF 2010


                                                      JUDGMENT
Abhay S. Oka, J.
1.    These two appeals take exception to the judgment dated 31 st

                            July 2009 passed by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh by which

                            conviction of the appellants has been confirmed. In all, there were

                            nine accused. The appellants in Criminal Appeal No.162 of 2010 are
Signature Not Verified
accused nos.2 and 3 and the appellant in Criminal Appeal No.1716 of
Digitally signed by
Charanjeet Kaur
Date: 2022.12.07
16:39:55 IST
Reason:
2010 is accused no.9.
1
2.    As per the case of the prosecution, when the incident occurred,

the complainant Jagannath (P.W.1) and his wife Kamlabai (P.W.8)

along with their son deceased Laxminarayan as well as two

daughters-in-law Suganbai (P.W.10) and Sharmilabai (P.W.11) were

sleeping in the house situated near a tube-well in their field. P.W.10

and P.W.11 were sleeping inside the house and others were sleeping

outside.   Around midnight, the accused reached the house and

started assaulting Jagannath (P.W.1). When P.W.8 Kamlabai tried to

save P.W.1 Jagannath, even she was assaulted by the accused. At

that time, deceased Laxminarayan came there to protect his parents.

He was also assaulted by the appellants. Though deceased ran away

to save himself, the accused chased him and assaulted him.          He

sustained injuries.   While he was being taken by a tractor to the

police station, he died on the way. It must be noted here that P.W.18

who was the Executive Magistrate purportedly recorded a statement

of P.W.1 Jagannath as a dying declaration. The Trial Court found all

nine accused persons guilty of the offence punishable under
Section

302
of Indian Penal Code (for short, ‘
IPC
’) with the aid of
Section 149
of IPC. The Trial Court held that accused no.1 - Ranglal and accused

no.4 - Prem Singh were guilty of the offence punishable under
Section

325
read with
Section 149
of IPC for assaulting P.W.1 Jagannath.

The said two accused were also held guilty of the offence punishable

under
Section 325
read with
Section 149
of IPC for assaulting P.W.8
2
Kamlabai.   Both accused nos.1 and 4 were also convicted for the

offence under
Section 148
of IPC. The Trial Court sentenced all the

accused to undergo life imprisonment for the offence punishable

under
Section 302
read with
Section 149
of IPC. The accused were

also separately punished for the other offences.
3.    There were separate appeals preferred by the accused. It must

be noted here that accused no.4 Prem Singh died during the

pendency of the appeals. By the impugned judgment, the High Court

acquitted accused no.1 Ranglal; accused no.5 Bhagwan Singh;

accused no.6 Kamal Singh; accused no.7 Benu and accused no.8

Lakhan. However, the conviction and sentence of the appellants in

these two appeals was maintained.       The learned counsel for the

appellants during the course of submissions stated that accused no.2

who is the appellant no.1 in Criminal Appeal No.162 of 2010 has

passed away.
4.    Ms. Pragati Neekhra, learned counsel appearing for appellants

in Criminal Appeal No.162 of 2010 has made detailed submissions.

Mr. Sharangouda S. Patil, learned counsel appointed to espouse the

cause of appellant in Criminal Appeal No.1716 of 2010, has assisted

the Court. The learned counsel appearing for appellants has taken us

through the judgments of the Trial Court and the High Court as well
3
as the material part of depositions of the prosecution witnesses. The

learned counsel pointed out that the appellants have been convicted

only on the basis of the evidence of P.W.1 Jagannath and P.W.8

Kamlabai and the evidence of the two other injured persons, namely,

P.W.10 Suganbai and P.W.11 Sharmilabai has been disbelieved. She

submitted that in fact evidence of P.W.1 and P.W.8 also deserve to be

discarded   as   there   are   number   of   material   omissions   and

contradictions brought on record during their cross-examination.

She submitted that a serious doubt is created whether both of them

have witnessed the incident as both of them were allegedly attacked

by the accused while they were sleeping.         The learned counsel

appearing for the appellants submitted that though P.W.1 and P.W.8

had ascribed the same role to all the accused, the High Court has

disbelieved their version only insofar as accused nos.1, 5, 6, 7 and 8

are concerned. It was submitted that on the ground of parity, even

the appellants ought to have been acquitted.
5.    Learned counsel appearing for the State urged that there was

no reason for the High Court to discard the testimony of P.W.10 and

P.W.11 who were injured eye witnesses. His submission is that both

the Courts have believed the testimony of P.W.1 and P.W.8 and,

therefore, there is no reason to interfere with the findings recorded on

the basis of appreciation of their evidence. He would, therefore,
4
submit that no interference is called for in the impugned judgment.
6.    We have given careful consideration to the submissions. We

have perused the judgments impugned in these appeals as well as the

depositions of the material witnesses. As the High Court has

disbelieved the testimony of P.W.10 and P.W.11 who were allegedly

injured eye witnesses, their evidence will have to be kept out of

consideration. The evidence of P.W.1 Jagannath and P.W.8 Kamlabai

needed careful scrutiny as they are interested witnesses being the

parents of the deceased. In the examination-in-chief, P.W.1 claimed

that he was lying on a charpai when acquitted accused no.1 and

accused no.4 came there and started giving blows by a lathi.          He

claimed that 5 to 7 people started assaulting his wife P.W.8. He stated

that after the deceased came out, the accused gave lathi blows to him

which caused his death. Though, he did not say that the assault on

the deceased was made after he ran away to some distance, P.W.8

has stated that when the deceased started running away, the accused

persons chased him and assaulted him. P.W.1 was confronted with

material part of his statement under
Section 161
of the Code of

Criminal Procedure (for short, ‘
Cr.PC
’) recorded by the police. In that

part of his statement, he had stated that blows of lathi were given to

him when he was asleep and he woke up only after the assault.

P.W.1 denied to have made such a statement to the police. He also
5
accepted that he had not named accused no.6 Kamal in his police

statement.
7.       The   Executive   Magistrate   had   purportedly   recorded   a

statement of P.W.1 Jagannath in the form of a dying declaration. In

view of
Section 157
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 the so-called

dying declaration can be treated as a former statement made by

P.W.1 and, therefore, the same can be used for contradicting the

witness. When P.W.1 Jagannath was confronted with a portion of his

statement at Ex.D-2, he accepted that the statement does not refer to

the presence of accused nos.1, 3, 7, 8 and 9.
8.       According to P.W.1, the accused were carrying lathis and the

deceased and injured witnesses received blows of lathis.      However,

P.W.8 deposed that all the accused persons were carrying lathis and

farsa (axe). She stated that one of the accused was holding Ballam

(spear) and by using the said weapon, he caused injury to the eye of

P.W.1.     As noted earlier, P.W.1 never claimed that any one was

holding weapons such as farsa and Ballam and that one of the

accused attacked him with Ballam. Though P.W.1 did not make out a

case that deceased Laxminarayan tried to run away, P.W.8 has come

out with the said case that the deceased ran away and she could see

from a distance that the accused were assaulting him.
6
9.    P.W.8 in the cross-examination admitted that she cannot

describe who were holding lathis and who were holding Ballam.

Further in paragraph 12 of the cross-examination, she stated that

she did not see how the accused were assaulting deceased by use of

Ballam as she was far away. She accepted in the cross-examination

that there was no injury caused to her husband P.W.1 by use of

Ballam but the injury was caused by use of farsa. P.W.8 claimed that

she went to the spot when accused were assaulting the deceased.

However, she admitted that when the deceased came out of the

house, she and P.W.1 were lying down on charpai due to injuries and

they continued to lie down for a period of one hour. She admitted

that she was unable to tell as to which of the accused caused injuries

to the deceased and by which weapon. In further cross-examination,

P.W.8 admitted that only after her husband P.W.1 made hue and cry

that she woke up.
10.   Thus, both P.W.1 and P.W.8 tried to implicate all the nine

accused by making omnibus statements. In his statement recorded

by the Executive Magistrate, P.W.1 did not disclose the names of five

accused including accused no.3 Boro and accused no.9 Shyam who

are the appellants in these appeals. Looking to the admissions given

by P.W.8 that she along with P.W.1 were lying down for a period of
7
one hour on the spot where they were assaulted and that fatal assault

was made on the deceased after he ran away from the spot, a serious

doubt is created whether both of them had seen the actual assault on

the deceased. Moreover, there is a serious discrepancy about the

weapons of assault. In the depositions of P.W.1 and P.W.8 though

role assigned by them to all the accused was the same, the High

Court acquitted accused no.1 Ranglal; accused no.5 Bhagwan Singh;

accused no.6 Kamal Singh; accused no.7 Benu and accused no.8

Lakhan. Neither the State Government nor the victim of the offence

have challenged their acquittal. Apart from the fact that there is a

serious doubt created about the truthfulness of the version of P.W.1

and P.W.8, there was no reason for the High Court for treating the

appellants differently from the acquitted accused. The accused no.1

who allegedly assaulted both the witnesses has been already

acquitted by the High Court.        The accused no.4 who allegedly

assaulted them has died during the pendency of the appeal before the

High Court.
11.   In the circumstances, taking overall view of the case, the

conviction of the appellants cannot be sustained. As noted in order

dated 22nd January 2010 in Criminal Appeal No.162 of 2010, at the

time of grant of bail, appellant no.1 (accused no.2) had undergone

sentence for seven and half years and the appellant no.2 (accused
8
no.3) had undergone sentence of 10 years. The appellant in the other

appeal who is accused no.9 had undergone sentence for 7 years and

10 months at the time of grant of bail, as noted in the order dated

17th January 2011.
12.   Hence, the appeals are allowed.    The impugned judgment of

the Trial Court and the High Court to the extent to which conviction

of appellants (except appellant no.1 in Criminal Appeal No.162 of

2010) in these two appeals was confirmed, are set aside and the said

appellants (accused no.3 Boro and accused no.9 Shyam) are

acquitted of the offences alleged against them.      The said two

appellants are on bail and, therefore, their bail bonds stand

cancelled. Criminal Appeal No.162 of 2010 stands abated as far as

appellant no.1 – Ramcharan is concerned.
…………………………………J.
                                        [SANJAY KISHAN KAUL]


                                        …………………………………J.
                                        [ABHAY S. OKA]

New Delhi
December 07, 2022.
9