[Cites
9
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Rajasthan vs Gurbachan Singh on 7 December, 2022
Author:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
1

                                                                                                         REPORTABLE

                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        CRIMINAL APPEAL           NO.       2201 OF 2011


        THE STATE OF RAJASTHAN                                                           .....            APPELLANT

                                                    VERSUS

        GURBACHAN SINGH & OTHERS                                                         .....          RESPONDENTS


                                                    J U D G M E N T
SANJIV KHANNA, J.
By   the    order      dated     01.05.2009,           notice       in    the    special

                         leave    petition      was        confined         to    the    first        respondent     -

                         Gurbachan Singh.        The special leave petition against other

                         respondents      was    dismissed.           Our     attention        is     drawn   to   the

                         order    dated       17.12.2008,             whereby      Criminal           Miscellaneous

                         Petition No. 19754/2008 preferred against the acquittal of

                         Manjeet Kaur, stands dismissed. The case and evidence relied

                         by the prosecution against Manjeet Kaur and Jangir Kaur is

                         identical.      We   are     of    the       opinion      and    reiterate       that     the

                         prosecution has not been able to establish its case against

                         Jangir Kaur. Challenge to the acquittal of Jangir Kaur is

                         dismissed.
2.                  The prosecution’s case as per the charge sheet is that Teja

                         Singh along with his brother Harbhajan Singh (PW-1) on one
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
BABITA PANDEY
Date: 2022.12.14
18:09:21 IST
side,   and    Gurbachan      Singh          along      with    the     co-convicts       and
Reason:
brothers Darshan Singh, Balvir Singh, and Manjeet Singh, on

                         the other side were embroiled in a dispute regarding partition
2
of land. On 06.11.2000 at about 5 P.M., Gurbachan Singh and

         Balvir Singh were ploughing the plot which belonged to water

         works department. Teja Singh had objected to this, post which,

         a village meeting was held, in which both Gurbachan Singh and

         Balvir Singh had left for their home in anger. At about 7:30

         P.M. on the same day, Harbhajan Singh (PW-1), and Jasveer Kaur

         (PW-2) were going to the Gurudwara in the village. At that

         time, Teja Singh was seen coming from the flour mill of Sohan

         Lal, which was near the Gurudwara. Thereupon, Gurbachan Singh

         and Balvir Singh, Manjeet Singh, and Darshan Singh, who hand

         come      armed   with     ‘lathi’,     ‘toka’,     axe,     and   ‘gandasi’

         respectively, had beaten and inflicted injuries on Teja Singh,

         which resulted in his death on the spot. Harbhajan Singh (PW-
1) had also suffered injuries in the incident.
3.       First Information Report1 was filed on the same day, mentions

         the names of Gurbachan Singh, Darshan Singh, Balvir Singh and

         Manjit Singh, and also the names of Jangir Kaur and Manjeet

         Kaur, who were statedly present at the place of occurrence.

         However, as per the FIR, no specific acts, verbal or physical

         in nature, were attributed to Jangir Kaur and Manjeet Kaur.
4.       The trial court, vide judgment dated 07.11.2001 had tried and

         convicted Gurbachan Singh along with others namely, Balvir

         Singh, Manjeet Singh, Darshan Singh, and Jangir Kaur under the

         following provisions of the
Indian Penal Code
, 18602:
(a)
Section   302
read   with
Section    149
of   the   IPC-   Life
1
For short, “FIR”
2   For short, “
IPC
”.
3
imprisonment and fine of Rs. l000/- each, with default

            stipulation of 2 months simple imprisonment;
(b)
Section 324
read with
Section 149
of the IPC- One and

            half years' rigorous imprisonment and fine of Rs.500/-

            each,    with    default     stipulation   of   one-month   simple

            imprisonment;
(c)    Section 323 read with Section 149 of the IPC- 3 months

            rigorous imprisonment and fine of Rs. l00, with default

            stipulation of 7 days simple imprisonment; and
(d)
Section 148
of the IPC - one year rigorous imprisonment

            and fine of Rs.100/- each, with default stipulation of 7

            days simple imprisonment.
Manjeet Kaur was tried separately in the year 2004, as

     she had absconded. She was convicted by the trial court, which

     conviction was set aside by the High Court. The judgment of

     acquittal in her case has become final.
5.   On appeal preferred by Gurbachan Singh, Balvir Singh, Manjeet

     Singh, Darshan Singh, and Jangir Kaur, the Division Bench of

     High    Court   of     Judicature   for   Rajasthan    at   Jodhpur,   vide

     judgment dated 04.04.2008, allowed the appeal filed by Jangir

     Kaur and has acquitted her. The appeal of Gurbachan Singh was

     partly allowed as his conviction under
Section 302
read with

     149,
Section 147
,
Section 148
,
Section 324
read with 149, and
Section 323
read with 149 of the
IPC
was set aside, and he has

     been convicted under
Section 323
of the IPC for the injuries

     caused to Teja Singh, and was directed to be released, as he
4
had suffered the maximum punishment provided for the offence.

     Conviction of Balvir Singh, Manjeet Singh and Darshan Singh

     under
Sections 149
and
148
of the IPC was set aside, albeit,

     their conviction under
Section 302
was maintained with the aid

     of
Section 34
of the IPC. Their conviction and sentence under
Section 324
read with
Section 34
of the IPC for injuries

     caused to Harbhajan Singh (PW-1) was maintained.
6.   It appears that Balvir Singh, Manjeet Singh, and Darshan Singh

     have not challenged their conviction and sentence imposed,

     which has attained finality.
7.   As such, the question before us, in this appeal by the State

     of   Rajasthan   is   whether   the   High   Court   was   justified   in

     setting aside the conviction and sentence awarded to Gurbachan

     Singh under
Section 302
read with other provisions of the
IPC
,

     by convicting him only under
Section 323
of the IPC, in view

     of the finding that he did not share common intention with

     Balvir Singh, Manjeet Singh, and Darshan Singh to cause the

     death of Teja Singh, as he only inflicted wounds on his feet

     with a ‘lathi’.
8.   Pertinently, the High Court while partly accepting the appeal

     preferred by Gurbachan Singh, has held as under:
“Now the question remains about accused Gurbachan who
            as per ocular testimony was armed with 'lathi' and
            the same was recovered also. After he gave an
            information through Ex. P/41 and the same was covered
            through Ex.P/23 and the same was also smeared with
            human blood. Harbhajan Singh himself is injured whose
            injury report Ex. P/15 was prepared by Dr. Mohan Lal
            Gupta. As per injury report he has received as many
            as eight injuries on his person, out of which one is
            from sharp edged weapon and as per statement of
            Harbhajan Singh said injury was inflicted by accused
            Balvir Singh with 'toka', when he reached on the spot
5
to save his brother. Gurbachan Singh gave 'lathi'
              blows on his person. From the testimony of ocular
              witnesses it can safely be inferred that accused
              Gurbachan Singh was not sharing the common intention
              as he was armed only with 'lathi' and whatever
              injuries on the person of the deceased which were
              given on vital part of the body of the deceased.”
9.   The aforesaid reasoning, accepts and in our opinion rightly

     that     Gurbachan   Singh    was       present       at    the   place      of    the

     occurrence with Balvir Singh, Manjeet Singh, and Darshan Singh

     when the violence took place, which resulted in death of Teja

     Singh on 06.11.2000 at about 7:30 P.M. Harbhajan Singh (PW-1),

     the brother of Teja Singh, along with his wife, Jasveer Kaur

     (PW-2), who were going to the Gurudwara in the village, had

     seen Teja Singh coming from the flour mill of Sohan Lal, which

     was near the Gurudwara. Gurbachan Singh, Darshan Singh, Balvir

     Singh,     and   Manjit    Singh    had        then    accosted       Teja    Singh.

     Harbhajan Singh (PW-1) and his wife Jasveer Kaur (PW-2) have

     deposed that Gurbachan Singh had come with a 'lathi', whereas

     Darshan Singh were seen with an axe, Balvir Singh with a

     'toka' and Manjeet Singh with a 'gandasi'. They had surrounded

     Teja Singh. Gurbachan Singh had then struck the feet of Teja

     Singh with ‘lathi’, who then fell-down. Thereupon, Gurbachan

     Singh and the co-convicts had beaten and inflicted injuries

     and wounds to Teja Singh. Balvir Singh in particular had used

     a 'toka', a sharp-edged weapon, to inflict incised wounds on

     the head of Teja Singh. The motive and cause was the land

     dispute between the brothers, and the occurrence at 5 P.M on

     06.11.2000, when Teja Singh had objected to Gurbachan Singh

     and    Balvir    Singh    ploughing      the    plot       of   the   water       works
6
department, and the village meeting where tempers got flared

      with Gurbachan Singh and Balvir Singh leaving the meeting in

      anger. It is pertinent that Harbhajan Singh (PW-1) was also

      injured during the violence.
10.   The post-mortem report marked as exhibit P-14 proved by Dr.

      Mohan Lal Gupta, (PW-9) had referred to 8 bone-deep injuries

      of different sizes on the head of Teja Singh. He had also

      deposed that these injuries could have been caused by sharp-

      edged weapons such as axe, 'toka', ‘gandasi’, 'lathi', and,

      etc., which were sufficient to cause death in ordinary course.
11.   Given the aforesaid position, we are of the view that
Section

      34
of the IPC i.e., common intention, is clearly attracted in

      the   case   of    Gurbachan     Singh,     whose     case     cannot      be

      distinguished, so as to exclude him as one who did not share

      common intention with Darshan Singh, Balvir Singh, and Manjit

      Singh.
Section 34
of the IPC makes a co-perpetrator, who had

      participated in the offence, equally liable on the principle

      of joint liability. For
Section 34
of the IPC to apply, there

      should be common intention among the co-perpetrators, which

      means that there should be community of purpose and common

      design. Common intention can be formed at the spur of the

      moment and during the occurrence itself. Common intention is

      necessarily a psychological fact and as such, direct evidence

      normally   will   not   be   available.   Therefore,      in   most    cases,

      whether or not there exists a common intention, has to be

      determined   by    drawing    inference    from     the    facts      proved.

      Constructive intention, can be arrived at only when the court
7
can hold that the accused must have preconceived the result

      that ensued in furtherance of the common intention.
12.   The impugned judgment observes that common intention cannot be

      inferred from the conduct of Gurbachan Singh, as he was only

      armed with ‘lathi’ and had struck only on the feet of Teja

      Singh. However, we are of the opinion that common intention to

      inflict injuries and cause the death of Teja Singh, can be

      gathered       from   the   conduct       and    action       of    Gurbachan    Singh.

      First,    it    is    deductible    from        the   quoted       paragraph    of   the

      impugned judgment read with the depositions of Harbhajan Singh

      (PW-1) and Jasveer Kaur (PW-2), that Gurbachan Singh had come

      prepared       with   ‘lathi’     along     with      others        who   had   carried

      ‘toka’, axe and ‘gandasi’. This is corroborated by the fact

      that blood-smeared ‘lathi’ was recovered from the possession

      of Gurbachan Singh. The evidence establishes the participation

      of Gurbachan Singh, in commission of the offence with co-

      participants/co-convicts. Secondly, Gurbachan Singh, was the

      first one to attack and inflict injury on Teja Singh, by

      hitting him on the feet with a ‘lathi’, who had then fallen

      down.    Lastly,      Gurbachan    Singh        along    with       co-convicts,     had

      inflicted 8 incised wounds on head and other injuries on vital

      and other parts on the person of Teja Singh, as recorded in

      the     post-mortem      report    (Ex.P.14).           The        statement    of   eye

      witnesses clearly reveal that Gurbachan Singh did not give

      just one ‘lathi’ blow, as it is being said by the defence, but

      he continued to give ‘lathi’ blows to the deceased, even when

      he fell down. This he did along with the other co-convicts,
8
Balvir     Singh,     Manjeet     Singh   and    Darshan      Singh,     who     had

      inflicted injuries with ‘toka’, axe and ‘gandasi’. These facts

      establish that Gurbachan Singh had shared the common intention

      to cause injuries with other co-convicts, and the crime was

      committed in furtherance of the common intention, which led to

      the death of Teja Singh.             Therefore, all of them, including

      Gurbachan Singh, would be responsible for the criminal act

      i.e., the offence under
Section 302
of the IPC, irrespective

      of the part played by them.
13.   Recording the aforesaid, we set aside the impugned judgment

      passed    by   the   High    Court    acquitting      Gurbachan    Singh       under
Section 302
of the IPC, and he is convicted for murder of Teja

      Singh under
Section 302
read with
Section 34
IPC. Gurbachan

      Singh’s    conviction       under
Section    324
of    the   IPC   for     the

      injuries       inflicted     on     Harbhajan    Singh       (PW-1)      is    also

      maintained. We restore the order of sentence passed by the

      trial     court     imposing      punishment    of    life    imprisonment       on

      Gurbachan Singh, for the offence under
Section 302
of the IPC

      albeit read with
Section 34
of the IPC, along with a fine of

      Rs. 1,000/-, with the stipulation that in case of non-payment,

      he would undergo sentence of simple imprisonment for a period

      of two months. Benefit of
Section 428
of the Code of Criminal

      Procedure, 1973 will be given. We, however, accept the view

      taken by the High Court that the conviction under
Section 149
read with
Section 148
of the IPC cannot be sustained as the

      requirement of unlawful assembly to attract these provisions

      of the
IPC
, is not satisfied.
9
14.   Gurbachan Singh will surrender within 21 days to undergo the

      remaining   sentence.   In   case,   Gurbachan   Singh   does   not

      surrender within the said period, the authorities/court will

      take action in accordance with law to detain Gurbachan Singh,

      so as to undergo remaining sentence.
15.   The appeal is allowed in the aforesaid terms.
16.   Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
..................J.
                                                        (SANJIV KHANNA)



                                                   ..................J.
                                                     (SUDHANSHU DHULIA)

NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 07, 2022.