[Cites
10
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
Kirloskar Brothers Limited vs Ramcharan on 5 December, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
Hima Kohli
,
M.R. Shah
REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 8446-8447 OF 2022


         Kirloskar Brothers Limited                                …Appellant(s)


                                                 Versus


         Ramcharan and Ors.                                        …Respondent(s)




                                             JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.              Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

         and order dated 09.03.2018, passed by the learned Single Judge of the

         High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Indore in W.P. (S) No. 1083 of 2004

         and the impugned judgment and order dated 12.11.2018 passed by the

         Division Bench of the High Court in W.A. (S) No. 813 of 2018, by which

         the High Court has dismissed the said appeal(s) preferred by the

         appellant herein – employer confirming the judgment and order passed

         by the Industrial Tribunal ordering reinstatement and directing that the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
concerned employees / workmen were the employees of the appellant –
Date: 2022.12.05
17:30:04 IST
Reason:
1
principal employer, the principal employer – Kirloskar Brothers Limited

has preferred the present appeals.
2.    The case on behalf of the appellant – principal employer in a

nutshell is as under:-
2.1   That respondent Nos. 1 to 6 herein were contractual labourers of

the respondent No. 7, who was a contractor engaged by the appellant in

terms of contract dated 22.04.1995, which was renewed from time to

time, including on 01.08.1995.       Upon entering into the contract,

necessary compliances under
Contract Labour (Regulation and

Abolition) Act, 1970
(hereinafter referred to as “
CLRA Act
”) was

completed by the appellant and the respondent No. 7 - contractor. The

labour contract came to an end on 07.10.1996. Therefore, the services

of the respondents were dispensed with by the contractor. Accordingly,

the appellant filed a return under
CLRA Act
on 25.01.1997, which shows

that the contract with the respondent No. 7 had come to an end.
2.2   According to the appellant, all statutory payouts, including the

salary of the workmen were paid by the contractor since under the
CLRA

Act
, the ultimate responsibility would be upon the appellant if these were

not paid by the contractor. By letter dated 06.04.1996, the appellant
2
informed the contractor about deducting an amount of Rs. 7,224/- from

the bill payable, for non-deposit of PF contribution for May, 1995.
2.3      That thereafter, the respondents approached the Labour Court

praying inter alia that they were employees of the appellant, who have

been orally terminated by the respondent No. 7 and sought to be re-
instated in service. That the learned Labour Court vide judgment and

order dated 14.03.2002, on appreciation of evidence returned a

categorical finding that the Contractor had obtained license under the
CLRA Act
and that the contesting respondents were the employees of

the contractor and not of the appellant.
2.4      That upon appeal, the learned Industrial Tribunal passed an order

dated 05.02.2004, ordering reinstatement and holding that a contract

labourer automatically becomes an employee of the principal employer.

Thereafter, the Industrial Tribunal considered the definition of ‘employee’

and ‘employer’ as contained in
Sections 2(13)
and
2(14)
of the Madhya

Pradesh Industrial Relations Act, 1960 (hereinafter called as “MPIR

Act”).
2.5      The judgment and order passed by the Industrial Tribunal has

been confirmed by the learned Single Judge.         The writ appeal filed
3
against the judgment and order passed by the learned Single Judge has

been dismissed as not maintainable and hence the appellant has

preferred the present appeals challenging the judgment(s) and order(s)

passed by the learned Single Judge as well as by the Division Bench of

the High Court.
3.    Shri Anupam Lal Das, learned Senior Advocate has appeared on

behalf of the appellant.
3.1   Shri Das, learned senior counsel has vehemently submitted that as

such the contesting respondents herein were the employees employed

by the respondent No. 7 – contractor. It is submitted that therefore and

in the absence of a notification under
Section 10
of CLRA Act and there

being no allegations or findings with regard to the contract being a sham,

the contesting respondents could not have been held to be employees of

the appellant and not of the contractor.
3.2   It is submitted that neither
Section 10
of the CLRA Act, nor any

other provision in the Act, whether expressly or by necessary implication,

provides for absorption of contract labour in the absence of a notification

by an appropriate Government, namely, in the present case, the State

Government,       under    sub-section       (1)   of
Section   10
,   prohibiting

employment of contract labour, in any process, operation or other work
4
in any establishment. It is submitted that in the present case, admittedly,

no notification under
Section 10
of the CLRA Act has been issued. It is

submitted that therefore, in the absence of a notification under
Section

10
of the CLRA Act, which can only be passed by the appropriate

Government, the Industrial Court could have given relief to the workmen

only if they had claimed and proved by leading cogent evidence that the

contract with the contractor was a sham. It is further submitted that in the

present case, there was no such allegation or pleading or finding arrived

at by any Court that the contract between the parties was a sham and

not genuine. Heavy reliance is placed upon the decisions of this Court in

the case of
Steel Authority of India Ltd. and Ors. Vs. National Union

Waterfront Workers and Ors.
, (
2001) 7 SCC 1 (paras 65, 108, 109,

120 and 125) and International Airport Authority of India Vs.

International Air Cargo Workers’ Union and Anr.
(2009) 13 SCC 374

(paras 36, 37 to 40, 53.13, 56).
3.3      It is further submitted on behalf of the appellant that in the present

case, the Courts below were not justified in invoking the provisions of the

MPIR Act as against the provisions of the
CLRA Act
, which is

inconsistent in view of the provisions of
Article 254
of the Constitution of

India.
5
3.4   It is submitted that the learned Industrial Tribunal and the High

Court have materially erred in coming to a conclusion that the contesting

respondents were in the employment of the appellant despite there

being not a single document to buttress the same. It is submitted that

the only document filed by the contesting respondents was an ESI

identity card, which did not even bear the name of the appellant herein.

It is submitted that even the deduction of PF and/or PF contribution by

the appellant may not go against the appellant. It is further submitted

that on non-payment of the salary and/or PF contribution, it was the

responsibility of the appellant to pay the same and thereafter to deduct

the same from the amount due and payable to the contractor. Therefore,

the payment of contribution by the appellant cannot be a ground to

confer the employer-employee relationship between the appellant and

the contesting respondents.
3.5   It is submitted that in the present case, none of the respondents

had produced any appointment issued by the appellant nor were they

given any benefits, uniform or punching cards, which were being

provided to all regular employees of the appellant. The direct control

and supervision of the respondents was always with the respondent No.

7 – contractor. It is submitted that therefore, the only conclusion based
6
upon the record would be that the contesting respondents were the

employee of the contractor.
3.6     Making above submissions, it is prayed that the present appeals

be allowed.
4.      Having heard learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the

appellant and the material on record, it appears that the contesting

respondents herein were the contractual labourers of the respondent

No. 7 – contractor, who was a contractor engaged by the appellant in

terms of the contract dated 22.04.1995, which was renewed from time to

time.    It is an admitted position in the present case that no notification

under
Section 10
of the CLRA Act has been issued by the State

Government / appropriate Government, prohibiting the contract labour. It

also appears that upon entering into the contract, necessary compliance

under the
CLRA Act
was also completed by the appellant and the

respondent No. 7 – contractor. On the labour contract coming to an end,

the services of the contesting respondents were dispensed with by the

contractor.
4.1     On going through the entire material on record, no documentary

evidence was produced, by which it can be said that the contesting

respondents were the employees of the appellant. There is no provision

under
Section 10
of the CLRA Act that the workers/employees employed
7
by the contractor automatically become the employees of the appellant

and/or the employees of the contractor shall be entitled for automatic

absorption and/or they become the employees of the principal employer.

It is to be noted that even the direct control and supervision of the

contesting respondents was always with the contractor. There is no

evidence on record that any of the respondents were given any benefits,

uniform or punching cards by the appellant.
4.2   Under the contract and even under the provisions of the CLRA, a

duty was cast upon the appellant to pay all statutory dues, including

salary of the workmen, payment of PF contribution, and in case of non-

payment of the same by the contractor, after making such payment, the

same can be deducted from the contractor’s bill.     Therefore, merely

because sometimes the payment of salary was made and/or PF

contribution was paid by the appellant, which was due to non-payment of

the same by the contractor, the contesting respondents shall not

automatically become the employees of the principal employer –

appellant herein.
4.3   Even otherwise, as observed hereinabove, in the absence of a

notification under
Section 10
of the CLRA Act unless there are

allegations or findings with regard to a contract being sham, private

respondents herein, who are as such the workmen/employee of the
8
contractor, cannot be held to be employees of the appellant and not of

the contractor. At this stage, the decision of this Court in the case of
Steel Authority of India Ltd. and Ors. Vs. National Union Waterfront

Workers and Ors.
(supra) is required to be referred to. Following two

questions fell for consideration before this Court:-
A. whether the concept of automatic absorption of
                 contract labour in the establishment of the
                 principal employer on issuance of the abolition
                 notification, is implied in
Section 10
of the CLRA
                 Act; and

              B. whether on a contractor engaging contract
                 labour in connection with the work entrusted to
                 him by a principal employer, the relationship of
                 master and servant between him (the principal
                 employer) and the contract labour, emerges.
4.4   After considering various decisions of this Court on the point, in

paragraph 125, it was concluded as under:-
“125.     The upshot of the above discussion is outlined
      thus:
(1)(a) Before 28-1-1986, the determination of the
      question whether the Central Government or the State
      Government is the appropriate Government in relation to
      an establishment, will depend, in view of the definition of
      the expression “appropriate Government” as stood in the
CLRA Act
, on the answer to a further question, is the
      industry under consideration carried on by or under the
      authority of the Central Government or does it pertain to
      any specified controlled industry, or the establishment of
      any railway, cantonment board, major port, mine or oilfield
      or the establishment of banking or insurance company? If
      the answer is in the affirmative, the Central Government
      will be the appropriate Government; otherwise in relation
9
to any other establishment the Government of the State in
which the establishment was situated, would be the
appropriate Government;
(b) After the said date in view of the new definition
of that expression, the answer to the question
referred to
above
, has to be found in clause (a) of
Section 2
of the
Industrial Disputes Act; if (i) the Central Government
company/undertaking concerned or any undertaking
concerned is included therein eo nomine, or (ii) any
industry is carried on (a) by or under the authority of the
Central Government, or (b) by a railway company; or (c)
by a specified controlled industry, then the Central
Government will be the appropriate Government;
otherwise in relation to any other establishment, the
Government of the State in which that other
establishment is situated, will be the appropriate
Government.
(2)(a) A notification under
Section 10(1)
of the CLRA Act
prohibiting employment of contract labour in any process,
operation or other work in any establishment has to be
issued by the appropriate Government:
(1) after consulting with the Central Advisory
       Board or the State Advisory Board, as the
       case may be, and
   (2) having regard to
(i) conditions of work and benefits
       provided for the contract labour in the
       establishment in question, and
(ii) other relevant factors including those
       mentioned in sub-section (2) of
Section 10
;
(b) Inasmuch as the impugned notification issued by
the Central Government on 9-12-1976 does not satisfy
the aforesaid requirements of
Section 10
, it is quashed
but we do so prospectively i.e. from the date of this
judgment and subject to the clarification that on the basis
of this judgment no order passed or no action taken giving
effect to the said notification on or before the date of this
judgment, shall be called in question in any tribunal or
10
court including a High Court if it has otherwise attained
finality and/or it has been implemented.
(3) Neither
Section 10
of the CLRA Act nor any
other provision in the Act, whether expressly or by
necessary implication, provides for automatic absorption
of contract labour on issuing a notification by the
appropriate Government under sub-section (1) of
Section
10
, prohibiting employment of contract labour, in any
process, operation or other work in any establishment.
Consequently the principal employer cannot be required
to order absorption of the contract labour working in the
establishment concerned.
(4) We overrule the judgment of this Court in
Air
India
case [(1997) 9 SCC 377] prospectively and declare
that any direction issued by any industrial adjudicator/any
court including the High Court, for absorption of contract
labour following the judgment in
Air India
case [(1997) 9
SCC 377] shall hold good and that the same shall not be
set aside, altered or modified on the basis of this
judgment in cases where such a direction has been given
effect to and it has become final.
(5) On issuance of prohibition notification under
Section 10(1)
of the CLRA Act prohibiting employment of
contract labour or otherwise, in an industrial dispute
brought before it by any contract labour in regard to
conditions of service, the industrial adjudicator will have to
consider the question whether the contractor has been
interposed either on the ground of having undertaken to
produce any given result for the establishment or for
supply of contract labour for work of the establishment
under a genuine contract or is a mere ruse/camouflage to
evade compliance with various beneficial legislations so
as to deprive the workers of the benefit thereunder. If the
contract is found to be not genuine but a mere
camouflage, the so-called contract labour will have to be
treated as employees of the principal employer who shall
be directed to regularise the services of the contract
labour in the establishment concerned subject to the
conditions as may be specified by it for that purpose in
the light of para 6 hereunder.
11
(6) If the contract is found to be genuine and
      prohibition notification under
Section 10(1)
of the CLRA
      Act in respect of the establishment concerned has been
      issued by the appropriate Government, prohibiting
      employment of contract labour in any process, operation
      or other work of any establishment and where in such
      process, operation or other work of the establishment the
      principal employer intends to employ regular workmen, he
      shall give preference to the erstwhile contract labour, if
      otherwise found suitable and, if necessary, by relaxing the
      condition as to maximum age appropriately, taking into
      consideration the age of the workers at the time of their
      initial employment by the contractor and also relaxing the
      condition as to academic qualifications other than
      technical qualifications.”


4.5   Thus, as observed and held by this Court, neither
Section 10
of the

CLRA Act nor any other provision in the Act, expressly or by necessary

implication, provides for automatic absorption of contract labour on

issuing a notification by the appropriate Government under sub-section

(1) of
Section 10
, prohibiting employment of contract labour, in any

process, operation or any other work in any establishment and

consequently, the principal employer cannot be required to order

absorption of the contract labour working in the establishment

concerned. It has further been observed and held by this Court in the

aforesaid decision that on issuance of prohibition notification under
Section 10(1)
of the CLRA Act, prohibiting employment of contract labour

or otherwise, in case of an industrial dispute brought before it by any

contract labour in regard to conditions of service, the industrial

adjudicator will have to consider the question whether the contractor has
12
been interposed either on the ground of having undertaken to produce

any given result for the establishment or for supply of contract labour for

work of the establishment under a genuine contract or is a mere

ruse/camouflage to evade compliance with various beneficial legislations

so as to deprive the workers of the benefits thereunder.

4.6   In the present case, neither any notification under
Section 10(1)
of

the CLRA Act has been issued prohibiting the contract labour, nor there

are allegations and/or even findings that the contract is sham and bogus

and/or camouflage.
4.7   In the case of
International Airport Authority of India Vs.

International Air Cargo Workers’ Union and Anr.
(supra), after

considering the decision of this Court in the case of
Steel Authority of

India Ltd. and Ors. Vs. National Union Waterfront Workers and Ors.
(supra), it has been observed and held by this Court that where there is

no abolition of contract labour under
Section 10
of the CLRA Act, but the

contract labour contends that the contract between the principal

employer and the contractor is sham and nominal, the remedy is purely

under the
ID Act
. It is further observed that the industrial adjudicator can

grant the relief sought if it finds that the contract between the principal

employer and the contractor is sham, nominal and merely a camouflage

to deny employment benefits to the employee and that there is in fact a

direct employment, by applying tests like: who pays the salary; who has
13
the power to remove/dismiss from service or initiate disciplinary action;

who can tell the employee the way in which the work should be done, in

short, who has direct control over the employee. It is further observed

that where there is no notification under
Section 10
of the CLRA Act and

where it is not proved in the industrial adjudication that the contract was

a sham/nominal and camouflage, then the question of directing the

principal employer to absorb or regularise the services of the contract

labour does not arise. It has further been observed in paragraphs 38

and 39 as under :-
“38. The tests that are applied to find out whether a
     person is an employee or an independent contractor may
     not automatically apply in finding out whether the contract
     labour agreement is a sham, nominal and is a mere
     camouflage. For example, if the contract is for supply of
     labour, necessarily, the labour supplied by the contractor
     will work under the directions, supervision and control of
     the principal employer but that would not make the worker
     a direct employee of the principal employer, if the salary is
     paid by a contractor, if the right to regulate the
     employment is with the contractor, and the ultimate
     supervision and control lies with the contractor.
39. The principal employer only controls and directs
     the work to be done by a contract labour, when such
     labour is assigned/allotted/sent to him. But it is the
     contractor as employer, who chooses whether the worker
     is to be assigned/allotted to the principal employer or
     used otherwise. In short, worker being the employee of
     the contractor, the ultimate supervision and control lies
     with the contractor as he decides where the employee will
     work and how long he will work and subject to what
     conditions. Only when the contractor assigns/sends the
14
worker to work under the principal employer, the worker
      works under the supervision and control of the principal
      employer but that is secondary control. The primary
      control is with the contractor.”


4.8   Applying the law
laid down by
this Court in the aforesaid two

decisions to the facts of the case on hand and in the absence of any

notification under
Section 10
of the CLRA Act and in the absence of any

allegations and/or findings that the contract was sham and camouflage,

both the Industrial Tribunal as well as the High Court have committed a

serious error in reinstating the contesting respondents and directing the

appellant – principal employer to absorb them as their employees. The

parties shall be governed by the
CLRA Act
and relief, if any, could have

been granted under the provisions of the
CLRA Act
and not under the

MPIR Act.
5.    In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the present

appeals are allowed. The impugned judgment(s) and order(s) passed by

the High Court in W.P.(S) No. 1083 of 2004 and W.A. No. 813 of 2018 as

well as the judgment and order passed by the Industrial Tribunal are

hereby quashed and set aside. The judgment and award passed by the

Labour Court is hereby restored.
15
Present appeals are accordingly allowed. However, in the facts

and circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
………………………………….J.
                                           [M.R. SHAH]


NEW DELHI;                              ………………………………….J.
DECEMBER 05, 2022.                         [HIMA KOHLI]
16