[Cites
11
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
Kamala Neti (Dead) Thr. Lrs. vs Special Land Acquisition Officer . on 9 December, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
Krishna Murari
,
M. R. Shah
REPORTABLE


                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6901 OF 2022


                 Kamla Neti (Dead) through LRs                           …Appellants


                                                 Versus


                 The Special Land Acquisition
                 Officer & Ors.                                         …Respondents




                                              JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.      Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

                 and order passed by the High Court of Orissa at Cuttack in Land

                 Acquisition Appeal No.79 of 2015 by which the High Court has

                 dismissed the said appeal preferred by the appellant herein and has
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Sanjay Kumar
Date: 2022.12.09
15:43:24 IST
confirmed the order passed by the learned Reference Court, the
Reason:
original applicant has preferred the present appeal.
1
2.    The dispute is with respect to the apportionment of the amount

of compensation with respect to the land acquired. The land originally

stood recorded in the name of late Satyananda Negi a common

ancestor of the appellant and the other coparceners.        The said

Satyananada died leaving behind his two sons namely Chakradhar

and Gajadhar. Chakradhar died leaving behind his four sons namely

Chintamani, Parakhita, Basudev and Kulamani and one daughter

Kamla (the appellant herein). Similarly, Gajadhar died leaving behind

his two daughters namely Kumari and Kumudini. With respect to the

land acquired, Khasra No.81, Mouza Kopsingha which originally stood

recorded in the name of late Satyananda Negi, the amount of

compensation was settled at Rs.5,97,35,754/­ in favour of the

respondent nos. 2 to 5 herein i.e. Kadamba Negi, Janhabi Negi,

Basudev Negi, Lalita Negi and daughters of Gajadhar i.e. Kumari

Dhrua and Kumudini Majhi.
2.1   At the instance of the appellant claiming to be the daughter of

Chakradhar and claiming 1/5th share in the amount of compensation a

reference was made to the Reference Court under
Section 30
of the

Land Acquisition Act. The Reference Court – the learned Senior Civil

Judge, Sundargarh rejected the claim of the appellant/share of the
2
appellant in the compensation, mainly on the ground that as the

parties belong to Scheduled Tribe Community, the provisions of the
Hindu Succession Act
shall not be applicable and therefore the

appellant being a daughter shall not be entitled to the share in the

amount of compensation. The order passed by the learned Reference

Court denying the share in the amount of compensation has been

confirmed by the High Court by the impugned judgment and order.

Hence, the present appeal against the impugned judgment and order

passed by the High Court.
3.    Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has heavily

relied upon the decision of this Court in the case of Madhu Kishwar &

Ors. Versus State of Bihar & Ors., (1996) 5 SCC 125 in support of his

submission that the appellant being a daughter shall be entitled to the

share in the amount of compensation even applying the provisions of

the
Hindu Succession Act
.
3.1   It is vehemently submitted that as observed and held by this

Court denial of right to succession to Scheduled Tribe women would

amount to deprivation of the right to livelihood under
Article 21
of the

Constitution of India. It is submitted that as observed and held by this
3
Court exclusive succession in the male line of heirs must remain in

suspended animation till the immediate female relatives of the last

male tenant continue to depend their livelihood on the land.



3.2   It is submitted that as observed and held by this Court in the

aforesaid decision, to deny the equal right to the women/daughter

belonging to Scheduled Tribe would be gender­based discrimination

and the daughter cannot be denied the right in the joint family

property in which all coparceners have the equal share.
Making the above submissions and relying upon above decision,

it is prayed to allow the present appeal and to hold that the appellant

being daughter of one of the coparceners shall be entitled to 1/5 th

share in the amount of compensation.
4.    Present appeal is vehemently opposed by Dr. Kedarnath

Tripathy, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the contesting

respondents.
4.1   It is submitted that in the present case the parties are members

of the Scheduled Tribe. The suit land belongs to one Satyananda Negi
4
and after his death, the said land devolved upon his two sons

Chakradhar and Gajadhar with the right of survivorship being

available. The said Chakradhar passed away in the year 1948 before

the commencement of
Constitution of India and the Hindu Succession

Act, 1954
. That after the death of Chakradhar and his wife, his share

in the property stood devolved upon his four sons who held 1/4 th share

each by way of succession.        After more than 60 years of such

succession by the four sons holding 1/4 th shares each, their properties

were acquired by the Government for establishment of Ultra Mega

Power Project at Bhedabahal, District Sundargarh. The compensation

for the acquisition of land was determined and the same was duly paid

to the four sons – respondents herein being the owners of the property.

It is submitted that thereafter the appellant herein filed an application

before the L.A.O., Sundargarh claiming their 1/5 th share in the

compensation being one of the descendants of the Satyananda Negi.

That the matter was referred to the Court of Senior Civil Judge,

Sundargarh in a matter of reference under
Section 30
of the Land

Acquisition Act made by the Special Land Acquisition Officer.        The

learned Reference Court dismissed the application by holding that she

is not entitled to claim any amount in the amount of compensation as

being member of the Scheduled Tribe, the provisions of Hindu
5
Succession Act
shall not be applicable and therefore, she would not

have any right of survivorship in the joint family property. It is

submitted that considering the provisions of the
Hindu Succession Act
more particularly
Section 2(2)
, the High Court has not committed any

error.
4.2      It is submitted that the appellant is not entitled to receive any

share in the suit property by virtue of
Section 8
of the Hindu

Succession Act.      It is submitted that her father Chakradhar passed

away way back in the year 1948 before the enactment of the
Hindu

Succession Act, 1954
and even before the Constitution of India. It is

submitted that apart from the fact that in view of
Section 2(2)
of the

Hindu Succession Act, 1954, the
Hindu Succession Act
, will not be

applicable to the members of the Scheduled Tribe, without any explicit

clause in the
Hindu Succession Act, the Hindu Succession Act
cannot

be given a retrospective operation to provide compensation to the

appellant.
4.3      It is further submitted that as per
Section 2(2)
of the Hindu

Succession Act, the Act shall not be applicable to the members of the

Scheduled Tribe. It is submitted that in the case of
Labishwar Manjhi
6
vs. Pran Manjhi and Ors.
, (2000) 8 SCC 587, it is clearly held that if

the members of the Scheduled Tribe follow customary and practices of

Hinduism, then and then only the
Hindu Succession Act
would be

applicable.   It is submitted that in the present case there is no

evidence on record to prove that the parties have Hinduised.      It is

submitted therefore
Hindu Succession Act
shall not be applicable to

the parties herein.
4.4   It is further submitted that as held by this Court in a catena of

decisions whenever there is a conflict between the law and equity, the

law would prevail. Reliance is placed on the decision of this Court in

the case of
B. Premananda and Ors. Vs. Mohan Koikal and Ors.
,

(2011) 4 SCC 266.
It is submitted that as observed and held by this

Court in the case of
J.P. Bansal vs. State of Rajasthan & Anr.
AIR

(2003) SC 1405 and State of Jharkhand & Anr. Vs. Govind Singh,

JT 2004 (10) SC 349, it is for the legislature to amend the law and not

the Court.
4.5   It is submitted that this Hon’ble Court on many occasions denied

extending the benefits of
Hindu Succession Act
to the tribal
7
communities unless the same has been notified by the Central

Government.    Reliance is placed on the observations made by this

Court in the case of Madhu Kishwar (supra).
Making above submissions, it is prayed to dismiss the present

appeal.
5.   Heard learned counsel for the respective parties at length.
6.   A short question which is posed for consideration of this Court is

whether the appellant/petitioner being the daughter is entitled to the

share in the compensation with respect to the land acquired, on

survivorship basis under the provisions of
Hindu Succession Act
? At

the outset, it is required to be noted that the appellant belongs to

tribal community and is a member of Scheduled Tribe. As per
Section

2(2)
of the Hindu Succession Act, the Hindu Succession Act will not be

applicable to the members of the Scheduled Tribe. Therefore, as such

as rightly observed by the High Court the appellant cannot claim any

right of survival under the provisions of the
Hindu Succession Act
.

Therefore, so long as
Section 2(2)
of the Hindu Succession Act stands

and there is no amendment, the parties shall be governed by the
8
provisions of
Section 2(2)
of the Hindu Succession Act. Therefore,

though on equity we may be with the appellant being daughter and

more than approximately 70 years have passed after the enactment of

the
Hindu Succession Act
and much water has flown thereafter and

though we are prima facie of the opinion that not to grant the benefit

of survivorship to the daughter in the property of the father can be

said to be bad in law and cannot be justified in the present scenario,

unless
Section 2(2)
of the Hindu Succession Act is amended, the

parties being member of the Scheduled Tribe are governed by
Section

2(2)
of the Hindu Succession Act. It is observed and held by this Court

in the case of
Mohan Koikal
(supra) that when there is a conflict

between the law and equity, the law would prevail. Equity can only

supplement the law. There is a gap in it but it cannot supplant the

law.
6.1    If the claim of the appellant on the basis of the survivorship

under the
Hindu Succession Act
is accepted
in that case
it would

tantamount to amend the law. It is for the legislature to amend the

law and not the Court.
9
6.2   Now so far as the reliance placed upon the decision of this Court

in the case of Madhu Kishwar (supra) by the learned counsel for the

appellant is concerned, at the outset it is required to be noted that by

the majority decision this Court refused to strike down the provisions

of
Chota Nagpur Tenancy Act, 1908
which provided the succession to

property in the male line of heirs and denying the right to Succession

to the daughter, on the touchstone of
Article 14.
However, this Court

read into the said provisions and observed and held that the

intervening right of female dependents/descendants under
Sections

7
and
8
of the Act shall be carved out, by suspending the exclusive

right of the male succession till the female dependent/descendent

chooses other means of livelihood manifested by abandonment or

release of the holding kept for the purpose. This Court by observing so

disposed of the writ petition. However, by disposing the writ petition

this Court issued direction to the State of Bihar to comprehensively

examine the question on the premise of our constitutional ethos and

the need voiced to amend the law.
6.3   This   Court   also   directed     to   examine   the   question   of

recommending to the Central Government whether the Central

Government consider it just and necessary to withdraw the exemptions
10
given under the
Hindu Succession Act and the Indian Succession Act
in so far as the applicability of these provisions to the Scheduled

Tribes in the State of Bihar is concerned.
6.4   However, Mr. Justice K. Ramaswamy in his concurrent judgment

has further observed and held that the provisions of the
Hindu

Succession Act and the Indian Succession Act
would apply to the

Scheduled Tribes, the general principles contained therein being

consistent with justice, equity, fairness, justness and good conscience

would apply to them. Thereafter it is held that the Scheduled Tribe

women would succeed to the estate of their parent, brother, husband,

as heirs by intestate succession and inherit the property with equal

share with the male heir with absolute rights as per the general

principles of the
Hindu Succession Act, 1956
, as amended and

interpreted by this Court. However, it is required to be noted that the

same is minority view.
7.    Under the circumstances in view of
Section 2(2)
of Hindu

Succession Act and the appellant being the member of the Scheduled

Tribe and as the female member of the Scheduled Tribe is specifically

excluded, the appellant is not entitled to any right of survivorship
11
under the provisions of
Hindu Succession Act
.       No error has been

committed by the High Court.      The appeal therefore deserves to be

dismissed and is accordingly dismissed.
7.1   Before parting, we may observe that there may not be any

justification to deny the right of survivorship so far as the female

member of the Tribal is concerned. When the daughter belonging to

the non­tribal is entitled to the equal share in the property of the

father, there is no reason to deny such right to the daughter of the

Tribal community. Female tribal is entitled to parity with male tribal

in intestate succession.   To deny the equal right to the daughter

belonging to the tribal even after a period of 70 years of the

Constitution of India under which right to equality is guaranteed, it is

high time for the Central Government to look into the matter and if

required, to amend the provisions of the
Hindu Succession Act
by

which the
Hindu Succession Act
is not made applicable to the

members of the Scheduled Tribe.
7.2   Therefore, though we dismiss the present appeal, it is directed to

examine the question by the Central Government to consider it just

and necessary to withdraw the exemptions provided under the Hindu
12
Succession Act
in so far as the applicability of the provisions of the
Hindu Succession Act
to the Scheduled Tribes and whether to bring a

suitable amendment or not.       We hope and trust that the Central

Government will look into the matter and take an appropriate decision

taking into consideration the right to equality guaranteed under
Articles 14
and
21
of the Constitution of India.
…………………………..J.
                                              (M. R. SHAH)




                                               …………………………...J.
                                             (KRISHNA MURARI)
New Delhi;
December 9, 2022.
13