[Cites
7
, Cited by
7
]
Supreme Court of India
Ram Shiroman Mishra vs Vishwanath Pandey on 8 August, 2012
Bench:
Ranjana Prakash Desai
,
Aftab Alam
NON-REPORTABLE

                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.7225 OF 2008


MR. RAM SHIROMAN MISHRA           …            PETITIONER

           Vs.

MR. VISHWANATH PANDEY        …           RESPONDENT

                                    ORDER
Delay condoned.
2.    The petitioner has challenged order  dated  27/4/2007  passed  by  the
Delhi High Court in Writ Petition (Civil) No.3042 of 2007.  The case of  the
petitioner, in short, is that the respondent  has  taken  advantage  of  the
kindness shown by him by allowing him to stay in  his  house  free  of  cost
from 1988 to 1991.  According to  the  petitioner,  when  he  requested  the
respondent to vacate his house and, in  fact  got  his  house  vacated,  the
respondent was annoyed.  He, therefore,  raised  a   dispute  to  the  Union
falsely alleging that he was working with Messrs  Ram  Saroman  Mishra  Jali
Factory of the petitioner as a machine-man since 1986  and  his  last  drawn
wages were Rs.1,100/- per month.  He further alleged that his services  were
terminated illegally in violation of
Section 25F
of the Industrial  Disputes
Act (for short, “the
ID Act
”) on 31/12/1991 and his wages for the months  of
1/10/1991 to 31/12/1991  were  also  not  paid.   He  claimed  that  he  was
unemployed since the date of his termination and  he  is  entitled  to  full
back wages and continuity in service.   According to the petitioner he  does
not own any jali factory as alleged and therefore there is  no  question  of
employing the petitioner as a machine-man.
3.    The Secretary (Labour),  Delhi  Administration,  Delhi,  referred  the
said dispute  to  the  Labour  Court,  Tis  Hazari,  Delhi.   The  terms  of
reference were as under :
“Whether the services of Shri Vishwa Nath Pandey have been  terminated
      illegally and/or unjustifiably by the management and, if so,  to  what
      relief is he entitled  and  what  directions  are  necessary  in  this
      respect?”
4.    Before the Labour Court, the respondent filed  an  affidavit.   It  is
the case of the petitioner that he  was  not  served  with  the  notice  and
consequently, he did not appear before the Labour Court. The  award  of  the
Labour Court however notes that the management was duly served of the  claim
but no written statement was filed by it and, therefore,  it  was  proceeded
ex-parte.  The Labour Court observed that the  material  on  record  clearly
showed that the respondent had served the management for more than one  year
when his services were terminated on 31/12/1991  without  any  valid  reason
and in violation of
Section 2(OO)
of the ID Act.  The Labour  Court  further
observed that since there was no compliance of
Section 25F
of  the  ID  Act,
the retrenchment was illegal.  The Labour  Court  ordered  reinstatement  of
the respondent with continuity in service and full back-wages calculated  at
the last drawn wages which were Rs.1,100/- per month.
5.    According to the petitioner,  he  was  unaware  of  this  award  since
notice was not served on him.  He came to know about this on 19/3/2003  when
some person came to his house and informed him that  he  has  to  appear  on
20/3/2003  at  10.00  a.m.  in  the  Implementation  Cell.   The  petitioner
thereafter moved an application for setting aside the ex-parte award  before
the Labour Court.  The Labour Court vide its order dated  5/3/2005  rejected
the application of the petitioner.   The  Labour  Court  observed  that  the
application was filed by the petitioner after publication of the  award  and
after issuance of the recovery certificate i.e. after the award  had  become
enforceable under the provisions of the
ID Act
.   The  Labour  Court  relied
upon the judgment of this court in
Sangham Tape Co.  v.  Hans Raj
, (2005)  9
SCC 331 to come to a conclusion  that  after  the  award  is  published  and
recovery certificate is issued, the Industrial Tribunal  and/or  the  Labour
Court becomes functus officio.  The Labour Court, therefore,  did  not  have
any jurisdiction to entertain the application for setting aside the award.
6.    The petitioner challenged the said order before the Delhi High  Court.
  The Delhi High Court dismissed the writ petition filed by the  petitioner.
 The High Court observed that no explanation was given by the petitioner  as
to why no steps were  taken  to  challenge  the  award  expeditiously.   The
judgment of the High Court indicates that the High Court was  not  satisfied
with the explanation given by the  petitioner  and  the  writ  petition  was
rejected on the ground of delay and laches.  Being  aggrieved  by
the  said
judgment
, the petitioner has preferred this special leave petition.
7.     On  20/7/2012  we  heard  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  and
reserved the judgment.
8.     The High Court has not referred to the  judgment  of  this  court  in
Sangham Tape Co.  The High Court has simply dealt with the aspect of  delay.
But, since it has confirmed the  Labour  Court’s  view  which  is  based  on
Sangham Tape Co., it was necessary for us to examine  whether  the  reliance
placed by the Labour Court on
the said judgment
is  apt.   While  examining
this,  we  noticed   that   on   the   question   whether   the   Industrial
Tribunal/Labour  Court  becomes  functus  officio  after  30  days  of   the
pronouncement/publication of the award and it loses all powers to recall  an
ex-parte award on an application made by the aggrieved party after  30  days
from the date of pronouncement/publication of the award, two Division  Bench
decisions have taken apparently conflicting view. In  Sangam  Tape   Co.,  a
two Judges Bench held and observed that an application for recall of an  ex-
parte award may be entertained by the Industrial Tribunal/Labour Court  only
in case it is  filed  before  the  expiry  of  30  days  from  the  date  of
pronouncement/publication of award. A contrary view  was  taken   by  a  two
Judges Bench  to  which  one  of  us  (Aftab  Alam,  J.)
was  a  party,  in
Radhakrishna Mani Tripathi v. L.  H.  Patel
,  (2009)  2  SCC  81.
In  both
cases, the court referred to  and  relied  upon  the  earlier  decisions  in
Grindlays Bank Ltd. v. Central Government Industrial Tribunal
, (1980)  Supp.
SCC 420 and Anil Sood v. Presiding Officer, Labour
Court II, (2001)  10  SCC
534, but read and interpreted those two  decisions  completely  differently.
Noticing this conflict, a Division Bench  in   M/S.  Haryana  Suraj  Malting
Ltd. V.  Phool Chand  (SLP (C) No. 6091/2010, to  which  one  of  us  (Aftab
Alam, J.) was a party has referred the said issue to a larger Bench.   Since
the same issue is involved in this case,  it  is  not  possible  for  us  to
dispose of this matter.  We will have to await the decision  of  the  larger
Bench. In the circumstances, we grant leave.
9.    Office Report dated 26/4/2012 indicates that though show cause  notice
was issued to the  respondent,  neither  AD  card  nor  unserved  cover  was
received back  by  the  office  and,  therefore,  the  petitioner  filed  an
application for leave to serve the  respondent  by  publication.   The  said
application  was  granted.   The  respondent   has   been   served   through
publication and to that effect, the petitioner has filed an  affidavit  with
proof of publication.  Though served, the respondent  has  neither  appeared
in person nor has he appeared through a counsel.  In the circumstances,  the
execution of award bearing No.ID-375/1992 titled as “Management of M/s.  Sri
Ram Shiromani Mishra Jali Factory, Plot  No.14A,  Gali  No.7,  Cement  Ghati
Road, Anand Road  Industrial  Area,  New  Delhi   versus   Sh.  Vishwa  Nath
Pandey, C/o. Jan Jagran Morcha,  CS  No.9/95,  Rakhi  Market,  Jakhira,  New
Delhi” dated 5/6/1992 passed by the Labour  Court,  Tis  Hazari,  Delhi,  is
stayed.  Registry is directed to call for the record from the Labour  Court,
Tis Hazari, Delhi.   Registry is further directed to  tag  this  matter   to
Special Leave Petition (c) No. 6091/2010.
……………………………………………..J.
                                (AFTAB ALAM)


                                                       ……………………………………………..J.
                                                     (RANJANA PRAKASH DESAI)

NEW DELHI.
AUGUST 08, 2012.