[Cites
22
, Cited by
123
]
Supreme Court of India
Patasi Devi vs State Of Haryana & Ors on 29 August, 2012
Equivalent citations: AIR 2013 SUPREME COURT 856, 2012 (9) SCC 503, 2012 AIR SCW 5294, 2012 (4) AIR JHAR R 739, 2012 (8) SCALE 416, (2012) 2 CLR 813 (SC), (2013) 1 LANDLR 33, AIR 2012 SC (CIVIL) 2740, (2012) 5 ALL WC 5324, (2012) 4 ICC 1, (2013) 1 ANDHLD 20, (2012) 8 SCALE 416, (2013) 2 CIVLJ 371, (2012) 3 CURCC 181
Bench:
Sudhansu Jyoti Mukhopadhaya
,
G.S. Singhvi
REPORTABLE
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6183   OF 2012
                   (Arising out of SLP(C)No.26705 of 2010


    Patasi Devi                               ...Appellant


                                   versus




    State of Haryana & Ors.                           ...Respondents
O  R  D  E  R



                Leave granted.
By notification dated 15.12.2006 issued under
Section  4(1)
of  the  Land  Acquisition  Act,  1894  (for  short,  'the  Act'),  the
    Government of Haryana proposed the acquisition of land measuring 231.04
    acres (48.23 acres of village Bahayapur, 139.25 acres of  village  Para
    and 43.56 acres of village Bohar, Tehsil and District Rohtak)  for  the
    development of Residential Sector 36, Rohtak under  the
Haryana  Urban
    Development Authority  Act,  1977
by  the  Haryana  Urban  Development
    Authority (HUDA). After considering the report of the Land  Acquisition
    Collector, who is supposed to have heard the objections  filed  by  the
    landowners and other interested persons under Section 5A(1), the  State
    Government issued declaration dated 14.12.2007 under
Section 6
of  the
    Act. The  award  was  passed  by  the  Land  Acquisition  Collector  on
    9.12.2009.
The appellant, who owned 14 kanals 8 marlas  land  situated
    in the revenue estate of Mouza Para, challenged the acquisition of  her
    land in Writ Petition No. 2494/2010. She pleaded that in  the  garb  of
    acquiring land for a public purpose, the State Government  misused  its
    power under
Sections 4
and
6
of the Act for the benefit  of  respondent
    No.6 M/s. Ujjawal Coloniser Pvt. Ltd. of Delhi,  who  was  constructing
    residential colony known as 'Sun City'; that her land should have  been
    exempted/released in terms of the policy framed by the State Government
    because  she  had  constructed  a  house  prior  to  the  issuance   of
    notification  under
Section  4(1)
of  the  Act;  that  she  has  been
    discriminated inasmuch as  land  belonging  to  M/s.  Sharad  Farm  and
    Holdings Pvt. Ltd. had been released vide letter  dated  4.9.2008,  but
    her land was not released and  that  the  acquisition  proceedings  are
    vitiated due to non-application of mind by  the  functionaries  of  the
    State Government and violation of the rules of natural justice.
In the counter affidavit filed by respondent Nos. 1 and  3,
    an objection was raised to the maintainability of the writ petition  on
    the ground that the same was filed  after  passing  of  the  award.  On
    merits, respondent Nos.1 and 3 did not  dispute  that  the  appellant's
    land was surrounded by the land of respondent No.6, who was  developing
    residential colony but pleaded that the acquisition was  for  a  public
    purpose  i.e.  development  of  Sector  36,   Rohtak.   The   plea   of
    discrimination raised by the appellant was contested by respondent Nos.
    1 and 3 by asserting that the appellant had not filed objections  under
    Section 5A(1).
The High Court did not decide the appellant's challenge  to
    the acquisition of her land and dismissed the writ petition  solely  on
    the ground that it was filed after passing of the award.  For  arriving
    at this conclusion, the High Court relied upon the  judgments  of  this
    Court  in
Municipal  Corporation  of  Greater  Bombay  v.   Industrial
    Development and Investment Company  (P)  Limited
(1996)  11  SCC  501,
    Municipal Council, Ahmednagar, v. Shah Hyder  Beig  (
2002)  2  SCC  48,
    C.Padma v. Deputy Secretary to the Government of Tamil  Nadu
(
1997)  2
    SCC 627, Star Wire (India) Ltd. v. State of Haryana
(1996) 11  SCC  698
    and M/s. Swaika Properties Pvt. Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan JT 2008  (2)
    SC 280.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties  and  scanned
    the record. We shall first consider the question whether the High Court
    was right in non-suiting the appellant without examining the merits  of
    her challenge to the acquisition proceedings. For this purpose, it will
    be apposite to note that in the counter affidavit filed  on  behalf  of
    respondent Nos.1 and 3 before the High Court  it  was  nowhere  pleaded
    that possession of the appellant’s land and  house  was  taken  by  the
    particular official / officer on a particular date and was handed  over
    to the Estate Officer, HUDA, Rohtak. Not only  this,  no  document  was
    produced evidencing dispossession of the appellant. This is the  reason
    why the High Court did not record a  finding  that  possession  of  the
    appellant's land had been taken after passing of the award.
In  the  counter  affidavit  filed  before   this   Court,
    respondent Nos. 1  and  3  have,  for  the  first  time,  averred  that
    possession of the acquired land was  handed  over  to  Estate  Officer,
    HUDA, Rohtak on the date of award and as per official assessment report
    the construction had been raised after the issue of notification  under
Section 4
. This statement  is  contained  in  para  6  of  the  counter
    affidavit, which is reproduced below:
“6. That the award related to the abovesaid notification was
                announced on 9.12.2009 and the possession was handed over to
                Estate Officer, HUDA, Rohtak on the same day. It is relevant
                to mention here that as per the official  assessment  report
                of  the  constructed   area   regarding   the   above   said
                notification the land of the petitioner was  vacant  at  the
                time of u/s-4 and the construction has been raised after the
                survey and issuance of the notification u/s-4. However since
                it  is  also  subsequent  to  declaration  of  the  area  as
                controlled area and  the  same  is  without  permission  and
                unauthorized one.”




                In the separate counter affidavit filed by Estate  Officer,
    HUDA, Rohatak (respondent No.2) before this Court, a  similar  averment
    has been made albeit without disclosing the name of the person  who  is
    said to have delivered possession of the acquired land to  him  on  the
    date of the award. Not only this, while making that  averment  in  para
    5(v) of the counter affidavit, the officer  has  used  white  fluid  to
    score out something recorded  after  the  words  “handed  over  to  the
    answering respondent”. By doing so the concerned officer has  tried  to
    hide the truth from this Court. That apart, what is most surprising  is
    that neither before the High Court nor before this Court  the  official
    respondents have produced any document to  show  that  actual  or  even
    symbolic possession of the acquired land was taken  by  the  particular
    officer/official and the same was handed over to the particular officer
    of HUDA. Therefore,  there  is  no  escape  from  the  conclusion  that
    respondent Nos.1 to 3 have failed to discharge the onus to  prove  that
    after passing of the award, possession of the acquired  land  had  been
    taken and delivered to the Estate Officer, HUDA.
In
Banda Development Authority, Banda v. Moti  Lal  Agarwal
(2011) 5 SCC 394, this Court considered as to what should be  the  mode
    of taking possession of the land acquired under the  Act,  referred  to
    the judgments in
Balwant Narayan Bhagde v. M.D. Bhagwat
(
1976)  1  SCC
    700, Balmokand Khatri Educational and  Industrial  Trust  v.  State  of
    Punjab
(1996) 4 SCC 212 , P.K. Kalburqi v. State of Karnataka (
2005) 12
    SCC 489, NTPC Ltd. v. Mahesh Dutta
(
2009) 8 SCC 339, Sita  Ram  Bhandar
    Society v. Govt. of NCT of Delhi
(
2009) 10 SCC 501, Brij  Pal  Bhargava
    v. State of UP
(2011)5 SCC 413 and culled out the following principles:
“i) No hard and fast rule can be laid down as  to  what  act
               would constitute taking of possession of the acquired land.
ii) If the acquired land is vacant, the act of the concerned
               State authority to go to the spot and  prepare  a  panchnama
               will ordinarily  be  treated  as  sufficient  to  constitute
               taking of possession.
iii)  If  crop  is  standing  on  the   acquired   land   or
               building/structure exists, mere going on  the  spot  by  the
               concerned authority will, by itself, be not  sufficient  for
               taking possession. Ordinarily, in such cases, the  concerned
               authority will have to give notice to the  occupier  of  the
               building/structure or the person who has cultivated the land
               and take possession in the presence of independent witnesses
               and get  their  signatures  on  the  panchnama.  Of  course,
               refusal of the owner of the land or  building/structure  may
               not lead to an inference that the possession of the acquired
               land has not been taken.
iv) If the acquisition is of a large tract of land,  it  may
               not be possible for the  acquiring/designated  authority  to
               take physical possession of each and  every  parcel  of  the
               land and it will be sufficient that symbolic  possession  is
               taken by preparing appropriate document in the  presence  of
               independent witnesses and getting their signatures  on  such
               document.
v)   If   beneficiary   of    the    acquisition    is    an
               agency/instrumentality of the State and  80%  of  the  total
               compensation is deposited in terms  of
Section  17(3A)
and
               substantial portion of the acquired land has  been  utilised
               in furtherance of the particular public  purpose,  then  the
               Court may reasonably presume that possession of the acquired
               land has been taken.”




                In
Prahlad Singh v. Union of India
(2011) 5  SCC  386,  the
    Court considered as to when the acquired land can be  treated  to  have
    vested in the State, referred to various  judgments  on  the  issue  of
    taking of  possession  including  the  judgment  in
Banda  Development
    Authority, Banda
(supra) and observed:
“If the present case is examined in the light of  the  facts
                which have been brought on record and  the  principles
laid
                down in
the judgment in
Banda Development Authority
case  it
                is not  possible  to  sustain  the  finding  and  conclusion
                recorded by the High Court that the acquired land had vested
                in the State Government  because  the  actual  and  physical
                possession of the acquired land  always  remained  with  the
                appellants  and  no  evidence  has  been  produced  by   the
                respondents to show that possession was taken by preparing a
                panchnama in the presence of independent witnesses and their
                signatures were obtained on the panchnama.”





                At the cost of repetition,  we  consider  it  necessary  to
    observe that in the present  case  no  evidence  was  produced  by  the
    official respondents before the High Court to show that  possession  of
    the appellant's land and the house constructed over it had  been  taken
    by the competent authority between 9.12.2009, i.e., the date  on  which
    the award was passed and 20.1.2010, i.e., the date on  which  the  writ
    petition was filed before the High Court. Indeed, it was not  even  the
    pleaded case of the official respondents that the house constructed  by
    the appellant was lying vacant on the date of award and  some  official
    had put lock over it evidencing the taking over of possession.
A somewhat similar question was considered by this Court in
Raghbir Singh Sehrawat v. State of Haryana
(2012) 1 SCC  792.  In  that
    case also, the High Court had non-suited the  writ  petitioner  on  the
    ground that possession of the acquired  land  had  been  taken  by  the
    concerned officers and the same will be deemed to have  vested  in  the
    State Government free from all encumbrances. This Court took cognizance
    of the entries recorded in khasra girdawari revealed existence of crops
    on the acquired land and observed:
“The respondents have not produced  any  other  evidence  to
               show that actual possession of the land, on which  crop  was
               standing,  had  been  taken  after  giving  notice  to   the
               appellant or that he was present at the site when possession
               of the acquired land was delivered to the Senior Manager  of
               HSIIDC. Indeed, it is not even the case of  the  respondents
               that any independent witness was  present  at  the  time  of
               taking possession of the acquired land.
The Land Acquisition  Collector  and  his  subordinates  may
               claim credit of having acted swiftly inasmuch as immediately
               after the pronouncement of  the  award,  possession  of  the
               acquired land of Village Jatheri is said to have been  taken
               from the landowners and handed over to the officer of HSIIDC
               but keeping in view the fact that crop was standing  on  the
               land, the exercise undertaken  by  the  respondents  showing
               delivery of possession cannot but be treated  as  farce  and
               inconsequential. We have no doubt that if the High Court had
               summoned the relevant records and scrutinised the  same,  it
               would not have summarily dismissed the writ petition on  the
               premise that possession of the acquired land had been  taken
               and the same vested in the State Government.”




                The Court then  referred  to  the  judgments  in
Municipal
    Corporation of Greater Bombay v. Industrial Development and  Investment
    Company (P) Limited
(
supra), Star Wire (India) Ltd. v. State of Haryana
(
supra), C.Padma v. Deputy Secretary to the Government  of  Tamil  Nadu
(
supra), Municipal Council, Ahmednagar, v. Shah Hyder Beig
(supra)  and
    M/s
Swaika Properties Pvt. Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan
(supra), on which
    reliance has been placed by the High Court and observed:
“In all the cases, challenge to the acquisition  proceedings
                was  negatived  primarily  on  the  ground  of   delay.   An
                additional factor  which  influenced  this  Court  was  that
                physical possession of the acquired land had been  taken  by
                the authorities concerned.  In  none  of  these  cases,  the
                landowners appear to have questioned  the  legality  of  the
                mode  adopted  by  the  authorities  concerned  for   taking
                possession of the acquired land. Therefore, these  judgments
                cannot be  relied  upon  for  sustaining  the  High  Court’s
                negation of the appellant’s challenge to the acquisition  of
                his land.”




                In view of the above discussion,  we  hold  that  the  High
    Court was not right in holding that the writ petition of the  appellant
    was not maintainable because the same was filed after  passing  of  the
    award.
As a sequel to the aforementioned conclusion, we  may  have
    set aside the impugned order and remitted the matter to the High  Court
    for disposal of the writ petition on merits but having  carefully  gone
    through the pleadings of the parties and the material  produced  before
    this Court, we are satisfied that the acquisition  of  the  appellant's
    land is vitiated due to colourable  exercise  of  power  by  the  State
    Government. No doubt, the notifications issued under
Sections 4
and
6
of the Act recite that the land was  acquired  for  a  public  purpose,
    namely, development of Sector 36, Rohtak, but the real  object  of  the
    acquisition was to benefit a colonizer i.e. respondent  No.6,  who  had
    undertaken to develop the area into a residential colony.   In  para  5
    and 6(iv) of the writ petition, the appellant had  made  the  following
    averments:
“5. That it would be worthwhile to point out here  that  the
                land which has been sought to be acquired vide the  impugned
                notification is surrounded by the land of Ujjawal  Coloniser
- respondent No. 6 from all sides and the residential colony
                named Sun City is being developed by the  respondent  No.  6
                and land situated in the Sun City was also acquired  by  the
                State Government and then it was handed over  to  respondent
                No. 6 who is a well known colonizer and the respondent No. 6
                also approached the petitioner for selling her land  to  him
                and the petitioner refused to accept the  said  proposal  of
                the respondent No. 6 and now the land which  the  respondent
                No. 6 failed to purchased  from  its  owners  has  been  got
                acquired for extension of
Section  36
,  Rohtak  with  clear
                understanding that same would  be  further  handed  over  to
                respondent No. 6 after completion  of  its  acquisition  and
                there is a secret agreement between  the  State  authorities
                and respondent No. 6.
6(iv)     That the acquisition of land for public purpose is
                just an eyewash. In fact, the land  is  being  acquired  for
                semi-public, commercial purpose etc. It is also so reflected
                from the lay out plan of
Section 36
and marked in  red.  The
                semi public purpose is for giving the land  to  the  private
                developers cannot be termed as a public purpose in the  real
                sense and earlier also the land was acquired for development
                of Sector 36 in a similar fashion and after acquisition  the
                same was handed over to the respondent No. 6 and the land of
                the petitioner is surrounded by the  land  of  Sun  City  by
                three sides and cannot be choose for any purpose  except  to
                acquire the same and hand over it to the  respondent  No.  6
                and the acquisition proceedings are  not  meant  for  public
                purpose in true sense and the authorities are bent  upon  to
                help the respondent  No.  6  in  an  illegal  and  arbitrary
                manner.”




                 In  the  counter  affidavit  filed  by  Land   Acquisition
    Collector, Urban Estates, Haryana, Rohtak on behalf of respondent Nos.1
    and 3, it was claimed that  the  procedural  requirement  contained  in
Sections 4
and
6
of the Act had been fully satisfied and  reference  to
Section 17(1)
in the declaration issued under
Section 6
was  a  mistake
    and further that no discrimination had been practised in acquiring  the
    land.  However,  it  was  not  denied  that  the  appellant's  land  is
    surrounded  by  the  land  of  respondent  No.6,  who  was   developing
    residential colony under the name and style 'Sun City' and earlier also
    the land acquired  for  the   development  of  Sector  36,  Rohtak  was
    transferred to respondent  No.6.  This  shows  that  in  the  guise  of
    acquiring land for a public purpose, the State Government had  acquired
    the land for being handed over to  the  private  coloniser.   In  other
    words, the State Government had misused the provisions  of
Sections  4
and
6
of the Act for making land available to a private  developer.  We
    may hasten to add that if the land was to be acquired  for  a  company,
    then the official respondents were bound to comply with the  provisions
    contained in Chapter 7 of the Act, which was admittedly not done in the
    instant case.
We also  find  merit  in  the  appellant's  plea  that  the
    official respondents are guilty of  practising  discrimination  in  the
    matter of release of land. In paragraphs 6(v) and  6(vi)  of  the  writ
    petition the appellant had made the following averments:
“6(v) That the petitioner who is having only small piece  of
               land/ residential house would be deprived of  the  roof  and
               the construction made by the petitioner is of  A  Class  and
               has been raised prior to the issuance of Notification
u/s  4
of the Act i.e. 15.12.2006. Photographs showing construction
               of the House of A Class, is  annexed  herewith  as  Annexure
               P/5. As  per  the  policy  of  the  State  Government  dated
               30.9.2007, copy of which is annexed  as  Annexure  P/6,  the
               structure which have been constructed prior to the  issuance
               of the notification
u/s 4
and is inhabited could be released
               u/s 48(1) of the Act ibid but the respondents  have  ignored
               its own instructions and for releasing the land the pick and
               choose policy has been adopted by the  authorities  and  the
               land of M/s Sharad Farm and Holdings Pvt. Ltd. has also been
               released arbitrarily after notification
u/s 6
of the Act  as
               is reflected from letter dated 4.9.2008, copy  of  which  is
               annexed as Annexure  P/7  and  furthermore  the  constructed
               house of the petitioner has been  acquired  but  the  vacant
               land of some influential person have been left out  and  the
               State Government is not justified in acquiring the  land  in
               question for further handing over the same  to  the  private
               developers  for  commercial  gains  at  the  cost   of   the
               life/livelihood  of  the   petitioner   and   the   impugned
               notification has not been issued for a bonafide purpose  and
               is a result  of  connivance  of  the  authorities  with  the
               respondent No. 4 to 6 and it is not permissible  under  law.
The release of land of the petitioner would not  create  any
               hurdle in the scheme of the respondents.
6(vi)      That  the  construction  of  the  house  of   the
               petitioner is prior to the notification
u/s 4
of  the  Land
               Acquisition Act. The Land Acquisition Collector  in  similar
               circumstances also recommended the release of the  land  and
               the same was not included while issuing the notification
u/s
               6
of the Land Acquisition Act and it has  been  incorporated
               while issuing notices  u/s  9  of  the  Act  ibid,  copy  of
               recommendations  of  the  L.A.C  is  attached  herewith   as
               Annexure P/8. There is, thus,  a  total  non-application  of
               mind. According to the notification
u/s  6
ibid  Killa  No.
               23(7-12) is stated to have been acquired but  while  in  the
               notice under
Section 9
of the Act ibid whole of the area has
               been shown to have been acquired. Even  the  recommendations
               of the L.A.C. for release of the constructed area  has  also
               been ignored without any basis.”




                In the counter affidavit  filed  on  behalf  of  respondent
    Nos.1 and 3, the above reproduced averments were not  denied.  This  is
    evinced from paragraphs 6(v) and 6(vi) of the counter affidavit,  which
    are extracted below:
“6(v). That the contents of Para no. 6(v) of the civil  writ
                Petition are wrong and denied. However, the state Govt,  has
                absolute right to acquire the land for  public  purpose  and
                the disputed land is also being acquired for serving  public
                purpose i.e. Sector-36 Rohtak. However petitioner has  never
                filed the objection regarding his house.
6(vi). That the contents of para no. 6(vi) of the civil writ
                petition are wrong and denied. However, it is submitted that
                there exists a public purpose for which the  land  has  been
                acquired and there is no  illegality  or  infirmity  in  the
                decision of the state. No discrimination has been done  with
                any of the land owners.”



                Before this Court it has been pleaded that on the  date  of
    issuance of preliminary notification the appellant's land  was  vacant,
    but, this statement cannot be relied upon for  denying  relief  to  her
    because no such averment was made in the counter affidavit filed before
    the High Court. The policy framed by the Government of Haryana  clearly
    stipulates release of land on which construction had been raised  prior
    to
Section 4
notification. The appellant's  case  is  covered  by  that
    policy. Therefore, her land ought to have been released as was done  in
    the case of M/s. Sharad Farm and Holdings Pvt. Ltd.
In the result, the appeal is allowed and the impugned order
    is set aside. The acquisition  of  the  appellant's  land  is  declared
    illegal and is quashed. The parties are left to bear their own costs.
.............................J,
                                         [G.S. SINGHVI]






                                         .............................J,
                                         [SUDHANSU JYOTI MUKHOPADHAYA]
    New Delhi,
    29th August, 2012.