[Cites
7
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
Usha Ananthasubramanian vs Union Of India on 12 February, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 1061, AIRONLINE 2020 SC 222
Author:
R.F. Nariman
Bench:
V. Ramasubramanian
,
S. Ravindra Bhat
,
Rohinton Fali Nariman
1


                                                                                                 REPORTABLE
                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7604 OF 2019

      USHA ANANTHASUBRAMANIAN                                                              Appellant(s)

                                                          VERSUS

      UNION OF INDIA                                                                       Respondent(s)




                                                    J U D G M E N T
R.F. Nariman, J.
1)   The   present   appeal      is       by   Usha    Anandhasubramanian     -

                         former MD & CEO of the Punjab National Bank.                      She was MD &

                         CEO of the said Bank from 14.08.2015 to 05.05.2017.
2)   A   charge    sheet   has   been          filed   by   the   CBI    against

                         several persons occupying positions in the Punjab National

                         Bank as well as the Directors of Gitanjali Gems Ltd.
3)   Mr.    C.S.     Vaidyanathan,             learned      Senior      Advocate

                         appearing on behalf of the appellant, points out that the

                         charge sheet by the CBI itself makes it clear that at the

                         highest even the criminal case against the appellant is only

                         that she omitted to take precautions or preventive steps to

                         prevent the fraud perpetrated by Nirav Modi and thereby
Signature Not Verified
committed mis-conduct and conspiracy with the other accused
Digitally signed by
SUSHMA KUMARI
BAJAJ
Date: 2020.02.18
16:47:43 IST
Reason:                  persons.   After pointing out the aforesaid charge sheet, Mr.

                         Vaidyanathan then pointed out orders that were passed by the

                         NCLT in exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 241 of
2
the
Companies Act
by which certain named individuals were

injuncted          from       disposing           movable          and          immovable

properties/assets which belong to them and whose assets were

frozen, making it clear that post-freeze only a sum of

Rs.1,00,000/- per month will be allowed to each of such

persons for personal expenses.                    He further argued that in

exercising powers under
Section 241
, powers may be exercised

under   various       provisions         of    the
Companies        Act
including
Section 337
and
339
only insofar as the mis-management of

that    very    Company      is     concerned,       which      is    obviously      not

relatable to any other corporate body, including the Punjab

National Bank, of which the appellant is the CEO & MD.

According to him, therefore, any order that freezes assets

of    the    appellant       in    the    exercise       of   jurisdiction         under
Section      241
of    the     Companies        Act      would        be     without

jurisdiction.          He read to us the relevant sections of the
Companies Act
and pointed out that however widely they are

construed they can only be qua the Company in which acts of

mis-management are alleged and not qua any other person.
4)     Mr.    Sanjay       Jain,    learned      Additional          Solicitor      General

appearing for the respondent, on the other hand, supported the

orders passed by the NCLT and the NCLAT                          in the appellant’s

case by reading to us, in particular,
Sections 337
and
339
of

the Companies Act.           According to him, where a person is liable

for    fraudulent      conduct       or       business    the    jurisdiction         under
Section 339
if very wide and would include freezing the assets

of    any    person    who    was    knowingly       a     party      to    the    carrying
3
on of the fraudulent conduct of business.
5)    Having heard learned counsel for both sides, we may first

set   out
Section    241(2)
and
Sections      337
and
339
of   the

Companies Act, which read as follows:-
“241. Application        to Tribunal        for relief    in
       cases of oppression, etc.- (1) xxx
       (2) The Central Government, if it is of the
       opinion that the affairs of the company are
       being    conducted   in    a   manner   prejudicial       to
       public interest, it may itself apply to the
       Tribunal for an order under this Chapter:
Provided that the applications under this sub-
       section, in respect of such company or class of
       companies, as may be prescribed, shall be made
       before    the   Principal      Bench   of    the   Tribunal
       which shall be dealt with by such Bench.
337. Penalty for frauds by officers.- If any
       person, being at the time of the commission of
       the alleged offence an officer of a company
       which is subsequently ordered to be wound up by
       the Tribunal under this Act. -
(a) has, by false pretences or by means of any
       other fraud, induced any person to give credit
       to the company;
(b) with intent to defraud creditors of the
       company or any other person, has made or caused
       to be made any gift or transfer of, or charge
       on, or has caused or connived at the levying of
       any   execution    against,      the   property     of   the
       company; or
(c) with intent to defraud creditors of the
       company, has concealed or removed any part of
4
the property of the company since the date of
any unsatisfied judgment or order for payment
of money obtained against the company or within
two months before that date,

he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than one year but
which may extend to three years and with fine
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees
but which may extend to three lakh rupees.
339.    Liability        for       fraudulent        conduct     of
business.-
(1) If in the course of the winding up of a
company, it appears that any business of the
company    has    been    carried        on   with    intent     to
defraud creditors of the company or any other
persons    or     for    any   fraudulent        purpose,       the
Tribunal, on the application of the Official
Liquidator, or the Company Liquidator or any
creditor or contributory of the company, may,
if it thinks it proper so to do, declare that
any person, who is or has been a director,
manager,    or     officer         of   the   company      or   any
persons    who     were    knowingly          parties      to   the
carrying    on     of    the       business    in    the   manner
aforesaid       shall     be       personally       responsible,
without any limitation of liability, for all or
any of the debts or other liabilities of the
company as the Tribunal may direct:
Provided that on the hearing of an application
under      this         sub-section,          the       Official
Liquidator or the Company Liquidator, as the
case may be, may himself give evidence or call
witnesses.
5
(2)     Where       the       Tribunal    makes       any    such

declaration,            it     may    give     such     further

directions as it thinks proper for the purpose

of giving effect to that declaration and, in

particular,—
(a) make provision for making the liability of

any such person under the declaration a charge

on any debt or obligation due from the company

to him, or on any mortgage or charge or any

interest      in    any      mortgage    or    charge   on    any

assets of the company held by or vested in him,

or any person on his behalf, or any person

claiming as assignee from or through the person

liable or any person acting on his behalf;
(b) make such further order as may be necessary

for the purpose of enforcing any charge imposed

under this sub-section.
(3) Where any business of a company is carried
on with such intent or for such purpose as is
mentioned in sub-section (1), every person who
was knowingly a party to the carrying on of the
business      in    the      manner   aforesaid,      shall    be
liable for action under
section 447
.
(4) This section shall apply, notwithstanding
that    the   person         concerned   may    be    punishable
under any other law for the time being in force
in    respect      of   the    matters    on    the   ground   of
6
which the declaration is to be made.
         Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a)   the     expression        “assignee”       includes        any
         person   to      whom     or   in     whose    favour,      by   the
         directions        of    the    person    liable,      the    debt,
         obligation, mortgage or charge was
         created, issued or transferred or the interest
         was created, but does not include an assignee
         for   valuable          consideration,          not    including
         consideration by way of marriage, given in good
         faith and without notice of any of the matters
         on the ground of which the declaration is made;
(b)   the        expression         “officer”    includes        any
         person in accordance with whose directions or
         instructions the directors of the company have
         been accustomed
         to act.”
6)    Under
Section 241(2)
, the Central Government, if it is of

the     opinion   that       the    affairs      of     the    Company     are   being

conducted in        a manner        prejudicial to        public interest,         may

apply itself to the Tribunal for orders under this Chapter,

which     is   headed            “prevention       of     oppression       and    mis-
management”.      Apart from the vast powers that are given to the

Tribunal under
Section 242
, powers under
Section 337
and
339
are also given in aid of this power, which will apply mutatis

mutandis.
7)
Section 337
refers to penalty for frauds by an officer of

the     company      in     which       mis-management         has    taken      place.

Likewise,
Section 339
refers to any business of the company

which has been carried on with intent to defraud creditors of
7
that company.    Obviously, the persons referred to in
Section

339(1)
as persons who are other than the parties “to the

carrying on of the business in the manner aforesaid” which

again refers to the business of the company which is being

mismanaged and not to the business of another company or other

persons.
8)   This being the case, it is clear that powers under these

sections cannot possibly be utilized in order that a person

who may be the head of some other organization be roped in,

and his or her assets be attached.        This being the case, we

set aside the impugned order passed by the NCLAT and well as

the NCLT.    The appeal is allowed in the aforesaid terms.
9)   We may clarify that nothing stated in this judgment will

have any effect insofar as the investigation conducted by the

CBI or the investigation by the SFIO is concerned.
.......................... J.
(ROHINTON FALI NARIMAN)



                                  .......................... J.
(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)



                                  .......................... J.
(V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN)

New Delhi;
February 12, 2020.