[Cites
20
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Osians Connoisseurs Of Art Pvt. Ltd. vs Securities And Exchange Board Of India on 12 February, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 422
Author:
R. F. Nariman
Bench:
V. Ramasubramanian
,
S. Ravindra Bhat
,
Rohinton Fali Nariman
‘REPORTABLE’

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 54 OF 2016

                      OSIANS CONNOISSEURS OF ART PVT. LTD.                  Appellant(s)

                                                          VERSUS

                      SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA & ANR.         Respondent(s)

                      WITH


                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 19936 OF 2017

                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 77 OF 2018




                                                J U D G M E N T
R. F. NARIMAN, J.
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 54 OF 2016

                             Learned   senior   counsel   appearing   for   the   appellant

                      seeks permission of the Court to withdraw the civil appeal.
The civil appeal is allowed to be withdrawn.



                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 19936 OF 2017

                             The brief facts leading to the filing of the present

                      civil appeal are as follows:
Signature Not Verified       Two trusts named Yatra Art Fund Trust (Fund I) and
Digitally signed by
SUSHMA KUMARI
BAJAJ
Date: 2020.02.19
17:48:46 IST
Reason:
Yatra Art Fund II (Fund II) were created under the
Indian

                      Trusts Act, 1882
, through execution of Indentures of Trust
1
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 54 OF 2016 etc.

dated 15.06.2005 and 01.12.2006.
A perusal of the trust deed shows that both these

trust   Funds      were   created      for   an    initial    period     of     4-4½

years, the first Fund ending, after extension of one year,

on   15.09.2011.          Insofar      as    the    second     Trust     Fund     is

concerned, this Trust Fund was also extended and ended on

31.01.2012.        It may also be mentioned that these Trusts

Funds were established so that investors could invest in

works of art.        In the Confidential Information Memorandum,

it   was    made     clear     to   the      investors       that    these      were

investments which were fraught with grave risks and that the

investors    invest       in   these    Trusts       Funds    with     open   eyes

knowing of the aforesaid risks.
So far as the first Fund was concerned, a total corpus

amounting     to     Rs.10.95       crores     was     collected       from      the

investors.      We are informed that 50 such investors invested

in this Fund.        So far as the second Fund is concerned, the

total corpus was Rs.21.92 crores, with 132 persons having so

invested.
On 18.06.2007, the Securities and Exchange Board of

India (hereinafter referred to as ‘SEBI’) first apprised the

appellants, who are the trustees of these two Trusts Funds

stating    that,     as   these     Funds    were     Collective       Investment

Schemes, they should apply for certificates of registration

insofar as these Funds were concerned.                   This was responded

to by Fund I on 16.07.2007, denying that the activities
2
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 54 OF 2016 etc.

would amount to the activities of a Collective Investment

Scheme.     As a result thereof, on 12.10.2007, SEBI issued a

Show Cause Notice to show cause as to why the Yatra Art Fund

should    not     register       itself     with    SEBI     in   the   prescribed

corporate        form,    as    otherwise      the     collective       investment

scheme carried out by the Trust would be illegal.                        The show

cause    notice     also       mentioned     that     all    amounts     collected

should be refunded within a period of 30 days from the said

show cause notice.             On 05.11.2007, the appellants responded

to the aforesaid show cause notice stating that there was no

violation of
Section 12 (1B)
of the Securities and Exchange

Board of India Act, 1992 (hereinafter referred to as ‘
SEBI

Act
’) read with
Regulation 3
of SEBI (Collective Investment

Scheme) Regulations, 1999 (hereinafter referred to as ‘CIS

Regulations’); and as the appellants were not registered in

the form of a company, the Regulations themselves would not

apply.     Secondly, detailed arguments were made as to why the

schemes     involved          could   not    be     said     to   be    collective

investment schemes.             One year later, on 03.11.2008, a joint

representation to SEBI was made stating that the aforesaid

schemes     floated      by     the   appellants        were      not   collective

investment schemes, reiterating that they were not made in

the corporate form.
It appears that, at this point of time, SEBI itself

was     unsure     as    to    whether      such     funds     would    amount   to

collective investment schemes.                However, in 2013, the matter
3
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 54 OF 2016 etc.

was resuscitated and after giving the appellants a hearing,

inasmuch as as many as nine investors complained with regard

to Trust Fund No.2, including an Investors’ Association, an

order was delivered by the whole-time member of SEBI on

06.11.2015 as follows:
“29. In view of the foregoing, I, in exercise of the
     powers conferred upon me under
Section 19
of the
     Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992
     read with
Sections 11
and
11B
thereof and Regulation
     65 of the SEBI (Collective Investment Scheme)
     Regulation,   1999,   hereby   issue   the  following
     directions:
a. Yatra Art fund shall abstain from collecting any
     money from the investors or launch or carry out any
     Collective Investment Schemes including the scheme
     which   have   been   identified   as   a  Collective
     Investment Scheme in this Order.
b. Yatra Art Fund is directed to refund the entire
     monies collected by it under its scheme to all the
     investors along with the returns at the rate of 10%
     per annum, within a period of three months from the
     date of this Order and thereafter, within a period
     of fifteen days, submit a winding up and repayment
     report to SEBI in accordance with the SEBI
     (Collective Investment Schemes) Regulations, 1999,
     including the trail of funds claimed to be refunded,
     bank account statements indicating refund to the
     investors    and    receipt   from    the   investors
     acknowledging such refunds.
c. Yatra Art Fund is restrained from accessing the
     securities market and are prohibited from buying,
     selling or otherwise dealing in securities market
     for a period of four (4) years.
d. Yatra Art Fund is also directed to immediately
     submit the complete and detailed inventory of the
     assets owned by Yatra Art Fund.
e. In the event of failure by Yatra Art Fund to
     comply with the above directions, the following
     actions shall follow:
- Yatra Art Fund shall remain restrained from
     accessing the securities market and would furhter be
     prohibited from buying, selling or otherwise dealing
     in securities, even after the period of four (4)
     years of restraint imposed in Paragraph 29(c) above,
     till all the monies mobilized through such schemes
     are refunded to its investors with interest, which
4
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 54 OF 2016 etc.

     are due to them.
- SEBI would make a reference to the State
     Government/Local Police to register a civil/criminal
     case   against   Yatra  Art  Fund,    its   promoters,
     directors and its managers/ persons in-charge of the
     business and its schemes, for offences of fraud,
     cheating,    criminal    breach    of     trust    and
     misappropriation of public funds; and
- SEBI shall also initiate attachment and recovery
     proceedings under the
SEBI Act
and rules and
     regulations framed thereunder.”


       An   appeal     was     carried   to   the   Securities    Appellate

Tribunal,      which     was    then     disposed    of   on    21.08.2017,

following the Appellate Tribunal’s judgment dated 13.10.2015

in   Osian’s      –
Connoisseurs      of   Art   Private     Limited    v.

Securities and Exchange Board of India & Anr.                    It
may be

pointed     out   that    the    Appellate    Tribunal    set    aside    the

paragraphs of         the SEBI’s    order which      required the     State

Government to make a reference to register civil/criminal

cases against the Fund and initiate attachment and recovery

proceedings under the
SEBI Act
and Rules and Regulations.

However, insofar as paragraph 29 (b) set out hereinabove of

SEBI’s order was concerned, the Appellate Tribunal remanded

the matter to SEBI, adopting the reasoning contained in the

earlier Tribunal judgment of 13.10.2015 as follows:
“……………………………………………………………………………
     ………………………………………………………………………………

     For the reasons stated in our order in Appeal No. 62
     of 2013 decided on October 13, 2015 the present
     appeals are disposed of in terms set out therein”


       Having heard Shri K.V. Vishwanathan, learned senior
5
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 54 OF 2016 etc.

counsel appearing for the appellants and Shri C. U. Singh,

learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent-SEBI,

for some time, it would not be possible to state that the

Schemes     in    the   present        case     would     not    be   Collective

Investment       Schemes.         It    is      difficult,       therefore,     to

interfere with the concurrent findings made in this behalf

by both SEBI and the Appellate Tribunal.
Further,     the     arguments        made   by    Shri    Vishwanathan,

learned senior counsel, based upon the language of
Section

11AA
of the SEBI Act does not commend itself to us.                       It may

be mentioned that
Section 11 (2)(c)
of the SEBI Act states

as follows:
“11 (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the
      foregoing provisions, the measures referred to
      therein may provide for-
……………………………………………………………………………………………….

      ……………………………………………………………………………………………….
(c) registering and regulating the working of
      venture capital funds and collective investment
      schemes, including mutual funds;”



       In 1995,
Section 12(1B)
was introduced, by which it

became clear that no person can sponsor or cause to be

sponsored    or    carry     on   or    cause       to    be    carried   on   any

collective investment scheme unless he obtains a certificate

of   registration       from   the      Board    in      accordance    with    the

regulations.
What is of importance is to notice that the expression
6
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 54 OF 2016 etc.

“person” is used by
Section 12(1B)
.          However, in 1999, by

amendment,
Section   11AA
was   introduced   in   which   it   was

stated as follows:
“11AA. Collective investment scheme.- (1) Any scheme
     or   arrangement  which   satisfies  the  conditions
     referred to in sub-section (2) or sub-section (2A)
     shall be a collective investment scheme:
Provided that any pooling of funds under any
     scheme or arrangement, which is not registered with
     the Board or is not covered under sub-section (3),
     involving a corpus amount of one hundred crore
     rupees or more shall be deemed to be a collective
     investment scheme.
(2) Any scheme or arrangement made or offered by any
     company under which,-
(i) the contributions, or payment made by the
         investors, by whatever name called, are pooled
         and utilized for the purposes of the scheme or
         arrangement;
(ii) the contributions or payments are made to
         such scheme or arrangement by the investors with
         a view to receive profits, income, produce or
         property, whether movable or immovable, from such
         scheme or arrangement;
(iii) the property, contribution or investment
         forming part of scheme or arrangement, whether
         identifiable or not, is managed on behalf of the
         investors;
(iv) the investors do not have day-to-day control
         over the management and operation of the scheme
         or arrangement.
(2A) Any scheme or arrangement made or offered by
         any person satisfying the conditions as may be
         specified in accordance with the regulations made
         under this Act.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (2) or sub-section (2A), any scheme or
         arrangement—
(i) made or offered by a co-operative society
         registered under the
Co-operative Societies Act,
         1912
(2 of 1912) or a society being a society
         registered or deemed to be registered under any
         law relating to co-operative societies for the
         time being in force in any State;
7
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 54 OF 2016 etc.
(ii) under which deposits are accepted by non-
         banking financial companies as defined in clause
(f) of
section 45-I
of the Reserve Bank of India
         Act, 1934;
(iii) being a contract of insurance to which the
Insurance Act, 1938
, applies;
(iv) providing for any Scheme, Pension Scheme or
         the Insurance Scheme framed under the
Employees
         Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act,
         1952
;
(v) under which deposits are accepted             under
section 58A
of the Companies Act, 1956;
(vi) under which deposits are accepted by a
         company declared as a Nidhi or a mutual benefit
         society under
section 620A
of the Companies Act,
         1956;
(vii) falling within the meaning of Chit business
         as defined in clause (e) of
section 2
of the Chit
         Fund Act, 1982;
(viii) under which contributions made are in the
         nature of subscription to a mutual fund;
(ix) such other scheme or arrangement which the
         Central Government may, in consultation with the
         Board, notify,

         shall not be a collective investment scheme.”


        Based on the aforesaid, Shri Vishwanathan argued that

it would not be possible for him to fall foul of the law

considering that
Section 11AA
uses the word “company” and

not “person”, and as his client carried on this business in

the form of a Trust, the provisions of
SEBI Act
would not be

attracted at all.
This argument would fly in the face of both
Section

12(1B)
and the CIS Regulations, in particular,
Regulation

2(h)
,   which   defined    a   “Collective   Investment   Management
8
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 54 OF 2016 etc.

Company” as follows:
“(h) “Collective Investment Management Company”
     means a company incorporated under the
Companies
     Act, 1956
and registered with the Board under these
     regulations, whose object is to organise, operate
     and manage a collective investment scheme;”
Regulation 3
of the CIS Regulations states:
“3. No person other than a Collective Investment
     Management Company which has obtained a certificate
     under these regulations shall carry on or sponsor or
     launch a collective investment scheme.”


         The   statutory      scheme,   therefore,        is   that,     if     a

collective investment scheme, as defined, is to be floated

by   a   person,   it   could    only   be    done   in    the    form    of   a

collective investment management company and in no other

form.      This    is   the    reason   why
Section     11AA
uses       the

expression “company” in sub-Section (2) and not the word

“person” (as the CIS Regulations of 1999 had come into force

on 15.10.1999;
Section 11AA
being enacted and coming into

force on 22.02.2000).
Once the statutory scheme becomes clear, it is clear

that the collective investment scheme that was being carried

on by the appellants in the form of a private Trust would be

in the teeth of the Statute read with the CIS Regulations

and would thus be illegal.
This being the case, it is difficult to upset any part

of SEBI’s order that remains after the penultimate part of

the order was set aside by the Appellate Tribunal.
9
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 54 OF 2016 etc.

       However, we find that this litigation has been going

on for an extremely long period of time and instead of

remanding the matter to SEBI to decide the refund issue

afresh, we order as follows:
The principal amount repayable to each investor of

both the Schemes shall be paid back within a period of six

months from today in the following manner:
We are informed that so far as the first Fund is

concerned, 81.32 per cent of the total principal sum of

Rs.10.95 crores has been repaid.
Insofar      as    Fund    No.     2   is    concerned,      we   have   been

informed    that     50    per     cent       of    the   principal      amount   of

Rs.21.92 crores has been repaid.
The balance owing to the 50 investors of Fund No. 1

and to the 132 investors of Fund No. 2 be therefore, repaid

within six months from the date of this judgment.
So far as the interest at the rate of 10 per cent is

concerned,    this        amount    will       be    paid     on   the   principal

outstanding amount from the date on which it becomes due to

each such member, till the date on which each Fund came to

an   end,   i.e.,    insofar       as   Fund        No.   1   is   concerned    till

15.09.2011    and    so     far    as   Fund        No.   2   is   concerned    till

31.01.2012.        The aforesaid interest shall be paid within

nine months from the date of this judgment.
Once the amounts are actually paid within the time

period specified, compliance report be filed with SEBI in
10
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 54 OF 2016 etc.

this behalf.
The appeal stands disposed of.
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 77 OF 2018

       In terms of our judgment in Civil Appeal No. 19936 of

2017, this appeal stands disposed of.
………………………………………………………………………., J.
                              [ ROHINTON FALI NARIMAN ]



                              ………………………………………………………………………., J.
                              [ S. RAVINDRA BHAT ]



                              ……………………………………………………………………….,
J.
                              [ V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN ]


New Delhi
;
February 12, 2020.
11