[Cites
5
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Chandigarh Construction Co. Pvt.Ltd. vs State Of Punjab on 14 February, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 203, (2020) 3 SCALE 620
Author:
A.S. Bopanna
Bench:
A.S. Bopanna
,
R. Banumathi
REPORTABLE


                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NOS.867­870 OF 2013


                         Chandigarh Construction Co. Pvt. Ltd.      .…Appellant(s)


                                                   Versus

                         State of Punjab & Anr.                  …. Respondent(s)



                                            JUDGMENT
A.S. Bopanna,J.
1.    The appellant is before this Court assailing the

                         order dated 08.04.2011 passed by the High Court of

                         Punjab & Haryana at Chandigarh in Civil Revision

                         No.2958/2008 which was disposed of along with Civil

                         Revisions Nos. 2949, 2960 and 2961 of 2008. Through

                         the said order the High Court allowed the Revision in part
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
MADHU BALA
to the extent of allowing the Claim No.1 of the appellant
Date: 2020.02.14
14:21:05 IST
Reason:
by modifying the judgment passed by the Trial Court and
Page 1 of 26
the First Appellate Court, but insofar as the remaining

    claims the judgments passed by the First Appellate Court

    was affirmed.     Consequently, the Award passed by the

    Arbitrator stood modified to that extent. The appellant,

    therefore, is aggrieved to the extent, the remaining claim

    of the appellant was rejected.                 In that view the

    consideration in the instant appeal pertains to the Claim

    Nos.2, 3, 8, 12 and 16 as put forth and also the issue

    relating   to   the    grant   of   interest    which   arose   for

    consideration under Claim No.19.
2.    For the purpose of convenience and clarity the

    parties would be referred to in the rank assigned to them

    in the arbitration proceedings. Accordingly, the appellant

    herein would be referred to as the claimant, while the

    respondents would be referred to as the opposite party.
3.    The proceedings in question arises relating to an

    Award passed under the
Arbitration Act, 1940
(‘Act 1940’

    for short).     The claimant and the opposite party had

    entered into a contract agreement dated 05.02.1985 for

    construction of Sutlej Yamuna Link Canal (Punjab) and

    in that regard        to carry out the earth work, drainage
Page 2 of 26
behind lining and cement concrete lining of Raech RD

    71.50 to 72.50 kms.      The estimated cost of the project

    was at Rs.31 lakhs and the contract amount for the work

    was fixed at Rs.59,86,732/­. The work concerned was to

    be executed in eight months.
4.    In respect of the said contract, the claimant

    contended that during execution, the scope of work was

    considerably      increased    on   account     of   substantial

    increase of earth work, sloughing of banks, rebuilding of

    banks with self­draining material, various decisions by

    the department regarding rebuilding of banks and

    changes in the strata encountered during excavation due

    to    incorrect   geological   data   observations      by   the

    department prior to inviting tender.          In that view, the

    claimant had raised a demand for the additional payment

    which was disputed by the opposite party, which led to

    an arbitral dispute.     Since the agreement provided for

    resolution of disputes by arbitration the claimant took

    recourse to the same. In that background the claimant

    had sought for additional payment in the claim statement

    filed before the Arbitrator. The opposite party filed their
Page 3 of 26
objections disputing the claim put forth by the claimant.

    The        learned   Arbitrator   on   considering   the   rival

    contentions passed the Award dated 31.08.1994 and

    awarded the amount as claimed by the claimant to be

    paid by the opposite party with interest at the rate of 18%

    per annum as also the future interest at 18% per annum

    from the date of the Award to the date of payment. As

    required under Act, 1940 the said Award was to be made

    a ‘Rule of Court’ for which purpose the Award was

    presented before the Court of the Senior Sub­Judge,

    Ropar.       The opposite party filed objections in the said

    proceedings and contended that the Award passed by the

    Arbitrator is not sustainable as the Arbitrator had

    misconducted himself by awarding the amounts which

    were not payable as per the contract and the learned

    Arbitrator had not indicated reasons for the decision.

    The learned Sub­Judge through the judgment and decree

    dated 21.10.1995 accepted the objections to the extent of

    rejection of Claim No.1 and reduction of interest to 12%
Page 4 of 26
per annum and in other respects the Award was made

    the ‘Rule of Court’.
5.    The opposite party however continued to remain

    aggrieved insofar as the non­interference with regard to

    other claims and, therefore, filed an appeal before the

    District Judge, Ropar in Civil Appeal No.9/3110 of 2006.

    The claimant preferred the cross appeal insofar as the

    rejection of Claim No.1 by the learned Sub­Judge and

    reduction of interest. The learned District Judge through

    judgment dated 06.11.2007 rejected the cross appeal

    filed by the claimant and allowed the appeal filed by the

    opposite party (State of Punjab) and set aside the amount

    awarded under Claim Nos.2, 3, 8, 12 and 16.           The

    claimant, therefore, contending to be aggrieved preferred

    the Revision Petitions before the High Court. It is in the

    said proceedings the High Court has rejected the

    remaining claim except Claim No.1 as indicated above. It

    is in that circumstance the claimant is before this Court

    in this appeal.
6.     Shri Nakul    Dewan,    learned   senior   advocate

    appearing for the claimant would contend that the First
Page 5 of 26
Appellate Court and the High Court were not justified in

    their conclusion to reject the Award passed by the

    learned Arbitrator.   It is contended that the basis on

    which the Claim No.2 would arise for consideration will

    be the same basis for the Award of the amount under

    Claim Nos. 3 and 12. Even insofar as the Claim No.8 the

    additional amount will have to be calculated on that

    basis for the extra items used. In that background, it is

    contended that under Note 6 to the schedule of work

    which forms a part of the contract, it provides that extra

    or other items of work shall be paid at the rate worked

    out on the basis of relevant Punjab Common Schedule of

    Rates Basis Plus Sanctioned Premium at the time of

    tendering, which is to be worked out. In that light it is

    contended that the estimated cost of the present contract

    is at Rs.31 lakhs while the contract amount has been

    worked out at Rs.59,86,732/­.     The difference between

    the estimated cost and the contract amount is the

    sanctioned premium which corresponds to the overall

    premium of 93.12% on the work for the purpose of
Page 6 of 26
computing the rates of extra items/quantity or work

    done. Insofar as the remaining claims the said 93.12%

    would become applicable. In that circumstance when the

    learned Arbitrator has taken note of this aspect and

    decided the Claim No.2, the same would be sustainable.

    It is contended that when the contract agreement is

    explicit insofar as the value and the difference being the

    sanctioned premium and the percentage being evident at

    93.12% the decision of the learned Arbitrator not

    indicating any further reasons in the Award would not be

    fatal.     When the obvious had been concluded by the

    learned Arbitrator, the amount ultimately awarded is

    sustainable and the claim put forth by the claimant is

    justified.
7.      Ms. Uttara Babbar, the learned counsel for the

    opposite party (State of Punjab), would on the other hand

    contend that the learned Arbitrator has not indicated any

    reason whatsoever to arrive at the conclusion that the

    claim made at 93.12% is admissible.          The learned

    counsel would in that regard refer to Clause 63 of the

    contract which provides for reference of the disputes to
Page 7 of 26
arbitration. The said clause after referring to the manner

    in which the learned Arbitrator is to be appointed, has

    further specified the requirement that all Awards shall be

    in writing and in case of awards amounting to Rs.1 lakh

    and above, such Award shall state the reason for the

    amount awarded. In that circumstance it is contended

    that when the contract between the parties is explicit

    with regard to the manner in which an Award is to be

    passed by the learned Arbitrator, the Award passed in

    such manner alone would be sustainable. In that light it

    is contended that in the instant case the Award does not

    indicate the reasons while answering Claim No.2, wherein

    it is only stated that as per agreement the premium

    works out to 93.12% and has awarded the same without

    specifying the reasons for such conclusion. In that view

    it   is    contended   that   such   Award   would   not     be

    sustainable. The learned counsel refers to the schedule

    of through rate items for construction, in the tender form

    (Annexure P2) wherein Note 6 specifies that the Punjab

    Common Schedule of Rates would be applicable.              It is
Page 8 of 26
contended   that   as   per   the   communication    dated

    05.01.1987 addressed by the Executive Engineer to the

    claimant, it indicates that the percentage above the

    departmental rates has been approved at 35.02%.         In

    that light it is contended that the calculation towards the

    claim in any event could not have exceeded the same. In

    that view it is contended that the learned Arbitrator had

    not considered these aspects nor does the Award indicate

    his mind. On the other hand, the learned First Appellate

    Court and the High Court having taken note of these

    aspects has arrived at the conclusion which does not call

    for interference. With regard to the Claim No.8 relating to

    extra payment for DALDAL (SWAMPY Area) the First

    Appellate Court and the High Court has taken into

    consideration that the claim had not been made within

    the time provided and has accordingly rejected the claim.

    In that view it is contended that the order passed by the

    High Court does not call for interference.
8.    In the light of the above, a perusal of the appeal

    papers would indicate that there is no serious dispute

    between the parties with regard to the contract entered
Page 9 of 26
into for construction, the work performed and certain

    additional work having been carried out by the claimant.

    The issue is however as to whether the learned Arbitrator

    had appropriately considered the matter in its correct

    perspective and in that light whether the Award of the

    amount at the premium of 93.12% would be justified and

    the manner of consideration by the learned Arbitrator

    without assigning reasons for his Award is sustainable.

    In that view the issue would be as to whether the First

    Appellate Court as also the High Court were justified in

    rejecting the claim raised by the claimant.
9.     While considering these aspects it is noticed that

    as pointed out by the learned counsel for the opposite

    party, Clause 63 of the contract which provides for

    arbitration of all disputes or differences between the

    parties also indicates the requirement of the Award to be

    as follows:
“All awards shall, be in writing and in case
           of awards amounting to Rs.1 lakh and
           above, such awards shall state the reasons
           for the amount awarded.”

    Keeping this in view, if the Award passed in the instant

    case by the learned Arbitrator (Annexure P6) insofar as
Page 10 of 26
Claim No.2 is perused, all that the learned Arbitrator has

    stated is as follows:
“As per agreement premium works out to
          93.12% which is awarded.”
10.     The    said   conclusion   on   Claim   No.2   without

    appropriate consideration is the basis of reckoning the

    premium at 93.12% in respect of the Claims No.3 and 12

    as well.      The learned senior advocate for the claimant

    while seeking to contend that the Award would still be

    sustainable even in that circumstance has relied on the

    decision of this Court in the case of
Indian Oil

    Corporation vs. Indian Carbon Ltd.
(1988) 3 SCC 36 to

    contend that it has been indicated therein that if the

    reason as to how the Arbitrator has drawn the inference

    is apparent the same would be sufficient.
The decision in

    the case of
Ispat Engineering and Foundry Works,

    B.S. City, Bokaro vs. Steel Authority of India Ltd.

    B.S. City Bokaro
(2001) 6 SCC 347 is relied, wherein it

    is held that in the event, however,       there are reasons,

    interference would still not be available unless of course,

    there exist a total perversity in the Award or the
Page 11 of 26
judgment is based on wrong proposition of law.
In

    addition, the decision in the case of
D.C.M Ltd. vs.

    Municipal Corporation of Delhi & Anr.
(1997) 7 SCC

    123 is relied upon to contend that even in case of a non­

    speaking Award if the Arbitrator has proceeded without

    overlooking any term of the contract, the same cannot be

    considered as an error apparent on the face of the Award.
In an attempt to persuade us the learned senior counsel

    has with leave referred to the decision of the High Court

    of Delhi in the case of M/s Naraindas R. Israni vs.

    Union of India DRJ (1993) 25 to point out that in

    respect of an agreement containing a similar clause the

    learned Judge had held that the learned Arbitrator is not

    required to give detailed reasons like a Civil Court but

    what is expected of the Arbitrator is that he must give out

    the trend of his thought process and it is not necessary

    for the Arbitrator to give any arithmetic computation.
11.    The learned advocate for the opposite party would

    however point out from the very decision in the case of
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd.
(supra) relied upon by the
Page 12 of 26
learned senior counsel for the claimant that this Court in
the said decision
has also held that where an authority

    makes an order in exercise of a quasi­judicial function it

    must record its reasons in support of the order it makes.

    It was further observed that every quasi­judicial order

    must be supported by reasons. It is therefore contended

    that the bar would raise higher for a judicial order which

    should indicate reasons for the conclusion. The learned

    advocate would further refer to the decision in the case of

    Raipur      Development   Authority   &    Ors.   vs.   M/s

    Chokhamal Contractors & Ors. (1989) 2 SCC 721

    wherein it is held that though it is well settled that an

    Award can neither be remitted nor set aside merely on

    the ground that it does not contain reasons in support of

    the conclusion or decision reached in it except where the

    arbitration agreement or the deed of submission requires

    it to give reasons.   In that light the learned advocate

    would point out that in the instant case the agreement

    between the parties would require that the learned

    Arbitrator has to assign reasons for the Award and when
Page 13 of 26
such requirement is stipulated the Award passed without

    reasons would not be sustainable being contrary to the

    explicit requirement in the contract between the parties.
The learned advocate for the opposite party has further

    referred to the decision in the case of
Gora Lal vs. Union

    of India
(2003) 12 SCC 459 wherein it is held as

    hereunder:
“6. A perusal of the aforesaid clause would
            show that the arbitrator is required to
            indicate a finding along with the sum
            awarded separately on each individual
            item of the dispute. While giving a finding,
            the arbitrator necessarily has to take into
            consideration the disputes, claims and
            counterclaims of the parties and after
            considering the evidence on such claims
            and the legal position, has to record his
            finding on each disputed item. In the
            present case what we find is that on each
            item the arbitrator has awarded a sum
            which according to us is not a finding but
            is merely a conclusion.”
12.     In the background of contentions put forth and

    from the legal position enunciated in the decisions relied

    upon, the position is clear that in the instant facts the

    agreement between the parties required the learned

    Arbitrator to pass the Award in a particular manner
Page 14 of 26
whereunder the reasons were required to be assigned

    since that was the explicit requirement under the

    contract. If in that background the Award impugned in

    the instant proceedings is taken note the learned

    Arbitrator   has   not   assigned   any   reasons   for   the

    conclusion reached on Claim No.2 which was also

    relevant for considering the Claim Nos.3 and 12 as well.

    If that be the position the only explanation that is sought

    to be put forth by the learned senior advocate for the

    claimant that the basis for such conclusion is the

    difference of the value between the estimated amount at

    Rs.31 lakhs and the contract amount at Rs.59,86,732/­

    to work out the premium would not be justified.           The

    quantum of the contract amount as against the estimated

    cost by itself could not have formed the basis to conclude

    the claim as made by the claimant towards premium of

    extra items, extra items for supply and laying of self­

    draining materials and towards re­handling of earth

    work. In that regard the contention to the contrary put

    forth by the opposite party was that the tender form
Page 15 of 26
provided for that aspect under Note 6, which reads as

    hereunder:
“Extra other items shall be paid for each
         such items of work at thorough rate
         worked out on the basis of relevant Punjab
         Common Schedule of Rates basis plus
         sanctioned premium (at the time of
         tendering), plus or minus percentage above
         or below worked out by the department by
         reference to department’s estimated cost of
         tender.”
13.     The said provision would indicate that the rate as

    prescribed under the Punjab Common Schedule of Rates

    would be applicable. In that light it is noticed that the

    letter dated 05.01.1987 relied upon by the learned

    advocate for the opposite party which was addressed to

    the claimant indicates that the premium as agreed under

    the schedule is at 35.02%. The said contention had been

    urged by the opposite party in their pleadings. In fact, as

    pointed out by the learned advocate for the opposite

    party, the First Appellate Court has taken note of this

    aspect and has arrived at its conclusion to disapprove the

    Award of premium at 93.12% for extra work.
14.    In the above backdrop, we fully concur with the

    manner in which the consideration was made by the First
Page 16 of 26
Appellate Court as also the High Court to arrive at the

    conclusion that the claim as put forth by the claimant in

    respect of Claims No.2, 3 and 12 at the premium of

    93.12% worked out only on the basis of difference of the

    amount between the estimated cost and the contract

    amount is not justified. However, in that circumstance

    when the learned Arbitrator has not assigned any

    reasons but had unilaterally in a cryptic fashion

    awarded the claim at the premium of 93.12% and when

    the same was disapproved as not sustainable,         the

    appropriate course in the normal circumstance ought to

    have been to set aside the Award and remit the matter to

    the learned Arbitrator to make a fresh consideration to

    determine the percentage of premium at which the claim

    for the extra items would be sustainable,           more

    particularly in a circumstance where the additional work

    carried out was not in serious dispute but the premium

    for rate of payment was to be determined.
15.    The said course would be open even at this stage,

    but in the instant case we however take note that the

    claim was under the Act, 1940 in respect of an agreement
Page 17 of 26
dated 05.12.1985 and the claim before the Arbitrator

    itself was of the year 1994. In that background a perusal

    of the consideration as made by the First Appellate Court

    would indicate that it does not refer to the claim that was

    admissible after working out the percentage of premium

    that is applicable. It has only arrived at the conclusion

    that the working out of the premium at 93.12% in respect

    of the extra items on Claim Nos.2, 3 and 12 are set aside.

    The learned First Appellate Judge ought to have arrived

    at the conclusion of the admissible claim and in that

    regard a conclusion ought to have been reached instead

    of rejecting the claim outright since the course to remand

    the matter to the Arbitrator was not adopted.
16.    In that background since we have referred to the

    communication dated 05.01.1987 which is produced at

    Annexure R3 with the additional documents and also on

    taking note of the contention urged by the opposite party

    regarding the premium rates to be worked out at 35.02%,

    we are of the opinion that instead of rejecting the entire

    claim as made by the claimants, premium for the extra

    items is to be determined at 35.02% and the claim based
Page 18 of 26
on the same is required to be awarded. To that extent,

    the calculation is to be made by the opposite party and

    the amount be paid to the claimant. The said calculation

    with the premium at 35.02% shall be made in respect of

    the extra items indicated under Claim Nos.2, 3 and 12.
17.   Insofar as the Claim No.8, it relates to the work

    carried out on DALDAL land wherein the soil was marshy

    and extra construction material was required to complete

    the work. The learned Arbitrator through the impugned

    Award had taken note of the same and awarded the sum

    of Rs.19,15,143/­ after indicting the amount for the said

    work on the same basis and deducting the agreed rate.

    Though the learned Sub­Judge had accepted the same

    for making it the ‘Rule of Court’, the learned First

    Appellate Judge on taking note of the claim had arrived

    at the conclusion that the learned Arbitrator was not

    justified in granting the claim. In that regard, the First

    Appellate Court had taken note of Clause 39 of the

    Contract Agreement wherein a provision was made for

    extra items.    The second paragraph therein which

    provides for the manner in which the contractor is
Page 19 of 26
required to submit the returns of the work claimed for

    extra items was referred to.        The said requirement

    indicated that the contractor shall deliver in the office of

    the Executive Engineer on or before the 10 th day of every

    month during continuance of the work, the return

    showing details of any work claimed for extra, and such

    return shall also contain the value of such work as

    claimed by the contractor.         If the details are not

    indicated, the Clause indicates that it shall be deemed

    that the contractor has waived all claims not included in

    such returns and will have no right to enforce any such

    claim not so included. In that light since the claim was

    ultimately   found   as   not   included   in   the   monthly

    statement, the First Appellate Court was of the opinion

    that the requirement of the conditions of the contract was

    not adhered to and, therefore, set aside the Award of the

    said amount by the learned Arbitrator and the same

    claim being made ‘Rule of Court’ by the learned Sub­

    Judge was also set aside. The High Court while adverting

    to this aspect of the matter has held that insofar as the
Page 20 of 26
amount sought under Claim No.8 the question is not

    whether the petitioner undertook this work but whether

    the petitioner raised any claim for this extra amount in

    terms with the contract. The High Court has also taken

    note of Clause 39 of the contract and has declined the

    claim.
18.    In that background having taken note of Clause 39

    of the Contract Agreement, it cannot be considered as a

    statutory   limitation   or   bar   for   the   claim     in   all

    circumstances.    The said Clause no doubt prescribes a

    method by which the claim is to be put forth in the

    statement every month. The said requirement will have

    to be construed as being put in the agreement so as to

    ensure that the additional work has actually been done,

    the claim is put forth along with details so that baseless

    claim is not made at a distant point in time when it will

    not be possible to determine.       Though the Clause also

    indicates that if such claim is not made,               it would

    amount to waiver, in a circumstance where the claim is

    ultimately put forth in the forum where an adjudication

    is made and based on the material if the adjudicating
Page 21 of 26
authority is satisfied that the actual work had been done

    and the contractor being entitled to the extra amount

    spent by him to carry out the work in an appropriate

    manner, it would not be just and proper to deny such

    claim only on the ground that it had not been indicated

    strictly in the manner as provided in the contract

    specially keeping in view the nature of work undertaken.

    To that limited extent a perusal of the Award passed by

    the learned Arbitrator would indicate that the learned

    Arbitrator had taken into consideration the letter dated

    14.11.1986 wherein the identification of soil which was

    agreed to.    The letter dated 09.03.1987 submitting the

    test results identifying the strata encountered as DALDAL

    is referred therein.    The work having been completed

    during the March, 1988 was also taken note.       In that

    circumstance when the fact remains that the DALDAL

    land was situated in the area, work was carried out and

    extra material was used, the claim in our opinion cannot

    be rejected outright adopting a technical view of the

    matter.     However, the claim for the extra item in that
Page 22 of 26
regard for the work of 1,33,181.00/­ ‘Cum’ will have to be

    calculated with premium at the same rate of 35.02% over

    and above the agreed rate and not at 93.12% as has been

    taken into consideration by the learned Arbitrator for

    awarding the amount.     The appropriate calculation in

    that regard shall however be worked out in such manner

    so as to award the amount under the said Claim No.8.
19.    Insofar as Claim No.16 we see no reason to

    interfere with the orders passed by the High Court or by

    the First Appellate Court.   Further with regard to the

    interest sought under Claim No.18 we are of the opinion

    that in the absence of agreement with regard to the rate

    of interest, the interest as awarded by the learned

    Arbitrator was on the higher side and the First Appellate

    Court was justified in reducing the same to 12% per

    annum and the High Court was also justified in not

    interfering with the same.
20.    As already indicated above the unreasoned award

    on being set aside by the First Appellate Court, the

    matter in a normal circumstance ought to have been

    remitted to the learned Arbitrator to redo the proceedings
Page 23 of 26
afresh in accordance with law. Such course ought to have

    been adopted by us as well. We had proceeded to

    examine the matter with regard to the validity of the

    claim keeping in view the time lapse and since the

    validity of the claim was to be taken note at the

    appropriate premium if not at the percentage of premium

    at 93.12% as determined by the learned Arbitrator.     In

    view of our conclusion     relating to the claim being

    sustainable to the extent as indicated by us above at the

    premium of 35.02%, under Claim Nos.2, 3, and 12 the

    calculation based on the extent and measurement of the

    extra items is an exercise which cannot be undertaken

    herein and as such the opposite party keeping in view the

    directions herein shall work out the actual amount

    payable in respect of the extent, measurement, quantity

    and price based on which the claim is made.      In that

    regard we hold that the claimant is entitled to the claim

    for extra items as put forth under Claim Nos. 2, 3, 8 and

    12 by working out the difference of cost on the tender

    premium at 35.02%. On arriving at the quantum of the
Page 24 of 26
amount, the same shall be payable with interest at 12%

    per annum in the manner as ordered by the First

    Appellate Court.      The claim No.1 ordered by the High

    Court is sustained. The said exercise for calculating and

    paying the amount to the claimants on claim Nos.1, 2, 3,

    8 and 12 shall be completed by the opposite party within

    the period of six weeks from this date. In the event of

    there being delay in payment beyond the said period, the

    same shall carry interest at the rate of 18% per annum

    till the date of payment.
21.     In the result we pass the following:
ORDER
(i) The order dated 06.11.2007 of First Appellate

            Court and the order dated 08.04.2011 by the High

            Court in Rev. No.2958/2008 are modified.
(ii)   It is ordered that in addition to the Claim

            No.1 allowed by the High Court, the claimant is

            also entitled to the amount under Claim Nos.2, 3,

            8 and 12, however, to be calculated at the

            premium of 35.02%. The same shall be calculated

            with interest at 12% per annum and paid in six
Page 25 of 26
weeks from this date failing which the same will

            carry interest at 18% per annum.
(iii) The appeals are, accordingly, allowed in part

            with costs.
(iv) The Registry is directed to draw up the

            decree/award in terms of the directions contained

            hereinabove.
(v)   Pending applications if any, shall also stand

            disposed of.
………….…………….J.
                                         (R. BANUMATHI)



                                        .……………………….J.
                                         (A.S. BOPANNA)

    New Delhi,
    February 14, 2020
Page 26 of 26