[Cites
7
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
Parmeshwar Nanda vs The State Of Jharkhand Chief Secretary on 7 February, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 177, (2020) 1 SCT 817 (2020) 3 SCALE 293, (2020) 3 SCALE 293
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
Hemant Gupta
,
L. Nageswara Rao
REPORTABLE

                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


              CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 505-531 OF 2020
    (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NOS. 27922-27948 OF 2017)


PARMESHWAR NANDA ETC.                               .....APPELLANT(S)

                                    VERSUS

THE STATE OF JHARKHAND THROUGH CHIEF
SECRETARY & ORS. ETC.                             .....RESPONDENT(S)

                                WITH

              CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 532-542 OF 2020
    (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NOS. 32135-32145 OF 2017)


                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 543 OF 2020
          (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 852 OF 2018)

                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 544 OF 2020
         (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 4380 OF 2019)

                                AND

             CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 545-546 OF 2020
     (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NOS. 4698-4699 OF 2019)




                         JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
Civil Appeal Nos. 505-531 of 2020

Civil Appeal Nos. 532-542 of 2020
Civil Appeal Nos. 543 of 2020
1
AND

Civil Appeal Nos. 545-546 of 2020
1.       The present appeals are directed against an order passed by the

         Full Bench of High Court of Jharkhand on 16 th June, 2017 wherein it

         has been held that the services rendered by the appellants under

         the Adult Education and Non-Formal Education Project 1 cannot be

         counted        under   a   Government   scheme   for   the   purpose    of

         pensionary benefits after the appellants were appointed by the

         State.
2.       Briefly, the facts are that the appellants were appointed under the

         Project, co-sponsored by the Central Government and the State

         Government, in the erstwhile undivided State of Bihar between the

         period 1978 to 1990. Some of the appellants were appointed as

         Adult     Education    Supervisors   whereas   other   appellants   were

         appointed in the ministerial cadre such as Stenographer, Clerk cum

         Accountant, Clerk cum Typist, Peon as well as Drivers.                 The

         appellants were working under the Project during the bifurcation of

         the State and their services fell in the successor State of Jharkhand

         which was formed on 15th November, 2000. The Government of

         India vide policy decision dated 1st April, 2001 closed the Project.

         The Government of Jharkhand, consequent to the bifurcation of

         State of Bihar, declared the employees to be surplus w.e.f. 16 th

         May, 2001.
1    for short, ‘Project’
2
3.   The Government of Jharkhand issued a notification dated 30 th May,

     2007 for absorption of the employees engaged in the Project in the

     Departments of Food, Public Distribution and Consumer Affairs,

     Finance, Social Welfare, Women and Child Development, Urban

     Development etc. on different posts, in their respective prescribed

     scales of pay. A perusal of the said notification shows that there

     were 756 employees who were declared as surplus and were to be

     absorbed by the State.      It appears that most of the surplus

     employees were absorbed in different scales of pay vide letter of

     appointments starting from 24th July, 2007 except those who had

     attained the age of superannuation or had died prior to such

     absorption.
4.   As per Clauses 11 and 12 of the notification dated 30 th May, 2007,

     the surplus employees absorbed were to be treated as new

     appointments and the services rendered by them prior to their

     declaration as surplus i.e. prior to 15th May, 2001, would not be

     counted for the purpose of their seniority and pay protection.

     Clauses 11 and 12 of the notification read as under:
“11. The adjustment of surplus personnels will be
              considered new appointment and being surplus on the
              basis of prior service, they will not be benefitted of
              seniority.
12. These surplus personnels will not be benefitted by
              pay protection.”
5.   59 writ petitions came to be filed claiming pensionary benefits and

     seniority before the High Court. The matter was placed before the
3
Full Bench in view of the divergence of opinions of the two Division

       Benches of the Jharkhand High Court in
State of Jharkhand &

       Ors. v. Bhubneshwar Mahto2
and
State of Jharkhand & Ors. v.

       Bimal Kumar Sinha3
.
6.     LPA No. 515 of 2004 was preferred by the State against the order of

       the learned Single Bench passed on 21st November, 2003. The writ

       petitioner was directed to be paid salary for the period 16 th May,

       2001 to 31st July, 2001 i.e. the date of his retirement. The writ

       petitioner was ordered to be treated as a regular employee of the

       State, having been appointed on 10th December, 1968, much

       before the Project started in the year 1978. LPA No. 188 of 2004

       was preferred by the State against the order of the learned Single

       Bench. In the appeal, it was held that the writ petitioner therein

       was appointed under the Project which was abolished on the

       specific condition that past service rendered by him will not be

       taken into account. Such writ petitions were categorized into three

       groups by the Full Bench. The first group of petitions were from

       those employees who had retired after being declared surplus w.e.f.

       16th May, 2001 but before they were absorbed pursuant to the

       notification dated 30th May, 2007.     In this category, some of the

       writ petitioners were legal heirs of those employees who had died

       during this period before being absorbed. The second group of

       petitions were from those employees who were declared surplus

       but   were    absorbed   by   the   Government   of   Jharkhand   vide
2    LPA No. 515 of 2004
3    LPA No. 188 of 2004
4
notification dated 30th May, 2007 and had retired thereafter. The

     third group of petitions were from those employees who were

     working on the date of filing of the writ petitions, after being

     absorbed by the Government of Jharkhand vide the aforementioned

     notification.    The employees in writ petitions comprising of

     Categories I and II claim pensionary benefits whereas the writ

     petitions filed in Category III claim seniority by taking into

     consideration their past services rendered under the Project

     resulting into payment of pension after attaining the age of

     superannuation.
7.   The common challenge in all the writ petitions were to clauses 11

     and 12, as reproduced above.             It was the stand of the writ

     petitioners that they are being treated as fresh appointees and

     their past service has not been counted for the purposes of

     seniority or fixation of their initial salary.
8.   The High Court in the impugned order referred to Jharkhand

     Pension Rules to hold that the following three conditions are

     required to be satisfied before the service can be treated to be

     pensionable service-
(i)       Service must be under Government.
     (ii)      Employment must be substantive and permanent.
     (iii)     Service must be paid by Government.
9.   Rule 59 provides that the State Government can declare any

     specific kind of service rendered in a non-gazetted capacity to

     qualify for pension even though either or both of conditions (1) and
5
(2) are not fulfilled. The High Court held that no declaration of the

      State Government in general terms has been made nor any

      direction in individual cases issued in favour of any such

      petitioners.
10.   Before this Court, learned counsel for the appellants referred to

      Circular issued by the State Government under Rule 59 of Bihar

      Pension Rules, 1950 which would be applicable in the State of

      Jharkhand after its bifurcation in terms of State Reorganization Act.

      The Circular dated 12th August 1969 reads thus:
“Regarding: - Declaration of a temporary service
                of a Government Servant who is not confirmed as
                pensionable.
Under the existing pension rules, a temporary
                Government servant if not confirmed in any point, is not
                entitled to pension unless his services are declared
                pensionable under Rule 59 of the Bihar Pension Rules.
2. There are a large number of temporary Government
                servants employed under different Schemes which are
                in existence for the last 15-20 years and it will cause
                hardship to them if they are not allowed pension after
                their retirement.
3. The State Government after careful consideration
                have, therefore, been pleased to decide that if the
                service of the temporary or officiating government
                servant who is not confirmed in any post is continuous
                and is more than 15 years, it will be considered as
                pensionable under rule 59 of the Bihar Pension Rules.
4. These orders will be applicable to government
                servants retiring on or after 12 August, 1969.”
11.   The argument is that the issue relating to arrears of salary for the

      period 16th May, 2001 till the date of the absorption of the
6
employees       under      notification   dated   30th   May,     2007    stands

       concluded by an order passed by this Court in
State of Jharkhand

       & Ors. v. Asgar Ali & Ors.4
, therefore, the appellants are entitled

       to consequential benefits of pension.
12.    On the other hand, the argument of learned counsel for the

       respondents is that the said Circular was not referred to by the

       appellants before the High Court and rightly so, as such Circular is

       not    applicable     to    the   employees       engaged       under    Central

       Government sponsored project. Still further, it is the temporary or

       officiating service of a Government servant which is to be

       considered as pensionable under Rule 59 of the Rules. Since the

       employees engaged under the Project were not discharging duties

       as temporary or officiating Government servants, therefore, such

       Circular will not be applicable to them. It is, thus, argued that the

       view of the Full Bench of the Jharkhand High Court does not

       warrant any interference in the present appeals.
13.    Before we consider the respective arguments of the learned

       counsel for the parties, some of the statutory provisions of

       Jharkhand Pension Rules are required to be reproduced:
“Rule 31:- Permanent post means a post carrying a
                   definite rate of pay and sanctioned without limit of
                   time.
Rule 38:- Substantive pay means the pay other than
                   special pay, personal pay or emoluments classed as pay
                   by the Provincial government under rule 26(a)(iii) to
                   which a government servant is entitled on account of a
4    Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) CC Nos. 10361-10364 of 2014 decided on 18 th July,
    2014.
7
post to which he has been appointed substantively or
by reasons of his substantive position in a cadre.

Rule 40:- Temporary post means a post carrying a
definite rate of pay and sanctioned for a limited time.
CHAPTER III
 GENERAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO GRANT OF PENSION
              SECTION-1-GENERAL

Rule 58:- The service of Government servant does not
qualify for pension unless it conforms to the following
three conditions:-
First-The service must be under Government.
Second-The employment must be substantive and
permanent.
Third-The service must be paid by Government.
Rule 59:- The Provincial Government may, however, in
the case of service paid from general revenues, even
though either or both of conditions (1) and (2) are not
fulfilled-
(1) declare that any specified kind of service rendered
in a non-gazetted capacity shall qualify for pension.

(2) in individual cases, and subject to such conditions as
it may think fit to impose in each case, direct that
service rendered by a Government servant shall count
for pension.
Rule 60:- The service of a Government servant does not
qualify unless he is appointed and his duties and pay
are regulated by the Government, or under conditions
determined by the Government. The following are
examples of Government servants exclude from
pension by this rule;
(1) Employees of a municipality,
(2) Employees of grant-in-aid schools and institutions.
(3) Service on an establishment paid from the house
hold allowance of the Governor or from his contract
establishment allowance.
Rule 61:- Service does not qualify unless the
Government servant holds substantively a post on a
permanent establishment.
Rule   74:-   Services   which   satisfied   the   conditions
8
prescribed in sub-sections (2) and (3) qualifies, or does
                not qualify, according to the source from which it is
                paid; with reference to this rule, service is classified as
                follows:-
(a) Paid from the general revenues.
(b) Paid from local funds.
(c) Paid from funds in respect to which the Government
                hold the position of trustee.
(d) Paid by fees levied by law, or under the authority of
                the Govt. or by commission.
(e) Paid by the grant, in accordance with law and
                custom, of a tenure in land, or of a source of income, or
                right to collect money.
Rule 103:- An interruption in the service of a
                Government servant entails forfeiture of his past
                service, except in the following case:-
(a) Authorised leave of absence.
(b) Unauthorized absence in continuation of authorized
                leave of absence so long as the post of the absentee is
                not substantively filled; if his post is substantively filled,
                the past service of the absentee is forfeited.
(c) Suspension, where it is immediately followed by
                reinstatement whether to the same or to a different
                post, or where the Government servant dies or is
                permitted to retire or is retired while under suspension.
(d) Abolition of the post or loss of appointment owing to
                reduction of establishment.
(e) Transfer or        non-qualifying      service   in     an
                establishment under Government Control. The transfer
                must be made by a competent authority; a Government
                servant who voluntarily resigns qualifying service
                cannot claim the benefit of this exception. Transfer to a
                grant-in-aid school entails forfeiture.
(f) Time occupied in transit from one appointment to
                another provided that the Government servant is
                transferred under the orders of competent authority, or,
                if he is a non-gazetted Government servant with the
                consent of the head of his old office.”
14.   Before this Court, 3 writ petitioners are in appeal falling in category

      I, 18 falling in category II and 6 falling in category III.
15.   In the order under appeal, the claim of the employees for pension
9
was declined for the reason that no declaration within the meaning

        of Rule 59(1) in general terms has been made nor any direction in

        individual cases issued in their favour. The High Court relied upon

        judgment of this Court reported as
Dhyan Singh & Ors. v. State

        of Haryana & Ors.5
.
The High Court also held that judgment of

        Single Bench of Patna High Court in
Baliram Singh & Ors. v.

        State of Bihar & Ors.6
is per incuriam. The High Court concluded

        as under:
“The foregoing discussion therefore makes it clear that
                    past services of these petitioners/employees were
                    under the centrally sponsored scheme known as Adult
                    Education/Non-formal Education/Mass Education Project
                    which was abolished w.e.f. 1.4.2001 by the Central
                    Government and consequently w.e.f. 15.5.2001 by the
                    Government of Jharkhand.        Appointment of these
                    petitioners/employees under such a scheme/project
                    therefore, cannot be treated as under regular
                    establishment of the Government on a permanent and
                    substantive post. Moreover, their pay and allowances
                    were borne by the grant-in-aid released by the Central
                    Government from time to time. That is the reason why
                    their services were treated as surplus once the Central
                    Government closed the scheme w.e.f. 1.4.2001.
                    Petitioners have failed to controvert the aforesaid
                    position on facts.”
16.     The judgment in Baliram Singh has attained finality with the

        judgment of this Court reported as
State of Bihar & Ors. v.

        Baliram Singh & Ors.7
. In the aforesaid case, the policy decision

        of absorbing the writ petitioners appointed under the Project

        contained a clause that the candidates will be treated as fresh

        appointments and that the earlier services rendered by them shall

5     (2002) 10 SCC 656
6     2016 SCC OnLine Pat 9958
7     (2018) 18 SCC 46
10
be calculated for their pension.     The writ petitioners before the

      Patna High Court claimed back wages from the date of their

      termination till the date they were absorbed. This Court declined

      the claim of back wages. The Court held as under:
“18. In the present case, however, the respondents
               have neither challenged the termination order after
               closure of the Non-Formal Education Scheme with effect
               from 1-4-2001 nor the policy dated 20-5-2005 under
               which they have been appointed or the appointment
               letter dated 16-3-2007. Even the appointment letter
               dated 16-3-2007 unambiguously predicates that the
               appointment was a fresh appointment and the past
               services would be reckoned only for the purpose of
               grant of pension and nothing more. Indisputably, the
               respondents acted upon such terms and conditions of
               appointment without any demurrer. They chose to file
               the subject writ petition only in the year 2013, when the
               cause of action first arose on 1-4-2001, then on 20-5-
               2005 and once again, on 16-3-2007. Unless the
               respondents are to be reinstated in their previous post
               (held prior to 1-4-2001), the question of awarding back
               wages would not arise at all. The relief of back wages is
               and can be linked only to the order of reinstatement. It
               cannot be awarded in isolation or, for that matter,
               during the period when the respondents were not in
               employment at all.”
17.   The case of Dhyan Singh was in respect of appointments under

      the Project in the State of Haryana. The services of the employees

      were discharged upon abolishing of the aforementioned Project.
The employees invoked the writ jurisdiction of the court claiming

      fixation of their salary by taking past service and for pension. This

      Court declined such claim and held as under:
“…..The continuance/engagement of the appellants
               under the specific scheme cannot be held to be an
               employment under any establishment of the
               Government. Such schemes are taken up for
               certain contingencies when money for the same is
11
provided either by the Central Government or at
               times by some foreign countries. But the
               employment under such scheme not being a part
               of the formal cadre of the State Government, it is
               difficult to hold that the period for which an
               employee rendered service under such scheme can
               be counted either for the purposes of deciding their
               pensionary benefits or even for fixing of their
               salary in the scale of pay once they are regularly
               absorbed.”
18.   In the present case, Clause 11 of the notification dated 30 th May,

      2007 issued by Government of Jharkhand is to the effect that

      absorption of the surplus personnel will be considered as new

      appointments and they will not be granted benefit of seniority on

      the   basis   of their past service. Neither will   such past service

      entitle them to such pay protection.        One of the appointment

      letters appointing 65 candidates as Project Officers was issued on

      20th December, 2007.       Such appointment letter had following

      clauses which read as under:
“4. Adjusted employees shall be covered under the old
               Pension Scheme.       Their service period prior to
               retrenchment shall be counted for the purpose of
               pension. Period of retrenchment shall not be counted
               for the purpose of pension.
5. Adjustment of above surplus Project Officers shall be
               considered as fresh appointment and benefit of
               seniority on the basis their service rendered prior to
               becoming surplus shall not be admissible to them.”


      The appointment letters to the other employees is on similar lines.
19.   The argument of the learned counsel for the appellants is that the

      policy decision of the State, vide notification dated 30 th May, 2007
12
only denies them the benefit of seniority or pay protection but not

      of their past service being counted towards pensionary benefits. It

      is contended that in terms of Rule 59 of the Rules, the State

      Government has declared that the services rendered by a

      temporary Government servant employed under different schemes

      would be entitled to pension after the completion of 15 years of

      service.
20.   The entire case is based upon Rule 59 of the Rules and the Circular

      dated 12th August, 1969 of the erstwhile State of Bihar. We do not

      find any merit in the arguments raised by the learned counsel for

      the appellants.     Rule 59 of the Rules empowers the State

      Government to declare any specified kind of service rendered by

      one in a non-gazetted service to qualify for pension, provided, that

      the salary is paid from the general revenue. Rule 58 of the Rules

      contemplates the conditions that are required to be satisfied for

      services to be pensionable. Herein, as it has been reiterated before,

      first condition is that the service must be under the Government;
second, that it must be substantive and permanent; and third, that

      it must be paid by the Government.
21.   The appellants were appointed under a specific Scheme i.e. the

      Project.   Such project was not a permanent establishment of the

      Government as it was meant for a specific purpose funded by the

      Central Government for a specified period. The appointment of the

      appellants under the Project is not a part of any cadre of the State
13
Government.      Therefore, the first condition of Rule 58 that the

      service rendered must be under the State Government is not

      satisfied by the appellants having been appointed under the

      Project.   The   second   condition   that   employment    must    be

      substantive and permanent is again not satisfied by the appellants

      as the employment of the appellants was under the Project.         A

      permanent post in terms of Rule 31 of the Rules means a post

      carrying a definite rate of pay and that is sanctioned without a time

      limit. The appointment of the appellants under the project was not

      in a pay scale nor was it sanctioned without a time limit. Further,

      substantive pay is defined in Rule 38 of the Rules as a person who

      is appointed in a cadre. At best, the appellants satisfied only the

      third condition i.e. that they were paid by the Government.
22.   If the first and second conditions mentioned in Rule 58 of the Rules

      are not satisfied, the State Government can declare any specified

      kind of service rendered in a non-gazetted capacity to qualify for

      pension.    The Circular dated 12th August, 1969 deals with

      pensionary benefits to a temporary Government servant.            The

      appellants were never appointed by the Government either on a

      temporary or on permanent basis. The appellants were engaged

      under the Project i.e. a scheme, therefore, the benefit of such a

      Circular cannot be claimed by the appellants. Still further, sub-rule

      (1) of Rule 59 of the Rules empowers the State to declare any

      specific kind of service to qualify for pension. The notification for

      absorption circulated on 30th May, 2007 and the subsequent letter
14
of appointments do not contain any condition that the services

      rendered by the appellants under the Project shall qualify for

      pension.   The policy decision contemplates that it is a fresh

      appointment and no benefit either of seniority or pay protection

      shall be given. The appellants have not disputed such condition of

      appointment having been appointed under such policy decision

      vide the notification dated 30th May, 2007.   The Circular has not

      granted pensionary benefits. In the absence of any specific

      condition in the Circular to grant pensionary benefits, it is not

      possible to read that pensionary benefits are to be granted to the

      erstwhile employees of the Project.    The appellants cannot turn

      around to say that the services rendered by them under the Project

      shall be counted for pension. The Circular dated 12 th August, 1969

      is not even remotely applicable to the employees appointed under

      the Project as the very nature of the appointment was for a specific

      purpose and not for an unlimited period of time.
23.   The case of Baliram Singh arises out of the policy of the State of

      Bihar wherein the past service has been specifically ordered to be

      considered for pension. Since in the State of Jharkhand, the policy

      decision is to treat them as fresh appointments without any benefit

      of seniority and pay protection, therefore, to count the period when

      the appellants were working under a Project as pensionable service

      is beyond comprehension. The appellants have been appointed as

      fresh candidates and, therefore, their period of service for pension

      has to be calculated from the date of their regular appointment and
15
therefore they cannot get any benefit of past service rendered by

         them.
24.      Learned counsel for the appellants have referred to an order

         passed by this Court in
Asgar Ali & Ors. v. State of Jharkhand

         & Ors.8
wherein the direction of the High Court for payment of

         arrears was not interfered with.   It is contended that since the

         appellants have been paid salary for the period prior to their

         regular appointment, the appellants would be entitled to pension

         as well.
25.      The Single Bench of the Jharkhand High Court in a judgment

         reported as Asgar Ali dealt with a prayer for absorption and for

         payment of arrears of salary from 16 th May, 2001, i.e. when the

         employees were rendered as surplus, till January, 2008, i.e. the

         date of their absorption, in Writ Petition No.729 of 2004.      The

         learned Single Bench vide order dated 4 th January, 2010, directed

         the state for the payment of salary for the reason that the services

         of the employees under the Project were not retrenched, therefore,

         the employees were entitled to their salary. In such petition the

         employees had made no claim for counting of past services for the

         purposes of pensionary benefits. As against such order of the

         learned Single Judge, the state sought LPA No.533 of 2012 which

         was dismissed vide order dated 1st October, 2013. Thereafter the

         State sought a Special Leave Petition which was also dismissed

         with a direction to make phased payments of salary to the writ
8     2010 SCC OnLine Jhar 8
16
petitioners/employees. Again, no claim for counting of past

      services for the purposes of pension was made or allowed by the

      Court. It was merely a monetary benefit which was granted on

      account of no formal order of retrenchment being passed against

      the employees employed under the Project.
26.   Since the appellants were absorbed as fresh appointees without

      pay protection and seniority, as a consequence thereof, they will

      not be entitled to count their past service rendered under the

      Project for the purpose of pension. We, thus, do not find any error

      in the order passed by the High Court which may warrant

      interference in the present appeals. Accordingly, the appeals are

      dismissed.
Civil Appeal No. 544 of 2020
27.   The present appeal is directed against an order passed by Division

      Bench of the High Court of Patna on 20 th June, 2018 whereby LPA

      No.189 of 2018 filed by the State was dismissed relying upon an

      order passed by the Single Bench in CWJC No. 20780 of 2010 and

      CWJC No. 20801 of 2010 on 19th April, 2011 wherein referring to

      Rule 103 of Bihar Pension Rules, 1950, it was held that an

      interruption in service on account of the abolition of a post shall not

      entail forfeiture of the past service of a Government servant, i.e.

      the intervening period can be counted for pensionary benefits. In

      view of the said fact, the State was directed to consider the writ

      petitioners as continuing in service between 1992 and 1998 solely
17
for the purpose of granting personal monetary benefits. The

         petitioners were not to be entitled to payment of salary for the

         period in any manner and neither claim any seniority over other

         Government servants.
28.      After the aforesaid judgments, Baliram Singh along with others

         filed CWJC No. 22208 of 2013 9 to claim back wages for the period

         from 1st October, 2001 to 3rd July, 2007. The learned Single Bench

         allowed the writ petition on 22nd August, 2016. Thereafter, LPA No.

         2307 of 2016 was dismissed on 15 th January, 2018. The said orders

         were set aside by this Court in Baliram Singh.                      Therefore, the

         reliance of the High Court on an order passed at earlier stage on

         Baliram Singh no longer holds good. It may be noticed that in the

         State of Bihar, past services rendered by employees under the

         Project were taken into consideration for pensionary benefits.                         In

         view of the said fact, the present appeal is disposed of in the same

         terms as in Baliram Singh.
.............................................J.
                                                              L. NAGESWARA RAO



                                              .............................................J.
                                                                (HEMANT GUPTA)


NEW DELHI;
FEBRUARY 07, 2020.
9     2016 SCC OnLine Patna 9958 decided on 22 nd August, 2016.
18