[Cites
10
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
Gelus Ram Sahu vs Dr. Surendra Kumar Singh on 18 February, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 1203, AIRONLINE 2020 SC 248, AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 1203 (2020) 3 SCALE 742, (2020) 3 SCALE 742
Author:
Chief Justice
Bench:
Surya Kant
,
B.R. Gavai
,
S.A. Bobde
REPORTABLE


                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO.1667 OF 2020
                    [Arising out of Special Leave Petition(C)No. 32417 OF 2016]



      Gelus Ram Sahu and others                                    ..... Appellants(s)



                                          VERSUS



      Dr. Surendra Kumar Singh and others                         .....Respondents(s)



                                                  WITH


                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO.1668 OF 2020
                    [Arising out of Special Leave Petition(C)No. 10647 OF 2017]



                                              JUDGMENT
Leave Granted.
2.
Signature Not Verified
The appellants are aggrieved by the order dated 28.09.2016 of
Digitally signed by
CHARANJEET KAUR
the High Court of Chhattisgarh through which the writ petition filed
Date: 2020.02.18
18:26:55 IST
Reason:
by Surendra Kumar Singh (Respondent No. 1) seeking declaration of

                                                                                Page | 1
Ph.D. being an essential qualification for the post of Principal at the

Polytechnic colleges was allowed and consequently appointment of the

appellants were quashed for want of the said qualification.
FACTS
3.    Respondent No. 1 started teaching as a lecturer of electrical

engineering at the Govt Polytechnic College, Ambikapur on 10.11.1993

and was promoted as the Head of Department (hereinafter, “HOD”) of

electrical engineering at the Govt Polytechnic, Durg from 03.03.2009.

He is presently working at Govt. Polytechnic, Kabirdham with

additional responsibility of Principal­in­charge. Having completed

three years of service as HOD on 01.01.2012, Respondent No. 1

applied for the post of Principal in response to the process of

promotion initiated by the State of Chhattisgarh (Respondent No. 2) in

2014. Along with Respondent No. 1, numerous other serving HODs

(including the seven appellants herein) too participated in the selection

process. Whereas Appellants No. 1       to 7 were declared successful

through notification dated 25.06.2014, the 1 st respondent did not

figure in the selection list.
4.    Respondent No. 1 being aggrieved approached the High Court,

complaining that his fundamental rights stood violated as the

promotion process was in contravention of the ‘Pay Scales, Service


                                                                Page | 2
conditions and Qualifications for the Teachers and other Academic

Staff    in   Technical      Institutions    (Diploma)      Regulations,      2010’

(hereinafter, “2010 AICTE Regulations”). These regulations were

framed by All India Council for Technical Education (Respondent No.

3, hereinafter “AICTE”) in exercise of its powers conferred under the
AICTE Act, 1987
which has been enacted by Parliament with

reference to Entry 66 of the Union List contained in Schedule VII of

the Constitution; and is thus binding on the State of Chhattisgarh

(Respondent No. 2). The ‘Chhattisgarh Technical Education (Teaching

cadre­Polytechnic)     (Gazetted)     Service    Recruitment        Rules,    2014’

(hereinafter, “2014 Chhattisgarh Rules”), in so far as they allow

candidates without Ph.D to be appointed as Principals, were

contended to be illegal for being in contravention of the 2010 AICTE

Regulations whereunder, according to respondent No. 1, Ph.D degree

was a mandatory qualification for the post of Principal.
5.      Respondent No. 1 butressed his superior claim highlighting that

he had the requisite three­year HOD experience and there was no

complaint or disciplinary enquiry pending against him. On the other

hand, he urged that the appellants had been promoted though none of

them was having Ph.D qualification. He further alleged several other

irregularities   in    the    selection     process,    including     the    below­

specification    ACR      gradings    possessed        by   certain   candidates.
Page | 3
Accordingly, Respondent No. 1 sought quashing of the 2014

Chhattisgarh Rules and the promotion order dated 25.06.2014; review

of the proceedings conducted by the Departmental Promotion

Committee and the grading awarded to him in his Annual Confidential

Reports     of   2012    and   2013,    and       further    sought     resultant

reconsideration of his case for promotion from HOD to Principal.
6.   The High Court viewed that the 2010 AICTE Regulations were

binding, and relying upon a decision of the High Court of Kerala in
B

Ajith Kumar v. State of Kerala1
, it held that the State Government

could not lower the qualification threshold. Further, the High Court

interpreted the AICTE criteria to imply that Ph.D was mandatory for

appointment/promotion as ‘Principal’ and any ambiguity which could

plausibly have existed in the initial formulation of 2010 AICTE

Regulations, had been clarified through the ‘All India Council for

Technical    Education    (clarifications    on    certain   issues/anomalies

pertaining to Qualifications, Pay Scales, Service Conditions, Career

Advancement Schemes (CAS) etc. for Teachers and other Academic

Staff of Technical Institutions Degree/Diploma), 2016’ (hereinafter,

“2016 AICTE Notification”) which although published on 04.01.2016

would     operate   retrospectively    being       clarificatory   in    nature.
1
(2009) 3 KLJ 563.
Page | 4
Consequently, the High Court quashed the incongruous parts of 2014

Chhattisgarh Rules.
7.   The High Court       further observed how Appellant No. 1 was

Chairman of the very Committee which drafted the 2014 Chhattisgarh

Rules, making him an interested party. Noting yet other infirmity

regarding the date of publication of 2014 Chhattisgarh Rules in the

official gazette, the High Court quashed the order promoting Appellant

Nos. 1 to 7 to the posts of Principal of the Polytechnic Colleges.


CONTENTIONS
8.   The distressed appellants contend before us that there existed

no ambiguity in the 2010 AICTE Regulations. These regulations clearly

mention “or” between two sets of qualifications, one in which Ph.D was

specified and the other without such prescription. It is submitted that

the High Court could hence not have read it in a manner which

converted “or” into “and”. It was further submitted that even if any

ambiguity existed, it was not open for the AICTE to retrospectively

introduce an eligibility condition in a manner which would expropriate

the appellants of their vested rights.
9.   Highlighting how seven out of nine positions would remain

vacant in case a Ph.D degree was mandated as an essential

qualification for the posts of Principal in polytechnic colleges in

                                                                     Page | 5
Chhattisgarh, the appellants vociferously sought intervention of this

Court. They further urged that having participated in the process of

promotion, Respondent No. 1 had acquiesced to the interpretation and

understanding of the Rules made by Respondent No. 2, and the former

was now estopped from challenging the validity of the selection­

process or of the 2014 Chhattisgarh Rules.
10.   Respondent No. 1, on the other hand, reiterated that the AICTE

is a statutory body established by the Parliament through the All India

Council for
Technical Education Act, 1987
, and thus enjoys complete

supremacy and superintendence over determination of standards for

technical education. All technical institutions across the country are

obliged to adhere to the minimum standards
laid down by
AICTE.

Supporting the High Court’s interpretation, he maintains that since

the 2010 AICTE Regulations mandated ‘Ph.D in Engineering’ as one of

the essential qualification for the post of Principal, the 2014

Chhattisgarh Rules were ultra vires for having impermissibly relaxed

mandatory qualifications. The 1st Respondent adverts to certain other

procedural irregularities in framing and publication of the 2014

Chhattisgarh Rules, and additionally alleges that Respondent No. 2

not only violated the Chhattisgarh Public Service Promotion Rules,

2003 but also arbitrarily altered the minimum grading requirement to

favour certain candidates.
Page | 6
11.   Respondent No. 3 (AICTE) has submitted that it was not their

case that candidates who had already been promoted to the posts of

Principal despite not possessing Ph.D, should be removed. Drawing

attention to various relevant provisions of the 2010 AICTE Regulations

read with the 2016 AICTE Notification, learned counsel for AICTE

urged that any interpretation by this Court holding Ph.D mandatory

ought only be prospective in application, and not retrospective.


ANALYSIS
12.
The AICTE Act, 1987
has been enacted, as explained briefly in

para 4 of this order with an explicit power to set up an Expert Body to

regulate the standards and norms in technical education and for

establishment of institutions imparting such education. It is not a

matter of dispute that AICTE is a creation of the said statute and the

Regulations framed by it in exercise of the powers under the
AICTE

Act, 1987
carry the force of law. Indeed, it has been accepted by

learned counsel for the parties that the 2010 AICTE Regulations would

be the governing law, holding the field, and would bind all parties,

including the State of Chhattisgarh. The foremost question which thus

arises for our consideration is whether the 2010 AICTE Regulations, in

fact, make it mandatory for candidates vying for the post of Principal

to possess a Ph.D degree?
Page | 7
(i)     Is Ph.D mandatory for appointment to the post of

          ‘Principal’ under the 2010 AICTE Regulations?
13.     The cause of the present controversy is not difficult to fathom.

Prerequisite criteria for appointment to the post of Principal in a

Polytechnic College has been provided under the 2010 AICTE

Regulations in a tabulated form, relevant parts of which are extracted

below:
Post                    Qualifications                Experience
PRINCIPAL
                           Qualification as above     Minimum of 10 years
                           for the post of Head of    relevant    experience      in
                           Department and Ph.D in     teaching/research/industry
                           Engineering                out of which at least 3
                                       OR             years shall be at the level of
                           Qualification as above     head of department or
                           for the post of Head of    equivalent.
                           Department
                                                      In case of Architecture,
                                                      professional practice of 10
                                                      years as certified by the
                                                      Council   of   Architecture
                                                      shall also be considered
                                                      valid.”


14.     Since   the     above   reproduced       clause    enables   a    ‘Head    of
Department’ to occupy the next higher post of Principal `with’ or

`without’ Ph.D qualification, it is necessary to find out the eligibility

conditions      laid    down    for   appointment     of    different    Heads     of

Department.       The    relevant     extracts   of   HOD     criteria   are    thus

illustratively reproduced hereunder:
Page | 8
         Post                   Qualifications                 Experience
Head of Department
Engineering /             Bachelor’s and Masters         Minimum of 10 years
Technology                degree    of    appropriate    relevant experience in
                          branch in Engineering /        teaching / research /
                          Technology with First Class    industry.
or     equivalent     either
                          Bachelor’s or Master’s level

                          OR

                         Bachelor’s    degree    and
                         Master’s      degree      of
                         appropriate    branch     in
                         Engineering / Technology
                         with    First   Class     or
                         equivalent            either Minimum of 5 years
Bachelor’s or Master’s level relevant experience in
                         and                           teaching / research /
                                                       industry
                         Ph. D or equivalent, in
                         appropriate discipline in
                         Engineering / Technology
NOTE: Since the qualifications and experience for the post of Heads of Pharmacy,
Hotel Management & Catering Technology and Architecture Departments are also
identical except that the qualification and experience must be only in the relevant
subjects, the same have not been reproduced to avoid multiplicity.
15.   A perusal of the qualification table makes it obvious that there

can be multiple HODs for different departments (like Engineering,

Architecture, Hotel Management, Pharmacy etc). In order to be HOD of

any such Department, a prospective candidate needs to have both

Master’s and Bachelor’s degrees in the relevant field. Whereas

candidates with a Ph.D must have had 5 years of experience in the

allied field, others without it must have worked for 10 years. Phrased

differently, Ph.D is not mandatory for HOD, and instead results in a 5­


                                                                           Page | 9
year relaxation in requisite work experience. In other words, Ph.D has

been treated equivalent to 5 years teaching experience.
16.   The interpretation as propounded by Respondent No. 1 would

necessarily mean that there is no power with a State Government to

make Ph.D optional, and that the higher of the two alternate criteria

specified under the 2010 AICTE Regulations would be binding on all.
We find such a plea is problematic on two counts. Firstly, it implies

that Ph.D, specifically in ‘Engineering’ only, would be compulsory for

all principals. This creates an inconsistency as such a restriction

would be in conflict with the nature of ‘experience’ specified by the

AICTE, like recognition of Experience Certificate granted by the

Council for Architecture, which undoubtedly shows that there can be

candidates other than from the field of ‘Engineering’ eligible for

appointment as Principal. Secondly, such a contention would be

iniquitous in so far as it disenfranchises HODs from multiple

recognised departments from applying to the posts of Principal, and

arbitrarily restricts the zone of consideration to Engineering HODs

only. Such seems to be neither the intent of the 2010 AICTE

Regulations nor is it supported by any cogent reasoning.
17.   We are also not inclined to read down the rules to omit the ‘in

Engineering’ part and only selectively insist upon a ‘Ph.D’, for in the

present facts it would amount to crossing the fine line between

                                                              Page | 10
interpretation and legislation. Hence, the only permissible way to read

the AICTE criteria would be to lay emphasis on the phrase “or” and

hence interpret ‘Ph.D in Engineering’ as being optional and it being

discretionary upon the adopting institution/State Government to

specify either of the two criteria.
18.   This does not mean that we have not given due weightage to

Ph.D degree while interpreting the 2010 AICTE Regulations. A

candidate with Ph.D degree can become HOD with merely 5 years of

work experience, whereas candidates without Ph.D need to work for

10 years. Although, requirement of experience for becoming Principal

is 10 years uniformly, it comes with a stipulation that 3 years must

have been spent as HOD or in an equivalent position. Thus, a

candidate without Ph.D would compulsorily need 10 years’ experience

for HOD and would need to work further 3 years in that capacity, i.e.

for minimum of 13 years’ experience to become Principal. Those with a

Ph.D on the other hand, can apply for principal­ship within 10 years,

as they would have become eligible for HOD with 5 years experience,

and could have completed the further 3 years term as HOD in the

interregnum. Hence, hypothetically, there is a 5­year eligibility

relaxation granted under AICTE Regulations to those with a Ph.D.
19.   The afore­stated advantage is only further exacerbated under the

2014 Chhattisgarh Rules, where those without a Ph.D need 15 years’

                                                              Page | 11
experience and those with such higher degree, can be appointed

within 10 years. This can be well demonstrated from the following

extracts of 2014 Chhattisgarh Rules:­




Sl.        Name of     Minimum      Maximum           Prescribed          Remarks
No.         posts      age limit    age limit        educational
         included in                                  education
           service
1         2           3             4                  5                 6
1       Principal          ­       58 years     (1) Bachelor and
                                                Master degree of
                                                appropriate branch in
                                                Engineering/
                                                Technology from a
                                                recognized
                                                University/Institute
                                                with First Class or
                                                equivalent at either
                                                Bachelor’s or Master’s
                                                level.
(2) Minimum of 15
                                                years relevant
                                                experience in
                                                teaching/research/
                                                industry out of which
                                                at least 03 years shall
                                                be at the level of head
                                                of department.
OR

                                                (1)   Bachelor     and
                                                Master     degree    of
                                                appropriate branch of
                                                Engineering/
                                                Technology    from    a
                                                recognized

                                                                          Page | 12
                                         University   /Institute
                                         with First Class or
                                         equivalent at either
                                         Bachelor’s or Master’s
                                         level and Ph.D or
                                         equivalent            in
                                         appropriate discipline
                                         in        Engineering/
                                         Technology    from     a
                                         recognized
                                         University/Institute.

                                         (2) Minimum of 10
                                         years           relevant
                                         experience            in
                                         teaching/research/
                                         industry out of which
                                         at least 03 years shall
                                         be at the level of head
                                         of    department      or
                                         equivalent.



                           HEAD OF DEPARTMENT

1   Civil/Mechanic     ­      58 years   Bachelor’s and         Minimum of
    al/Electrical/El                     Master’s degree of     10      years
    ectronics/                           appropriate branch     relevant
    Information                          in Engineering/        experience
    Technology/                          Technology from a      in teaching/
    Instrumentatio                       recognized             research/
    n/Metallurgy/                        University/Institute   industry.
    Mining/Chemic                        with First Class or
    al/Computer                          equivalent at either
    Science and                          Bachelor’s or
    Engineering                          Master’s level.

                                                  OR
                                                                Minimum of
                                         Bachelor’s        and  05      years
                                         Master’s degree of     relevant
                                         appropriate branch     experience
                                         in       Engineering/  in teaching/
                                         Technology from a
                                                               research/
                                         recognized University
                                                               industry.
                                         /Institute with First
                                         Class or equivalent

                                                                    Page | 13
                                         at either Bachelor’s
                                         or Master’s level and
                                         Ph.D or equivalent in
                                         appropriate
                                         discipline          in
                                         Engineering/
                                         Technology from a
                                         recognized
                                         University/Institute.

xxx                           xxx                          xxx
20.      Additionally, construction of 2010 AICTE Regulations this way,

avoids conflict with the 2014 Chhattisgarh Rules, as extracted above.

Even otherwise, given a choice between two interpretations, one which

restricts the pool of applicants for public employment and another

which enfranchises many, it would befit the spirit of
Article 16
that

the expansive interpretation is adopted. Such a recourse would both

provide opportunities to a wider meritorious class, will increase

competition and concomitantly ensure meritorious selections.
(ii)     Does the 2016 AICTE Notification retrospectively ‘clarify’

           eligibility conditions for appointment as ‘Principal’?
21.      The next question which logically arises is whether the

notification issued by the AICTE in 2016 changes the eligibility

conditions which are explicit in the 2010 AICTE Regulations, as

discussed above.
Page | 14
22.   The 2016 AICTE Notification has made a significant impact upon

the High Court’s determination of the present dispute. The High Court

has held that the said Notification, clearly specified through Issue No.

64 that Ph.D was compulsory for all Principals. As the notification was

`clarificatory’, it was held applicable retrospectively which would

remove any ambiguity created by the 2010 AICTE Regulations and

consequently the appellants were ineligible to hold the posts of

‘Principal’. The relied­upon Issue No. 64 reads as under:
SI.                      Issue                          Clarification
No.
64.   Whether Ph.D is an essential qualification Yes
      for the Post of Principal in Diploma Level
      Technical Institutions.
23.   The appellants as well as the AICTE have drawn our attention to

Issue No. 48 in the same table of 2016 AICTE Notification which, they

contend, depicts a contrary picture. The relevant part of the 2016

Notification which has not been noticed by the High Court reads as

under:
SI.                    Issue                           Clarification
No.
48.   Whether a faculty of Engineering &          Yes, provided the person
      Technology with minimum 10 years            also       has        an
      relevant experience in teaching/research    administrative
out of which 3 years is in the same grade   experience of at least 3
      Pay (i.e. Rs.9000) at par with HOD is       years.
eligible for the post of Principal in
      Polytechnic.
Page | 15
24.   After going through the contents of the 2016 AICTE Notification

in its entirety, we are of the opinion that the conclusion drawn by the

High Court is erroneous for a variety of reasons. At the very outset, no

attempt appears to have been made to determine the nature of the

2016 AICTE Notification, as to whether it supplements an obvious

omission in the 2010 AICTE Regulations and most importantly its

effect on those who have meanwhile acquired vested rights.
25.   ‘Clarificatory’ legislations are an exception to the general rule of

presuming prospective application of laws, unless given retrospective

effect either expressly or by necessary implication. In order to attract

this exception, mere mention in the title or in any provision that the

legislation is ‘clarificatory’ would not suffice.
Instead, it must

substantively be proved that the law was in fact ‘clarificatory’, as noted

by this Court in
Virtual Soft Systems v. CIT2
:
“50. It may be noted that the amendment made to Section 271
       by the
Finance Act, 2002
only stated that the amended
       provision would come into force with effect from 1­4­2003. The
       statute nowhere stated that the said amendment was either
       clarificatory or declaratory. On the contrary, the statute stated
       that the said amendment would come into effect on 1­4­2003
       and therefore, would apply only to future periods and not to
       any period prior to 1­4­2003 or to any assessment year prior to
       Assessment Year 2004­2005. It is the well­settled legal
       position that an amendment can be considered to be
       declaratory and clarificatory only if the statute itself
       expressly    and    unequivocally      states   that   it   is    a
2
(2007) 9 SCC 665.
Page | 16
       declaratory and clarificatory provision. If there is no
       such   clear    statement    in    the   statute    itself,   the
       amendment      will   not   be    considered   to   be   merely
       declaratory or clarificatory.
51. Even if the statute does contain a statement to the effect
       that the amendment is declaratory or clarificatory, that is not
       the end of the matter. The Court will not regard itself as being
       bound by the said statement made in the statute but will
       proceed to analyse the nature of the amendment and then
       conclude whether it is in reality a clarificatory or declaratory
       provision or whether it is an amendment which is intended to
       change the law and which applies to future periods.”

                                                  (emphasis supplied)
26.   The present case is one where except for the title, nothing

contained therein indicates that the 2016 AICTE Notification was

clarificatory in nature. The said Notification is framed in a question­

answer style and merely restates what has already been made explicit

in the 2010 AICTE Regulations. There seems to be no intent to alter

the position of law but instead only to simplify what the AICTE had

resolved through its original regulation. The 2016 AICTE Notification

is a response to the doubts put forth to AICTE by the public. This is

evident from the stand put forth by AICTE before us in its reply as well

as during the course of hearing, namely, that there is no retrospective

alteration in the qualification prescribed for the post of Principal.
27.   Even if the 2016 AICTE Notification was clarificatory, it must be

demonstrated that there was an ambiguity in the criteria for


                                                                     Page | 17
appointment to the posts of Principal, which needed to be remedied.

Clarificatory notifications are distinct from amendatory notifications,

and the former ought not to be a surreptitious tool of achieving the

ends of the latter. If there exists no ambiguity, there arises no

question of making use of a clarificatory notification. Hence, in the

absence of any omission in the 2010 AICTE Regulations, the 2016

AICTE Notification despite being generally clarificatory must be held to

have reiterated the existing position of law.
28.      As discussed earlier, there were no two interpretations possible,

and hence Issue Nos. 48 and 64 of 2016 AICTE Notification have, in

no     uncertain    terms,   reprised     the   substance     of   2010        AICTE

Regulations.
(iii)   Whether      retrospective       changes    in        qualificatory

             requirements can affect the existing appointments?
29.      Having    held   that   the   2016     AICTE   Notification      is    only

complementary to what the AICTE had
laid down in
2010, we may

hasten to add that even in a situation where eligibility conditions are

clarified from an anterior date, it may not be prudent to affect the

appointments which had been made on the basis of a possible

understanding of the eligibility conditions.
Page | 18
30.   This Court in a range of decisions including TR Kapur v. State

of Haryana3,
K Ravindranath Pai v. State of Karnataka4
and
K

Narayanan v. State of Karnataka5
, has opined that vested rights

cannot be impaired by enacting law with retrospective effect and that

such statutory rules ought not to result in any discrimination or

violation of constitutional rights.
31.   The law on vested rights in service matters has exhaustively

been elaborated in
Railway Board v. Rangadhamiah,6
wherein it

has been stated:
“20. It can, therefore, be said that a rule which operates in
       futuro so as to govern future rights of those already in service
       cannot be assailed on the ground of retroactivity as being
       violative of
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution, but a rule
       which seeks to reverse from an anterior date a benefit which
       has been granted or availed of, e.g., promotion or pay scale,
       can be assailed as being violative of
Articles 14
and
16
of the
       Constitution to the extent it operates retrospectively.
xxx
24. In many of these decisions the expressions “vested rights”
       or “accrued rights” have been used while striking down the
       impugned provisions which had been given retrospective
       operation so as to have an adverse effect in the matter of
       promotion, seniority, substantive appointment, etc., of the
       employees. The said expressions have been used in the context
       of a right flowing under the relevant rule which was sought to
       be altered with effect from an anterior date and thereby taking
3
1986 Supp SCC 584.
4
1995 Supp (2) SCC 246.
5
1994 Supp (1) SCC 44.
6
(1997) 6 SCC 623
                                                                    Page | 19
       away the benefits available under the rule in force at that time.
It has been held that such an amendment having retrospective
       operation which has the effect of taking away a benefit already
       available to the employee under the existing rule is arbitrary,
       discriminatory and violative of the rights guaranteed under
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution. ...”
32.    The aforestated principle would apply with equal force on the

outcome of judicial review also and any new meaning given to a set of

Rules/Regulations by the court of law would not ordinarily unsettle

the settled appointments or conferment of other service benefits. We

are,   nevertheless,   fully   conscious    of   the   legal   position    that

appointment of a candidate who has erroneously secured public

employment without fulfillment of minimum qualifications can always

be annulled upon discovery of mistake. An appointment which is

erroneous or illegal from the very inception does not clothe               the

appointee with any indefeasible right and such appointment is always

subject to correctional decisions.
33.    There is no quarrel that the appellants herein do not possess

Ph.D. However, they satisfied the requirement of having fifteen years’

experience (of which at least three years was as HOD) under the 2014

Chhattisgarh Rules and were found suitable for promotion by the

Departmental Promotion Committee on the basis of various other

material. They have also been found in possession of one of the

eligibility criteria prescribed under the 2010 AICTE Regulations. We


                                                                     Page | 20
are, thus, of the considered opinion that the appellants’ appointments

ought to remain undisturbed in any eventuality.
34.   This takes us to the last objection taken by the High Court

regarding ‘conflict of interest’.    It is not in dispute that the State

Government had inducted Appellant No. 1 in a Committee which

submitted the draft service rules.     It is, however, difficult to accept

(nor has it been alleged) that the said appellant held a position

through which he could influence the rule­making authority to

exercise its powers under Proviso to
Article 309
of the Constitution as

per his wishes. He was holding too small a position that no inference

of his dominance in the decision making process can be drawn.


CONCLUSION
35.   In the light of the above discussion, the appeals are allowed. The

judgment of the High Court is set aside and the writ petition filed by

Respondent No. 1 challenging the promotion of appellants is dismissed

but without any order as to costs.
………………………….CJI
                                                     (S.A. BOBDE)


                                                ……..……………………..J.
                                                       (B.R. GAVAI)


                                                                Page | 21
                     …………………………… J.
(SURYA KANT)
NEW DELHI
DATED : 18.02.2020




                               Page | 22