[Cites
14
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs M/S. Associated Container Terminal ... on 14 February, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 1287, AIRONLINE 2020 SC 211, AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 1287 (2020) 3 SCALE 667, (2020) 3 SCALE 667
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
Dinesh Maheshwari
,
Hemant Gupta
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
REPORTABLE

                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4490 OF 2008



UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                     .....APPELLANT(S)

                                     VERSUS


M/S. ASSOCIATED CONTAINER TERMINAL LTD.                 .....RESPONDENT(S)




                         JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
1.    The order dated 28th November, 2007 passed by the High Court of

      Delhi is the subject matter of challenge in the present appeal. Vide

      the aforesaid order, the writ petition filed by the respondent was

      allowed and the demand raised by the appellants vide letters

      dated 17th February, 2005 and 19th April, 2005 were found to be

      without authority of law and, thus, the appellant was directed to

      refund a sum of Rs.27,47,146/- together with interest @12% per

      annum.
2.    One M/s. Kushang Apparel Ltd. had imported CTV kits and filed six

      Bills of Entries, all dated 9th February, 2001.   Such goods were

      permitted by the Custom Department to be kept in warehouse for
1
one year in terms of
Section 59
of the Customs Act, 1962 1 at ICD,

         Faridabad. The Bond period expired on 28 th February, 2002 but the

         importer did not clear the imported goods and also did not pay the

         rent for the warehouse.     The warehouse issued notices for the

         recovery of its dues failing which it will be constrained to sell the

         imported goods by public auction/tender sale. With the approval of

         custom authorities, the imported goods were put for sale through

         auction under
Section 63(2)
of the Act with a valuation of imported

         goods at Rs.1,52,04,176/-.     However, the goods could not be

         successfully sold.   The valuation was reduced for the second

         auction held on 4th September, 2002 to Rs.1,36,83,759/- and

         further reduced in the third auction held on 7th May, 2003 to

         Rs.54,44,650/-. The highest bid of Rs.35 lakhs alone was received.

         The auction was not confirmed.
3.       Thereafter, tender sale was resorted to dispose of the goods in the

         warehouse. The valuation of the imported goods in the warehouse

         was fixed at Rs.33 lakhs for which tenders were invited upto 3 rd

         December, 2003. Later, the valuation was reduced to Rs.30 lakhs

         in the second tender sale up to 31 st August, 2004.      In this sale

         process, the highest bid received was of Rs.41,44,555/-.         The

         Assistant Commissioner passed an order on 12 th October, 2004

         that the goods will not be cleared on ex-bond Bill of Entry as it is

         not a case of clearance under
Section 68
of the Act but on

         realization of charges under
Section 72
of the Act in terms of the


1    for short, ‘Act’
2
judgment of this Court in
Kesoram Rayon v. Collector of

        Customs, Calcutta2
. The sale proceeds will be appropriated as

        per
Section 105
of the Act.
4.      Subsequently, on 2nd February, 2005, the Assistant Commissioner

        of Customs permitted the auctioned goods to be released to

        auction purchaser on furnishing of bank guarantee in the sum of

        Rs.27,47,146/- after paying a sum of Rs.2,05,329/- as expenses of

        sale and payment of Rs.11,92,080/- as duty.              The respondent

        deposited the amount of duty and also furnished the bank

        guarantee. Subsequently, on 4th March, 2005, the respondent was

        called upon to deposit remaining amount of Rs.27,47,146/-

        immediately failing which the bank guarantee was intended to be

        invoked.        Subsequently, on 19th April, 2005, the Additional

        Commissioner informed the respondent that Chief Commissioner of

        the Central Excise is of the view that the matter stands settled with

        the Board’s clarification of 17th February, 2005 and the outstanding

        arrears of custom duty is required to be recovered.             The bank

        guarantee was sought to be invoked which led the respondent to

        invoke the writ jurisdiction of the Delhi High Court.
5.     The High Court allowed the writ petition with the following findings:
“16. It appears that on the facts of the present case
                   the occasion to invoke
Section 72 (1)(d)
would arise
                   only if the goods in respect of which a bond has been
                   executed has not been cleared for home consumption.
                   In such event, the owner of the goods can be asked to
                   pay the entire duty. This obviously does not apply to the
                   warehouse-keeper like the petitioner and no demand of
2    (1996) 5 SCC 576
3
payment for customs duty can be made against the
              petitioner.
xx             xx                 xx
20. We therefore hold that the Petitioner was justified
              in recovering the warehousing charges due to it from
              the auction sale proceeds in terms of
Section 63 (2)
of
              the Act. The balance amount deposited with the
              Government Treasury can be adjusted by the customs
              department towards part payment of customs duty as
              computed by it.”
6.   The argument of the learned counsel for the Revenue is that the

     distribution of sale proceeds has to be in accordance with
Section

     150
of the Act as there is a specific provision concerning custom

     duty charges which will have precedence over recovery of

     warehouse charges under 150(2)(e) of the Act.
7.   Before this Court, learned counsel for the appellants relied upon

     the judgment of this Court in Kesoram.        This Court considered
Section 15(1)(d)
of the Act that if the goods which are not removed

     from a warehouse within the permissible period (in terms of Section
61) are treated as goods improperly removed from the warehouse.

     Such improper removal takes place when the goods remain in the

     warehouse beyond the permitted period or its permitted extension.

     The importer of the goods may be called upon to pay customs duty

     at the rate applicable on the date of their deemed removal from

     the warehouse. This Court held as under:
“13. Goods which are not removed from a warehouse
              within the permissible period are treated as goods
              improperly removed from the warehouse. Such
              improper removal takes place when the goods remain in
              the warehouse beyond the permitted period or its
              permitted extension. The importer of the goods may be
4
called upon to pay customs duty on them and,
              necessarily, it would be payable at the rate applicable
              on the date of their deemed removal from the
              warehouse, that is, the date on which the permitted
              period or its permitted extension came to an end.
14.
Section 15(1)(b)
applies to the case of goods
              cleared under
Section 68
from a warehouse upon
              presentation of a bill of entry for home consumption;
payment of duty, interest, penalty, rent and other
              charges; and an order for home clearance. The
              provisions of
Section 68
and, consequently, of
Section
              15(1)(b)
apply only when goods have been cleared from
              the warehouse within the permitted period or its
              permitted extension and not when, by reason of their
              remaining in the warehouse beyond the permitted
              period or its permitted extension, the goods have been
              deemed to have been improperly removed from the
              warehouse under
Section 72
.
xx            xx                 xx
17. The consequence of non-removal of warehoused
              goods within the permitted period or the permitted
              extension is, by virtue of the terms of
Section 72
,
              certain. The date on which it comes to end is the date
              relevant for determining the rate of duty. When the duty
              is in fact demanded is not relevant. The alternative
              submission on behalf of the appellants must, therefore,
              also be rejected.”
8.   On the basis of
the said judgment
, it is contended that the duty

     payable on the goods imported has to be assessed on the date of

     deemed    removal    of   goods   from   the   warehouse    for     home

     consumption i.e. on the expiry of one year of the warehouse period

     i.e. 28th February, 2002. Therefore, the custom duty leviable as on

     that day is to be recovered from the sale proceeds and in terms of
Section 150(2)
of the Act, the custom duty has to be paid in

     preference to the warehouse charges.           Some of the relevant

     provisions of the Act read as under:
5
“
Section 63
. Payment of rent and warehouse
charges. - (1) The owner of any warehoused goods
shall pay to the warehouse-keeper rent and warehouse
charges at the rates fixed under any law for the time
being in force or where no rates are so fixed, at such
rates as may be fixed by the Principal Commissioner of
Customs or Commissioner of Customs.
(2) If any rent or warehouse charges are not paid within
ten days from the date when they became due, the
warehouse -keeper may, after notice to the owner of
the warehoused goods and with the permission of the
proper officer cause to be sold (any transfer of the
warehoused goods notwithstanding) such sufficient
portion of the goods as the warehouse-keeper may
select.
xx                         xx                  xx
Section 71
. Goods not to be taken out of
warehouse except as provided by this Act. - No
warehoused goods shall be taken out of a warehouse
except on clearance for home consumption or export or
for removal to another warehouse, or as otherwise
provided by this Act.
xx                         xx                  xx
Section 150
. Procedure for sale of goods and
application of sale proceeds. - (1) Where any goods
not being confiscated goods are to be sold under any
provisions of this Act, they shall, after notice to the
owner thereof, be sold by public auction or by tender or
with the consent of the owner in any other manner.
(2) The proceeds of any such sale shall be applied –
(a) firstly to the payment of the expenses of the sale,
(b) next to the payment of the freight and other
charges, if any, payable in respect of the goods sold, to
the carrier, if notice of such charges has been given to
the person having custody of the goods,
(c) next to the payment of the duty, if any, on the goods
sold,
(d) next to the payment of the charges in respect of the
goods sold due to the person having the custody of the
6
goods,
(e) next to the payment of any amount due from the
              owner of the goods to the Central Government under
              the provisions of this Act or any other law relating to
              customs, and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the
              owner of the goods.”
9.   Learned counsel for the respondent refers to Chapter 21 of Central

     Board of Excise and Customs Manual relating to disposal of

     unclaimed/uncleared cargo. The relevant clauses from the Manual

     read as under:
“7. Once the goods are sold, the Customs duty on the
              goods is calculated. For calculation of Customs duty,
              the sale proceeds from the sale of unclaimed/uncleared
              goods is taken as cum-duty price (value + duty) and
              customs duty is calculated working backwards on the
              price realised.
Apportionment of sale proceeds of goods:
8. On the unclaimed/uncleared goods, liabilities towards
              customs duty as well as carrier’s charges and storage
              charges arise, which are to be recovered from the sale
              proceeds. In addition, sales expenses incurred on sale
              of such goods are to be recovered. In most of the
              cases, the sale proceeds of such goods may not be
              sufficient to meet liabilities of all the agencies. In such
              cases, question arises as to which liability is to be met
              first. To take care of such a situation, provisions have
              been made in
section 150(2)
of the Customs Act. The
              sale proceeds of any such sale of unclaimed/uncleared
              goods is to be applied in following manners:
(a) first, to the payment of the expenses of the sale,
(b) next to the payment of the freight and other
              charges, if any, payable in respect of the goods sold, to
              the carrier, if notice of such charges has been given to
              the custodians,
(c) next to the payment of the duty, if any, on the goods
              sold,
(d) next to the payment of the charges in respect of the
7
goods sold due to the person having the custody of the
               goods,
(e) next to the payment of any amount due from the
               owner of the goods to the Central Government under
               the provisions of this Act or any other law relating to
               Customs.
After making above-said payments, if any balance
               remains, that is to be paid to the owner of the goods.”
10.   Reference is made to another Circular dated 28 th November, 2001

      issued by the Central Board of Excise and Customs. The Circular

      reads as under:
“A reference was received from the Container
               Corporation of India (CONCOR) stating that there is a
               divergence of practice in Custom Houses with regard to
               apportionment of sale proceeds from disposal/sale of
               unclaimed/uncleared goods under
section 150
of the
               Customs Act, 1962. It was reported that some Custom
               Houses determine the Customs duty payable on
               auctioned goods after deducting the sales expenses
               from the sale proceeds of the goods whereas other
               Custom Houses are determining duty on the basis of
               sale proceeds without allowing any deduction.
2. The matter has been examined. It is clarified that –
(a) the Customs duty shall be determined by backward
               calculation    considering    the    sale  proceeds     of
               unclaimed/uncleared goods as the cum-duty price. For
               calculation of duty, total sale proceeds without allowing
               any deduction towards sales expenses or any other
               charge is to be taken as cum duty price.
(b) After determination of the Customs duty, sale
               proceeds of unclaimed/uncleared goods is to be
               appropriated in the manner as provided in
section
               150(2)
of the Customs Act, 1962.
3. These instructions may be brought to the notice of
               all concerned by way of issuance of suitable Public
               Notice/Standing Order.
4.    Difficulties, if any, in implementation of these
               instruction, may be brought to the notice of the Board.
               Kindly acknowledge receipt of this Circular.”
8
11.   The issue required to be examined in the present appeal is whether

      the calculation of the custom duty would be assessed as on the

      date of the deemed removal of goods from the warehouse in terms

      of
Section 61
as interpreted by this Court in Kesoram or on the

      date of sale for the reason that the importer has failed to seek

      clearance of the goods imported.
12.   As per the appellants, the right to recover customs duty is superior

      to the right to recover warehouse charges in terms of
Section 150
of the Act and that sale was conducted under
Section 72
and not

      under
Section 63
of the Act. If the contention of the Revenue is to

      be accepted, the custom duty will be much more than the price

      received in tender sale.      However, if the date of calculation of

      custom duty is treated to be the date of sale, the demand of sum of

      Rs.27,47,146/- would be untenable.
13.   The appellants have referred to a communication dated 16 th April,

      2004 wherein the respondent was called upon to clear the goods

      after the expiry of extended period failing which payment of full

      amount of duty will be payable together with all rent, penalties,

      interest and other charges.
14.   Kesoram is a case where the importer claimed levy of custom

      duty which remained in bonded warehouse beyond the permitted

      period claiming that the duty as is applicable on the date the goods

      were sought to be removed for home consumption, will be
9
chargeable.   This Court found that the goods can be kept in a

      warehouse in terms of the period specified under
Section 61
of the

      Act and, therefore,
Section 68
and
Section 15(1)(b)
apply only

      when the goods were cleared from the warehouse within the

      permitted period or with permitted extension and not beyond the

      permitted period or permitted extension.
15.   The present case is not a case of levy of custom duty on the

      importer. The importer has not sought the release of goods within

      the permitted period of warehouse.      Therefore, the judgment in

      Kesoram will not be applicable in respect of the goods to be

      auctioned on account of failure to seek the release of imported

      goods by the importer though after the permission from the proper

      officer.
16.
Section 63
of the Act compels the owner of the warehoused goods

      to pay rent and warehouse charges at the rates fixed under any law

      for the time being in force or at such rates as may be fixed by the

      Commissioner of Customs. If the rent or warehouse charges are

      not paid, the warehouse-keeper is competent to sell the goods or

      such sufficient portion of the goods as the warehouse-keeper may

      select after permission from the proper officer.
Section 63
, thus, is

      to ensure that the warehouse-keeper recovers the rent or

      warehouse charges from the importer.
17.
Section 150
deals with the distribution of sale proceeds if the goods

      other than the confiscated goods are sold under any provision of
10
the Act.   The Central Board of Excise & Customs had issued a

      clarification on 28th November, 2001 keeping in view divergence of

      practice with regard to apportionment of sale proceeds from

      disposal/sale of unclaimed/uncleared goods under
Section 150
of

      the Act.   It was communicated that the custom duty shall be

      determined by backward calculation considering the sale proceeds

      of unclaimed/uncleared goods as the cum-duty price.                 For

      calculation of duty, total sale proceeds without allowing any

      deduction towards sales expenses or any other charge is to be

      taken as cum-duty price.
18.   In view of the Circular issued by the Central Board of Excise &

      Customs, the custom duty is to be calculated on the sale price and

      not on the duty as is payable on the date of deemed expiration of

      permitted period of warehouse.        Such Circular of the Board is

      binding on the Revenue. Therefore, the custom duty has to be paid

      on the basis of sale proceeds realised from the sale of the goods

      kept in a warehouse and not on the basis of the custom duty

      payable at the time of filing the Bill of Entry or on the date of expiry

      of permitted period of warehouse.
19.   Consequently, the present appeal is disposed of with directions to

      ascertain the customs duty keeping in mind the dispensation

      indicated in the enabling provisions of the
Customs Act, 1962
and

      Chapter 21 of Central Board of Excise and Customs Manual read

      with circular dated 20th November, 2011 and adjust the same as
11
per the priority specified in
Section 150(2)
of the stated Act.
Further, if the bank guarantee in the sum of Rs. 27,47,146/-

      (Rupees twenty seven lakhs forty seven thousand one hundred

      forty six only) has already been invoked by the appellants, the said

      amount shall be made over to the respondent in terms of the

      directions given by the High Court within three months from today

      after making due adjustments of the proceeds of sale as indicated

      hitherto.
20.   The appeal is disposed of in the above terms with no order as to

      costs.
.............................................J.
                                                       (A.M. KHANWILKAR)



                                      .............................................J.
                                                           (HEMANT GUPTA)



                                      .............................................J.
                                                  (DINESH MAHESHWARI)
NEW DELHI;
FEBRUARY 14, 2020.
12