[Cites
14
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Kalindi Damodar Garde(D) By Lrs. vs Manohar Laxman Kulkarni And Ors. on 7 February, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 810, AIRONLINE 2020 SC 163, (2020) 3 SCALE 285 (2020) 139 ALL LR 225, (2020) 139 ALL LR 225
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
Hemant Gupta
,
L. Nageswara Rao
REPORTABLE

                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


              CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 6642-6643 OF 2010


KALINDI DAMODAR GARDE (D) BY LRS.                        .....APPELLANT(S)

                                    VERSUS

MANOHAR LAXMAN KULKARNI & ORS. ETC.                   .....RESPONDENT(S)


                         JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
1.   The present appeals arise out of an order passed by the learned

     Single Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay on 11 th

     December, 2006 deciding writ petition disputing the orders passed

     by the Revenue Authorities excluding the names of the sons of

     Laxman natural born son of Pandurang, on the ground that they

     have no right, title or interest in relation to suit property as they

     were born prior to the date of adoption of Laxman.         The first

     appeal filed by the natural daughter of Laxman was dismissed

     along with the writ petition holding that the sons born to Laxman

     prior to adoption are the heirs of Laxman and are entitled to his

     estate along with the daughter born to Laxman after his adoption.
2.   The facts are that Laxman was given in adoption to Saraswati on

     2nd November, 1935. Laxman had three sons Gangadhar aged 4
1
years 5 months; Dattatraya aged 2 years 5 months and Manohar

     aged 9 months at the time of his adoption. After adoption, Laxman

     and his wife Padmavati joined the family of Saraswati along with

     their 3 sons. It was in the year 1938, daughter Kalindi was born to

     Laxman and Padmavati. The natural father of Laxman, Pandurang

     effected partition in respect of his joint family property on 30 th

     December, 1948 wherein Laxman was excluded from any share as

     he had gone in adoption to Saraswati.
3.   Laxman died on 10th January, 1987.      Saraswati had predeceased

     Laxman.     After the death of Saraswati, Laxman inherited the

     property of Saraswati which is the subject matter of the present

     appeals. After the death of Laxman, his daughter Kalindi applied

     for effecting the change in the village revenue record for inclusion

     of her mother Padmavati and herself as owners. The mutation was

     entered on 11th March, 1987.     The matter was taken at various

     stages thereafter. The revision filed by Manohar, son of Laxman,

     was dismissed on 8th September, 1992. Aggrieved, Manohar had

     filed the writ petition.
4.   Padmavati, wife of Laxman, died on 10 th October, 1992 leaving a

     registered Will dated 21st May, 1987 in which she had bequeathed

     her share to her 3 sons which were born prior to the date of

     adoption. On 20th October, 1996, Gangadhar, one of the sons of

     Laxman and Padmavati, died. Thereafter, Dattatraya, the second

     son filed a suit for partition, separate possession and mesne profit
2
against forcible possession by Kalindi. This suit was decreed on 13 th

        November, 2004.        The main contest of the parties was on the

        question as to whether the three sons of Laxman born before

        adoption in 1935, namely, Gangadhar, Dattatraya and Manohar are

        entitled to inherit the property in adoptive family of Laxman after

        his death.
5.      In a suit by Kalindi, the daughter born to Laxman and Padmavati,

        she had taken a plea that the sons born before adoption have no

        right, title or interest in the properties left behind by Laxman and

        she being a daughter born to Laxman after his adoption would

        inherit the entire property along with Padmavati, her mother. Both

        the matters were taken up for hearing together wherein the

        learned Single Bench relying upon Section 8 of the Hindu

        Succession Act, 19561 held that the son born before adoption is

        entitled to succeed to the property of their father.
6.      Before this Court, Mr. Venkataramani, learned senior counsel for

        the appellants relied upon judgment of Division Bench of Bombay

        High Court reported as
Kalgavda Tavanappa Patil v. Somappa

        Tamangavda Patil & Anr.2
wherein it has been held as under:
“The son, then, begotten by an adopted Hindu before
                   adoption has vested rights in the ancestral property of
                   the family of his birth. Rights of property once vested
                   cannot be taken away except in the mode or modes
                   prescribed by Hindu Law. They cease either by death,
                   sale, gift, degradation, disqualification or by adoption.
                   In the case of a son whose father has been given in

1    for short, ‘Act’
2    ILR (1909) 33 Bom 669
3
adoption after his birth, if none of these modes for the
              extinction of his vested rights of property applies, there
              must be the clear authority of some text for holding
              that the rights in question are extinguished because the
              father of the owner of those rights, having been given
              in adoption, has his rights in his natural family
              extinguished by the act of adoption.”
7.   The argument is that the wife of an adoptee passes with her

     husband to the adopted family but not the sons born to an adoptee

     before his adoption. They continue to be members in the family in

     which their father was naturally born. Mr. Venkataramani, learned

     senior counsel for the appellants vehemently argued that the

     codified Hindu Law has not provided that the children born to an

     adoptee before adoption will be entitled to inherit the property in

     the adopted family, therefore, keeping in view the interpretation of

     Hindu Law as interpreted in Kalgavda Tavanappa Patil, the

     children born before adoption will not pass with the adoptee in the

     adopted family and are not entitled to the share in the estate of the

     adopted family.
8.   Learned senior counsel for the appellants relied upon the following

     quote from the judgment in Kalgavda Tavanappa Patil:
“But it is argued that when a married man is given in
              adoption, his wife passes with him into the adoptive
              family—she, like him, acquires the new gotra; that what
              applies to the wife of the man adopted must apply to
              his son also, begotten before the adoption, because,
              both according to the Smriti writers and their
              commentators, a man's wife and sons go together. In
              support of this argument reliance is placed on a text of
              Narada cited by Vijnaneshvara in his chapter on
              “Resumption of Gifts” in the Mitakshara (p.
225, Moghe's 3rd Ed).” (page 687)
4
xx              xx                   xx

                  …………….But the text does not say that the son of that
                  man, born before his adoption, ceases to be his son and
                  loses the right to offer funeral oblations to his soul in
                  case of his death. For one thing, according to the
                  Hindu Shastras, “by no means can you make your
                  father cease to be” (Jaimini, Bibliotheoa Indica Series,
                  Vol. I, p. 742). The mere fact that the father has gone
                  into another family by adoption and ceased to be of his
                  son's gotra or family cannot unmake what he naturally
                  is—the son's father. The gotras of the two may differ in
                  consequence of the adoption, but it is not always
                  necessary for funeral ceremonies that the person
                  performing them should be of the same gotra as the
                  deceased. A sister's son and a son-in-law can perform
                  those ceremonies and yet they are not of the
                  same gotra. So a son begotten before the adoption of
                  his father would be entitled to perform the latter's
                  funeral ceremonies. All the Smriti says is that such
                  ceremonies “shall be performed by a son.” It does not
                  make the obligation dependent upon the continuance of
                  the father in the same gotra as the son.” (Page 690)
9.     The Full Bench of Bombay High Court in Martand Jiwajee Patil &

       Anr. v. Narayan Krishna Gumast-Patil & Anr.3 referred to the

       aforesaid judgment when considering a case as to whether the

       adoptee has a right to give his son, born prior to his adoption, in

       adoption. The Court held as under:
“In Raghuraj Chandra v. Subhadra Kunwar
[(1928) L.R.
                  55 I.A. 139 at p. 148, S.C. 30 Bom. L.R. 829.] their
                  Lordships of the Privy Council after stating at p. 148
                  that though adoption is spoken of as “new birth” in
                  many cases, a term sanctioned by the theory of Hindu
                  law, yet “As has been more than once observed, the
                  expressions ‘civilly dead or as if he had never been born
                  in the family’ are not for all purposes correct or logically

3    AIR 1939 Bom 305
5
applicable, but they are complementary to the term
‘new birth’.” The inapplicability of the theory can be
illustrated by concrete instances:—
(a) The tie of blood between the adopted son and the
members of his natural family is not severed. He cannot
marry in his natural family within the prohibited
degrees, nor can he adopt from his natural family a boy
whom he could not have adopted if he had remained in
that family [Moottia Moodelly v. Uppon Vencata Charry].
[(1858) Mad. S.D. 117.]

         xx              xx                 xx
(c) The adoptive father cannot give his adopted son in
adoption (Sarkar's Hindu Law of Adoption, pages 281-
282).
xx              xx                 xx

These instances show that an adopted son is not civilly
dead in his natural family nor reborn in his adoptive
family.
It is no doubt true that by giving away his son in
adoption the adopted father indirectly meddles with
the riktha or property of his natural family, since the
effect of that adoption will be to extinguish the son's
interest in that property. But thereby the father himself
gains no interest in the property. All that Manu's text
says is that he should not take for himself
the gotra and riktha of his natural family, and does not
prohibit him from doing any act which may affect the
property of his natural family. Thus, for instance, if he
has a brother in his natural family, he is not prohibited
from giving his son born after his own adoption, in
adoption to that brother, although thereby the different
interests in the property of his natural family are
affected.
xx              xx                 xx

In the absence of any express text or judicial decision
depriving an adopted son of his right to give away in
adoption his son born before his adoption, we do not
think that any useful purpose will be served by
imposing such a restriction upon him. The modern trend
of decisions is to take a more liberal view and to
6
interpret the texts from a practical point of view as far
               as possible. This is particularly noticeable in the
               decisions of this Court on several questions of adoption,
               such as the adoption of an only son, the adoption of a
               married boy, the adoption of a boy whose mother the
               adopting father could not have legally married, and the
               adoption by a widow without the express consent of her
               husband. We do not see why a similar liberal view
               should not be taken in this case, having regard to the
               interests of the boy to be given in adoption. With his
               father actually living, it would be a hardship on the boy
               to treat him as an orphan, merely because the father
               has gone in adoption. Usually when the father is
               adopted, his preborn sons are still minors, and in
               practice they go with their father to live with him,
               though legally they are held to have remained in the
               natural family of their father. Though the father has
               gone in adoption, the ties of affinity and love for his
               preborn sons cannot be severed, and he is the proper
               man to look after their education and welfare. If a
               guardian is to be appointed for them, he will naturally
               be consulted. Having their interest at heart, he is the
               best person to decide whether one of them should be
               given in adoption and what is conducive to their
               benefit. By giving one of his sons in adoption he himself
               gains no benefit, and he may be safely trusted to
               exercise his discretion rightly for the good of his son,
               though born before his own adoption.”
10.   The Court held that the paternity of the father cannot be shaken off

      even though he may leave the family, as, according to Hindu

      Shastras, “By no means can you make your father cease to be,”.

      The Court held as under:
“It may be that in ancient and primitive society the son
               was regarded as hardly better than his father's slave,
               and the prominent idea involved in an adoption was the
               transfer of dominion or patria potestas to the person
               adopting. But when the times changed and the status of
               the son was raised, the father's power to give in
               adoption came to be founded on a different conception.
               The text of Vasishtha quoted in Dattaka Mimansa (sec.
               V, pl. 31), which is said to afford the foundation of the
               Hindu law of adoption, and which I have already
7
referred to, recognizes the power of the father and the
               mother to “give or sell or abandon” their son as he is
               “produced from their virile seed and uterine blood.”
               This paternity of the father cannot be shaken off even
               though he may leave the family, as, according to the
               Hindu Shastras “By no means can you make your father
               cease to be,” (Jaimini, Bibliotheca Indica Series, Volume
               I, p. 742). The same thing is expressed by
               Chandavarkar, J. in
Kalgavda Tavanappa v. Somappa
               Tamangavda
as follows (p. 690):—

                    “The mere fact that the father has gone into
                    another family by adoption and eased to be of his
                    son's gotra or family cannot unmake what he
                    naturally is—the son's father.”
11.   Though, the aforesaid judgment was in the context of the right of

      an adoptee to give his son born prior to his adoption, but the fact

      that the adoptee will remain the father of the son was recognised

      way    back   in   1939.    Thus,    the   Judgment     in   Kalgavda

      Tavanappa Patil has not been accepted even under the Hindu

      Law.
12.   However, the situation has undergone a complete change with the

      enactment of the Act.      The said Act overrides all text, rule or

      interpretation of Hindu law or any custom or usage as part of that

      law in force immediately before the commencement of this Act.

      Section 4 of the Act reads as under:
“4. Overriding effect of Act. - Save as otherwise
               expressly provided in this Act,—
(a) any text rule or interpretation of Hindu law or any
               custom or usage as part of that law in force
               immediately before the commencement of this Act shall
               cease to have effect with respect to any matter for
               which provision is made in this Act;.
8
(b) any other law in force immediately before the
                    commencement of this Act shall cease to have effect in
                    so far as it is inconsistent with any of the provisions
                    contained in this Act.”
13.      Since the succession has opened after the death of Laxman on 10 th

         January, 1987, therefore, succession has to be in accordance with

         the Act and not as per Hindu law as all text, rule or interpretation

         of Hindu law prior to commencement of the Act have ceased to

         have any effect unless expressly provided for in the said Act. This

         Court in a Judgment reported as
Bhaiya Ramanuj Pratap Deo v.

         Lalu Maheshanuj Pratap Deo4
held that a bare perusal of

         Section 4 would indicate that any custom or usage as part of Hindu

         law in force will cease to have effect after the enforcement of
Hindu Succession Act
with respect to any matter for which

         provision is made in the Act.
14.      The principle that the Act will be applicable on the date succession

         opens is well settled. Reference may be made to a judgment re-

         ported as
Bhanwar Singh v. Puran & Ors.5
, wherein this Court

         held that the Act brought about a sea of change in the matter of

         inheritance and succession amongst Hindus.
Section 4
of the Act

         contains a non- obstante provision in terms whereof any text, rule

         or interpretation of Hindu Law or any custom or usage as part of

         that law in force immediately before the commencement of the

         Act, ceased to have effect with respect to any matter for which

         provision is made therein save as otherwise expressly provided.

4     (1981) 4 SCC 613
5     (2008) 3 SCC 87
9
15.   Since there is no provision of denying the rights of succession to

      the natural born son of an adoptee father, therefore, the succession

      will be in terms of the provisions of the Act alone.
16.   It may be noticed that the three sons and Kalindi are born to

      Laxman and his wife Padmavati. They are agnates and related by

      full blood in terms of
Section 3(a)
and
3(e)
of the Act. As per the
Schedule to the Act
, the son and the daughter of a deceased Hindu

      male are class I heirs. Some of the relevant provisions of the Act

      read as under:
“3. Definitions and interpretation.- (1) In this Act,
                unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a)     “agnate”—one person is said to be an
                “agnate” of another if the two are related by blood or
                adoption wholly through males;
xx              xx                  xx
(e) “full blood”, “half blood” and “uterine blood”—
(i) two persons are said to be related to each other by
                full blood when they are descended from a common
                ancestor by the same wife, and by half blood when they
                are descended from a common ancestor but; by
                different wives;
(ii) two persons are said to be related to each other by
                uterine blood when they are descended from a common
                ancestress but by different husbands;
(f) “heir” means any person, male or female, who is
                entitled to succeed to the property of an intestate
                under this Act;
xx              xx                  xx
(j) “related” means related by legitimate kinship:
Provided that illegitimate children shall be deemed to
                be related to their mothers and to one another, and
10
their legitimate descendants shall be deemed to be
                     related to them and to one another; and any word
                     expressing relationship or denoting a relative shall be
                     construed accordingly.
xx               xx                    xx
8. General rules of succession in the case of males.—
                     The property of a male Hindu dying intestate shall
                     devolve according to the provisions of this Chapter—
(a) firstly, upon the heirs, being the relatives specified
                     in class I of the Schedule;
(b) secondly, if there is no heir of class I, then upon the
                     heirs, being the relatives specified in class II of the
                     Schedule;
(c) xxxxx”
17.      The manner of inheritance under the Act, in the cases of adoption

         of married persons before the enactment of the Act, has come up

         for consideration before the Learned Single Bench of Bombay High

         Court in an unreported Judgment (Dundyappa Laxman Karol v.

         Neelavva Chandrappa Jarali)6.                 In the said case, the plaintiffs

         were children of Shivappa, from his wife Gouravva, born before the

         adoption of Shivappa. The claim was in the estate of Shivappa, who

         died on 17th March 1957 that is after the commencement of the

         Act. Gouravva also died on 6 th August 1957. The stand of the

         defendant was that the plaintiffs being children of Shivappa before

         he went in adoption were not entitled to inherit the property of

         Gouravva, which she inherited from her husband.                      The learned

         Single Bench noticed that the adoption of Shivappa took place long

         before the enactment of
Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act,
6
Second Appeal No. 556 of 1964 decided by Bombay High Court on 26 th November, 1971.
11
1956 and thus adoption would be governed by Hindu law as it

existed prior to enactment. The Court held that an adopted child is

to be deemed as a child of his or her adoptive father or mother for

all purposes with effect from the date of the adoption.              One

important result of the severance of the ties in the family of birth

would be that the adoptee can no longer claim any right to succeed

to the property of his natural father or mother or any of the

relations in the family of birth.      The question considered was

whether the children born prior to date of adoption of Shivappa

would be entitled to inherit the property on the death of Gouravva

which took place after coming into force of the Act. It was held that

the property inherited by a Hindu female howsoever acquired

would be her absolute property. The Court held as under:
“…Broadly speaking, the property possessed by a Hindu
         female after the coming into force of the said Act would
         no longer be her limited estate but will be regarded as
         her absolute property and the intestate succession to
         such property would be governed by
sections 15
and
16
of the Hindu Succession Act.
xx              xx                 xx

         In my opinion, the fictional severance of ties with the
         natural family would not mean that her children would
         cease to be her children or can be considered to be not
         her children by means of a legal fiction. If by virtue of
         the definition in
Section 3(j)
even the illegitimate
         children of a Hindu female have been given a right to
         inherit her property, then it would not be permissible to
         say that her legitimate children should be excluded
         because they were born to her prior to the date of her
         husband’s adoption. If, however, the Legislature had
         specifically provided for this, then effect must be given
         to such a provision and the wishes of the Legislature
         respected. Where, however, there is no such clear
         provision, such exclusion would appear to be against
12
the plain language of the enactment and it would not
                       be proper to come to any such conclusion.”
18.      It was found that the Privy Council decision reported as
Tewari

         Raghuraj Chandra & Ors. v. Rani Subhadra Kunwar & Ors.7
does not afford any guidance to the question as to whether the

         legitimate children born prior to adoption would cease to be

         included in the category of her children.
19.      The Division Bench of Bombay High Court in Kausalyabai W/o
Jagdeorao v. Devkabai
W/o Jaiwantrao Deshmukh8 while

         examining the right of a daughter born to an adoptee before his

         adoption, on the question as to whether she is entitled to inherit

         the estate of her father after the commencement of the Act, held

         as under:
“33. Mr. Paranjpe fairly stated that he could not find
                       any authority taking the view that such a daughter
                       would cease to be the daughter of her father because of
                       his adoption. As far as we are aware, there is no text of
                       any Dharmashashtra, which lays down that a daughter
                       ceases to be a daughter the moment her father is given
                       in adoption.
34. The blood relation of the daughter and the father
                       continued till the
Hindu Succession Act
came into force;
and hence we are of the view that Mr. Deo's contention
                       that the daughter, the defendant, was entitled to ⅝th
                       share in the suit lands, having regard to the provisions
                       contained in
ss. 8
and
15(b)
read with
s. 10
, R. 1, must
                       be upheld. The decree must, therefore, follow in favour
                       of the plaintiff; only to the extent of ⅜th share in the
                       suit lands.”
20.      Similar view has been taken by the Division Bench of the Karnataka

         High Court in a judgment reported as
Smt. Neelawwa v. Smt.
7     AIR 1928 PC 87
8     (1978) 16 Mh.L.J. 357
13
Shivawwa9 wherein, the daughter of deceased Mallappa claimed

      half share in the suit property and the defendant claimed her right

      as a widow, being the step mother of the plaintiff. However, the

      defendant alleged that the plaintiff was born prior to the adoption.

      Mallappa was given in adoption in the year 1939 whereas the

      plaintiff was born in the year 1937. In this case, the Court held as

      under:
“9……………………..In our view it means and includes
                  moveable and immoveable property, whether separate
                  or self acquired or an interest in a Mitakshara
                  Coparcenary property provided he has left him
                  surviving any of the female heir or a daughter's son
                  mentioned in
Class I of the Schedule to the Act
. The fact
                  that the deceased Mallappa had come to own and
                  possess the suit land by reason of his adoption did not
                  make any difference for the purpose of
Section 8
of the
                  Act as it was the property of Mallappa at the time of his
                  death. Now we shall see whether the plaintiff cannot be
                  considered to be an heir of her father merely because
                  she was born before he was given in adoption. The
                  expressions ‘heir’ and ‘related’ are also defined in
Section 3(f)
and (j) respectively of the Act. “Heir”
                  means any person male or female who is entitled to
                  succeed to the property of an intestate under the Act.
                  “Related” means related by legitimate kinship. The
                  proviso to this definition is not relevant for our purpose,
                  because it is not in dispute that the plaintiff is the
                  legitimate daughter of the deceased Mallappa born
                  through his 1st wife. It is true, adoption had the effect
                  of removing Mallappa from his natural family into the
                  adoptive family, but did not and could not severe the tie
                  of blood relationship between him and the plaintiff, or
                  for that matter the members of his natural family.
                  Therefore, the plaintiff irrespective of the adoption of
                  her father continued to be the daughter of Mallappa.
                  Thus the plaintiff being the daughter falls in the
                  category of heirs specified in
Class I of the Schedule to
                  the Act
……………”
9   AIR 1989 Karnataka 45
14
21.   In view of the provisions of the Act which do not make any

      distinction between the son born to a father prior or after adoption

      of his father and that there is no provision which bars the natural

      born son to inherit the property of his natural father, therefore, the

      High Court has rightly upheld the rights of the sons of Laxman. In

      fact, in the Full Bench judgment of Bombay High Court in Martand

      Jiwajee Patil, it has been held that the natural father retains the

      right to give in adoption his son born before his own adoption.

      Therefore, if he has a right to give his son in adoption, such son has

      a right to inherit property by virtue of being an agnate. There was

      a full blood relationship between the three sons and the daughter

      who was born after adoption. All the children of Laxman are

      entitled to inherit the property of their natural father and mother in

      accordance with the provisions of the Act as succession has opened

      after the death of Laxman in 1987 and subsequently the mother in

      the year 1992.
22.   In view thereof, we do not find any error in the judgment of the

      learned Single Bench of the Bombay High Court. Accordingly, the

      appeals are dismissed.
.............................................J.
                                                      (L. NAGESWARA RAO)



                                       .............................................J.
                                                            (HEMANT GUPTA)

NEW DELHI;
FEBRUARY 07, 2020.
15