[Cites
4
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Nola Ram Dulichand Dal Mills Partner vs Union Of India on 14 February, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 210, (2020) 3 SCALE 661
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
Hemant Gupta
,
Deepak Gupta
REPORTABLE

                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10636 OF 2010


M/S. NOLA RAM DULICHAND DAL MILLS &
ANR.                                                      .....APPELLANT(S)

                                       VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                   .....RESPONDENT(S)

                                   WITH

                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7257 OF 2009

                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10637 OF 2010

                                    AND

                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7233 OF 2009




                              JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
Civil Appeal No. 10636 of 2010
1.      The challenge in the present appeal is to an order passed by the

        High Court of Rajasthan whereby the writ petition filed by the

        appellant was dismissed. In the writ petition, challenge was to a

        Circular dated 21st January, 2009 on the ground that it is contrary

        to the Foreign Trade Policy 2004-20091. Such policy is issued under


1    for short, ‘FTP’
1
Section 5 of the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act,

        19922. The FTP provides various schemes for providing incentives.
2.      The present is a case pertaining to “Vishesh Krishi Upaj Yojna 3” for

        giving incentives to promote export of fruits, vegetables, flowers,

        minor forest produce, dairy, poultry and their value added

        products.         In the Scheme notified for the year 2005-06, the

        following exports were not to be taken into account for duty credit

        entitlement under the Scheme:
“3.8 VISHESH KRISHI UPAJ YOJANA
                      (SPECIAL AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE SCHEME)

                            xx                  xx                xx
3.8.2.2.  Following exports shall not be taken into
                      account for duty credit entitlement under the scheme:
(a) Export of imported goods covered under Para 2.35
                      of the Foreign Trade Policy or exports made through
                      transshipment.
(b) Deemed exports (even when payments are received
                      in Free Foreign Exchange and payment is made from
                      EEFC account).”
3.      However, in the Scheme notified for the year 2006-2007 on 7 th

        April 2006, clauses 3.8 and 3.8.2.2 were changed.              The clauses

        read as under:
“3.8 VISHESH KRISHI AND GRAM UDYOG YOJANA
                      (SPECIAL AGRICULTURE AND VILLAGE INDUSTRY
                      SCHEME)

                            xx                  xx                xx

                      3.8.2.2.  Following exports shall not be taken into
                      account for duty credit entitlement under the scheme:
2    for short, ‘Act’
3    for short, ‘Yojna’
2
(a) Export of imported goods covered under Para 2.35
              of the Foreign Trade Policy or exports made through
              transshipment.
(b) Deemed Exports.
(c) Exports made by SEZs units and EOUs units.
xx                    xx                 xx

              3.8.5. Government reserves the right in public interest,
              to specify from time to time the export products, which
              shall not be eligible for calculation of entitlement.”
4.   The Circular dated 21st January, 2009 was issued so as to clarify the

     scheme notified for the year 2006-07. The relevant part of the

     circular reads as under:
“
                          xx              xx          xx
2. However, in FTP RE-2006 (issued on 7.4.2006),
              exports made by EOUs were made ineligible for benefits
              under VKGUY scheme [vide introducing Para 3.8.2.2
(c)]. In further, in FTP RE-2006, two new schemes,
              namely, Focus Market Scheme (FMS) and Focus Product
              Scheme (FPS) were introduced. Similar provisions were
              made under para 3.92.2(b) for FMS, and under Para
              3.10.2.2 (b) for FPS. Accordingly, for the period from
              1.4.2006 to 31.3.2007, exports made by EOUs (or
              through DTA units) are not eligible for benefits under
              VKGUY, FMS and FPS.”
5.   The appellant is said to be engaged in manufacturing/trading and

     selling of Guar Gum, Guar Chri and Korma, Refined Splits and Guar

     Gum Powder in the domestic as well as export market.                The

     appellant asserts that it is purchasing Guar Gum Powder from M/s.

     Neelkanth Polymers, which is 100% export-oriented unit.             The

     reason to purchase from the said supplier are multiple and
3
commercial in nature. In the writ petition, it is averred as under:
“12. That the petitioner firm used to purchase the Guar
              Gum Powder from M/s. Neelkanth Polymers supporting
              manufacturer under cover of invoice which was further
              exported in capacity of merchant exporter under cover
              of shipping bill, commercial invoice, bill of lading
              through Customs Port situated either at Kandla/Mundra
              Port or CONCOR ICD, Jaipur etc.“
6.   The appellant-writ petitioner has sought quashing of the Circular,

     inter alia, on the ground that it is contrary to the Policy notified on

     7th April, 2006. Learned counsel for the appellant contended that

     the Scheme has been notified under the Act, therefore, such

     Scheme has a statutory force which cannot be amended or

     modified by the Executive issuing the impugned Circular. The said

     Circular issued by the Government being contrary to the Scheme is

     not permissible. The learned counsel referred to Sections 3 and 5

     of the Act, which read as under:-
“3.    Powers to make provisions relating to
              imports and exports.-(1) The Central Government
              may, by Order published in the Official Gazette, make
              provision for the development and regulation of foreign
              trade by facilitating imports and increasing exports.
(2) The Central Government may also, by Order
              published in the Official Gazette, make provision for
              prohibiting, restricting or other wise regulating, in all
              cases or in specified classes of cases and subject to
              such exceptions, if any, as may be made by or under
              the Order, the import or export of goods or services or
              technology:
Provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall
              be applicable, in case of import or export of services or
              technology, only when the service or technology
              provider is availing benefits under the foreign trade
              policy or is dealing with specified services or specified
              technologies.
4
(3) All goods to which any Order under sub-section (2)
                        applies shall be deemed to be goods the import or
                        export of which has been prohibited under
section 11
of
                        the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962) and all the
                        provisions of that Act shall have effect accordingly.
(4) Without prejudice to anything contained in any other
                        law, rule, regulation, notification or order, no permit or
                        licence shall be necessary for import or export of any
                        goods, nor any goods shall be prohibited for import or
                        export except, as may be required under this Act, or
                        rules or orders made thereunder.
xx             xx                  xx
5. Foreign Trade Policy—The Central Government
                        may, from time to time, formulate and announce, by
                        notification in the Official Gazette, the foreign trade
                        policy and may also, in like manner amend that policy:
Provided that the Central Government may
                        direct that, in respect of the Special Economic Zones,
                        the foreign trade policy shall apply to the goods,
                        services and technology with such exceptions,
                        modifications and adaptations, as may be specified by
                        it by notification in the Official Gazette.”
7.      Learned counsel for the appellant argued that the Scheme

        excludes the benefit of exports by units in Domestic Tariff Area 4

        pertaining to Focus Market Scheme5 notified along with Yojna.

        Therefore, there was specific exclusion of exports by DTA in FMS,

        whereas, there is no such exclusion in the Yojna. Therefore, the

        Revenue has drawn distinction between the two Schemes notified

        on the same day, which shows that the Revenue has treated two

        Schemes differently, therefore, exports other than by units in SEZ

        and EUO units are entitled to benefit of exports.


4    for short, ‘DTA’
5    for short, ‘FMS’
5
8.     Learned counsel for the appellants also argued that in Para 3.8.2.2,

       the benefit of exports is not available if the exports are made by

       EOU or units situated in SEZ Units.               It is contended that only

       exports by these units are not entitled to incentive whereas the

       appellants are not part of either EOU or SEZ Unit as the expression

       used is exports made ‘by’ EOU and SEZ Unit and not ‘through’

       them.
9.      Mr. Arijit Prasad, learned senior counsel appearing for the

        respondents refers to a judgment of this Court reported as
Director General of Foreign Trade & Anr. v. Kanak Exports &

        Anr.6
wherein in respect of FTP notified under
Section 5
of the

        Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947, it was held that the

        Government has a right to amend, modify or even rescind a

        particular scheme. The Court held as under:
“105. We may state, at the outset, that the incentive
                   scheme in question, as promulgated by the
                   Government, is in the nature of concession or incentive
                   which is a privilege of the Central Government. It is for
                   the Government to take the decision to grant such a
                   privilege or not. It is also trite law that such exemptions,
                   concessions or incentives can be withdrawn any time.
                   All these are matters which are in the domain of policy
                   decisions of the Government. When there is withdrawal
                   of such incentive and it is also shown that the same was
                   done in public interest, the Court would not tinker with
                   these policy decisions. This is so
laid down in
a catena
                   of judgments of this Court and is now treated as
                   established and well-grounded principle of law. In such
                   circumstances, even the doctrine of promissory
                   estoppel cannot be ignored.
xx                          xx                  xx


6    (2016) 2 SCC 226
6
109.      Therefore, it cannot be denied that the
               Government has a right to amend, modify or even
               rescind a particular scheme. It is well settled that in
               complex economic matters every decision is necessarily
               empiric and it is based on experimentation or what one
               may call trial and error method and therefore, its
               validity cannot be tested on any rigid prior
               considerations or on the application of any straitjacket
               formula.    In Balco   Employees' Union v. Union of
               India [Balco Employees' Union v. Union of India, (2002)
               2 SCC 333] , the Supreme Court held that laws,
               including executive action relating to economic
               activities should be viewed with greater latitude than
               laws touching civil rights such as freedom of speech,
               religion, etc. that the legislature should be allowed
               some play in the joints because it has to deal with
               complex problems which do not admit of solution
               through any doctrine or straitjacket formula and this is
               particularly true in case of legislation dealing with
               economic matters, where having regard to the nature of
               the problems greater latitude require to be allowed to
               the legislature. The question, however, is as to whether
               it can be done retrospectively, thereby taking away
               some right that had accrued in favour of another
               person?”
10.   It is argued that 100% export-oriented units have been specifically

      excluded from benefit of the Scheme when it was notified on 7 th

      April, 2006. The appellant is purchaser from the said 100% export-

      oriented unit and claiming benefit of the Scheme in respect of

      exports made by it. It is contended that since the 100% export-

      oriented units are not entitled to the benefit under the Scheme,

      therefore, the purchasers from such export-oriented units will also

      not be entitled to the benefit of the Scheme. It is contended that

      what cannot be done directly cannot be done indirectly.             Since

      there was ambiguity in the Scheme, the same was clarified.
11.   We have heard learned counsel for the parties and find no merit in
7
the present appeal.
12.
Section 5
of the Act empowers the Central Government to

      formulate and announce by notification in the official gazette the

      Foreign Trade Policy and may also, in the like manner, amend that

      policy from time to time.    The Circular dated 21 st January, 2009

      does not modify or amend the Scheme notified for the year 2006-
07. It only clarifies that 100% export-oriented units which are not

      entitled to seek exemption cannot avail benefit indirectly through

      the purchasers from them. It is modification or amendment of the

      Scheme which is required to be carried out by publication in the

      official gazette but not the clarifications to remove ambiguity in the

      existing Scheme.      In terms of Clause 3.8.5 of the Scheme, the

      Government has reserved the right to specify from time to time the

      export products which shall not be eligible for calculation of

      entitlement.   Since the Government has reserved right in public

      interest in terms of the Scheme notified under the Act, therefore,

      the Circular dated 21st January, 2009 cannot be said to be illegal in

      any manner.
13.   We do not find any merit in the argument that exports made

      through an Export Oriented Unit would be entitled to incentives.

      The purpose of the Scheme is that 100% Export Oriented Units or

      units situated in Special Economic Zone are not to be granted

      incentives. The purpose and object of the Scheme notified cannot

      be defeated by granting incentives to units which exports though
8
100% Export Oriented Units.
14.   We do not find any merit in the argument that exports made

      through an Export Oriented Unit would be entitled to incentives.

      The purpose of the Scheme is that 100% Export Oriented Units or

      units situated in Special Economic Zone are not to be granted

      incentives. The purpose and object of the Scheme notified cannot

      be defeated by granting incentives to units which exports through

      100% Export Oriented Units.
15.   We do not find any merit in the argument that the Scheme

      excludes the benefit of exports by units in DTA in a Scheme

      pertaining to FMS notified along with Yojna in April 2006 for the

      reason that FMS has an explicit clause whereas the DTA was not

      excluded from claiming exemption under clause 3.8.2.2 related to

      Yojna.   Since the appellant is a purchaser from 100% export-

      oriented unit, therefore, the medium of the appellant cannot be

      used to avoid the intended purport of the policy for the year 2006-
07. We find that the export-oriented units cannot use the appellant

      for export under the Scheme and to claim benefit of export when it

      is not permissible for them directly.
16.   Consequently, we do not find any merit in the present appeal. The

      same is dismissed.
Civil Appeal No. 10637 of 2010
17.   The appellant is 100% export-oriented unit.   Such export-oriented
9
unit stands specifically excluded from the Scheme in Para 3.8.2.2,

      therefore, we do not find any merit in the present appeal.                 The

      same is dismissed.
Civil Appeal Nos. 7233 of 2009 and 7257 of 2009
18.   The appellant challenged the change in the Policy “Vishesh Krishi

      Upaj Yojna” wherein 100% export units were denied the benefit of

      exemption on the ground that the policy binds the respondents for

      a period of five years and that such policy is discriminatory as

      direct tariff areas were excluded. The High Court held as under:
“After hearing the counsel for the petitioners, we do not
               find any illegality in the impugned Notification dated
               7.4.2006 (Annexure P-7) as by the said Notification the
               Government has taken a policy decision to withdraw the
               aforesaid benefit as the Export Oriented Units enjoy
               special status for tax exemptions and permission to
               source various requirements including the one in
               agricultural sector, duty free. They also enjoy income
               tax benefits and have been set up primarily for exports,
               therefore, they cannot be treated at par with DTA Units
               which do not enjoy all these benefits. Therefore, the
               benefit under the said Policy has not been extended to
               Special Economic Zone Units and Export Oriented
               Units.”
19.   We do not find any error in the findings recorded. Accordingly, the

      appeals are dismissed.
.............................................J.
                                                              (DEEPAK GUPTA)
10
.............................................J.
                                          (HEMANT GUPTA)

NEW DELHI;
FEBRUARY 14, 2020.
11