[Cites
1
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Aarati Kumari vs Sanjeev Kumar Singh on 4 October, 2021
Author:
S. Ravindra Bhat
Bench:
S. Ravindra Bhat
1

                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                          CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                    TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NO.232 OF 2018

      AARATI KUMARI                                                                Petitioner

                                                          VERSUS

      SANJEEV KUMAR SINGH                                                          Respondent



                                                   O R D E R
This transfer petition has been filed by the petitioner-wife

      seeking                transfer    of   divorce    petition    filed   by    the    respondent-

      husband in the Court of Principal Judge, Family Court, Varanasi to

      the Family Court, Muzaffarpur, Bihar.
By order dated 16.09.2019, the parties were directed to appear

      before                 the    Supreme   Court      Mediation    Centre      to     explore     the

      possibility of settlement.
According to the report of the Supreme Court Mediation Centre

      submitted                on    05.10.2019,   the    parties    could   not       arrive   at   any

      mutually acceptable terms of settlement.
Heard learned counsel for both sides and perused the record.

                          Considering the facts and circumstances on the record, this

      Court is of the opinion that request for transfer of proceedings

      from the Family Court, Varanasi to the Family Court, Muzaffarpur,

      Bihar, is justified.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by Dr.
Mukesh Nasa
Date: 2021.10.08
09:04:41 IST
Reason:
2
Consequently,      the    divorce     petition   bearing      No.1299/2017,

titled as
“Sanjeev Kumar Singh v. Aarati Kumari”
, pending in the

Court of the Principal Judge, Family Court, Varanasi is transferred

to the Court of Principal Judge, Family Court, Muzaffarpur, Bihar

    The   Family   Court     at   Varanasi   is   directed   to   transmit   the

entire record to the transferee Court immediately.

    The   transferee    Court     at   Muzaffarpur   shall   ensure   that   for

facilitation of the parties, successive date(s) of hearing and/or

for recording of evidence are fixed to suit the convenience of the

parties, especially the respondent who has to travel to attend the

proceedings.
The transferee Court shall decide the case so transferred as

expeditiously as possible and in any case within one year from the

receipt of copy of this order.
The Registry is directed to send a copy of this Order to both

the Courts immediately by e-mail for compliance.

    This transfer petition is allowed accordingly.
.................................J.
                                       [S. RAVINDRA BHAT]

NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 04, 2021