[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Parul Jaiswal vs Avinash Jaiswal on 4 October, 2021
Author:
S. Ravindra Bhat
Bench:
S. Ravindra Bhat
1


                                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                               CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                      TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NO.2189 OF 2019

      PARUL JAISWAL                                                                          Petitioner

                                                                   VERSUS

      AVINASH JAISWAL & ANR.                                                                 Respondent



                                                             O R D E R
This transfer petition has been filed by the petitioner-wife

      seeking                  transfer       of    divorce    petition     filed       by   the    respondent-

      husband in the Court of Vth Additional Principal Judge, Family

      Court, Bengaluru, Karnataka to a Court of competent jurisdiction at

      Allahabad, Uttar Pradesh.
Having      heard        the   learned      counsel     for    the       parties   and

      considered the pleadings, this Court is of the opinion that in the

      larger                   interest       of    justice,       orders   for    the       conduct    of   the

      proceedings are warranted.                              Accordingly, following directions are

      issued:
a)    The    Family        Court    at    Bengaluru     before      which    the

                                proceedings in M.C. No.5296 of 2018 are pending and

                                were stayed by this Court by order dated 11.09.2019,
Signature Not Verified          shall now proceed with the matter.                  However, in the
Digitally signed by Dr.
Mukesh Nasa
Date: 2021.10.08
09:04:41 IST
Reason:
first instance, the parties shall be referred to the

                                Mediation Centre.
2
Considering         the      pendency         of      mediation

             proceedings, which shall be conducted for next 10

             weeks,    the     Family    Court    shall     not    take      up    the

             proceedings on merits.
b)   The Mediation proceedings shall be conducted online

             on such date(s) as are convenient to the parties and

             the concerned Mediator(s). Such proceedings shall be

             concluded within 10 weeks.
c)   In    case   of    a     settlement,    the    Family        Court      at

             Bengaluru, which is seized of the proceedings, shall

             pass orders having regard to the settlement arrived

             at between the parties.
d)   In case no settlement is arrived at or the mediation

             proceedings       remain    inconclusive,      the     Family        Court

             shall take up the proceedings and continue with them

             in accordance with law, after the said period of 10

             weeks.
For the facility and convenience of the parties, the Family

Court    shall     conduct     the    proceedings    online.       This      is    with     the

express agreement of all parties.
In case the presence of the petitioner is required on any

particular date, the Family Court at Bengaluru shall fix date(s)

convenient to the petitioner. In such event, the Family Court shall

ensure that the petitioner is paid Rs.10,000/- (Rupees Ten Thousand

Only) for every date of hearing when she will be required to remain

present      for   recording     of     her   evidence     and/or      for    such        other
3
purposes as are necessary.    The respondent shall pay the said

amount to the petitioner.
This transfer petition is disposed of in the aforesaid terms.
..........................J.
                                      [S. RAVINDRA BHAT]

NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 04, 2021