[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Deepa Mohan Naik vs Chandra Bhusan Pal on 4 October, 2021
Author:
S. Ravindra Bhat
Bench:
S. Ravindra Bhat
1



                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                            CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                    TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NO.2241 OF 2018

      DEEPA MOHAN NAIK                                                             Petitioner

                                                          VERSUS

      CHANDRA BHUSAN PAL                                                           Respondent


                                                       O R D E R
This transfer petition has been filed by the petitioner-wife

      seeking transfer of petition filed by the respondent-husband in the

      Court of Principal Judge, Family Court, Bhojpur, Ara, Bihar to the

      Court of Civil Judge Senior Division, Panaji, Goa.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties, this Court is of

      the                 opinion    that     another    attempt   for   securing         an   amicable

      settlement through mediation should be made by the parties.
Considering   the    facts    and   circumstances   on    the    record   and

      overall interest of justice, this Court is of the opinion that

      request for transfer of proceedings from the Court at Bhojpur, Ara,

      Bihar to the Court at Panaji, Goa, is justified.
Consequently, the petition being Matrimonial Case No.84 of

      2017, titled as “Chandra Bhusan Pal v. Deepa Mohan Naik”, pending

      in the Court of Principal Judge, Family Court, Bhojpur, Ara, Bihar

      is transferred to the Court of Civil Judge Senior Division, Panaji,
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by Dr.
Mukesh Nasa
Date: 2021.10.08
Goa.
09:04:41 IST
Reason:
2
The    Family    Court    at   Bhojpur,   Ara,   Bihar   is   directed   to

transmit the entire record to the transferee Court immediately.

    The transferee Court shall in the first instance refer the

parties to the Mediation Centre of the Bombay High Court, Goa

Bench.    The Mediation Centre shall conduct the proceedings as per

the choice of the parties - if so required by Video-Conferencing

mode as well.
The transferee Court shall not proceed with the case for eight

weeks,    during    which    period   the   mediation   proceedings   may    be

pending. In case no settlement is arrived at between the parties,

the case shall be taken up after said period of eight weeks. This

period shall commence from the date of receipt of the papers from

the Court at Bhojpur, Ara, Bihar alongwith the order of this Court.

    The transferee Court shall decide the case so transferred as

expeditiously as possible.
The Registry is directed to send a copy of this Order to both

the Courts immediately for compliance.

    This transfer petition is allowed accordingly.
.................................J.
                                       [S. RAVINDRA BHAT]

NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 04, 2021