[Cites
22
, Cited by
41
]
Supreme Court of India
Geo Varghese vs The State Of Rajasthan on 5 October, 2021
Equivalent citations: AIR 2021 SUPREME COURT 4764, AIRONLINE 2021 SC 849
Author:
Krishna Murari
Bench:
Krishna Murari
,
S. Abdul Nazeer
REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1164 OF 2021
                                 (Arising out of S.L.P (Crl.) No. 4512 OF 2019)


          GEO VARGHESE                                              …    APPELLANT (S)

                                                   VERSUS

          THE STATE OF RAJASTHAN & ANR.                             …    RESPONDENT(S)



                                                 JUDGMENT
KRISHNA MURARI, J.
Leave granted.
2.             Being aggrieved by the impugned judgment and order dated 30.04.2019

          passed by the High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan at Jaipur (hereinafter

          referred to as ‘High Court’) dismissing the petition under Section 482 of the

          Code of Criminal Procedure seeking to quash the First Information Report dated

          02.05.2018 registered as Case No. 162 of 2018 at Police Station Sodala, Jaipur

          City (South), the accused, a Physical Training Teacher in St. Xavier’s School,

          Nevta, Jaipur and also a member of the Disciplinary Committee for maintaining
Signature Not Verified
overall discipline by the students of the School, who is to face prosecution for
Digitally signed by
Neelam Gulati
Date: 2021.10.05
15:23:40 IST
Reason:
1
offence under Section 306 Indian Penal Code (hereinafter referred to as ‘IPC’)

is before us.
3.    The appellant herein was appointed as a Physical Training Teacher in St.

Xavier’s School, Nevta in the year 2016. He was imparting Physical Training to

the students from 1st to 5th standard. He was also a member of the Disciplinary

Committee for maintaining overall discipline by the students of the School.
4.    One student of Class 9th of the institution, unfortunately, committed

suicide in the morning at about 04:00 AM on 26.04.2018. The mother of the

deceased-student lodged the FIR in question on 02.05.2018 before the

concerned Police Station under
Section 306
IPC after about 7 days of the

suicide, alleging that her son committed suicide due to mental harassment meted

out by the appellant.
5.    Detailed facts as unfolded in the First Information Report by the

complainant- Respondent No. 2 was that :
On 26.04.2018, my son Nitant Raj Lata, aged 14 years was found hanging

      with the fan in the room at 04:00 AM by his grandmother. Immediately,

      the knot was opened and after bringing him down, he was immediately

      taken to Santkba Durlabhji Hospital where doctors declared him brought

      dead. The Hospital administration informed the concerned Police Station
2
immediately and on the same day, the body of deceased was handed over

to the police and postmortem was conducted. It is further stated in the

FIR that on 19.04.2018, Nitant Raj (the deceased) informed her that on

the said day his PTI (Physical Training Instructor) GEO Sir had harassed

and insulted him in the presence of everyone because of which he was

under deep mental pressure. However, she persuaded her son and sent

him to the School on Monday. Thereafter, on 25.04.2018, when the child

was in the School, a telephone call was received from school at about

09:00 AM calling the parents to come to the school on the next day i.e.,

26.04.2018. When Nitant returned from the school on 25.04.2018 again

he was under very much pressure and on being inquired he told that today

again GEO PTI Sir has harassed and insulted him very much. On this she

persuaded the child that we will go to school tomorrow and will discuss

because a phone call came from the school. Thereafter, the child had been

under more severe pressure and tension. He went to his room to sleep and

was found hanging at about 04:00 AM.        It is further stated that on

30.04.2018 at 11:00 AM, Assistant Sub-Inspector Shri Kallu Khan, came

to the house and searched his room where a suicide note in two pages and

curtain which was used for hanging and other items like a blank copy

from which two pages were torn and note book, etc. were recovered.
3
6.      Heard Shri Abhishek Gupta, learned Counsel for the appellant, Dr.

Manish Singhvi, learned counsel for the State-Respondent No. 1 and Mr. Aditya

Kumar Chaudhary, learned counsel for the State-Respondent No. 2. We have

also gone through the impugned judgment as also the record of the case with the

assistance of the learned counsel for the parties.
7.    Shri Abhishek Gupta, learned counsel for the appellant vehemently

contended that on a plain reading of the First Information Report, by no stretch

of imagination, it can be said that necessary ingredients to constitute an offence

of abetment, as defined under
Section 306
IPC, are not borne out and the

complaint does not disclose the commission of the said offence.
8.    It was further asserted that the allegations made in the FIR clearly spells

out that appellant in no manner abetted the commission of suicide by the

deceased as no such material exists on record and present proceedings if

allowed to continue would be nothing but an abuse of the process of law.
9.    Shri Abhishek Gupta, also took us through the suicide note which is filed

as Annexure P-2. A perusal of the same reveals that it is a note consisting of

three pages with following written on each separate paper :-
01st page – ‘MY ALL THINGS GOES TO MY DEAR BRO KAIRN EVEN MY

             LOVE BYE BUDDY & SORRY’

02nd page – ‘NEEDED JUSTICE’
4
03rd page – ‘THANKS GEO (PTI) OF MY SCHOOL’
10.   Dr. Manish Singhvi, learned senior counsel appearing for the State of

Rajasthan contends that the allegations in the FIR discloses a commission of

cognizable offence and there is a suicide note specifically taking the name of the

appellant. He further contends that the appellant harassed the deceased from

19.04.2018 till 24.04.2018 and ultimately on the complaint of the appellant

when the deceased was called by the Principal on 25.04.2018 for bunking

classes and the parents were also asked to come to school on 26.04.2018, the

deceased committed suicide on the intervening night of 25.04.2018 - 26.04.2018

and there is a proximate nexus in the harassment and suicide and thus, a prima

facie case for alleged cognizable offence is made out against the appellant and

the High Court has rightly refused to quash the First Information Report.
11.   Shri Aditya Kumar Chaudhary, learned counsel appearing for Respondent

No. 2 – ‘the Complainant’, while trying to defend the impugned order submits

that the impugned First Information Report clearly makes out that appellant’s

direct and indirect acts of humiliation, harassment led the deceased boy to

commit suicide. He further submitted that the question of mens rea attributable

to the appellant cannot be established at this stage when the investigation is yet

to be completed.
5
12.   We have considered the rival contentions of the learned counsel

appearing for the parties and perused the entire records.
13.   In our country, while suicide in itself is not an offence as a person

committing suicide goes beyond the reach of law but an attempt to suicide is

considered to be an offence under
Section 309
IPC. The abetment of suicide by

anybody is also an offence under
Section 306
IPC. It would be relevant to set

out
Section 306
of the IPC which reads as under :-
“306. Abetment of suicide.—If any person commits suicide,
      whoever abets the commission of such suicide, shall be
      punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
      which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.”
14.   Though, the
IPC
does not define the word ‘Suicide’ but the ordinary

dictionary meaning of suicide is ‘self-killing’. The word is derived from a

modern latin word ‘suicidium’ , ‘sui’ means ‘oneself’ and ‘cidium’ means

‘killing’. Thus, the word suicide implies an act of ‘self-killing’. In other words,

act of death must be committed by the deceased himself, irrespective of the

means adopted by him in achieving the object of killing himself.
15.
Section 306
of IPC makes abetment of suicide a criminal offence and

prescribes punishment for the same. Abetment is defined under
Section 107
of

IPC which reads as under :-
“107. Abetment of a thing - A person abets the doing of a
           thing, who—
6
First.—Instigates any person to do that thing; or
           Secondly.—Engages with one or more other person or
           persons in any conspiracy for the doing of that thing, if an
           act or illegal omission takes place in pursuance of that
           conspiracy, and in order to the doing of that thing; or
           Thirdly.—Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission,
           the doing of that thing.
Explanation       1.—A       person     who,      by wilful
           misrepresentation, or by wilful concealment of a material
           fact which he is bound to disclose, voluntarily causes or
           procures, or attempts to cause or procure, a thing to be
           done, is said to instigate the doing of that thing.

           Explanation 2.—Whoever either prior to or at the time of
           the commission of an act, does anything in order to
           facilitate the commission of that act, and thereby
           facilitates the commission thereof, is said to aid the doing
           of that act.”
16.   The ordinary dictionary meaning of the word ‘instigate’ is to bring about

or initiate, incite someone to do something. This Court in the case of
Ramesh

Kumar Vs. State of Chhattisgarh1
has defined the word ‘instigate’ as under :-
“Instigation is to goad, urge forward, provoke, incite or
           encourage to do an act.”
17.   The scope and ambit of
Section 107
IPC and its co-relation with
Section

306
IPC has been discussed repeatedly by this Court.
In the case of
S.S.Cheena

Vs. Vijay Kumar Mahajan and Anr.2
, it was observed as under:-
“Abetment involves a mental process of instigating a
           person or intentionally aiding a person in doing of a thing.
           Without a positive act on the part of the accused to
           instigate or aid in committing suicide, conviction cannot be
1. (2001) 9 SCC 618
2. (2010) 12 SCC 190
7
sustained. The intention of the legislature and the ratio of
           the cases decided by the Supreme Court is clear that in
           order to convict a person under
Section 306
IPC there has
           to be a clear mens rea to commit the offence. It also
           requires an active act or direct act which led the deceased
           to commit suicide seeing no option and that act must have
           been intended to push the deceased into such a position
           that he committed suicide.”
18.
In a recent pronouncement, a two-Judge Bench of this Court in the case

of
Arnab Manoranjan Goswami Vs. State of Maharashtra & Ors.
3, while

considering the co-relation of
Section 107
IPC with
Section 306
IPC has

observed as under :-
“47. The above decision thus arose in a situation where
           the High Court had declined to entertain a petition for
           quashing an FIR under
Section 482
of the 14 (2014) 4
           SCC 453 PART I 33
CrPC
. However, it nonetheless
           directed the investigating agency not to arrest the accused
           during the pendency of the investigation. This was held to
           be impermissible by this Court. On the other hand, this
           Court clarified that the High Court if it thinks fit, having
           regard to the parameters for quashing and the self
           restraint imposed by law, has the jurisdiction to quash the
           investigation ―and may pass appropriate interim orders
           as thought apposite in law. Clearly therefore, the High
           Court in the present case has misdirected itself in
           declining to enquire prima facie on a petition for quashing
           whether the parameters in the exercise of that jurisdiction
           have been duly established and if so whether a case for the
           grant of interim bail has been made out. The settled
           principles which have been consistently reiterated since
           the judgment of this Court in
State of Haryana vs Bhajan
           Lal(Bhajan Lal
) include a situation where the allegations
           made in the FIR or the complaint, even if they are taken at
           their face value and accepted in their entirety, do not
           prima facie constitute any offence or make out a case
           against the accused. This legal position was recently
3. (2021) 2 SCC 427
8
reiterated in a decision by a two-judge Bench of this Court
          in
Kamal Shivaji Pokarnekar vs State of Maharashtra
.
48. The striking aspect of the impugned judgment of the
          High Court spanning over fifty-six pages is the absence of
          any evaluation even prima facie of the most basic issue.
The High Court, in other words, failed to apply its mind to
          a 15 1992 Supp. 1 SCC 335 16 (2019) 14 SCC 350 PART I
          34 fundamental issue which needed to be considered while
          dealing with a petition for quashing under
Article 226
of
          the Constitution or
Section 482
of the CrPC. The High
          Court, by its judgment dated 9 November 2020, has
          instead allowed the petition for quashing to stand over for
          hearing a month later, and therefore declined to allow the
          appellant‘s prayer for interim bail and relegated him to
          the remedy under
Section 439
of the CrPC. In the
          meantime, liberty has been the casualty. The High Court
          having failed to evaluate prima facie whether the
          allegations in the FIR, taken as they stand, bring the case
          within the fold of
Section 306
read with
Section 34
of the
          IPC, this Court is now called upon to perform the task.”
19.
In the case of
M. Arjunan Vs. State, Represented
by its Inspector of

Police4, a two-Judge Bench of this Court has expounded the ingredients of
Section 306
IPC in the following words:-
“The essential ingredients of the offence under
Section
          306
I.P.C. are: (i) the abetment; (ii) the intention of the
          accused to aid or instigate or abet the deceased to commit
          suicide. The act of the accused, however, insulting the
          deceased by using abusive language will not, by itself,
          constitute the abetment of suicide. There should be
          evidence capable of suggesting that the accused intended
          by such act to instigate the deceased to commit suicide.
Unless the ingredients of instigation/abetment to commit
          suicide are satisfied, accused cannot be convicted under
Section 306
I.P.C.”
4. (2019) 3 SCC 315
9
20.   At this stage, we may also refer to another recent judgment of a two-

Judge Bench of this Court in the case of
Ude Singh & Ors. Vs. State of

Haryana5
, which elucidated on the essential ingredients of the offence under
Section 306
IPC in the following words:-
“16. In cases of alleged abetment of suicide, there must be
          a proof of direct or indirect act/s of incitement to the
          commission of suicide. It could hardly be disputed that the
          question of cause of a suicide, particularly in the context
          of an offence of abetment of suicide, remains a vexed one,
          involving multifaceted and complex attributes of human
          behaviour and responses/reactions. In the case of
          accusation for abetment of suicide, the Court would be
          looking for cogent and convincing proof of the act/s of
          incitement to the commission of suicide. In the case of
          suicide, mere allegation of harassment of the deceased by
          another person would not suffice unless there be such
          action on the part of the accused which compels the
          person to commit suicide; and such an offending action
          ought to be proximate to the time of occurrence. Whether a
          person has abetted in the commission of suicide by
          another or not, could only be gathered from the facts and
          circumstances of each case.
16.1. For the purpose of finding out if a person has
          abetted commission of suicide by another; the
          consideration would be if the accused is guilty of the act of
          instigation of the act of suicide. As explained and
          reiterated by this Court in the decisions above-referred,
          instigation means to goad, urge forward, provoke, incite
          or encourage to do an act. If the persons who committed
          suicide had been hypersensitive and the action of accused
          is otherwise not ordinarily expected to induce a similarly
          circumstanced person to commit suicide, it may not be safe
          to hold the accused guilty of abetment of suicide. But, on
          the other hand, if the accused by his acts and by his
          continuous course of conduct creates a situation which
5. (2019) 17 SCC 301
10
leads the deceased perceiving no other option except to
           commit suicide, the case may fall within the four-corners
           of
Section 306
IPC. If the accused plays an active role in
           tarnishing the self-esteem and self-respect of the victim,
           which eventually draws the victim to commit suicide, the
           accused may be held guilty of abetment of suicide. The
           question of mens rea on the part of the accused in such
           cases would be examined with reference to the actual acts
           and deeds of the accused and if the acts and deeds are
           only of such nature where the accused intended nothing
           more than harassment or snap show of anger, a particular
           case may fall short of the offence of abetment of suicide.
However, if the accused kept on irritating or annoying the
           deceased by words or deeds until the deceased reacted or
           was provoked, a particular case may be that of abetment
           of suicide. Such being the matter of delicate analysis of
           human behaviour, each case is required to be examined on
           its own facts, while taking note of all the surrounding
           factors having bearing on the actions and psyche of the
           accused and the deceased.”
21.   We may also refer to a two-Judge Bench judgment of this Court in the

case of
Narayan Malhari Thorat Vs. Vinayak Deorao Bhagat and Anr.
, 6

wherein the judgement rendered by the High Court quashing the FIR under
Section 482
was set aside. In the said case, an FIR was registered under
Section

306
IPC stating that the son and daughter-in-law were teachers in a Zila

Parishad School where the accused was also a teacher used to make frequent

calls on the mobile of the daughter-in-law, and used to harass her. Despite the

efforts of the son of the informant in trying to make the accused see reason and

stop calling, the accused continued with his activity.
On 09.02.2015, there was

a verbal altercation between the son of the informant and the accused and on
6. (2019) 13 SCC 598
11
12.02.2015, he committed suicide leaving a note stating that his family life has

been ruined by the accused who should not be pardoned and should be hanged.

Under
Section 482
Cr.PC, a petition was filed by the accused challenging the

FIR, which was allowed by the High Court and thereafter, was challenged

before this Court.    The appeal was allowed by this Court and made the

following observations:-
“We now consider the facts of the present case. There are
          definite allegations that the first respondent would keep on
          calling the wife of the victim on her mobile and keep
          harassing her which allegations are supported by the
          statements of the mother and the wife of the victim recorded
          during investigation. The record shows that 3-4 days prior
          to the suicide there was an altercation between the victim
          and the first respondent. In the light of these facts, coupled
          with the fact that the suicide note made definite allegation
          against first respondent, the High Court was not justified in
          entering into question whether the first respondent had the
          requisite intention to aid or instigate or abate the
          commission of suicide. At this juncture when the
          investigation was yet to be completed and charge-sheet, if
          any, was yet to be filed, the High Court ought not to have
          gone into the aspect whether there was requisite mental
          element or intention on part of the respondent.”


      In the above quoted observations of this Court, there is a clear indication

that there was a specific averment in the FIR that the respondent had

continuously harassed the spouse of the victim and did not rectify his conduct

despite being objected by the victim. Thus, as a matter of fact he had actively

facilitated in the commission of suicide.
12
22.   What is required to constitute an alleged abetment of suicide under
Section 306
IPC is there must be an allegation of either direct or indirect act of

incitement to the commission of offence of suicide and mere allegations of

harassment of the deceased by another person would not be sufficient in itself,

unless, there are allegations of such actions on the part of the accused which

compelled the commission of suicide. Further, if the person committing suicide

is hypersensitive and the allegations attributed to the accused is otherwise not

ordinarily expected to induce a similarly situated person to take the extreme step

of committing suicide, it would be unsafe to hold the accused guilty of abetment

of suicide. Thus, what is required is an examination of every case on its own

facts and circumstances and keeping in consideration the surrounding

circumstances as well, which may have bearing on the alleged action of the

accused and the psyche of the deceased.
23.   In the backdrop of the above discussion, we may now advert to the facts

of the present case to test whether the ingredients of offence under
Section 306
IPC exist, even prima-facie, to continue with the investigations.
24.   The FIR recites that victim boy was under deep mental pressure because

the appellant herein had harassed and insulted him in the presence of everyone

and he was not willing to go to school on 25.04.2018 but was persuaded to go to

school by the complainant. When he returned from the school, again he was
13
under very much pressure and on being enquired told that today again he was

harassed and insulted by the GEO, PTI Sir (the appellant). The boy was

informed that the parents have been called to school next day and this brought

him under further severe pressure and tension.
25.   In the First Information Report and as also the statement of the

complainant recorded by the police, no reasons or cause for the appellant to

harass and insult the victim are spelled out nor there are any details with respect

to any action on the part of the appellant by which the deceased boy might have

felt being harassed and insulted.
26.   The appellant in his petition under
Section 482
CrPC before the High

Court has set out detailed facts and circumstances, which unfortunately the High

Court failed to even take notice of much less analyse the same before coming to

the conclusion. It was stated in the petition that as a PT Teacher, he was

imparting Physical Training to the students from 1st to 5th standard and being a

member of the Disciplinary Committee, was also charged with the duty of

maintaining discipline in the school which included keeping a watch upon

students and oversee that they are attending the classes instead of bunking the

same and moving around in the school premises without permission. It was also

stated that the victim, a student of class 9, generally used to bunk his classes and

was warned by the appellant and other school staff a number of times. On
14
19.04.2018, he was caught by the appellant bunking classes and moving around

the school campus without any cause or permission and a warning was given to

him. On 25.04.2018, he was caught bunking classes and again the appellant

issued him a warning and on account of persistent act of bunking classes,

reported the same to the Principal of the School, who informed the parents of

the boy to come to the school.
27.   It is a solemn duty of a teacher to instil discipline in the students. It is not

uncommon that teachers reprimand a student for not being attentive or not being

upto the mark in studies or for bunking classes or not attending the school. The

disciplinary measures adopted by a teacher or other authorities of a school,

reprimanding a student for his indiscipline, in our considered opinion, would

not tantamount to provoking a student to commit suicide, unless there are

repeated specific allegations of harassment and insult deliberately without any

justifiable cause or reason. A simple act of reprimand of a student for his

behaviour or indiscipline by a teacher, who is under moral obligations to

inculcate the good qualities of a human being in a student would definitely not

amount to instigation or intentionally aid to the commission of a suicide by a

student.
28.   ‘Spare the rod and spoil the child’ an old saying may have lost its

relevance in present days and Corporal punishment to the child is not
15
recognised by law but that does not mean that a teacher or school authorities

have to shut their eyes to any indiscipline act of a student. It is not only a moral

duty of a teacher but one of the legally assigned duty under
Section 24 (e)
of the

Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 to hold regular

meetings with the parents and guardians and apprise them about the regularity

in attendance, ability to learn, progress made in learning and any other act or

relevant information about the child.
29.   Thus, the appellant having found the deceased boy regularly bunking

classes, first reprimanded him but on account of repeated acts, brought this fact

to the knowledge of the Principal, who called the parents on telephone to come

to the school. No further overt act has been attributed to the appellant either in

the First Information Report or in the statement of the complainant, nor

anything in this regard has been stated in the alleged suicide note. The alleged

suicide note only records insofar as, the appellant is concerned, ‘THANKS

GEO (PTI) OF MY SCHOOL’. Thus, even the suicide note does not attribute

any act or instigation on the part of the appellant to connect him with the

offence for which he is being charged.
30.   If, a student is simply reprimanded by a teacher for an act of indiscipline

and bringing the continued act of indiscipline to the notice of Principal of the

institution who conveyed to the parents of the student for the purposes of school
16
discipline and correcting a child, any student who is very emotional or

sentimental commits suicide, can the said teacher be held liable for the same

and charged and tried for the offence of abetment of suicide under
section 306
IPC.
31.    Our answer to the said question is 'No'.
32.    Considering the facts that the appellant holds a post of a teacher and any

act done in discharge of his moral or legal duty without their being any

circumstances to even remotely indicate that there was any intention on his part

to abet the commission of suicide by one of his own pupil, no mens rea can be

attributed. Thus, the very element of abetment is conspicuously missing from

the allegations levelled in the FIR. In the absence of the element of abetment

missing from the allegations, the essential ingredients of offence under
section

306
IPC do not exist.
33.    All these facts have been clearly ignored by the High Court while

mechanically dismissing the petition under
Section 482
CrPC on the ground that

FIR discloses the commission of a cognizable offence.
34.    The scope and ambit of inherent powers of the Court under
Section 482
CrPC or the extra-ordinary power under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India,
17
now stands well defined by series of judicial pronouncements. Undoubtedly,

every High Court has inherent power to act ex debito justitiae i.e., to do real and

substantial justice, or to prevent abuse of the process of the Court. The powers

being very wide in itself imposes a solemn duty on the Courts, requiring great

caution in its exercise. The Court must be careful to see that its decision in

exercise of this power is based on sound principles. The inherent power vested

in the Court should not be exercised to stifle a legitimate prosecution. However,

the inherent power or the extra-ordinary power conferred upon the High Court,

entitles the said Court to quash a proceeding, if it comes to the conclusion that

allowing the proceeding to continue would be an abuse of the process of the

Court, or the ends of justice require that the proceeding ought to be quashed.
35.   The following observations made by this Court in the case of
State of

Karnataka Vs. L. Muniswamy & Ors.7
may be relevant to note at this stage:-
“The whole some power under
Section 482
CrPC entitles
          the High Court to quash a proceeding when it comes to the
          conclusion that allowing the proceeding to continue would
          be an abuse of the process of the Court or that the ends of
          justice require that the proceeding ought to be quashed.
          The High Courts have been invested with inherent power,
          both in civil and criminal matters, to achieve a salutary
          public purposes. A Court proceeding ought not to be
          permitted to degenerate into a weapon of harassment or
          persecution. The Court observed in this case that ends of
          justice are higher than the ends of mere law though justice
7. (1977) 2 SCC 699
18
must be administered according to laws made by the
          legislature.”
36.    Again in
Madhavrao Jiwajirao Scindia & Anr. Vs. Sambhajirao

Chandrojirao Angre & Ors.8
, this Court observed in paragraph 7 as under :-
“7. The legal position is well-settled that when a
          prosecution at the initial stage is asked to be quashed, the
          test to be applied by the court is as to whether the
          uncontroverted allegations as made prima facie establish
          the offence. It is also for the court to take into
          consideration any special features which appear in a
          particular case to consider whether it is expedient and in
          the interest of justice to permit a prosecution to continue.
          This is so on the basis that the court cannot be utilised for
          any oblique purpose and where in the opinion of the court
          chances of an ultimate conviction is bleak and, therefore,
          no useful purpose is likely to be served by allowing a
          criminal prosecution to continue, the court may while
          taking into consideration the special facts of a case also
          quash the proceeding even though it may be at a
          preliminary stage.”
37.
In
State of Haryana & Ors. Vs. Bhajan Lal & Ors.
9, this Court held that

it may not be possible to lay down any precise, clearly defined and inflexible

guidelines or rigid formulae and to specify an exhaustive list of the cases, where

such power should be exercised. However, by way of illustration, the Court laid

down the following categories of cases wherein such power could be exercised

either to prevent abuse of the process of the Court or otherwise to secure the

ends of justice.
8.    (1988) 1 SCC 692
9.    (1992) Supp (1) SCC 335
19
“(1) Where the allegations made in the First Information
Report or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face
value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie
constitute any offence or make out a case against the
accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the First Information Report
and other materials, if any, accompanying the F.I.R. do not
disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by
police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except
under an order of a Magistrate within the purview of
Section 155(2) of the Code.
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR
or 'complaint and the evidence collected in support of the
same do not disclose the commission of any offence and
make out a case against the accused.
(4) Where the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a
cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable
offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer
without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under
Section 155(2)of the Code.
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint
are so absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of
which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion
that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the
accused.
(6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of
the provisions of the Code or the concerned Act (under
which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution
and continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a
specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act,
providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the
aggrieved party.
20
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended
          with mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously
          instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance
          on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private
          and personal grudge.”
38.
In the case of M/s.Zandu
Pharmaceutical Works Ltd. & Ors. Vs. Mohd.

Sharaful Haque & Anr.10
, this Court observed as under :-
“It would be an abuse of process of the court to allow any
         action which would result in injustice and prevent promotion
         of justice. In exercise of the powers court would be justified
         to     quash     any     proceeding    if   it    finds    that
         initiation/continuance of it amounts to abuse of the process
         of court or quashing of these proceedings would otherwise
         serve the ends of justice. When no offence is disclosed by the
         complaint, the court may examine the question of fact. When
         a complaint is sought to be quashed, it is permissible to look
         into the materials to assess what the complainant has
         alleged and whether any offence is made out even if the
         allegations are accepted in toto.”
39.   Insofar as, the suicide note is concerned, despite our minute examination

of the same, all we can say is that suicide note is rhetoric document, penned

down by an immature mind. A reading of the same also suggests the hyper-

sensitive temperament of the deceased which led him to take such an extra-

ordinary step, as the alleged reprimand by the accused, who was his teacher,

otherwise would not ordinarily induce a similarly circumstanced student to

commit suicide.
10. (2005) 1 SCC 122
21
40.   In the absence of any material on record even, prima-facie, in the FIR or

statement of the complainant, pointing out any such circumstances showing any

such act or intention that he intended to bring about the suicide of his student, it

would be absurd to even think that the appellant had any intention to place the

deceased in such circumstances that there was no option available to him except

to commit suicide.
41.   In the absence of any specific allegation and material of definite nature,

not imaginary or inferential one, it would be travesty of justice, to ask the

appellant-accused to face the trial. A criminal trial is not exactly a pleasant

experience and the appellant who is a teacher would certainly suffer great

prejudice, if he has to face prosecution on absurd allegations of irrelevant

nature.
42.   Bearing in mind the factual aspects of the case delineated herein above

and the legal principles enunciated by a series of pronouncements of this Court

discussed herein above, we are of the view that High Court was not justified in

dismissing the application under
section 482
CrPC for quashing the First

Information Report in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction.
43.   We are conscious of the pain and suffering of the complainant who is the

mother of the deceased boy. It is also very unfortunate that a young life has
22
been lost in this manner, but our sympathies and the pain and suffering of the

complainant, cannot translate into a legal remedy, much less a criminal

prosecution.
44.   In view of above facts and discussions, the impugned judgment of the

High Court dated 30.04.2019 cannot be sustained and is hereby set aside. The

First Information Report registered as Case No. 162 of 2018 at Police Station

Sodala, Jaipur City (South), stands quashed.
45.   The appeal, accordingly, stands allowed.
....…..........................J.
                                                       (S. ABDUL NAZEER)



                                                      …................................J.
                                                      (KRISHNA MURARI)



NEW DELHI;
05 OCTOBER, 2021
23