[Cites
8
, Cited by
211
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Uttar Pradesh vs Premlata on 5 October, 2021
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2021 SC 846
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
A. S. Bopanna
,
M. R. Shah
REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO.6003 OF 2021

         THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ORS.                                 ..APPELLANT(S)

                                                 VERSUS

         PREMLATA                                                     ..RESPONDENT(S)


                                               JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.              Feeling   aggrieved   and   dissatisfied   with   the   impugned

                         judgment and order dated 14.09.2018 passed by the High

                         Court of Judicature at Allahabad in Special Appeal Defective

                         (SAD) No.620 of 2018, by which the Division Bench of the

                         High Court has allowed the said appeal and quashed and set

                         aside the judgment and order dated 31.07.2018 passed by

                         the learned Single Judge and consequently has directed the

                         appellants – original respondents to consider the candidature

                         of the respondent herein – original appellant for appointment
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
Date: 2021.10.05
on compassionate ground in Grade­III service, the State of
16:49:56 IST
Reason:
U.P. has preferred the present appeal.
1
2.    The facts leading to the present appeal in nutshell are as

      under:­


2.1   That the deceased employee at the time of his death was

      posted and serving as Messenger in Police Radio Department

      of   Uttar   Pradesh   (Class­IV)   died   on   07.11.2014.    The

      respondent herein being widow of the deceased – government

      servant submitted an application dated 05.12.2014 for

      appointment on the post of Assistant Operator in Police

      Radio Department on compassionate ground which was

      rejected on the ground that she is not fulfilling the requisite

      eligibility criteria for the said post. That thereafter the

      respondent submitted another application before the U.P.

      Police Radio Headquarter, Lucknow for appointment on the

      post of Workshop Hand on compassionate ground. However

      as she failed to clear the physical fitness examination

      conducted on 28.01.2018 for the selection of Workshop

      employee, her application for appointment as Workshop

      employee on compassionate ground came to be rejected. Due

      to unsuccessful in the physical eligibility test on the post of

      Workshop Hand/Workshop employee, vide letter                  dated
2
23.02.2018 of the Police Radio Headquarter, U.P., Lucknow,

      the respondent herein was offered the post below the rank of

      Workshop Hand i.e. Messenger in Radio Department. Instead

      of accepting the said post the respondent filed the writ

      petition before the High Court claiming the appointment on

      the post of Workshop Hand (Karmshala Karmchari) in Police

      Radio Department under the provisions of Dying­In­Harness

      Rules 1974 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules 1974) on

      compassionate ground and to direct the appellants to appoint

      her on the post of Workshop Hand (Karmshala Karmchari) or

      the post suitable for her in similar cadre.



2.2   By the judgment and order dated 31.07.2018, learned Single

      Judge of the High Court dismissed the said writ petition on

      the ground that as the deceased employee was Class­IV

      employee and she has also been offered appointment on a

      Class­IV post, she cannot        claim   the appointment on

      compassionate ground on the post of Workshop Hand or on

      any other suitable Class­III post.
2.3   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the judgment and

      order passed by the learned Single Judge, the respondent
3
herein preferred the appeal before the Division Bench of the

High Court and by the impugned judgment and order the

Division Bench of the High Court has set aside the order

passed by the learned Single Judge and has allowed the

appeal and has directed the appellants to consider the

candidature of the respondent herein for appointment on

compassionate ground in Grade­III service and same be

accorded to her if she otherwise does not suffer any

ineligibility. By the impugned judgment and order the

Division Bench of the High Court has observed that a bare

perusal of Rule 5 of the Rules 1974 makes it crystal clear

that appointment under Rule 5 is required to be given on a

“suitable post” and the term ‘suitable’ in Rule 5 pertains to

suitability of the person who desires for appointment and it

has nothing to do with the post held by the deceased

government servant. The Division Bench also observed that

the suitability of the aspirant is required to be assessed on

the   basis   of   the   educational   qualification   and   other

eligibilities so possessed by such person. The Division Bench

noted that in the case in hand, respondent is having the

qualification of Bachelors Degree in Arts as well as Bachelors
4
Degree in Education and therefore qualified for appointment

     on a post in Grade­III.
3.   Feeling   aggrieved     and   dissatisfied   with   the   impugned

     judgment and order passed by the Division Bench of the High

     Court, the State of U.P. and others have preferred the present

     appeal.
4.   Ms. Ruchira Goel, learned Advocate appearing on behalf of

     the appellants has vehemently submitted that in the facts

     and circumstances of the case, the Division Bench of the

     High Court has misinterpreted the Rule 5 of the Rules 1974

     by observing that the respondent shall be entitled to

     appointment on compassionate ground on ‘suitable post’

     considering the educational qualification and irrespective of

     the fact that the deceased employee was working on Class­IV

     post. It is submitted that the Division Bench of the High

     Court has not properly appreciated the fact that the

     appellant sought appointment on compassionate ground

     which     cannot   be     equated   with     regular   post/regular

     recruitment.
5
4.1   It is submitted that ‘suitable post’ is required to be linked to

      the object and purpose of appointment on compassionate

      ground.
4.2   It is submitted that the object and purpose of providing the

      appointment on compassionate ground is to meet out the

      difficulties created on account of sudden death of the sole

      bread earner and cannot be equated with the regular

      recruitment/appointment.          It    is   further   submitted     that

      ‘suitable post’ is to be considered considering the post held

      by deceased employee and it cannot be a higher post.


4.3   It is submitted that ‘suitable post’ mentioned in Rule 5 of

      Rules 1974 has to be construed considering the educational

      qualification of dependent vis­à­vis the post held by the

      deceased employee.
4.4   It is submitted that in the present case earlier the respondent

      applied   for   the   post   of       Sub­Inspector    for   which   the

      respondent was not possessing the requisite qualification of

      ITI. It is submitted that even subsequently when she applied

      for the appointment on compassionate ground on the post of

      Workshop Hand she did not clear the physical examination
6
test which was required to be cleared as per Uttar Pradesh

      Radio Adhinasth Sewa Second Amendment Niyamawali,

      2005. It is submitted that therefore the respondent was

      offered next lower post i.e. Messenger, which the respondent

      refused to accept.
4.5   It is submitted that even as per the Circular dated

      24.11.2015, only one opportunity was required to be given

      for appointment on any post to the dependent of the

      deceased. It is submitted that in the present case, the

      respondent failed to avail the opportunity twice.


4.6   It is submitted that the Division Bench of the High Court has

      erred in holding that the ‘suitable post’ under Rule 5 of the

      Rules    1974,        would    mean      any   post     suitable   to   the

      qualification of the candidates.
4.7 Making the above submissions, it is prayed to allow the

      present appeal.
5.    The present appeal is vehemently opposed by Shri Shashank

      Singh,   learned        Advocate       appearing   on     behalf   of   the

      respondent.      It    is     submitted    that    in    the   facts    and
7
circumstances of the case, the Division Bench of the High

      Court has rightly interpreted Rule 5 of the Rules 1974, would

      mean any post suitable to the qualification of the candidate.


5.1   It is submitted that in the present case the Division Bench of

      the High Court has not directed to appoint the respondent as

      Workshop Hand, but has directed to consider the case on

      any   other   suitable   post       as   Grade­III   looking   to   the

      qualification of the respondent.
5.2 It is vehemently submitted that as such Circular dated

      24.11.2015, issued by the DGP, Uttar Pradesh, granting only

      one opportunity for appointment on compassionate ground

      on any post to the dependent of the deceased, and in case

      such dependent fails to avail the opportunity, such person

      shall be offered appointment on any other lower rank within

      a period of three months shall not be applicable to the facts

      of the case on hand as the respondent applied prior to the

      said circular. It is submitted that therefore the conditions in

      the said circular in relation to grant of one opportunity shall

      not be applicable to the respondent herein.
8
5.3   It is further submitted that while determining ‘suitability’

      under the provisions of Rules 1974, Rule 5 of the said rules

      laying down qualification requirements ought to be read

      harmoniously with Rule 8 of the Rules 1974 that the

      candidate ought to be able to maintain minimum standards

      of work and efficiency.
5.4   It is submitted that a hyper­technical approach ought not to

      be adopted in cases of compassionate appointments. It is

      submitted that so far as the compassionate appointments are

      concerned such     appointments    are   exempted from     the

      requirements of ordinary/normal recruitment procedure.


5.5   It is further submitted that there is no bar for appointment of

      a dependent at a higher post than was held by the deceased.

      It is submitted that Rule 5 of Rules 1974 provides that the

      appellant may be given a suitable employment in government

      service on a post except the post within the purview of the

      Uttar Pradesh Public Service Commission in relaxation of he

      normal recruitment rules.
5.6   It is submitted that even the respondent ought not to be

      denied the appointment as Workshop Hand on the ground
9
that the respondent failed to pass the physical test. It is

   submitted that the suitability of a post may be determined on

   the basis of educational qualification and/or other criteria. It

   is submitted that it is true that as per the provisions of law

   once a post is accepted on account of compassionate

   appointment, no right may be claimed to further or later

   apply for a higher post. It is submitted that however the facts

   in the present case are peculiar. The specialized post of

   Workshop Hand requires, in addition to requisite educational

   qualification, a physical test also to be passed. It is

   submitted that the respondent’s failure to pass the physical

   test makes her ineligible for this particular post. However,

   the post of Messenger being offered is disproportionate to her

   educational qualifications. Therefore, the respondent may be

   considered for an alternate or suitable post within Grade­III

   wherein such specific recruitment of the physical test may

   not be applicable as the down gradation of the post would

   render her educational qualification futile.


5.7 Making the above submissions and relying upon the decision

   of this court in case of
Phoolwati (Smt) vs. Union of India and
10
Others
reported in 1991 Supp (2) SCC 689, it is requested to

     dismiss the present appeal.
6.   Heard the learned counsel for the respective parties at

     length.
7.   The respondent’s husband was serving as Messenger (Class­

     IV/Grade­IV post) in Police Radio Department. He died on

     07.11.2014.   The    respondent­widow     of   the   deceased   –

     government servant submitted an application on 05.02.2014

     for appointment on the post of Assistant Operator which was

     not considered as she was not fulfilling the requisite

     eligibility criteria required for the post of Assistant Operator.

     That thereafter she made an application for the appointment

     on compassionate ground on the post of Workshop Hand

     which is a Grade­III post on 19.02.2015. She was granted the

     opportunity for appointment on said post, however, she could

     not pass the physical eligibility test conducted for the said

     post and thereby as a result of her failure in physical

     eligibility test, she could not be granted the appointment on

     the post of Workshop Hand on compassionate ground. Still

     by order dated 23.02.2018, the respondent was offered the
11
post below the rank of Workshop Hand i.e. Messenger in

     Radio Department, which she refused and the respondent

     insisted that she must be appointed on the compassionate

     ground on the post of Workshop Hand or equivalent post of

     Grade­III looking to her educational qualification. The

     learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition. However,

     the Division Bench by the impugned judgment and order has

     directed   to   consider   the    case   of   the   respondent   for

     appointment on compassionate ground on the post of

     Workshop Hand or any equivalent post in Grade­III looking to

     her qualification and on interpretation of Rule 5 that the

     ‘suitable post’ under Rule 5 of the Dying­in­Harness Rules

     1974 would mean any post suitable to the qualification of the

     candidate. The aforesaid is the subject matter of appeal

     before this court.
8.   While considering the issue involved in the present appeal,

     the law
laid down by
this court on compassionate ground on

     the death of the deceased employee are required to be

     referred to and considered.
In the recent decision this court

     in Civil Appeal No.5122 of 2021 in the case of the Director of
12
Treasuries in
Karnataka & Anr. vs. V. Somashree
, had

     occasion to consider the principle governing the grant of

     appointment on compassionate ground.
After referring to the

     decision of this court in
N.C. Santhosh vs. State of Karnataka

     and Ors.
reported in (2020) 7 SCC 617, this Court has

     summarized the principle governing the grant of appointment

     on compassionate ground as under:­
(i)     that the compassionate appointment is an
                 exception to the general rule;
(ii)    that      no     aspirant     has     a   right   to
                 compassionate appointment;
(iii)   the appointment to any public post in the service
                 of the State has to be made on the
                 basis      of     the principle in accordance with
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution of India;
(iv)    appointment on compassionate ground can
                 be made only on fulfilling the norms
laid down by
the State’s policy and/or satisfaction of the
                 eligibility criteria as per the policy;
(v)     the norms prevailing on the date of the
                 consideration of the application should be the
                 basis for       consideration      of   claim    for
                 compassionate appointment.
9.   As per the law
laid down by
this court in catena of decisions

     on the appointment on compassionate ground, for all the

     government vacancies equal opportunity should be provided

     to all aspirants as mandated under
Article 14
and
16
of the

     Constitution.      However,    appointment     on   compassionate
13
ground offered to a dependent of a deceased employee is an

      exception to the said norms. The compassionate ground is a

      concession and not a right.
9.1    In the case of
State of Himachal Pradesh and Anr. vs.

       Shashi Kumar
reported in (2019) 3 SCC 653, this court had

       an occasion to consider           the object and purpose of

       appointment on compassionate ground and considered

       decision of this court in case of
Govind Prakash Verma vs.

       LIC
reported in (2005) 10 SCC 289, in para 21 and 26, it is

       observed and held as under:­

          “21.
The decision in Govind Prakash Verma [Govind
          Prakash Verma v. LIC, (2005) 10 SCC 289, has been
          considered subsequently in several decisions. But,
          before we advert to those decisions, it is necessary to
          note that the nature of compassionate appointment
          had been considered by this Court in Umesh Kumar
          Nagpal v. State     of    Haryana [Umesh        Kumar
          Nagpal v. State of Haryana, (1994) 4 SCC 138 : 1994
          SCC (L&S) 930] .
The principles which have been laid
          down in
Umesh Kumar Nagpal [Umesh Kumar
          Nagpal v. State of Haryana
, (1994) 4 SCC 138 : 1994
          SCC (L&S) 930] have been subsequently followed in a
          consistent line of precedents in this Court. These
          principles are encapsulated in the following extract:
(Umesh     Kumar     Nagpal    case [
Umesh      Kumar
          Nagpal v. State of Haryana
, (1994) 4 SCC 138 : 1994
          SCC (L&S) 930] , SCC pp. 139­40, para 2)

                 “2. … As a rule, appointments in the
            public services should be made strictly on the
14
basis of open invitation of applications and
merit. No other mode of appointment nor any
other consideration is permissible. Neither the
Governments nor the public authorities are at
liberty to follow any other procedure or relax
the qualifications
laid down by
the rules for the
post. However, to this general rule which is to
be followed strictly in every case, there are
some exceptions carved out in the interests of
justice and to meet certain contingencies. One
such exception is in favour of the dependants
of an employee dying in harness and leaving
his family in penury and without any means of
livelihood. In such cases, out of pure
humanitarian       consideration      taking  into
consideration the fact that unless some source
of livelihood is provided, the family would not
be able to make both ends meet, a provision is
made in the rules to provide gainful
employment to one of the dependants of the
deceased who may be eligible for such
employment. The whole object of granting
compassionate employment is thus to enable
the family to tide over the sudden crisis. The
object is not to give a member of such family a
post much less a post for post held by the
deceased. What is further, mere death of an
employee in harness does not entitle his family
to such source of livelihood. The Government
or the public authority concerned has to
examine the financial condition of the family of
the deceased, and it is only if it is satisfied,
that but for the provision of employment, the
family will not be able to meet the crisis that a
job is to be offered to the eligible member of the
family. The posts in Classes III and IV are the
lowest posts in non­manual and manual
categories and hence they alone can be offered
on compassionate grounds, the object being to
relieve the family, of the financial destitution
and to help it get over the emergency. The
15
provision of employment in such lowest posts
            by making an exception to the rule is
            justifiable and valid since it is not
            discriminatory. The favourable treatment given
            to such dependant of the deceased employee in
            such posts has a rational nexus with the object
            sought to be achieved viz. relief against
            destitution. No other posts are expected or
            required to be given by the public authorities
            for the purpose. It must be remembered in this
            connection that as against the destitute family
            of the deceased there are millions of other
            families which are equally, if not more
            destitute. The exception to the rule made in
            favour of the family of the deceased employee
            is in consideration of the services rendered by
            him and the legitimate expectations, and the
            change in the status and affairs, of the family
            engendered by the erstwhile employment
            which are suddenly upturned.”

          “26.
The judgment of a Bench of two Judges
          in Mumtaz         Yunus         Mulani v. State      of
          Maharashtra [Mumtaz Yunus Mulani v. State of
          Maharashtra, (2008) 11 SCC 384 : (2008) 2 SCC
          (L&S) 1077] has adopted the principle that
          appointment on compassionate grounds is not a
          source of recruitment, but a means to enable the
          family of the deceased to get over a sudden financial
          crisis. The financial position of the family would need
          to be evaluated on the basis of the provisions
          contained in the scheme. The decision in Govind
          Prakash Verma [Govind Prakash Verma v. LIC, (2005)
          10 SCC 289 : 2005 SCC (L&S) 590] has been duly
          considered, but the Court observed that it did not
          appear that the earlier binding precedents of this
          Court have been taken note of in that case.”
10.   Thus as per the law laid down by this court in the aforesaid

      decisions, compassionate appointment is an exception to the
16
general rule of appointment in the public services and is in

       favour of the dependents of a deceased dying in harness and

       leaving his family in penury and without any means of

       livelihood, and in such cases, out of pure humanitarian

       consideration taking into consideration the fact that unless

       some source of livelihood is provided, the family would not be

       able to make both ends meet, a provision is made in the rules

       to provide gainful employment to one of the dependants of

       the deceased who may be eligible for such employment. The

       whole object of granting compassionate employment is thus

       to enable the family to tide over the sudden crisis. The object

       is not to give such family a post much less a post held by the

       deceased.
10.1   Applying the law laid down by this court in the aforesaid

       decisions   and     considering    the    observations      made

       hereinabove and the object and purpose for which the

       appointment on compassionate ground is provided, the

       submissions    on   behalf   of   the    respondent   and    the

       interpretation by the Division Bench of the High Court on

       Rule 5 of Rules 1974, is required to be considered.
17
10.2 The Division Bench of the High Court in the present case has

     interpreted Rule 5 of Rules 1974 and has held that ‘suitable

     post’ under Rule 5 of the Rules 1974 would mean any post

     suitable to the qualification of the candidate irrespective of

     the post held by the deceased employee. The aforesaid

     interpretation by the Division Bench of the High Court is just

     opposite   to   the   object   and   purpose    of    granting   the

     appointment on compassionate ground. ‘Suitable post’ has to

     be considered, considering status/post held by the deceased

     employee and the educational qualification/eligibility criteria

     is required to be considered, considering the post held by the

     deceased employee and the suitability of the post is required

     to be considered vis a vis the post held by the deceased

     employee, otherwise there shall be no difference/distinction

     between the appointment on compassionate ground and the

     regular appointment. In a given case it may happen that the

     dependent of the deceased employee who has applied for

     appointment     on    compassionate    ground    is    having    the

     educational qualification of Class­II or Class­I post and the

     deceased employee was working on the post of Class/Grade­
18
IV and/or lower than the post applied, in that case the

       dependent/applicant      cannot       seek   the    appointment   on

       compassionate ground on the higher post than what was

       held by the deceased employee as a matter of right, on the

       ground that he/she is eligible fulfilling the eligibility criteria

       of such higher post. The aforesaid shall be contrary to the

       object   and    purpose        of    grant   of     appointment   on

       compassionate ground which as observed hereinabove is to

       enable the family to tide over the sudden crisis on the death

       of the bread earner. As observed above, appointment on

       compassionate ground is provided out of pure humanitarian

       consideration taking into consideration the fact that some

       source of livelihood is provided and family would be able to

       make both ends meet.
10.3   In the present case as observed hereinabove initially the

       respondent     applied   for    appointment        on   compassionate

       ground on the post of Assistant Operator in Police Radio

       Department. The same was not accepted by the Department

       and rightly not accepted on the ground that she was not

       fulfilling requisite eligibility criteria for the post of Assistant
19
Operator. Thereafter the respondent again applied for

      appointment on the compassionate ground on the post of

      Workshop Hand. The case of the respondent was considered,

      however, she failed in the physical test examination, which

      was required as per the relevant recruitment rules of 2005.

      Therefore,   thereafter   she    was   offered   appointment   on

      compassionate ground as Messenger which was equivalent to

      the post held by the deceased employee. Therefore appellants

      were justified in offering the appointment to the respondent

      on the post of Messenger. However, the respondent refused

      the appointment on such post.
11.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the

      Division Bench of the High Court has misinterpreted and

      misconstrued Rule 5 of the Rules 1974 and in observing and

      holding that the ‘suitable post’ under Rule 5 of the Dying­In­

      Harness Rules 1974 would mean any post suitable to the

      qualification of the candidate and the appointment on

      compassionate ground is to be offered considering the

      educational qualification of the dependent. As observed

      hereinabove such an interpretation would defeat the object
20
and purpose of appointment on compassionate ground.
12. In view of the above for the reasons stated above, present

   appeal succeeds. The impugned judgment and order passed

   by the Division Bench of the High Court dated 14.09.2018 in

   Special Appeal Defective (SAD) No.620 of 2018 is hereby

   quashed and set aside. Consequently the writ petition

   preferred by the respondent before the learned Single Judge

   being Writ Petition No.16009 of 2018 stands dismissed and

   the order passed by the learned Single Judge dated

   31.07.2018 dismissing the writ stands restored. No costs.
…………………………………J.
                                     (M. R. SHAH)




                                   …………………………………J.
                                    (A. S. BOPANNA)

New Delhi,
October 05, 2021.
21