[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Dharmin Bai Kashyap vs Babli Sahu on 16 August, 2023
Author:
Bela M. Trivedi
Bench:
Bela M. Trivedi
,
Dipankar Datta
2023 INSC 712                                                                    REPORTABLE


                                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                               CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2517 OF 2023


             DHARMIN BAI KASHYAP                                                   …APPELLANT


                                                         VERSUS


             BABLI SAHU & OTHERS                                               …RESPONDENT(S)



                                                    J U D G M E N T
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J.
1.             The aggrieved appellant has preferred the present appeal challenging

                            the legality and validity of the impugned judgment and order dated

                            25.04.2022 passed by the High Court of Chhattisgarh, Bilaspur in Writ

                            Appeal No. 72 of 2022, whereby the Division Bench of High Court has

                            allowed the said writ appeal and set aside the order dated 06.01.2022

                            passed by the Single Bench in W.P. (C) No. 09 of 2022.

                            Consequently, the Division Bench has set aside the order dated
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Neetu Khajuria
Date: 2023.08.16
12:13:31 IST
20.12.2021 passed by the Sub Divisional Officer and also the
Reason:
recounting of votes undertaken on 31.12.2021.
1
2.   The bare summary of facts necessary for the purpose of deciding this

     Appeal are: -
(i)     28.01.2020 – The election of Gram Panchayat, Semarkona

               Block, District Mungeli, Chhattisgarh took place for the post

               of Sarpanch in which petitioner, respondent no.1 and

               respondent nos.5 to 8 contested the election.
(ii)    30.01.2020 – The result of election was declared in which

               respondent no.1 was declared elected.
(iii)   07.02.2020 - The petitioner filed the Election Petition before

               the Sub Divisional Officer, Mungeli and prayed for recounting

               of the votes mainly on the ground that there was no sufficient

               light at the three booths as stated therein.
(iv)    18.10.2021 - The Sub Divisional Officer (R), Mungeli allowed

               the said Election Petition and directed recounting of votes.
(v)    08.11.2021 – The respondent no. 1 having challenged the

               said order dated 18.10.2021 passed by SDO approached

               the High Court by filing writ petition, which came to be

               allowed on the ground that SDO had not followed the due

               process of law. The High Court also directed the SDO to

               decide the Election Petition in accordance with the

               provisions contained in Rule 11 of the Chhattisgarh

               Panchayats (Election Petitions, Corrupt Practices and
2
Disqualification for Membership) Rules, 1995 (hereinafter

               referred to as the Rules of 1995).
(vi)   20.12.2021 – The Sub Divisional Officer after recording the

               evidences of witnesses held that there was insufficiency of

               light at the polling stations, and ordered for recounting in

               three polling stations on 31.12.2021.
(vii) 31.12.2021 – After the recounting of the votes, the petitioner

               herein was declared as elected Sarpanch.
(viii) 06.01.2022 – The respondent no. 1 having challenged the

               said order of SDO by filing the writ petition, the same came

               to be dismissed by the Single Bench of the High Court.
(ix)   25.04.2022 – The respondent no. 1 having preferred the writ

               appeal before the Division Bench, the same came to be

               allowed vide the impugned judgment and order, mainly on

               the ground that the relief claimed by the petitioner in the

               Election Petition was not in consonance with the Rule 6 of

               the Rules of 1995.
3.   The crisp question of law that falls for consideration before this Court

     is whether the Election Petition filed by the petitioner before the Sub

     Divisional Officer (R) seeking relief of recounting of votes alone,

     without seeking any relief under Rule 6 of the Rules of 1995 was

     maintainable?
3
4.   Before adverting to the submissions made by the learned counsel for

     the parties on the issue involved it would be apt to mention that as per

     Section 122 of the Chhattisgarh Panchayat Raj Adhiniyam, 1993

     (hereinafter referred to as the said Act) an election under the said Act

     could be called in question only by a petition presented in the

     prescribed manner, and in case of Panchayat to the Sub Divisional

     Officer (R), within 30 days from the date on which the election in

     question was notified. The State Government in exercise of the

     powers conferred by sub-section (1) of Section 95 read with Section

     43 of the said Act of the 1993 has framed the Rules called the

     Chhattisgarh Panchayat Nirvachan Niyam, 1995 (hereinafter

     referred to as the Nirvachan Niyam 1995). Chapter IX of the said

     Nirvachan Niyam 1995 deals with “Poll and voting for election”. Sub

     rule (1) and sub rule (2) of Rule 77 thereof being relevant are

     reproduced here under: -
“77. Counting of votes. –
                   (1) Every ballot paper which is not rejected under rule 76
                   shall be counted:
Provided that no cover containing tender ballot
                   papers shall be opened and no such ballot paper shall
                   be counted.
(2) After the counting of votes in respect of a polling
                   station has been completed, the Returning Officer or
                   such other officer authorised by him, shall make the
                   entries in result sheet in Form 16 for Panchas and in Part
                   one of the result sheet in Form 17, 18 and 19 for
                   sarpanch, members of Janpad Panchayat and Zila
                   Panchayat respectively and announce the total number
                   of votes polled by each candidate.”
4
5.   Rule 80 pertains to the recount of votes. The relevant sub-rule (1) and

     (2) thereof are reproduced hereunder: -
“80. Recount of votes. –
                         (1) After an announcement has been made by the
                   Returning Officer or such other officer authorised by him,
                   of the total number of votes polled by each candidate
                   under sub-rule (2) of rule 77, a candidate or, in his
                   absence, his election agent or his counting agent may
                   apply in writing to the Returning Officer or such officer
                   authorised by him, for a recount of all or any of the votes
                   already counted, stating the grounds on which he
                   demands such recount.
(2) On such an application being made the
                   Returning Officer or such other officer authorised by him
                   shall decide the matter and may allow the application in
                   whole or in part or may reject it in to if it appears to him
                   to be frivolous or unreasonable.”
6.   It is pertinent to mention that the State Government has also framed

     the Rules of 1995, under the said Act of 1993. Rule 5 of the said Rules

     of 1995 pertains to the “Contents of the petition” and Rule 6 pertains

     to the “Relief that may be claimed by the petitioner”, which read as

     under: -
“5. Contents of the petition. – An election petition shall
(a) contain a concise statement of all material facts on
                   which the petitioner relies;
(b) set forth with sufficient particulars, the grounds on
                   which the election is called in question;
(c) be signed by the petitioner and verified in the manner
                   laid down in
the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 (V of
                   1908), for the verifications of pleadings.
“6. Relief that may be claimed by the petitioner. - A
                   petitioner may claim-
(a) a declaration that the election of all or any of the
                   returned candidates is void; and
(b) in addition, thereto, a further declaration that he
                   himself or any other candidate has been duly elected.”
5
7.   As stated hereinabove, the election of Gram Panchayat Semarkona,

     District Mungeli had taken place on 28.01.2020, whereby the

     respondent no. 1 was declared elected as the Sarpanch. The

     petitioner had called in question the said election by presenting an

     Election Petition on 07.02.2020 before the Sub Divisional Officer (R)

     under
Section 122
of the said Act of 1993, mainly on the ground that

     the counting of votes was done hurriedly in the late evening hours,

     without there being proper facility of light at three booths. The precise

     relief claimed therein was as under: -
“…it is prayed that the votes of Booth Nos. 3, 4 and 5 of
                   election area Gram Panchayat Semarkona, Tahsil and
                   District Mungeli should be recount”
8.   It was strenuously urged by the learned counsel for the appellant that

     the Sub Divisional Officer (R) having recorded the evidence of the

     witnesses and having been satisfied that there was no proper facility

     of light while counting the votes at three booths, had rightly ordered

     for recounting of votes. The said order of SDO was also confirmed by

     the Single Bench of the High Court, however the same was wrongly

     set aside by the Division Bench vide the impugned order on the

     ground of non-compliance of the Rule 6 of the said Rules of 1995.
Placing heavy reliance on Three-Judge Bench decision of this Court
6
in case of
Sohan Lal vs. Babu Gandhi and Others1
, he submitted

        that once the result is declared, the only remedy available to an

        aggrieved party is filing of an Election Petition under
Section 122
, and

        the Tribunal i.e., SDO in this case, is bound to consider the plea of

        recounting of votes and also declare the result accordingly.
He also

        submitted that the agent of the petitioner had orally requested the

        Returning Officer to recount the votes, immediately on the

        announcement of total number of votes polled by each candidate, as

        required under Rule 80 of the Nirvachan Niyam, 1995, however

        Returning Officer did not pay any heed to it.
9.      Rebutting the said submissions, learned counsel for the respondent

        no. 1 submitted that no such objection was raised either orally or by

        application in writing for re-counting of votes by the petitioner or her

        agent, either during the counting or after the completion of counting

        of votes. He further submitted that the only prayer prayed for by the

        petitioner in the election petition was for re-counting of votes at three

        selective booths, and such a prayer was not in consonance with Rule

        6 of the said Rules of 1995.
10. At the outset, it may be noted that a three judge bench of this Court

        in
Sohan Lal vs. Babu Gandhi and others
(supra) dealing with the
1
(2003) 1 SCC 108
7
provisions contained in M.P. Panchayat Raj Evam Gram Swaraj

        Adhiniyam, 1993, similar to the provisions contained in the

        Chhattisgarh Act, 1993, did not agree with the earlier decision in
Ram

        Rati vs. Saroj Devi and Others2
and held, inter alia, that there was

        no prohibition in the Act or under the rules prohibiting the Court or

        Tribunal to direct re-counting of the votes. The precise observations

        made in Para 14 are reproduced as under: -
“14.
In view of
Section 122
and the Rules, we are unable
                      to agree with the
ratio
laid down in
Ram Rati
case [(1997) 6 SCC 66 : AIR 1997 SC 3072] . It is not
                      correct to hold that, in an election petition, after the
                      declaration of the result, the court or tribunal cannot
                      direct re-counting of votes unless the party has first
                      applied in writing for re-counting of votes. There is no
                      prohibition in the Act or under the Rules prohibiting the
                      court or tribunal to direct a re-counting of the votes. Even
                      otherwise, a party may not know that the re-counting is
                      necessary till after the result is declared. At this stage, it
                      would not be possible for him to apply for re-counting to
                      the Returning Officer. His only remedy would be to file an
                      election petition under
Section 122
. In such a case, the
                      court or the tribunal is bound to consider the plea and
                      where a case is made out, it may direct re-count
                      depending upon the evidence led by the parties. In the
                      present case, there was obvious error in declaring the
                      result.
We, therefore, hold that the
ratio
laid down in
Ram
                      Rati
case [(1997) 6 SCC 66 : AIR 1997 SC 3072] is not
                      correct.”
11. There cannot be any disagreement with the
ratio
laid down in
the

        afore-stated case of Sohan Lal, which has stated that till the result is

        declared, it may not be possible for the party to apply for re-counting
2
(1997) 6 SCC 66
8
of votes to the Returning Officer, and his only remedy would be to file

       Election Petition, and that in such a case, a Court or the Tribunal is

       bound to consider the plea and where a case is made out, it may

       direct re-counting depending upon the evidence
laid down by
the

       parties. However, in the instant case the question involved is whether

       the election petition could be filed seeking the prayer only for re-

       counting of votes, without seeking any reliefs as contemplated in Rule

       6 of the said Rules of 1995.
12. It is well settled principle of law that where a right or a liability is

       created by a statue, which gives a special remedy for enforcing it, the

       remedy provided by the statue must be availed of. It is also well

       settled salutary principle that if a Statue provides for doing a thing to

       be done in a particular manner, then it has to be done in that manner

       and in no other manner. In Cherukuri Mani w/o Narendra Chowdari

       vs. Chief Secretary, Government of Andhra Pradesh and Others3,

       it is observed that “where the law prescribes a thing to be done in a

       particular manner following a particular procedure, it shall be done in

       the same manner following the provisions of law, without deviating

       from the prescribed procedure.”
3
(2015) 13 SCC 722
9
13. So far as the facts of the present case are concerned,
Section 122
of

    the said Act provides that an election under the said Act could be

    called in question only by a petition presented in the prescribed

    manner. The manner prescribed is in the Rules of 1995. Rule 5

    pertains to the “contents of the election petition” and Rule 6 thereof

    pertains to “the relief that may be claimed by the petitioner”. In the

    said Rule 6, it has been provided that the petitioner may claim a

    declaration that the election of all or any of the returned candidates is

    void; and in addition, thereto a further declaration that he himself or

    any other candidate has been duly elected. In view of the said Rule

    6, there remains no shadow of doubt that in the Election Petition filed

    under
Section 122
of the said Act, the reliefs claimed have to be in

    consonance with the said Rule 6 of Rules of 1995. It is true that as

    laid down in Sohan Lal’s case, the Court or Tribunal may direct re-

    counting of votes in the Election Petition, depending upon the

    evidence laid down by the parties in the Election Petition, nonetheless

    the Election Petition seeking the relief for re-counting of votes only,

    without seeking any other reliefs i.e., declarations as contemplated in

    Rule 6, would not be tenable in the eye of law. The main reliefs that

    may be claimed in the Election Petition have to be the reliefs as

    envisaged in Rule 6 of the said Rules of 1995.
10
14. Though a faint attempt was made by the learned counsel for the

       petitioner to argue that the agent of the petitioner had orally requested

       the Returning Officer to re-count the votes immediately after the

       announcement of total number of votes polled by each of the

       candidates, admittedly no such request was made in writing either by

       the petitioner or his agent to the Returning Officer as required under

       Rule 80 of the Nirvachan Niyam 1995. Even otherwise the petitioner

       was required to call in question, the election by filing an Election

       Petition under
Section 122
of the said Act, in the manner prescribed

       under the Rules of 1995 which required the petitioner to seek

       declarations as envisaged in Rule 6 thereof, and in such a petition,

       she could have prayed for a relief of re-counting of votes.
15. There is hardly any need to reiterate the trite position of law that when

       it comes to the interpretation of statutory provisions relating to election

       law, jurisprudence on the subject mandates strict construction of the

       provisions4. Election contest is not an action at law or a suit in equity

       but purely a statutory proceeding, provision for which has to be strictly

       construed. The petitioner having failed to make any application in

       writing for re-counting of votes as required under
Section 80
of the

       Nirvachan Niyam, 1995, and having failed to seek relief of
4
(2020) 6 SCC 812 (
Laxmi Singh and Others vs. Rekha Singh and others
)
11
declarations as required under Rule 6 of the Rules of 1995, the

    Election Petition filed by the petitioner before the Sub Divisional

    Officer (R) seeking relief of re-counting of votes alone was not

    maintainable.
16. In that view of the matter, we do not find any merit in the present

    appeal.
17. The appeal is dismissed.
..………………………. J.
[BELA M. TRIVEDI]



                                                 .…................................J.
                                                [S.V.N. BHATTI]

    NEW DELHI;
August 16, 2023
12