[Cites
16
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Iqbal @ Bala vs State Of U. P. on 8 August, 2023
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
B.R. Gavai
2023 INSC 685
                                                                      NON-REPORTABLE


                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2342           OF 2023
                                 (Arising out of S.L.P. (Criminal) No. 50 of 2023)


                            IQBAL @ BALA & ORS.                     …APPELLANT(S)


                                                    VERSUS

                            STATE OF U.P. & ORS.                    …RESPONDENT(S)


                                                    JUDGMENT
J.B. PARDIWALA, J. :
1.     Leave granted.
2.     This appeal arises from an order passed by the High

                            Court of Judicature at Allahabad dated 13.07.2022 in the

                            Criminal Miscellaneous Writ Petition No. 8905 of 2022 filed by

                            the appellants herein (original accused Nos. 1, 2 and 6

                            respectively) by which the High Court rejected the Writ Petition

                            and thereby declined to quash the First Information Report

                            (FIR) No. 122 of 2022 dated 21.06.2022 for the offences
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
punishable under Sections 376, 323 and 354(A) of the Indian
   Charanjeet Kaur
   Date: 2023.08.08
   15:45:17 IST
   Reason:
Penal Code (
IPC
) and
Sections 7
and
8
of the Protection of
1
Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012
registered at Women’s

Police Station, Mirzapur, District Saharanpur for the above

enumerated offences.
FACTUAL MATRIX
3.     The FIR dated 21.06.2022 reads thus:-
“Copy of the complaint written in Hindi Language- To the
     Senior Superintendent of Police, District – Saharanpur.
     Sir, I want to request that my name is X wife of Y
     residence of Kaswa & P.S. Mirjapur, District –
     Saharanpur. The complainant 3 years earlier used to
     work before the house of Haji Iqbal @ Balla son of Abdul
     Wahid residence of Kaswa Mirjapur, Saharanpur. I want
     to state that said Iqbal @ Balla is very much influential
     person having huge approach. For some days it is for
     some days, everything went smoothly. Then Iqbal
     stopped me from going outside of his house. In his house
     he has given one room for my living purpose. Then one
     day during night hours after finding good opportunity,
     said Iqbal raped me. It is however; it is due to public
     shame and due to influence of said Iqbal, I could not
     speak anything at that time. It is thereafter; both Iqbal
     and his brother Mehmood after finding opportunity, they
     used to rape me on every day. I wanted to disclose the
     present fact before my husband. It is however, the people
     there did not allow to come out from there. It is
     sometimes; my daughter Saliya and my son Akmal used
     to come there to meet. Then, Javed, Alishan and Afjal
     sons of Iqbal used to keep bad eyes on my daughter.
     They after taking her to different room, used to do vulgar
     acts with my daughter. It is then the age of my daughter
     was 14-15 years. It is at that time; after making
     courage, I wanted to oppose it. It is however; Javed and
     Dilshad (Bahanoi of Iqbal) mercilessly beaten me and
     caused fracture to my head. It is at that time 12 stitches
     were made before my head. I had then tried to make
     information of the same before the police station. It is
     however, I became unable to give the information of the
     same. It is after residing 4-5 months before there; it is on
2
one day after getting opportunity, I run away from there.
It is thereafter after taking my children; I started to live
     before my relatives. It is now; I got to know that it is
     against Iqbal, some of the people raised their voice. It is
     hence; it is for seeking justice from the injustice done to
     me, I have come down before you after hoping to get
     justice before you. It is thus, I request you to lodge my
     report and take necessary legal action.”
4.     Thus it appears from the aforesaid that the victim X

(respondent No. 4 herein), a resident of        Kaswa, Mirjapur,

Saharanpur, used to work for the appellant No.1 namely Iqbal

alias Bala and also used to stay at his residence in a separate

room. It is alleged by the victim that the appellants Nos. 1

and 2 respectively used to regularly rape her and whenever

her daughter (who was about 14 to 15 years) used to visit the

residence of the appellant No.1 to meet her, Javed, Alishan

and Afjal (sons of the appellant No.1 i.e. Accused No. 3, 4 and

5 respectively) used to misbehave and outrage her modesty. It

is further alleged that once when the victim offered resistance,

the co-accused Javed (accused No. 3) and Dilshad (appellant

No. 3) hit her resulting in a fracture on her head.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS
5.     Mr. Siddhartha Dave, the learned senior counsel

appearing for the appellants herein in his written submissions

has stated thus:-
3
“a) It is respectfully submitted that the alleged First
Information Report is mala fide and inherently
improbable since, on a plain reading of the said FIR,
the offence under
Sections 376
,
323
,
354 (A)
of the
Indian Penal Code and
Sections 7
and
8
of POCSO Act,
2012 is clearly not made out against the Petitioners.
The allegations in the FIR are vague as there is no
mention of time, date, place of the incident in the FIR.
Even otherwise, there is an inordinate delay of more
than 3 years in lodging the said complaint, reason for
which has been vaguely left unexplained in the FIR.
b) The allegations in the FIR are all concocted and
unjustified since they do not meet the requirement of
the sections which the Petitioners are alleged to have
committed. This is for the reason that the allegation
that Petitioner No. 1 and 2 raped the Complainant on
several occasions is completely vague given that the
Medico Legal Cause (MLC) where the description of the
incident as narrated to the doctor merely states that the
said Petitioners attempted sexual violence. Moreover,
the only allegation against Petitioner No. 3 is that he
had beaten the Complainant, causing fracture on her
head resulting in 12 stitches is completely baseless
since the MLC of the Complainant do not support any
such allegation. Lastly, with regard to the allegations
under
Sections 7
and
8
of POCSO Act said to have
committed against the daughter of the Complainant, it
is submitted that this allegation is against the Accused
No. 3, 4 and 5 as stipulated under the FIR and not
against the present Petitioners. Even otherwise, it is
submitted that in this regard there is no medical
record/MLC of the daughter of the Complainant against
whom the said offences under the
POCSO Act
are
alleged to have been committed.
c) The allegation put forth by the Respondents that
there are several cases already pending against the
Petitioners is misleading and lack any justification
since there is no mention of the present status of the
said cases. It is submitted that after the change of
Government in the State of Uttar Pradesh in the year
2017, the ruling party came to power and immediately
after the change of Government, the Petitioners along
4
with their family members were falsely implicated in
more than 30 criminal cases at the behest of the ruling
party. The Petitioners are being unnecessarily harassed
by the Respondent State by misusing its administrative
and police machinery. It is pertinent to mention that the
State authorities have illegally demolished three
residential houses of the Petitioners and the
Respondent State is heavily relying upon the criminal
cases registered against the Petitioners to show that
they are habitual offenders and every time the
Petitioners or their family members get protection
(anticipatory bail or stay of arrest) from either this
Hon’ble Court or the Hon’ble High Court, the local Police
immediately registers false cases against them.
d) It is respectfully submitted that the Hon’ble High
Court has committed grave error while refusing to
quash the FIR by holding that there exist no grounds for
quashing and a cognizable offence is made out. It is
submitted that the allegations made in the First
Information Report do not prima facie constitute any
offence or make out a case under
Sections 376
,
323
,
354(A)
of the Indian Penal Code and
Sections 7
and
8
of POCSO Act, 2012 against the Petitioners and hence,
the Hon’ble High Court ought to have quashed the FIR.
It is pertinent to mention that even after the charge
sheet has been filed, the petition for quashing of an FIR
is well within the powers of a Court of law [Please see:
ANAND KUMAR MOHATTA & ANOTHER VS. STATE
(NCT OF DELHI), DEPARTMENT OF HOME &
ANOTHER
(2019) 11 SCC 706 at paragraph 14 & 16].
e) That this Hon’ble Court has held that there arises no
need to warrant prosecution in a case (like the present
one) where the allegations levelled are general and
omnibus rather than specific and distinct [Please see:
KAHKASHAN KAUSAR & OTHERS VS. STATE OF
BIHAR AND OTHERS
(2022) 6 SCC 599 at paragraph
18].
f) It is further submitted that the alleged Look Out
Notice dated 10.05.2022 was issued much prior to the
5
registration of the present FIR No. 122 of 2022 which
     was registered on 21.06.2022.
g) For the reasons mentioned above, the Special Leave
     Petition may be allowed and the order of the Hon’ble
     High Court refusing to quash the FIR No. 122 of 2022
     dated 21.06.2022 be set aside.”


SUBMISIONS ON BEHALF OF THE STATE:
6.     On the other hand, Ms. Garima Prasad, the learned

Additional Advocate General appearing for the State of U.P. in

her written submissions has stated thus:-
“a) The in the above FIR/Crime No. 122/2022 U/s 376,
     323, 354(ka)
IPC
&
Section 7
,
8
of POCSO Act, 2012,
     registered at P.S. Mahila Thana, District Saharanpur,
     there are total six (6) accused persons namely Iqbal @
     Bala, Mehmood, Javed, Alishan, Afjal, Dilshad but only
     three accused (Petitioners) have come before this Hon’ble
     Court to quash the said FIR.
b) Further, the Investigation Officer also recorded the
     statement of the independent witnesses to know that the
     complainant used to go in the house of Petitioners or not,
     the independent witnesses have revealed the truth that
     the complainant used to go in the house of Petitioners for
     odd jobs, after some time, she used to live there. The
     witnesses heard that the complainant and victim was
     tortured and beaten by the Petitioners and his family
     members.
c) The Investigation has been completed and chargesheet
     is ready to file against the Petitioners but due to stay
     order dated 02.01.2023 of this Hon’ble Court, the
     chargesheet could not be submitted.
d) The chargesheet has been filed against the other
     accused Persons and the trial was commenced. During
     trial, the statement of Complainant and Victim were
     recorded as PW- 1 & PW- 2, wherein the Complainant
     specifically states that the Petitioner Iqbal @ Bala used
6
to rape in the house and thereafter, the other accused
     used to rape the complainant and molested the daughter
     of the complainant. (Copy of statement of PW-1 & PW-2
     is attached in IA No. 127360/2023 dated 07.07.2023 @
     Page No. 13 & 101 respectively).
e) During investigation, the statement of Complainant/
     Victim under
section 161
Cr.P.C. was recorded, wherein
     the victim has revealed that she was pressurized to
     make settlement in the aforementioned FIR No. 122 of
     2022 by the Gang members of the Petitioner No. 1 Mohd.
Iqbal. Further, it was also informed that Khurshid S/o
     Asgar, Farooq S/o Mutaaq, Mehraj S/o Farooq and
     Suleman Kabadi S/o Khurfan has threaten the victim
     and Suleman Kabadi has shown the pistol and warned
     that if she has not settled the issues, she would have to
     face the consequences.
f) It is submitted that the Petitioner No. 1 is Ex-MLC and
     powerful persons and he is having all sources in the
     previous Government(s), due to fear & threat given by the
     Petitioner, the complainant did not raise his voice against
     the Petitioner No. 1 and his family members.
In view of the aforementioned factual & legal
     submissions, it is most respectfully submitted that the
     present special leave petition of the Petitioners is liable to
     be dismissed with exemplary cost and the impugned
     order dated 13.07.2022 passed by the Hon’ble High
     Court in Criminal Misc. Writ Petition No. 8905 of 2022 is
     liable to be upheld.”



ANALYSIS
7.     Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the

parties and having gone through the materials on record, the

only question that falls for our consideration is whether we

should quash the FIR?
7
8.     It is relevant to note that the victim has not furnished

any information in regard to the date and time of the

commission of the alleged offence. At the same time, we also

take notice of the fact that the investigation has been completed

and charge sheet is ready to be filed. Although the allegations

levelled in the FIR do not inspire any confidence more

particularly in the absence of any specific date, time, etc. of the

alleged offences, yet we are of the view that the appellants

should prefer discharge application before the Trial Court under
Section 227
of the Code of Criminal Procedure (
CrPC
). We say so

because even according to the State, the investigation is over

and charge sheet is ready to be filed before the competent court.

In such circumstances, the Trial Court should be allowed to

look into the materials which the investigation officer might have

collected forming part of the charge sheet. If any such discharge

application is filed, the Trial Court shall look into the materials

and take a call whether any case for discharge is made out or

not.
9.     At this stage, we express no final opinion as regards the

truthfulness of the allegations levelled in the FIR.
10.    At this stage, we would like to observe something

important. Whenever an accused comes before the Court
8
invoking either the inherent powers under
Section 482
of the

Code   of   Criminal   Procedure     (
CrPC
)      or    extraordinary

jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution to get the

FIR or the criminal proceedings quashed essentially on the

ground that such proceedings are manifestly frivolous or

vexatious or instituted with the ulterior motive for wreaking

vengeance, then in such circumstances the Court owes a duty

to look into the FIR with care and a little more closely. We say

so because once the complainant decides to proceed against

the accused with an ulterior motive for wreaking personal

vengeance, etc., then he would ensure that the FIR/complaint

is very well drafted with all the necessary pleadings. The

complainant would ensure that the averments made in the

FIR/complaint are such that they disclose the necessary

ingredients to constitute the alleged offence. Therefore, it will

not be just enough for the Court to look into the averments

made   in   the   FIR/complaint    alone   for   the    purpose   of

ascertaining whether the necessary ingredients to constitute

the alleged offence are disclosed or not. In frivolous or

vexatious proceedings, the Court owes a duty to look into

many other attending circumstances emerging from the record

of the case over and above the averments and, if need be, with
9
due care and circumspection try to read in between the lines.

The Court while exercising its jurisdiction under
Section 482
of the CrPC or
Article 226
of the Constitution need not restrict

itself only to the stage of a case but is empowered to take into

account     the   overall   circumstances    leading   to   the

initiation/registration of the case as well as the materials

collected in the course of investigation. Take for instance the

case on hand. Multiple FIRs have been registered over a period

of time. It is in the background of such circumstances the

registration of multiple FIRs assumes importance, thereby

attracting the issue of wreaking vengeance out of private or

personal grudge as alleged.
11.      In the aforesaid view, we dispose of this appeal with

liberty to the appellants to prefer discharge application under
Section 227
of the Code of Criminal Procedure before the Trial

Court.
………………………………..J.
                                   ( B.R. GAVAI )



                                   ………………………………..J.
                                   ( J.B. PARDIWALA )
NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 08, 2023
10