[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Vijaya Bhiku Kadam vs Mayani Bhag Shikshan Prasarak Mandal on 28 August, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
,
Abhay S. Oka
2023INSC775


                                                                                 Non­Reportable

                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                         CIVIL APPEAL NOS.5483­5484 OF 2023
                             (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) Nos.6764­6765 of 2018)


                            Vijaya Bhiku Kadam                                         … Appellant



                                                                versus



                            Mayani Bhag Shikshan Prasarak
                            Mandal & Ors.                                        … Respondents


                                                        JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
1.    Leave granted.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
2.    The issue concerns the employment of the appellant, a
                            lecturer,    with    the   second      respondent–College    which   is
                            affiliated   to     the    fourth     respondent–Shivaji    University,
                            Kolhapur, Maharashtra.
Signature Not Verified
3.    The appellant has done M.A. in English and by the year
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2023.08.28
17:56:56 IST
Reason:
1992, she had acquired the qualification of PhD. The second
                            respondent–College was established in the Academic Year
SLP (C) Nos.6764­6765 of 2018                                                    Page 1 of 15
1991­1992. On an application made by the appellant, by the
       order dated 15th September 1992, the second respondent
       College appointed the appellant as a part­time lecturer in
       English for the Academic Year 1992­1993.                  The first
       respondent­Society runs the second respondent­College. The
       fourth respondent–University approved the said appointment.
4.     On      5th   July   1993,   an   advertisement    (the   first
       advertisement) was published by the first respondent for
       inviting applications to the posts of full­time lecturer. In the
       said advertisement, two posts were advertised.           One was in
       the open category and the other one was against the
       Scheduled Caste category.           The appellant and the fifth
       respondent applied for the said posts along with another
       candidate, namely, Ms S.D. Patil.         The University Selection
       Committee recommended the aforesaid three candidates. The
       name of Ms S.D. Patil was first in the order of merit, the fifth
       respondent was the second one and the appellant was the
       third one. Though the fifth respondent did not belong to the
       Scheduled Caste category, on 26th August 1993, the first
       respondent appointed her against the post reserved for the
       Scheduled Caste category for a period of one year. Ms S.D.
       Patil, the candidate at serial no.1 in the order of merit, did not
       join the employment and therefore, by the appointment order
       dated 8th September 1993, the appellant was appointed to the
       post of lecturer in English for one academic year on a full­
       time basis.
SLP (C) Nos.6764­6765 of 2018                                              Page 2 of 15
5.     The        fourth    respondent–University     approved   the
       appointment of Ms S.D. Patil as a full­time lecturer in the
       open category.           The fourth respondent–University approved
       the appointment of the fifth respondent for a period of one
       academic year against the post reserved for the Scheduled
       Caste category. The approval was given subject to a condition
       that during the period of probation, the candidates must clear
       the NET Examination. Noticing the mistake in the approval
       granted by the fourth respondent–University, the second
       respondent–College wrote a letter on 28th January 1994 to the
       fourth respondent–University requesting to grant approval to
       the appointment of the appellant in the open category as Ms
       S.D. Patil did not join. The fourth respondent–University, by
       the letter dated 4th March 1994, did not accept the said
       request      as     the    appellant   was   not    possessing   NET
       qualification. At that time, both the appellant and the fifth
       respondent were not possessing NET qualification.
6.     On 8th September 1994, the second respondent–College
       again advertised (the second advertisement) the two posts.
       The advertisement recorded that the requirement of NET
       qualification was exempted to those candidates who have
       been awarded a PhD degree before 31 st December 1993. Both
       the appellant and the fifth respondent applied for that post.
       However, the fifth respondent was not possessing the
       qualification of a PhD.           She had appeared for the M.Phil
       degree examination.            The University Selection Committee
       recommended the names of the appellant and the fifth
SLP (C) Nos.6764­6765 of 2018                                             Page 3 of 15
respondent.        As per the order of merit, the appellant was
       above the fifth respondent.              The Selection Committee
       recommended the appellant for appointment to the open
       category post. The fifth respondent was recommended for the
       post reserved against the Scheduled Caste category.            The
       fourth respondent–University approved the appointment of
       the appellant on the open post and granted approval to the
       appointment of the fifth respondent on the post reserved for
       the Scheduled Caste category.
7.     The third advertisement was published by the first
       respondent–College on 7th August 1995 wherein, only the post
       of lecturer reserved for the Scheduled Caste category was
       advertised.       Pursuant to the said advertisement, the fifth
       respondent applied for the said post.                The Selection
       Committee recommended the fifth respondent against the
       said post. By the letter dated 3rd January 1996, the fourth
       respondent–University approved the appointment of the fifth
       respondent against the reserved post for a period of one
       academic year.           Accordingly, a letter of appointment dated
       20th June 1996 was issued to the fifth respondent informing
       her that her appointment will come to an end after the
       Selection Committee selects a Scheduled Caste candidate.
       The fourth advertisement was issued on 17 th June 1996 for
       the same post reserved for Scheduled Caste.               The fifth
       respondent again applied for the post. On 28 th October 1996,
       the second respondent–College terminated the appointment of
       the fifth respondent from the end of the term.               Being
SLP (C) Nos.6764­6765 of 2018                                           Page 4 of 15
aggrieved by the termination, the fifth respondent preferred
       an appeal before the University and College Tribunal, Pune
       (for short, ‘the Tribunal’) in which the appellant was not made
       a party.      The Tribunal granted a stay to the order of her
       termination. During the pendency of the said appeal, the first
       respondent–College again passed an order of termination
       dated 20th April 1997 against the fifth respondent on the
       ground that the Commerce Section in the College was closed
       down.      Therefore, another appeal was preferred by the fifth
       respondent before the Tribunal.                By the order dated 5 th
       February 1998, the Tribunal allowed the appeal and directed
       reinstatement of the fifth respondent to her original post. The
       first respondent–College filed a writ petition for challenging
       the    said     order,      in   which   the    appellant   applied   for
       impleadment.             However, the High Court rejected the said
       application.
8.     On 6th May 1998, in the writ petition filed by the College,
       an interim order was passed by the High Court directing the
       College to continue the fifth respondent as a lecturer.
       Therefore, by the letter dated 5 th January 1999, the College
       addressed a letter to the fourth respondent–University, in
       which it was stated that due to the interim order in favour of
       the fifth respondent, there will be three full­time lecturers of
       English for which, there was no approval.               Thereafter, the
       College requested the fourth respondent–University to grant
       approval to continue the appellant as a half­time or part­time
       teacher. As the approval was for two and a half posts of full­
SLP (C) Nos.6764­6765 of 2018                                                 Page 5 of 15
time lecturers in English, the fourth respondent–University
       did not accede to the said request. Therefore, by the letter
       dated 29th March 2000, the first respondent–College informed
       the appellant that for the next academic year, she will work
       for a half­time workload and on half pay. In the meanwhile,
       the appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court for
       challenging the order dated 5 th February 1998 by which the
       fifth respondent was ordered to be reinstated.        During the
       pendency of the said writ petition filed by the appellant, in the
       writ petition filed by the College, there was a compromise
       between the College and the fifth respondent and therefore,
       the writ petition earlier filed by the College was disposed of as
       infructuous. On 5th September 2014, the High Court in the
       writ petition filed by the appellant set aside the order dated 5 th
       February 1998 of the Tribunal and remanded the appeal for
       fresh consideration. In the meanwhile, by the communication
       dated 29th March 2000, the College informed the appellant
       that her seniority will be below the seniority of the fifth
       respondent.        The appellant preferred an appeal against the
       said decision before the Tribunal. The restored appeal along
       with the appeal preferred by the appellant were heard and by
       the common judgment and order dated 21 st December 2015,
       the appeal preferred by the appellant was dismissed and the
       appeals preferred by the fifth respondent were allowed.
9.     Being aggrieved by the said common judgment, the
       appellant filed two writ petitions before the High Court of
       Judicature at Bombay. By the impugned judgment and order
SLP (C) Nos.6764­6765 of 2018                                           Page 6 of 15
dated 25th July 2017, the learned Single Judge of the High
       Court dismissed both the writ petitions. Being aggrieved by
       the said judgment, the present appeals have been preferred
       by the appellant in which on 12 th March 2018, while issuing
       notice, the status quo was ordered to be maintained.          As a
       result of which, the appellant continued in part­time/half­
       time service.
SUBMISSIONS
10.    The submission of the learned senior counsel appearing
       for the appellant is that the appellant was appointed on the
       basis of the first advertisement.        Even on the basis of the
       second advertisement, the appellant was selected.           In both
       processes, the appellant was selected against the open
       category post. That is how, on 26 th October 1994, the first
       respondent–College       issued    the    letter   of   appointment
       appointing the appellant in open category to which the fifth
       respondent did not raise any objection.            On the contrary,
       pursuant to the third and fourth advertisements, the fifth
       respondent applied for the post which was reserved for the
       Scheduled Caste category.         The submission of the learned
       senior counsel is that after the fifth respondent accepted the
       appointment of the appellant against open category, it was too
       late in the day for her to approach the Tribunal and contend
       that she was above the appellant in the order of merit in the
       process conducted on the basis of the first advertisement.
       His submission is that the appellant was a regularly
SLP (C) Nos.6764­6765 of 2018                                           Page 7 of 15
appointed candidate and therefore, her appointment on a full­
       time basis cannot be disturbed.
11.    The submission of the learned counsel appearing for the
       fifth respondent is that pursuant to the first advertisement
       when      the    selection   process   was   conducted,   the   fifth
       respondent was shown above the appellant in the order of
       merit.     Therefore, the fifth respondent ought to have been
       appointed against the open category post and the appellant
       on a temporary basis against the post reserved for the
       Scheduled Caste category.         As far as the first and second
       respondents are concerned, their stand is that they have
       abided by the orders of the High Court and the Tribunal. The
       learned counsel appearing for the fourth respondent justified
       the action of granting approval to the fifth respondent against
       the open category post.          The submission of the learned
       Standing Counsel for the State Government is that the
       additional burden of payment of salary cannot be put on the
       State Government by directing the appointment of the
       appellant against the full­time post.
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
12.    Pursuant to the first advertisement published on 5 th
       July 1993, both the appellant and the fifth respondent had
       applied for selection to two posts of lecturers in English.
       Pursuant to the said process, on 8th September 1993, the
       appellant was appointed by the first respondent–College as
       lecturer in English against the open post. In the said letter of
SLP (C) Nos.6764­6765 of 2018                                             Page 8 of 15
appointment, it was mentioned that it was on a temporary
       basis till the appellant passed the NET Examination during
       the Academic Year 1993­1994, during the probation period.
       What is important here is that by the letter dated 20 th
       January 1994, the fourth respondent–University approved the
       appointment of Ms S.D. Patil against the open post of
       lecturer. As noted earlier, Ms S.D. Patil had participated in
       the process on the basis of the first advertisement but she
       was not interested in getting employment. Under the same
       letter, the appointment of the fifth respondent was made for
       one academic             year against the post reserved for the
       Scheduled        Caste       category.     Thereafter,   the   College
       Administration wrote to the fourth respondent–University
       stating that Ms S.D. Patil had not joined and therefore, they
       requested for grant of approval to the appointment of the
       appellant. The fifth respondent never made any protest about
       her appointment against the post reserved for the Scheduled
       Caste category. In fact, pursuant to the second advertisement
       dated 8th September 1994, the fifth respondent again applied.
       Even the appellant applied. As per the advertisement, as the
       appellant was a PhD, the requirement of NET qualification
       was relaxed.             It is pertinent to note here that the fifth
       respondent did not challenge the process that commenced on
       the basis of the second advertisement on the ground that
       against the first advertisement, she was entitled to the
       appointment to the open post.            On the basis of the second
       advertisement, the Selection Committee recommended both
SLP (C) Nos.6764­6765 of 2018                                              Page 9 of 15
the appellant and the fifth respondent. However, in the order
       of merit, the appellant was shown at serial no.1 and the fifth
       respondent was shown at serial no.2. By the letter dated 5 th
       January 1995, the fourth respondent–University approved the
       appointment of the appellant against the open post of
       lecturer. The fourth respondent–University also approved the
       appointment of the fifth respondent against the post reserved
       for the Scheduled Caste category on a temporary basis.
13.    Thereafter came the fourth advertisement dated 17 th
       June 1996 for the same post reserved for the Scheduled Caste
       category. Again, the fifth respondent applied. However, the
       management of the second respondent–College appointed one
       Mr Gorakh Jagannath Sathe against the reserved post which
       led to the order of termination of the fifth respondent.    As
       pointed out earlier, the fifth respondent challenged the order
       of termination by filing an appeal to which, the appellant was
       not made a party. In the said appeal, a specific stand was
       taken by the College that the appointment of the appellant
       was made on the open post regularly and she has been
       working as a confirmed teacher in the said post. During the
       pendency of the appeal preferred by the fifth respondent, the
       second order of termination was passed on the ground that
       the Commerce faculty was closed. Therefore, one more appeal
       was preferred by the fifth respondent. On 5 th February 1998,
       the Tribunal by setting aside the order of termination of the
       fifth respondent, directed her reinstatement. For giving effect
       to the said order, on 5th January 1999, the appellant was
SLP (C) Nos.6764­6765 of 2018                                      Page 10 of 15
appointed again as a part­time lecturer on the ground that
       there was approval to only two and a half posts of English
       lecturers and the fifth respondent cannot be removed. In the
       writ petition filed by the appellant, there was an order of
       remand.        After remand, the appeal preferred by the fifth
       respondent was again allowed and that is how the appellant
       filed a writ petition before the High Court which has been
       dismissed by the impugned order. The High Court found that
       when the selection process was conducted against the first
       advertisement, the appellant was placed below the fifth
       respondent in the order of merit and in fact, approval was not
       granted to the appointment of the appellant.
14.    The analysis of the aforesaid factual position shows that
       the appellant has been placed in a very peculiar position. On
       the basis of the process conducted pursuant to the first
       advertisement, the appellant was appointed against the open
       post by the letter of appointment issued on 8 th September
       1993 which recorded that the appointment of the appellant
       was temporary subject to the condition of qualifying the NET
       Examination during the probation period.         At that time,
       though the fifth respondent was appointed against the post
       reserved for the Scheduled Caste category, she did not
       protest.      Pursuant to the second advertisement, both the
       appellant and the fifth respondent applied.       By the letter
       dated 26th October 1994, the appellant was appointed subject
       to clearing the NET Examination during the probation period.
       By the letter dated 5th January 1995, the appointment of the
SLP (C) Nos.6764­6765 of 2018                                       Page 11 of 15
appellant was approved by the fourth respondent–University
       against the open post. As stated earlier, the fifth respondent
       applied pursuant to the third and fourth advertisements
       without making any grievances about the outcome of the
       process conducted under the second advertisement under
       which the appellant was appointed against the open post.
       Due to the orders passed by the Tribunal, by the order dated
       5th January 1999, the appellant was again appointed as a
       part­time lecturer on a temporary basis. Thus, the appellant
       worked against the open category post of lecturer in English
       from 8th September 1993 till 5th January 1999 and in the
       meanwhile, the fourth respondent–University approved the
       regular appointment of the appellant by the letter dated 5 th
       January 1995.            This situation has arisen as the fifth
       respondent never objected to the appointment of the appellant
       pursuant to the first and second advertisements and she
       participated in the two further processes conducted on the
       basis of the third and fourth advertisements. In this process,
       the appellant has become age barred to get the appointment
       to the post of lecturer elsewhere. Even assuming that there
       was an error committed by the College Management by
       appointing the appellant against the open category of post in
       the year 1994, the appellant cannot be allowed to suffer, as in
       the second process, she was the first in the order of merit.
       This selection was never challenged by the fifth respondent.
15.    The appellant continues to work as a lecturer in English
       on a half time basis. Therefore, for doing substantial justice,
SLP (C) Nos.6764­6765 of 2018                                         Page 12 of 15
this is a fit case where we should invoke our power under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India for continuing her
       appointment on full time basis. While doing so, we will have
       to issue directions to the State Government to release grant­
       in­aid to the first and second respondents for payment of
       salary to the appellant.
16.    Hence, by modifying the impugned order, without
       disturbing the fifth respondent, we issue the following
       directions in the exercise of our jurisdiction under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India:
a. The appellant shall be reinstated to the post of
                      lecturer in English in the second respondent­
                      College with effect from 5th January 1995 within a
                      period of one month from today;
b. However, the appellant will not be entitled to the
                      salary of the post of lecturer from 5 th January
                      1995 till the date of her appointment in terms of
                      this order;
c. The appellant shall be placed in the seniority list
                      immediately below the fifth respondent and the
                      lecturer   appointed   on   the   post   reserved   for
                      Scheduled Caste;
SLP (C) Nos.6764­6765 of 2018                                             Page 13 of 15
d. As clarified earlier, the appellant will not be
                      entitled to salary admissible the post of lecturer
                      from 5th January 1995 till the date of her
                      appointment in terms of this order and this period
                      shall be taken into consideration only for the
                      limited purposes of granting retiral benefits to the
                      appellant;
e. We         direct   the   State   Government   to   release
                      necessary grant­in­aid for payment of salary to the
                      appellant from the date of her appointment to the
                      post of lecturer in English pursuant to this order,
                      if necessary, by creating a supernumerary post;
f. We make it clear that notwithstanding this order,
                      the post and status of the fifth respondent shall
                      remain unaffected;
g. We make it clear that the directions issued under
                      this order are in the exercise of the jurisdiction of
                      this Court under
Article 142
of the Constitution
                      and the same shall not be treated as precedent;
                      and
SLP (C) Nos.6764­6765 of 2018                                                Page 14 of 15
h. The appeals are disposed of on the above terms.
….…………………….J.
                                                 (Abhay S. Oka)


                                                 .....…………………...J.
                                                 (Sanjay Karol)
       New Delhi;
August 28, 2023.
SLP (C) Nos.6764­6765 of 2018                                          Page 15 of 15