[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Bengal vs Mitul Kumar Jana on 22 August, 2023
Author:
J.K. Maheshwari
Bench:
J.K. Maheshwari
REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8510/2011

         State of West Bengal & Ors.                                                   …Appellants

                                                         Versus

         Mitul Kumar Jana                                                             …Respondent

                                                   JUDGMENT
J.K. Maheshwari, J.
1.              This appeal arises out of the judgement of the High Court of Judicature at

                         Calcutta, dated 16.12.2010, passed in ‘WPST No. 600 of 2010’ filed by

                         respondent Mitul Kumar Jana. The High Court by the said judgment

                         allowed the writ and set-aside the order dated 23.11.2010 passed by the

                         West Bengal Administrative Tribunal (for short “Tribunal”) and directed

                         the appellant no. 2, i.e., the Superintendent of Police to appoint the

                         respondent as constable in the West Bengal police force.
2.              Succinctly stated, facts of this case are that the respondent appeared before

                         appellant no. 2 – Superintendent of Police, South 24 Parganas, for
Signature Not Verified   measurement, physical efficiency test and for interview on 06.09.2008,
Digitally signed by
Jayant Kumar Arora
09.09.2008 and 10.09.2008 respectively. He was declared fit in the said
Date: 2023.08.28
16:08:24 IST
Reason:
selection, and placed in the merit list of the constables in the West Bengal
1
Police Force. Pursuant thereto, respondent was supplied with the ‘Police

     Verification Roll’ and asked to fill-up the same in his own handwriting. He

     deposited the same with the appointing authority within the time schedule.

     As per the police verification report sent by the local Police Station, it was

     alleged that the respondent was implicated in a criminal case bearing Case

     No. 124 of 2007, dated 03.08.2007, registered at Kakdwip Police Station.

     After investigation, charge-sheet was filed on 31.08.2007, whereafter, the

     trial was pending at the time of his interview and physical test. The police

     report further indicated that the respondent was granted anticipatory bail

     on 16.08.2007 and regular bail on 27.08.2007.
3.   Upon scrutinizing the said verification form, the authority formed an

     opinion that the respondent had suppressed material information regarding

     his involvement in a pending criminal case. The verification roll submitted

     by the respondent was sent to the Intelligence Branch, West Bengal for

     opinion. Vide Memo no. 3875/S – 503-08/S.A. – II/VR, dated 09.02.2009,

     the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Intelligence Branch had informed

     that the respondent has supressed the fact of his involvement in a criminal

     case and as the case against the respondent is sub-judice, no opinion for his

     suitability could be given at this stage. In the given facts, order of

     appointment was not issued by the appellant. However, the respondent

     filed Original Application No. 343 of 2010 before the Tribunal seeking

     directions to issue the letter of appointment on account of his selection for
2
the post of constable in the West Bengal Police Force. The Authorities filed

     their reply and contended that the respondent was involved in a criminal

     case and despite having knowledge of the same, he had not disclosed the

     same in the verification roll and suppressed the information about the

     pending criminal case, hence, he is not suitable for the appointment.
4.   The Tribunal vide order dated 23.11.2010, disposed-off the Original

     Application and was of the opinion that it is not a case of suppression of

     information by the respondent. It was said that, without his acquittal in the

     pending criminal case, direction to issue the letter of appointment cannot

     be recommended and observed that, in case the respondent is acquitted, his

     case may be considered by the appellant as per rules.
5.   Being aggrieved, the respondent preferred Writ Petition before the High

     Court at Calcutta and prayed for appropriate directions. The Court in the

     impugned judgement referred to column no. 12 of the verification roll and

     opined that the information sought in the said column was of arrest,

     detention and conviction. As per details asked in the said column,

     information regarding pending criminal case was not required to be

     furnished. Therefore, the High Court concurred with the finding of the

     Tribunal on the issue of suppression of material information and was of the

     opinion that because the respondent has not yet been held guilty in the

     criminal case by the competent Court, therefore, presumption of innocence

     in his favour still remains. Hence, the appellant was directed to issue the

     letter of appointment subject to final outcome of the pending criminal case.
3
Being aggrieved by the said order, this appeal has been filed by the State of

     West Bengal.
6.   Learned counsel for the appellants submits that High Court committed an

     error in directing appointment of the respondent particularly during the

     pendency of a criminal case against him. The said direction would affect

     the morale of the police force and undermine the public faith in it.

     Emphasizing the object of furnishing the information in the verification

     roll, it was urged that the character of a person to judge his suitability to

     the post in public employment is a necessary concomitant to avoid

     defacing of the Police Department.
In support of the said contention,

     reliance is placed on a judgement in the case of
“R. Radhakrishnan Vs.

     Director General of Police & Others
, 2008 (1) SCC 660” to urge that even

     on acquittal of a candidate, he can still be denied appointment on account

     of suppression of material information regarding pendency of a criminal

     case.
7.   Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent referring to the details of

     column 12 of the verification roll, submits that the information sought was

     vague and considering the nature of the information asked, the respondent

     was not required to furnish the details of the pending criminal case. The

     Tribunal and the High Court have appreciated the said issue and rightly

     recorded the finding that it is not a case of suppression of material

     information, and the High Court was right in directing the appellant to

     issue the letter of appointment subject to the decision in the pending
4
criminal case. He further contended that, in the said criminal case,

     respondent has been honourably acquitted. Therefore, there is no

     impediment before the appellants to carry out such directions. Placing

     reliance on the judgement of “Secy., Deptt. of
Home Secy., A.P. and

     Others Vs. B. Chinnam Naidu
, (2005) 2 SCC 746”, it is urged that since

     specific requirement to mention about the pending criminal case was not

     sought in the verification roll, the respondent cannot be held at fault for

     suppression of material information.
8.   Having heard learned counsel for the parties and on perusal of the material

     placed, it is not in dispute that vide judgement dated 04.06.2012, the

     learned Judicial Magistrate (First Class), Kakdwip District, South 24

     Parganas, acquitted the respondent from the charges of
Sections

     147
/
149
/
447
/
323
/
506
of IPC in Criminal Case No. 362/2004. After

     appreciating the evidence as brought on record, the Court found that the

     prosecution has hopelessly failed to bring home the guilt and prove the

     charges against the respondent. On account of acquittal of the accused

     persons, the objection regarding pendency of criminal case no more

     subsists. In addition, on perusal of the prosecution story of the said case,

     the cause of dispute was of egress and ingress to a passage for which the

     order of attachment was passed by the Sub-Divisional Magistrate. As

     alleged, the accused persons started raising fencing which was opposed by

     the complainant. For the said incident, FIR against eight accused persons
5
including the respondent was registered. In the said judgement, the name

     of the respondent was shown as “Mridul Jana” and not his correct name,

     i.e., “Mitul Kumar Jana”. Be that as it may, as discussed above, the

     prosecution has miserably failed to prove the charges. In our considered

     view, the said allegations do not constitute any offence affecting moral

     turpitude and shall not cause any impediment for public employment to a

     candidate who got selected by the due process of law.
9.   In the facts of the case, the other objection raised by the appellant is related

     to suppression of material information in the verification roll.             For

     analysing the sustainability of the said objection, the language used to ask

     information in Column No. 12 of verification roll may be relevant and for

     ready reference, it is reproduced as under;
“Have you been arrested, detained or convicted by a court of any
           offence if the answer is 'yes' the full particulars of the Arrest or
           detention or conviction and the sentence should be given.
           Answer: No”
10. Bare perusal of the details of the information sought in the above column

     indicates that, it was regarding arrest, detention and conviction by a Court

     in any offence. In case the answer was ‘yes’, then full particulars of the

     arrest or detention or conviction and sentence were required to be

     furnished. In case the answer was in the negative, no other particulars were

     required to be furnished. In the case on hand, in reply to the information

     asked the respondent gave the answer as “no”. As per the contents of the
6
information sought and as per the answer given by the respondent, he is

    not required to furnish information regarding pending criminal case.

    Therefore, supply of such information by the respondent does not fall

    within the expression ‘suppression of material information’. This Court

    had an occasion to deal with the similar issue in the case of
B. Chinnam

    Naidu
(supra). The relevant paragraph of
the said judgment
is reproduced

    herein below –

           “9. …The State Government and the Tribunal appeared to have
           proceeded on the basis that the respondent ought to have indicated
           the fact of arrest or pendency of the case, though column 12 of the
           attestation form did not require such information being furnished.
           The learned counsel for the appellants submitted that such a
           requirement has to be read into an attestation form. We find no
           reason to accept such contention. There was no specific requirement
           to mention as to whether any case is pending or whether the
           applicant had been arrested. In view of the specific language so far
           as column 12 is concerned the respondent cannot be found guilty of
           any suppression.”
11.
In
the above case
, the Court has distinguished the judgment of
“Kendriya

    Vidyalaya Sangathan & Others Vs. Ram Ratan Yadav
, (2003) 3 SCC

    437”, on the pretext that the details of information sought in the

    verification roll in said case was different. In the facts of the present case,

    the information sought from the respondent in the verification form was

    vague.
Similar was the position in the case of
Chinnam Naidu
(supra).

    Therefore
,
the said judgment
squarely applies in the facts of this case.

    Though in the said case, finding regarding desirability for appointment of a
7
person in government service was not decided because it was not the

    subject matter.
12. In view of the discussion made herein above, the opinion given by the

    Deputy Inspector General of Police, Intelligence Branch, and the stand

    taken by the Department before the Tribunal and the High Court regarding

    suppression of material information by the respondent cannot be

    countenanced. The Tribunal and the High Court have rightly recorded the

    finding that it is not a case of suppression of material information and we

    affirm such finding. Simultaneously, the criminal case registered against

    the respondent were for petty offences. The allegations in the said case

    were neither of heinous/serious offences, nor related to an offence

    involving moral turpitude. In the said case, the respondent was honourably

    acquitted because the prosecution had miserably failed to prove the

    charges. Hence, in our view, prima-facie there appears no impediment to

    issue the order of appointment in favour of the respondent.
13. It is relevant to state here that on the issues relating to suppression of

    information and/or submitting false information and as to the question of

    having been arrested or regarding pendency of a criminal case and effect of

    conviction/acquittal in such criminal cases, there were conflicting opinions

    of Division Bench judgments of this Court. On making a reference, the

    said controversy has been decided in the case of
“Avtar Singh Vs. Union

    of India and Others
, (2016) 8 SCC 471”. The Court after considering
8
various judgments has taken a holistic approach and summarised certain

yardsticks in Paragraph 38, which are reproduced as thus:
“38. We have noticed various decisions and tried to explain and
    reconcile them as far as possible. In view of aforesaid discussion, we
    summarize our conclusion thus:
38.1 Information given to the employer by a candidate as to
    conviction, acquittal or arrest, or pendency of a criminal case,
    whether before or after entering into service must be true and there
    should be no suppression or false mention of required information.
    38.2 While passing order of termination of services or cancellation of
    candidature for giving false information, the employer may take
    notice of special circumstances of the case, if any, while giving such
    information.
38.3 The employer shall take into consideration the Government
    orders/instructions/rules, applicable to the employee, at the time of
    taking the decision.
38.4 In case there is suppression or false information of involvement
    in a criminal case where conviction or acquittal had already been
    recorded before filling of the application/verification form and such
    fact later comes to knowledge of employer, any of the following
    recourse appropriate to the case may be adopted : -
    38.4.1 In a case trivial in nature in which conviction had been
    recorded, such as shouting slogans at young age or for a petty offence
    which if disclosed would not have rendered an incumbent unfit for
    post in question, the employer may, in its discretion, ignore such
    suppression of fact or false information by condoning the lapse.
    38.4.2 Where conviction has been recorded in case which is not trivial
    in nature, employer may cancel candidature or terminate services of
    the employee.
38.4.3 If acquittal had already been recorded in a case involving
    moral turpitude or offence of heinous/serious nature, on technical
    ground and it is not a case of clean acquittal, or benefit of reasonable
    doubt has been given, the employer may consider all relevant facts
    available as to antecedents, and may take appropriate decision as to
    the continuance of the employee.
38.5 In a case where the employee has made declaration truthfully of
    a concluded criminal case, the employer still has the right to consider
    antecedents, and cannot be compelled to appoint the candidate.
9
38.6 In case when fact has been truthfully declared in character
         verification form regarding pendency of a criminal case of trivial
         nature, employer, in facts and circumstances of the case, in its
         discretion may appoint the candidate subject to decision of such case.
         38.7 In a case of deliberate suppression of fact with respect to
         multiple pending cases such false information by itself will assume
         significance and an employer may pass appropriate order cancelling
         candidature or terminating services as appointment of a person
         against whom multiple criminal cases were pending may not be
         proper.
38.8 If criminal case was pending but not known to the candidate at
         the time of filling the form, still it may have adverse impact and the
         appointing authority would take decision after considering the
         seriousness of the crime.
38.9 In case the employee is confirmed in service, holding
         Departmental enquiry would be necessary before passing order of
         termination/removal or dismissal on the ground of suppression or
         submitting false information in verification form.
         38.10 For determining suppression or false information
         attestation/verification form has to be specific, not vague. Only such
         information which was required to be specifically mentioned has to be
         disclosed. If information not asked for but is relevant comes to
         knowledge of the employer the same can be considered in an objective
         manner while addressing the question of fitness. However, in such
         cases action cannot be taken on basis of suppression or submitting
         false information as to a fact which was not even asked for.
         38.11 Before a person is held guilty of “suppressio veri” or suggestio
         falsi”, knowledge of the fact must be attributable to him.”
14. As per the said case, para 38.10 comes to the aid of the respondent,

    because in this case, the information sought in verification roll was not

    specific and vague in nature. The respondent has specifically disclosed the

    information which was required to be furnished. Considering the

    subsequent development of the clean acquittal of respondent for the petty

    offences, it requires consideration objectively by the authority, about the
10
question of fitness, ignoring the issue of supressing the information. Even

    in case where the information regarding pending criminal case is truthfully

    furnished and on acquittal therein, an employer has the discretion to

    consider the antecedents while issuing the letter of appointment. The High

    Court could not have directed the issuance of the letter of appointment as

    per para 38.5 of the case of
Avtar Singh
(supra). In our view, the issuance

    of order of appointment is required to be left on the discretion of the

    employer and the High Court ought not to have taken away the said

    discretion. Accordingly, we modify the order passed by the High Court.
15. In view of the discussion made herein above, we confirm the findings of

    the Tribunal and the High Court on the issue of suppression of material

    information. As the respondent was not involved in heinous/serious offence

    or any offence involving moral turpitude, and the fact that in the said

    criminal case he has been honourably acquitted, therefore, modifying the

    order of the High Court, we direct the appellant to consider the case of the

    respondent and issue order of appointment to the post of constable in West

    Bengal Police Force within a period of four weeks from the date of passing

    of this order. Needless to observe that the authorities shall take note of the

    discussion made herein above and shall exercise their discretion

    judiciously in assessing the suitability and antecedents of the prospective

    candidate. It is made further clear that in the event of issuance of the order

    of appointment, the respondent would only be entitled to notional benefits
11
including continuity in service and pay fixation at par with other similarly

    situated persons and he would not be entitled for salary and back wages till

    the date of his appointment.
16. Accordingly, this appeal stands disposed-off in the above terms. Pending

    application(s), if any, shall also stand disposed-off. No order as to costs.
……………………………J.
                                                     [J.K. MAHESHWARI]


                                                     ……………………………J.
                                                      [K.V. VISWANATHAN]


NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 22, 2023.
12