[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Committee Of Management Anjuman ... vs Rakhi Singh on 4 August, 2023
Author:
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
Bench:
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
SLPC D.31345/2023
2023 INSC 702
                                                     1


                                                                                          Reportable

                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                            EXTRAORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                             Special Leave Petition (Civil) No    of 2023
                                              [Diary No 31345 of 2023]


         Committee of Management Anjuman Intezamia                                   …Petitioner
         Masajid, Varanasi


                                                Versus


         Rakhi Singh and Others                                                      Respondents




                                           JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI



         1      The proceedings under
Article 136
of the Constitution have been initiated to

                challenge an order of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad dated 3 August

                2023. The High Court dismissed the appeal against an order of the District Judge

                directing an archeological survey of the area in which the Gyanvapi Mosque

                [Settlement Plot No. 9130] is situated.
2      The respondent-plaintiffs filed a suit (Civil Suit No. 18 of 2022) seeking a declaration
SLPC D.31345/2023
2
that they were entitled to perform rituals of deities which are allegedly present within

          the premises of the Gyanvapi mosque. The respondents also filed an application

          under Section 75 and Order XXVI Rules 9 and 10 read with Section 151 of the Civil

          Procedure Code 19081 for the appointment of an Advocate Commissioner for

          inspection of the premises. The petitioner-defendant moved an application under

          Order 7 Rule 11(d)
of the CPC
for the dismissal of the suit on the ground that it is

          barred by the provisions of the
Places of Worship (Special Provision) Act
1991.

    3     The application seeking the appointment of the Advocate Commissioner was

          allowed by the Civil Judge. The appeal against the order of the Civil Judge was

          dismissed by the High Court by an order dated 21 April 2022. The petitioners

          instituted proceedings (SLP No. 9388 of 2022) under
Article 136
challenging the

          order of the High Court. In the meanwhile, the Advocate Commissioner submitted a

          report recording that a Shivaling was found in the premises of the mosque. By an

          order dated 16 May 2022, the Civil Judge directed the place where the Shivaling

          was allegedly found be sealed. This Court by an order dated 17 May 2022 directed

          the order of the Civil Judge dated 16 May 2022 shall not restrain the access of

          Muslims to the mosque or the use of the mosque for the purpose of performing

          Namaz.      By another order dated 20 May 2022, this Court directed that the

          application filed by the petitioner under
Order VII Rule 11 of CPC
be decided on

          priority.
4     The District Judge dismissed the application of the petitioner under Order VII Rule


1 “
CPC
”
SLPC D.31345/2023
3
11. The appeal against the order dismissing the application was dismissed by the

    High Court by an order dated 31 May 2023. The Special Leave Petition challenging

    the order of the High Court dismissing the Order 7 Rule 11 application of the

    petitioner is pending before this Court.
5   Meanwhile, the respondents filed application nos. 327C and 333C under Section

    75(c) and
Order 26 Rule 10A of the CPC
seeking a direction to the Director of the

    Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) to undertake a scientific survey of Settlement

    Plot No 9130 for the purpose of ascertaining the nature of the construction and the

    age of the structure. The District Judge allowed the applications and directed the

    ASI to “undertake the scientific investigation/survey/excavation on the property

    bearing Settlement Plot No 9130”, excluding certain areas which were sealed by the

    orders of this Court dated 17 May 2022, 20 May 2022 and 11 November 2022. The

    District Judge while allowing the applications issued the following directions:
“ (a) The Director of ASI is directed to undertake the scientific
                  investigation/survey/excavation at the property in question i.e. at
                  Settlement Plot No.9110 in the case excluding the areas scaled by
                  the Hon'ble Supreme Court vide order dated 17.05.2022,
                  20.05.2022 as well as vide order dated 11.11.2022 in SLP(C)
                  No.9388/2022 tilled as Committee of Management Anjuman
                  lntejamia
Masajid Varanasi vs. Rakhi Singh & Ors.
;
(b)   The Director of ASI is also directed to conduct a detailed scientific
                  investigation by using GPR Survey, Excavation, Dating method
                  and other modem techniques of the present structure to find out
                  as to whether same has been constructed over a pre-existing
                  structure of Hindu temple;
(c)   The Director of ASI is also directed to conduct scientific
                  investigation in the light of the averment made in this application
                  after associating the Plaintiffs, Defendants and their respective
SLPC D.31345/2023
4
counsels and submit report to this Hon'ble Court upto 04-08-2023
      and also to photograph and video-graph the entire survey
      proceedings;
(d)   The Director of ASI is also directed to investigate the age and
      nature of construction of the western wall of the building in
      question through scientific method(s);
(e)   The Director of ASl is also directed to conduct Ground Penetrating
      Radar (GPR) survey just below the 3 domes of the building in
      question and conduct excavation, if required;
(f)   The Director of ASl is also directed to conduct Ground Penetrating
      Radar (GPR) survey beneath the western wall of the building and
      conduct excavation, if required;
(g)   The Director or ASI is also directed to conduct Ground Penetrating
      Radar (GPR) survey beneath the ground of all the cellars and
      conduct excavation, if required;
(h)   The Director of ASI is also directed to prepare a list of all the
      artefacts which are found in the building specifying their contents
      and carry out scientific investigation and undertake dating exercise
      to find out the age and nature of such artefacts;
(i)   The Director of ASI is also directed to conduct dating exercise of
      the pillars and plinth of the building to find out the age and the
      nature of construction;
(j)   The Director of ASI is also directed lo conduct GPR survey,
      excavation wherever required, dating exercise and other other
      scientific methods for determining the age and nature of
      construction existing at the site in question;
(k)   The Director of ASl is also directed to investigate the artefacts and
      other objects of historical and religious importance existing in
      different parts of the building and also beneath the structure which
      may be found during such exercise;
The Director of ASI is also directed to ensure that there should be
      no damage to the structure standing on the disputed land and it
      remains intact and unharmed. Report will be submitted up to 04-
      08-2023. Put up on 04-08-2023 for further proceedings."
SLPC D.31345/2023
5
6   The order of the District Judge was assailed before the High Court of Judicature at

    Allahabad in proceedings under
Article 227
of the Constitution. By a judgment dated

    3 August 2023, the order of the District Judge was affirmed subject to (i) the

    observations made by the High Court in the text of its judgment; and (ii) the contents

    of the affidavit which was filed by the ASI before the High Court.


7   During the course of the hearing before the High Court, the ASI was called upon to

    assist the Court. In pursuance of the direction of the High Court, the Additional

    Director General, ASI filed an affidavit setting out the nature of the proposed survey

    that would be carried out. Paragraphs 13 to 20 of the affidavit filed by the ASI are

    extracted below for convenience of reference:
“13   That it is also submitted that the GPR survey would be conducted
                  by the renowned experts of the technical institutions such as IIT,
                  Kanpur.
14    That it is further submitted that the survey team will study the
                  pillars and architectural members, detail study of western wall,
                  survey of complex and structure, study of open place/floor, GPR
                  survey and photo documentations etc.

            15    That it is pertinent to mention here that Scientific Archeological
                  Studies do not damage or remove the structure rather they are
                  preserved and wherever any structure is exposed that area is left
                  untouched.
16    That it is further submitted that while Scientific Archeological
                  Studies would be carried out beyond the structures and in open
                  areas only.
17    That it is further submitted that no drilling, no cutting, no removal
                  of brick or stone from the existing structure will be done while
                  conducting the survey and study.
SLPC D.31345/2023
6
18    That it is further submitted that archeological sites will be in open
                  place floor area which will not affect the structure at all.
19    That it is further submitted that no wall/structure would be
                  damaged and the entire survey will be conducted by the non
                  destructive method by using techniques such as GPR survey,
                  GPS survey, the other scientific methods and other modern
                  techniques.
20    That it is further submitted that the ASI is premier organization to
                  conduct archeological investigations in the country, and
                  undertakes that entire survey will be conducted in accordance with
                  the directions issued by the Hon’ble Courts without using any
                  destructive method and damage to the structure. In case any
                  further investigation/excavation is required permission of Hon’ble
                  Court would not be sought.”
8   Apart from the affidavit, the deponent Shri Alok Tripathi, who is the Additional

    Director General of the ASI, appeared before the court in-person. The submissions

    which were made by the Additional Director General have been recorded in the

    following extract of the judgment of the High Court:
“...he submitted that the ASI will conduct a detail survey in accordance
            with law and prepare a list of the antiquities which are found in building
            and carry out detail survey and undertake the exercise to find age and
            nature of the structure. He further submitted that the ASI will conduct
            survey, documentation, photography, detail description, GPR survey and
            full studies without harming the existing structures. He also submitted
            that all the aforesaid works would be carried without any damage to the
            structures. He has submitted that the scientific investigation would be
            carried out beyond the structure and in open areas only: no drilling, no
            cutting, no removal of brick or stones from the existing structure will be
            done while conducting the survey and study. It has been further
            submitted that archaeological sites will be in open place floor area which
            will not affect the structure at all and no wall/structure would be
            damaged and the entire survey will be conducted by the non-destructive
            method by using techniques such as GPR survey. GPS survey the other
            scientific methods and other modem techniques. It has also been
            submitted that in case any further investigation/excavation is required,
            permission of the Hon’ble Court would be sought.”
SLPC D.31345/2023
7
9    The High Court held that the order of the District Judge directing a survey falls within

     the ambit of
Order XXVI Rule 10A of the Code of Civil Procedure
1908. The High

     Court rejected the submission of the petitioners that Order XXVI Rule 10A cannot be

     used by the parties to gather evidence in their favour. The Court observed that

     where a question arising in a suit involves a scientific investigation which cannot, in

     the opinion of the court, be conveniently conducted before the court, it may, if it

     thinks necessary or expedient in the interest of justice so to do, issue a commission

     for that purpose. In paragraph 21 of its judgment, the High Court has dealt with the

     apprehension that the survey would envisage an act of excavation or destruction of

     the structure existing at the site. The High Court has recorded the statement of the

     Additional Director General, ASI as well as of the Additional Solicitor General who

     was appearing for the Union of India, that no excavation whatsoever will take place.

     The High Court observed that since the Department of Archeology and counsel

     representing the Department had expressly stated that no damage would be caused

     to the property in question, the survey which is proposed, may be permitted to be

     carried out. In the concluding paragraph of its order, the High Court clarified that

     while it was affirming the order dated 21 July 2023 of the District Judge, this was

     subject to the observations of the High Court and the contents of the affidavit which

     was filed on behalf of ASI.
10   Before we deal with the submissions which have been urged on behalf of the

     petitioners by Mr Huzefa A Ahmadi, senior counsel, it needs to be clarified at the
SLPC D.31345/2023
8
outset that it has been clarified on behalf of ASI by Mr Tushar Mehta, Solicitor

     General that the entire survey which is envisaged to be carried out in pursuance of

     the order of the District Judge would be completed without any excavation at the site

     and without causing any damage to the structure.
11   On behalf of the petitioner, it has been submitted by Mr Huzefa A Ahmadi, senior

     counsel that this Court ought to interfere with the order of the High Court because:
(i)     The carrying out of a survey is contrary to the provisions of the
Places of

             Worship (Special Provisions) Act
1991, the genesis of which has been

             explained in the judgment of the Constitution Bench in M Siddiq (Dead)

             Through Legal Representatives vs Mahant Suresh Das and Others 2 [Ram

             Janmabhumi Temple Case];
(ii)    In the suit of 1991, pursuant to a similar plea, a survey by the ASI was ordered

             which has been stayed by the High Court by an order dated 9 September

             2021;
(iii)   A similar issue pertaining to an order for carbon dating of a structure which is

             claimed to be a ‘Shivaling’ by the plaintiffs and a ‘fountain’ by the defendants is

             pending in
Committee of Management Anjuman Intezamia Masajid,

             Varanasi vs Rakhi Singh and Others3
. In the course of the proceedings

             before this Court, the order for survey was stayed, on the Solicitor General

             joining in the submission that the process of carbon dating may partake of an

2 (2020) 1 SCC 1
3 SLP (C) No 11351 of 2023
SLPC D.31345/2023
9
invasive nature;
(iv)    An order of status quo in respect of the property was passed in the judgment

             of this Court in Mohd Aslam Alias Bhure vs Union of India and Others 4

             because of a threat to the property; and
(v)     While an order for conducting a scientific investigation or survey under Order

             XXVI Rule 9 may be passed at any stage, ordinarily a scientific survey ought

             not to be ordered until the court is cognizant of the issues that would arise in

             the suit.
12   On the other hand, Ms Madhavi Divan, senior counsel appearing on behalf of the

     original plaintiffs in the suit submitted that:
(i)     An order under Order XXVI is essentially for the benefit of the court which

             requires such a survey to be conducted to assist it in deciding the substance of

             the controversy in a suit;
(ii)   The order of the trial Judge ordering a survey is neither adversarial nor

             prejudicial since it is not determinative of the substance of the rights of the

             parties;
(iii)   All parties would be entitled to file their objections to the report of the ASI and

             to seek cross-examination should the survey be intended to be let into

             substantive evidence;
4 (1994) 2 SCC 48
SLPC D.31345/2023
10
(iv)   The issue in terms of the provisions of
Section 4(1)
of the Places of Worship

            (Special Provisions) Act 1991 is as regards the religious character of the place.

            The frame of the plaint would indicate that the contention of the plaintiffs is that

            both before and after 1947, the religious character of the place is indicative by

            acts of continuing worship;
(v)    The function of the ASI is to preserve and protect monuments of historical

            importance and hence there is no basis for any apprehension that damage

            would be caused to the structure; and
(vi) The circumstances pertaining to the earlier suit of 1991 are distinct inasmuch as
in that case
the suit was on title in which an application under
Order VII Rule

            11 CPC
was allowed by the Trial Judge. The order of the Trial Judge was set

            aside in First Appeal against which proceedings under
Article 227
were

            instituted by the original defendants before the High Court. In those

            proceedings, there was a stay of the proceedings in the suit. In this backdrop,

            when the Trial judge allowed an application for a survey by the ASI, the order

            was stayed by the High Court during the pendency of the proceedings.


13   Order XXVI Rule 10A stipulates that where any issue in a suit involves any scientific

     investigation which cannot in the opinion of the Court be conveniently conducted

     before the court, the court may, if it thinks necessary or expedient in the interest of

     justice so to do, issue a commission to such person as it thinks fit directing them to

     inquire into such question and report thereon to the court. Under sub-rule (2) of Rule
SLPC D.31345/2023
11
10A, the provisions of Rule 10 of the order shall, as far as may be, apply in relation

to a Commissioner appointed under the rule as they apply to a Commissioner

appointed under Rule 9. Rules 9 and 10 of Order XXVI therefore assume relevance

and are extracted below:
“9. Commissions to make local investigations.—In any suit in which
        the Court deems a local investigation to be requisite or proper for the
        purpose of elucidating any matter in dispute, or of ascertaining the
        market-value of any property, or the amount of any mesne profits or
        damages or annual net profits, the Court may issue a commission to
        such person as it thinks fit directing him to make such investigation and
        to report thereon to the Court:
Provided that, where the State Government has made rules as to the
        persons to whom such commission shall be issued, the Court shall be
        bound by such rules.
10. Procedure of Commissioner.—(1) The Commissioner, after such
        local inspection as he deems necessary and after reducing to writing the
        evidence taken by him, shall return such evidence, together with his
        report in writing signed by him, to the Court.
(2) Report and depositions to be evidence in suit.—The report of the
        Commissioner and the evidence taken by him (but not the evidence
        without the report) shall be evidence in the suit and shall form part of the
        record; but the Court or, with the permission of the Court, any of the
        parties to the suit may examine the Commissioner personally in open
        Court touching any of the matters referred to him or mentioned in his
        report, or as to his report, or as to the manner in which he has made the
        investigation.
(3) Commissioner may be examined in person.—Where the Court is
        for any reason dissatisfied with the proceedings of the Commissioner, it
        may direct such further inquiry to be made as it shall think fit.

        10-A. Commission for scientific investigation.—(1) Where any
        question arising in a suit involves any scientific investigation which
        cannot, in the opinion of the Court, be conveniently conducted before
        the Court the Court may, if it thinks it necessary or expedient in the
        interests of justice so to do, issue a commission to such person as it
SLPC D.31345/2023
12
thinks fit, directing him to inquire into such question and report thereon
              to the Court.
(2) The provisions of Rule 10 of this Order shall, as far as may be, apply
              in relation to a Commissioner appointed under this rule as they apply in
              relation to a Commissioner appointed under Rule 9.”


14   In terms of Order XXVI Rule 10, the Commissioner has to submit a report in writing

     to the court. The report of the Commissioner and the evidence taken by him

     constitute evidence in the suit and form a part of the record. However, the court and,

     with its permission, any of the parties may examine the Commissioner personally in

     open court touching any of the matters referred to him or mentioned in the report or

     as regards the report including the manner in which the investigation has been

     made. The court is also empowered to direct such further inquiry if it is dissatisfied

     with the proceedings of the Commissioner. The evidentiary value of any report of the

     Commissioner is a matter to be tested in the suit and is open to objections including

     cross-examination. A report of the Commissioner does not by and of itself amount to

     a substantive finding on matters in dispute and is subject to the process of the court

     during the course of the trial.
15   At this stage, the court must notice that the District Judge while acting as a trial

     Judge in the suit exercised discretion under Order XXVI Rule 10A to direct a

     scientific investigation by the ASI. The order of the learned Trial Judge under Order

     XXVI Rule 10A cannot prima facie be construed to be without jurisdiction. The High

     Court has found no reason to interfere, having set out the legal position which

     constrains the nature of the challenge under
Article 227
of the Constitution while
SLPC D.31345/2023
13
dealing with an interlocutory order of this nature. At the same time, the High Court

     has introduced certain safeguards which need to be reiterated in the course of the

     present judgment of this Court.
16   Having regard to the nature and ambit of a court appointed Commissioner, we are

     unable to differ with the view of the High Court, particularly while exercising the

     jurisdiction under
Article 136
of the Constitution. The High Court has introduced

     certain specific directions to circumscribe the nature of the order which was passed

     by the District Judge. Reading the directions which have been issued by the District

     Judge, it is apparent that they would be amenable to the carrying out of an

     excavation at the site. However, during the course of the proceedings before the

     High Court, ASI has clarified on affidavit that it was neither carrying out any

     excavation nor would the survey involve any destruction of the property.


17   We reiterate the direction of the High Court that there shall be no excavation at the

     site which was in accordance with the statement which was made before the High

     Court by the Additional Solicitor General and which has been reiterated in the

     submissions made by the Solicitor General on behalf of the ASI. We have recorded

     the submission of the Solicitor General in the earlier part of this order to the effect

     that the survey shall not involve any excavation at the site or any destruction of the

     structure. In terms of the statement and the directions of the High Court, we direct

     that the entire process shall be concluded by any non-invasive methodology that

     may be adopted by the ASI.
SLPC D.31345/2023
14
18    The report which would be prepared by the ASI shall in terms of the provisions of

      Order 26 shall be remitted to the Trial court and shall thereafter abide by the

      directions which would be passed by the District Judge at the trial of the suit.


19    The Special Leave Petition is accordingly disposed of.

20    Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
………......…...….......…………………..CJI.
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                                    …………....…........……………….…........J.
                                                     [J B Pardiwala]




                                                    ..……….....…........……………….…........J.
                                                      [Manoj Misra]

New Delhi;
August 4, 2023
CKB