[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Hind Offshore Pvt. Ltd. vs Iffco-Tokio General Insurance Co. Ltd on 9 August, 2023
Author:
A.S. Bopanna
Bench:
M.M. Sundresh
,
A.S. Bopanna
REPORTABLE
2023 INSC 697

                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7228 OF 2015

                            Hind Offshore Pvt. Ltd.                        .… Appellant(s)

                                                          Versus

                            IFFCO – Tokio General
                            Insurance Co. Ltd.                           …. Respondent(s)


                                                      JUDGMENT
A.S. Bopanna, J.
1.   The present appeal is directed against the order of the

                            National   Consumer       Disputes     Redressal   Commission

                            (hereinafter    for   short   “NCDRC”)     dated    15.05.2015

                            dismissing the consumer complaint filed by the appellant

                            herein.
2.   The brief facts leading to the claim before the NCDRC

                            are that the appellant entered into Bareboat Charter Party

                            Agreement dated 02.10.2006 for a sea vessel known as M.V.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Sea Panther (hereinafter for short “vessel”), the registered
   Nisha Khulbey
   Date: 2023.08.10
   10:51:39 IST
   Reason:
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 1
owner whereof is Astron Equities S.A. The appellant

obtained ‘Marine Hull Insurance Policy’ in respect of the

said   vessel   from   the   respondent   bearing    policy     no.

21212985 covering the vessel for various risks including the

‘perils of the seas’ for an insured sum of Rs. 8,26,92,000/-

for the period 09.11.2005 to 08.11.2006. The Marine Hull

Insurance Policy is subject to the vessel possessing a Class

Warranty.
3.     On 22.02.2006, the vessel on a voyage from Singapore

to Mumbai suffered major damage to its port main engine.

Dhiraj Offshore Surveyors and Adjusters Pvt. Ltd. conducted

a preliminary inspection on 22.04.2006 and opined that the

crankshafts and connecting rods were found beyond repair.

Since the wait time for the replacement of the engine crank

shaft was six months, considering the urgent commercial

commitments, the main port engine was temporarily

repaired. The appellant had presented an invoice of

Rs.1,32,66,803/- towards the cost to be incurred.              The

respondent on the recommendation of Dhiraj Offshore

Surveyors and Adjusters Pvt. Ltd. issued a cheque for Rs.
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 2
1,00,00,000/- dated 09.06.2006 as an advance payment for

replacing the engine crank shaft and other components.
4.    Subsequent to the term of the first policy ending, the

appellant entered into a fresh Marine Hull Insurance Policy

in respect of the vessel, bearing policy no. 21306557

covering the vessel for various risks including the ‘perils of

the seas’ for an insured sum of Rs. 8,26,92,000/- for the

period 09.11.2006 to 08.11.2007. The American Bureau of

Shipping (hereinafter for short “ABS”) conducted a survey

on the vessel on 29.09.2006 and 14.10.2006 and issued

Class Certificate dated 19.10.2006 extending the Class

Certificate   until   30.06.2009.     The   Class     Certificate

constitutes a representation by ABS as to the structural

and mechanical fitness of the vessel.
5.    Unfortunately for the appellant, on 03.12.2006, the

vessel on a voyage from Mumbai to SLQ Complex, Mumbai

High South Field was struck by a Tug Boat ‘Sea Ways 9’ as a

result of which the vessel sank with all cargo on board. The

appellant     submitted   a   claim     amounting        to     Rs.
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 3
8,26,92,000/- due to the total loss of the vessel and cargo.

As per the procedure, the respondent appointed M/s. J.

Basheer & Associates Surveyors Pvt. Ltd. (hereinafter for

short “surveyor”) as the surveyors to assess the loss. The

surveyor   on   visiting   the   ABS   ascertained   that    the

owners/representatives of the appellant had not informed

the ABS about the previous damage to the port main engine

and ABS only based on their inspection, had issued the

Class certificate dated 19.10.2006. The surveyor’s report

also states that the Country Manager of ABS also reported

that if a Vessel sustains any damage to either Hull or

Machinery and the same is not reported to the Class, then

the Class would deem to be automatically suspended as per

ABS Rules for Building and Classing Steel Vessels-2005

Edition, Part 1, Chapter 1, Section 2 heading ‘Suspension

and Cancellation of Classification’.
6.     In the meanwhile, Dhiraj Offshore Surveyors and

Adjusters Pvt. Ltd. submitted its final report on 19.02.2007.

As per their conclusion, it was considered unlikely that the

vessel will be recovered and as such permanent repairs to
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 4
the port main engine will not be effected, as were supposed

to be done as a consequence of the first accident. Thus, it

was recommended that the sum of Rs.1,00,00,000/- paid

as “on account” on the basis of their report dated

22.04.2006 be recovered.
7.       In   that   background,   since   the   claim    of   Rs.

8,26,92,000/- was not settled by the respondents, the

appellant approached the NCDRC by filing Consumer

Complaint No.166 of 2008 claiming Rs.16,62,51,467/-

comprising of Rs.8,26,92,000/- towards loss of insured

asset, loss of earnings of Rs.5,41,98,144/-, and interest on

the insured asset @ 18% along with the cost of proceedings

i.e. Rs.2,93,61,324/-.
8.     The gist of contentions raised by Sri Neeraj Kishan

Kaul, learned senior counsel for the appellant is as follows:
(a)   It is submitted on behalf of the appellants that though

ABS was empowered to reconsider, withhold, suspend or

cancel the Class of any vessel or any part of the machinery

for non-compliance of the Rules, at no point of time did the
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 5
ABS alter the Class Certificate accorded to the Vessel or

impose any conditions thereon. There was no withdrawal,

suspension or cancellation of the Class by ABS and in the

absence thereof, the same cannot and could not be

presumed to have been automatic.
(b)   It is further submitted on behalf of the appellant that

the Class Certificate issued by the ABS was after a rigorous

physical inspection of the vessel and its machinery that was

conducted by ABS on 14.10.2006.
(c) It was further submitted that there was no breach of

class   warranty   insofar   as   there   were   neither    any

recommendations, requirements or restrictions imposed by

ABS relating to unseaworthiness to be complied with by the

appellant as per clause 1.2 of class warranty nor was there

any obligation on the appellant regarding reporting to ABS

of accident and defects in the vessel as per clause 1.5 of

class warranty, as the same was applicable prospectively i.e.

to accident and defects in the vessel after issuance of the

Class Certificate and not during the term of the earlier
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 6
Class Certificate or Policy. The appellant's vessel was

classed with ABS and the existing class was maintained as

per clause 1.1 of the class warranty. The appellant complied

with     all   statutory       requirements     relating     to    the

seaworthiness of the vessel as per clause 1.4 of class

warranty and provided clarification by ABS that the vessel's

Class has been maintained as per clause 4 of the class

warranty.
(d)    It was also submitted that the factum of the meeting

between the surveyors and the ABS on 22.12.2006 was

only hearsay and there was no evidence which was led

regarding      to   the    purported     meeting.   The      surveyor

purportedly approached the Classification Society directly,

without seeking authorisation of the Appellant as required

under     clause     3    of   class   warranty.    This     assumes

significance in view of the comments of this Court on the

tailor-made report of this very Surveyor in the case of The

New      India      Assurance      Ltd    vs.   M/s.       Protection

Manufacturers Pvt. Ltd., (2010) 7 SCC 386.
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 7
9.    The gist of the contentions put forth by Sri Devdatt

Kamath, learned senior counsel for the respondent is as

follows:
(a) The main contention of the sole respondent is that

appellant’s vessel was without Class Certification on the

date of the incident, being invalid and the respondent was

under no contractual and/or legal obligation to reimburse

the appellant. As per Section 2 of the Rules of the ABS

Classification Society, any damage to the Hull or Machinery

of the vessel has to be necessarily reported to the

Classification Society of the vessel and repairs conducted

thereto have to be as per the recommendations and under

supervision of the Classification Society. Any violation

and/or breach of the rules of classification society leads to

withdrawal/ suspension of the class of the vessel.
(b)   It was further argued that there was a breach of

warranty by the appellants. As per the terms of the

insurance policy, the termination clause at 4.1 reads

“Unless the Underwriters agree to the contrary in writing,
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 8
this insurance shall terminate automatically at the time of

change of the Classification Society of the vessel, or change,

suspension, discontinuance, withdrawal or expiry of her

Class therein, provided that if the Vessel is at sea, such

automatic termination shall be deferred until arrival at her

next port. However, where such change, suspension,

discontinuance or withdrawal of her Class has resulted

from loss or damage covered by Clause 6 of this insurance,

such automatic termination shall only operate, should the

Vessel sail from her next port without the prior approval of

the Classification Society”.
(c)   Clause 6 covers perils and includes the perils of the

sea. Rivers, lakes or other navigable waters.
(d)   Class warranty as per the policy warranted that the

Assured Owner’s Manager         and   Superintendents      shall

comply with all requirements of the Classification Society

regarding the reporting to the society of accident to and

defects in the vessel and for the purpose of any claim the

Assured will provide certification by the Classification
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 9
Society that the vessel's Class has been maintained. It is

contended that the said warranty constitutes an express

warranty in terms of
Section 37
of the Marine Insurance

Act, 1963 which was breached by the appellants by not

disclosing the first accident and damage to the vessel. The

appellant’s failure to comply with the requirements of ABS

Rules and warranties by not reporting the accidents and

damages to the vessel discharge the respondent from any

liability under the insurance policy as per
Section 35(3)
of

the Marine Insurance Act, 1963. Reliance has been placed

in this regard on
Ranjan Kumar and Brothers v. Oriental

Insurance Co.
, (2020) 4 SCC 364.
(e)   It is further submitted that it is a settled principle of

Law that a contract of insurance is based on the principle of

Ubberimae fide, as stipulated under
Section 19
of the

Marine Insurance Act, 1963. The appellant after receiving

an amount of Rs. 1,00,00,000/- from the respondent on

09.06.2006, never replaced the crank shaft and connecting

rods. As per the Preliminary report of Surveyor the same

was stated to be done in six months. The respondent issued
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 10
the second Insurance Policy to the appellant on 09.11.2006.
Emphasis is supplied on the fact that the appellant never

informed the insurer that they had not carried out the

replacement of the vital parts to the main engine. It is

submitted by the respondent that this non-disclosure by the

appellant would tantamount to misrepresentation and

breach of good faith. Reliance in this regard is placed on
Sea Lark Fisheries vs. United India Insurance Company

and Anr.
, 2008 (4) SCC 131;
Contship Container Lines

Limited vs. D.K. Lall & Ors.
, 2010 (4) SCC 256.
10.    The rival contentions noted above were essentially

the case put forth by the parties before the NCDRC since

the facts referred to by the NCDRC in the impugned order

would refer to the same. In that background, at the outset,

it would be apposite to note the conclusion reached by the

NCDRC. The relevant portions read as hereunder;
“Despite knowing the stand taken by the
         insurance company viz. the damage
         which took place during the term of the
         first policy had not been reported to ABS,
         no effort was made by the complainant to
         produce any evidence from ABS before
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 11
this Commission to prove that the
aforesaid damage, including the fact that
the crankshaft and connecting rods had
not been replaced, was duly reported to
them by the complainant.         In these
circumstances, it would be difficult for us
to reject the report of the surveyor, who
specifically stated that he had met the
Principal Surveyor Mr. Ashok and
Country Manager, Mr. R.C. Bhavnani of
ABS to enquire whether they were
informed of the damage to the port main
engine of the vessel, which had occurred
on 22.02.2006 and the temporary repairs
carried out as per their recommendations
and they were quite surprised to learn
about such serious damage to the port
main engine of the vessel. According to
Mr. Basheer they clearly told him that
they were not aware of the aforesaid
damage nor had the owner of the vessel
intimated any such incident to them.
They also told the surveyor that when
they had inspected the vessel, no damage
to the port main engine had been
reported to them. Mr. R.C. Bhavnani told
the surveyor that if a vessel sustains any
damage to either HULL or machinery and
the same is not reported to them, then
the Class was deemed to be automatically
suspended. Reliance in this regard was
placed on the rules of the ABS and
relevant rule has been extracted in the
report of the surveyor and reproduced
hereinabove.”

“There is no dispute that the vessel was
actually classed with ABS for the period
from 30.03.2006 to 03.12.2006; the issue
before   us    is  that   the   aforesaid
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 12
         Classification was obtained by concealing
         vital information with respect to the
         damage to the vessel, from the
         Classification Society. We are therefore,
         satisfied that had the complainant
         disclosed to ABS that the vessel had met
         with a serious accident on 22.02.2006
         and only temporary repairs to the port
         main engine had been carried out
         whereas the crankshaft and connecting
         rods were yet to be replaced, the requisite
         Class Certificate would not have been
         issued by the ABS in respect of the vessel
         in question.      The Class Certificate
         obtained by the complainant, therefore,
         has to be excluded from consideration,
         the same having been obtained by
         concealment of material facts from the
         Classification Society. Consequently, the
         vessel shall be deemed to be without
         class on the date it was hit by ship
         Seaways-9.      The insurance company
         therefore is under no contractual or legal
         obligation to reimburse the complainant
         company for the loss suffered by it on
         account of sinking of the vessel.”

         “The case of the insurance company is
         based on the Class Certificate having
         been obtained by concealment of material
         fact from the Classification Society and
         not on the actual unseaworthiness or
         otherwise of the vessel.”
11.     The question, therefore, is as to whether the

consideration made and conclusion reached by the NCDRC

as extracted above would admit of any perversity or error in
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 13
its reasoning.   In the instant case, the fact that an ABS

classification certificate was obtained by the appellant and

was produced to the respondent, based on which a Marine

Hull Insurance Policy valid for the period 09.11.2006 to

08.11.2007 was issued in favour of the appellant by the

respondent is the accepted position. The fact that the vessel

had a collision with a Tug boat ‘Sea Ways 9’ on 03.12.2006

during the subsistence of the policy is also the accepted

factual position. The policy vide Clause 6 thereto, inter alia

provides for covering loss or damage suffered due to ‘perils

of the seas’ is also evident.
12.    In a normal circumstance noted above, it would be

sufficient to admit the claim and determine the quantum of

loss suffered.    However, in the instant case, there is a

prelude which provides a different dimension to the claim.

Prior to the instant policy, the vessel was covered under a

policy for the period 09.11.2005 to 08.11.2006. During the

subsistence of the earlier insurance policy, a claim was

lodged by the appellant claiming the reimbursement of the

insurance amount towards damage to the engine crank
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 14
shaft and the related parts of the vessel. Dhiraj Offshore

Pvt. Ltd. was appointed as a surveyor to assess the loss for

which the insurance amount was claimed by the appellant.

The Surveyor on inspection found that the chief component

of the port main engine of the vessel was beyond repairs.

However, the appellant had indicated that they had carried

out temporary repairs to the port main engine due to their

urgent commitments for delivery of cargo and as there was

a waiting period of six months for delivery of the engine

crank shaft and connecting rods from the manufacturers,

the replacement was not immediately possible.                The

insurance company based on the recommendations of the

surveyor made a payment of Rs.1,00,00,000/- to the

appellant, on account, towards the said damage to the

engine crank shaft and connecting rods which required

replacement. However, the said replacement was not made

and the status continued to be the same which came to be

known only on 19.02.2007 when Dhiraj Offshore Pvt. Ltd.

submitted the final report by which time the present

accident had occurred. It is in that light, the question would
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 15
arise as to whether the obtainment of the Class Certificate

from ABS based on which the present policy covering the

period between 09.11.2006 to 08.11.2007 was issued would

be valid to be invoked by the appellant in respect of the

damage suffered in the accident which occurred on

03.12.2006.
13.         The respondent insurance company declined to

honour the claim under the said policy on the basis that the

non-disclosure of the fact that the engine crank shaft and

connecting     rods   had    suffered   damage    requiring      the

replacement, had not been informed by the appellant to the

Classification Society for the issue of the Class Certificate

and therefore, the Class Certificate would not remain valid

for   the   reason    of    non-compliance   of   the   warranty

requirement. The appellant would however contend that the

insurance company having issued the policy for the earlier

period and having made the payment on account for the

replacement, being aware of the repairs carried out and

having gone on a voyage to deliver the booked cargo cannot

now decline and it was for the respondent insurance
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 16
company to make appropriate inquiries before issuing the

policy.    It is in that background a consideration was made

by the NCDRC.
14.       To put the matter in perspective by keeping in view

the rival contentions and the provisions as also the

regulations guiding the parties under the
Marine Insurance

Act, 1963
, and the Rules for Building and Classing, the

relevant provisions are required to be noted. In this regard,
Sections 35
,
37
,
41(5)
and
55
of Act, 1963 which are

relevant have been brought to the notice of this Court which

read as hereunder:
“35.    Nature   of     warranty.—(1)      A
           warranty, in the following sections
           relating   to   warranties,       means    a
           promissory warranty, that is to say a
           warranty     by   which       the   assured
undertakes that some particular thing
           shall or shall not be done, or that some
           condition shall be fulfilled, or whereby he
           affirms or negatives the existence of a
           particular state of facts. (2) A warranty
           may be express or implied. (3) A warranty,
           as above defined, is a condition which
           must be exactly complied with, whether it
           be material to the risk or not. If it be not
           so complied with, then, subject to any
           express provision in the policy, the
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 17
insurer is discharged from liability as
from the date of the breach of warranty,
but without prejudice to any liability
incurred by him before that date.
37. Express warranties.—(1) An express
warranty may be in any form of words
from which the intention to warrant is to
be inferred. (2) An express warranty must
be included in, or written upon, the
policy, or must be contained in some
document incorporated by reference into
the policy. (3) An express warranty does
not exclude implied warranty, unless it be
inconsistent therewith.
41. Warranty of seaworthiness of ship.
—

(1) xxxxx

(2) xxxxx

(3) xxxxx

(4) xxxxx

(5) In a time policy there is no implied
warranty that the ship shall be seaworthy
at any stage of the adventure, but where,
with the privity of the assured, the ship
is sent to sea in an unseaworthy state,
the insurer is not liable for any loss
attributable to unseaworthiness.
55. Included and excluded losses.—(1)
Subject to the provisions of this Act, and
unless the policy otherwise provides, the
insurer is liable for any loss proximately
caused by a peril insured against, but,
subject as aforesaid, he is not liable for
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 18
         any loss which is not proximately caused
         by a peril insured against. (2) In
         particular— (a) the insurer is not liable
         for any loss attributable to the wilful
         misconduct of the assured, but, unless
         the policy otherwise provides, he is liable
         for any loss proximately caused by a peril
         insured against, even though the loss
         would not have happened but for the
         misconduct or negligence of the master or
         crew; (b) unless the policy otherwise
         provides, the insurer on ship or goods is
         not liable for any loss proximately caused
         by delay, although the delay be caused by
         a peril insured against; (c) unless the
         policy otherwise provides, the insurer is
         not liable for ordinary wear and tear,
         ordinary leakage and breakage, inherent
         vice or nature of the subject-matter
         insured, or for any loss proximately
         caused by rats or vermin, or for any
         injury to machinery not proximately
         caused by maritime perils.”
15.   The relevant Classing Rules to be noted are as follows:
“The continuance of the classification of
         any vessel is conditional upon the Rule
         requirements for periodical, damage and
         other surveys being duly carried out. The
         Committee     reserves    the   right   to
         reconsider, withhold, suspend, or cancel
         the class of any vessel or any part of the
         machinery for noncompliance with the
         Rules, for defects or damages which are
         not reported to ABS, for defects reported
         by the Surveyors which have not been
         rectified in accordance with their
         recommendations, or for nonpayment of
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 19
       fees which are due on account of
       Classification, Statutory or Cargo Gear
       Surveys. Suspension or cancellation of
       class may take effect immediately or after
       a specified period of time.
Class will be suspended and the
       Certificate of Classification will become
       invalid    in  any     of   the   following
       circumstances:
i)     If recommendations issued by the
       Surveyor are not carried out by their due
       dates and no extension has been granted.
ii)    If Continuous Survey items which are
       due or overdue at the time of Annual
       Survey are not completed and no
       extension has been granted.
iii)   If the other surveys required for
       maintenance of class, other than Annual,
       Intermediate or Special Surveys, are not
       carried out by the due date and no Rule
       allowed extension has been granted, or
iv)    If any damage, failure or deterioration
       repair has not been completed as
       recommended.
(10 August 2004)

       Classification may be suspended, in
       which      case    the    Certificate    of
       Classification will become invalid, upon
       failure to submit any damage, failure,
       deterioration or repairs for examination
       upon the first opportunity or, if proposed
       repairs, as referred to in 7-1-1/7, have
       not been submitted to the Bureau and
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 20
             agreed upon prior to commencement, as
             referred to in 7-1-1/7.”
16.     From a perusal of the provisions as contained in the
Marine Insurance Act
1963 relating to warranties, if the

requirement is not complied with, then the insurer is

discharged from liability as from the date of breach of

warranty but without prejudice to any liability incurred

before that date. In that background, in a time policy, there

is no implied warranty that the ship shall be seaworthy at

any stage but where with the privity of the assured, the

ship is sent to sea in an unseaworthy state, the insurer is

not liable for any loss attributable to unseaworthiness. It is

in    that    light,   the   Classification   Certificate   assumes

relevance with reference to the manner in which it was

obtained. In view of the warranty requirement, the assured

is expected to bring to the notice of the Classification

Society the shortcomings or the defects if any, before the

issue of such Class Certificate since the insurance coverage

to be provided by the insurer is based on such Class

Certificate which is assumed to have been issued by the

Classification Society after keeping in view all aspects
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 21
including the defects if any brought to their notice. It is in

that light the provisions extracted above becomes relevant

as to the circumstance under which the Class will be

suspended and the Certificate of Classification will become

invalid in the circumstances stated therein, which also

refers to such suspension and invalidation, if any damage,

failure or deterioration repair has not been completed as

recommended.
17.     Hence if these aspects are kept in perspective, the

entire issue in the instant case would hinge on the aspect

as to whether the appellant had brought any material on

record, either when the claim was lodged or before the

NCDRC to indicate that the damage to the engine crank

shaft which was required to be replaced and on account of

which payment had been obtained, had been factually

replaced, or if it had not been replaced, whether it was

reported to ABS so that the Classification Society would

have thereafter assessed as to whether even in that

circumstance where the replacement had not been made,

whether the repairs carried out were sufficient to certify the
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 22
seaworthiness of the vessel. On being aware, an informed

decision was to be taken to issue the Class Certificate. In

the instant case, no such material was brought on record.
18.    The learned senior counsel for the appellant would

however seek to rely at the outset on a decision rendered by

the NCDRC in the case of
Ceyaki Shipping Pvt. Ltd. vs.

New India Assurance Pvt. Co. Ltd.
in Consumer Case

No.278 of 2011 dated 21.03.2017 to persuade us to adopt

the view taken therein.   In the said case the facts reveal

that the incident had been brought to the notice of the

insurer and the policy was issued only thereafter. In that

circumstance, it was held that it was not open for the

insurance company to repudiate the claim inasmuch as the

insurer had an opportunity to ask the proposer whether the

said defects/deficiencies in the vessel had been reported to

the Classification Society or not. Having noted the same we

are of the opinion that the said decision would not be of

assistance inasmuch as the defects which were existent was

known to the insurance company. However, in the instant

case though, there was an earlier damage to the engine
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 23
crank shaft and on the recommendation for replacement,

the insurer had reimbursed the amount for that purpose.

Though the immediate voyage with repairs had been

brought to the knowledge of the insurer, the replacement

was to be made in due course. The entire onus cannot be on

the insurer to check as to whether subsequently the engine

had been replaced by utilising the amount received. In such

situation when the replacement, in fact was not made, the

onus was entirely on the appellant to bring it to the notice

of the Classification Society and in that circumstance when

the Class Certificate was issued, the warranty class had in

fact been violated by the appellant and the exclusion as

indicated would apply and make it invalid.
19.    The decision relied on by the learned Senior Counsel

for appellant in the case of Marine Offshore Pvt. Ltd. vs.

China Insurance Company (Singapore) Pvt. Ltd. & Anr.,

(2006) 4 SLR 689 is also not of assistance to the appellant

since the consideration therein was entirely in a different

circumstance where the clause relating to the perils of the

sea was the issue and, in that circumstance, whether the
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 24
unseaworthiness could be considered. In the instant facts

as noted the unseaworthiness alone is not the issue but the

non-reporting of the damage/defects to the Classification

Society before issue of the certificate and the same

rendering the Class Certificate invalid though issued earlier

is the issue and in that circumstance whether the owner is

to inform this aspect or as to whether the verification by the

insurer is warranted.
20.        Further, the decision in the case of
New India

Assurance Company Ltd. vs. Pradeep Kumar
, (2009) 7

SCC 787 relied on by the learned senior counsel for the

appellant to contend that the word of the surveyor is not

final would not assist the appellant. In the instant case, the

surveyor has recommended rejection of the claim mainly on

the reason that the earlier defect with reference to

seaworthiness had not been brought to the notice of the

Classification Society. It is in that regard the surveyor has

referred   to   the   inquiries   made   by   him      from      the

Classification Society and has indicated that the persons

representing the Classification Society had stated that the
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 25
said deficiencies had not been brought to their knowledge.

Though the learned senior counsel would contend that such

indication in the surveyor’s report being hearsay cannot be

relied upon, we are of the opinion that in the absence of any

material on behalf of the appellant to indicate that they had

intimated the Classification Society, there was no obligation

in terms of the legal position for the insurance company to

make such inquiry.     Therefore, the inquiry made by the

surveyor was an additional factor which has not been

rebutted or controverted with any other evidence by the

appellant.
In that circumstance the decision in
New India

Assurance      Company        Limited      vs.      Protection

Manufacturers Private Limited
, (2010) 7 SSC 386 relied

on by the learned Senior Counsel to comment on the

conduct of the Surveyor is also of no relevance.
21.
Insofar as the provisions relating to warranty, the

manner in which the representation is required to be made

has been considered in detail by this Court in the case of
Rajankumar & Brothers (IMPEX) vs. Oriental Insurance

Company Ltd.
, (2020) 4 SCC 364 relied upon by the
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 26
learned senior counsel for     the respondent insurance

company. The referred paragraphs read as hereunder:
“19. Subsequent common-law decisions,
        however, have held that the obligation of
        the assured to inform the correct details
        in respect of the vessel's classification
        extends even where a policy is
        issued after the particulars of the vessel
        have been provided.
32. A       warranty    imposes      certain
        obligations on the insured, and
Section
        35(3)
makes it amply clear that a
        warranty needs to be complied with,
        regardless of whether or not its non-
compliance materially affects the risk
        involved in carrying the shipment. As a
        corollary, when a warranty is not
        complied with i.e. there is a breach of
        warranty, the insurer is discharged from
        liability from the date of such breach, by
        virtue of
Section 35(3)
. At the outset,
        therefore, it is important to note that the
        scheme of the 1963 Act is clear inasmuch
        as the automatic consequence of a breach
        of warranty is discharge of the insurer's
        liability. Such discharge of liability does
        not require any express conduct or
        representation from the insurer.
35. It is not the appellant's case that the
        respondent had chosen to issue the
        marine insurance policy despite being
        informed by the appellant that the vessel
        was non-classed. Rather the appellant
        had represented that the subject vessel
        was “IRS” classed. That being the case, as
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 27
        noted        in Everbright       Commercial
        Enterprises [Everbright          Commercial
        Enterprises Pte Ltd. v. Axa Insurance
        Singapore Pte Ltd., 2001 SGCA 24]
        and Kam Hing Trading [Kam Hing Trading
        (Hong Kong) Ltd. v. The People's Insurance
        Co. of China (Hong Kong) Ltd., (2010) 4
        HKLRD 630] , it was not the respondent's
        burden      to   have     investigated   the
        appellant's claim and informed the
        appellant that the subject vessel was non-
        classed. Hence, at the outset it is
        important to note that the mere formal
        issuance of the marine insurance policy
        by the respondent does not indicate
        “acceptance”/waiver      of    the   vessel's
        classification or lack thereof.
40. For instance, after the occurrence of
        loss, even if the insurer makes an express
        representation that it would affirm the
        contract and indemnify the loss, if the
        insurer    can     prove   that   such   a
        representation was made without the
        knowledge that there was a breach of
        warranty on the part of the insured, the
        liability of the insurer would stand
        discharged from the date on which the
        warranty was breached. Similarly, mere
        knowledge on the part of the insurer that
        there was a breach of warranty would not
        amount to a waiver, in the absence of an
        express representation to that effect.”

From a perusal of the above judgment, it is clear that the

mere knowledge on the part of the insurer that there was a

breach of warranty would not amount to a waiver in the
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 28
absence of an express representation to that effect.           As

noted in the instant case, though during the subsistence of

the insurance policy for the earlier term there was a claim

lodged towards damage to the main engine of the port and

crank shaft, based on the recommendation of the surveyor

substantial amount had been paid, on account, to the

appellant since such advancement of the amount was

towards the replacement of the engine crank shaft. Except

for the knowledge of the insurer that in view of the waiting

period prescribed by the manufacturers for supply of the

engine   crank shaft for replacement, repairs were carried

out and a voyage would be undertaken for urgent delivery of

the cargo during the subsistence of the earlier policy period,

there is nothing on record to indicate that prior to the issue

of the instant insurance policy for the period 09.11.2006 to

08.11.2007 or during subsistence the replacement of the

engine had been waived.     In that circumstance, when the

respondent insurance company relied upon the Class

Certification to issue the policy there was no express or

implied waiver. The appellant has not established that the
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 29
defects were brought to the notice of the Classification

Society and thereafter the certificate had been obtained. In

such a situation when it is subsequently noticed that these

defects were not intimated and the warranty class had not

been   complied,    the    Classification   Certificate     would

automatically become invalid. In fact, in the instant case,

the fact that the replacement of the engine crank shaft had

not been made had come to the knowledge of the insurer

only when the final surveyor report was submitted on

19.02.2007 after the policy had already been issued on

09.11.2006 and the accident had occurred on 03.12.2006.

As such there is no waiver on the part of the respondent

insurer in this case.
22.    The learned senior counsel for the appellant, during

the course of his argument has repeatedly contended that at

best   the   sum    of    Rs.1,00,000/-     advanced      towards

replacement of the engine crank shaft can be recovered and

not deny the claim when the policy was in force.           In our

view, such contention is not acceptable at a point after the

accident. When we have noted that the issue of policy is
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 30
based on trust, the natural conduct of the appellant ought

to have been to come clean on this aspect before the

issuance of subsequent policy by informing the respondent

of non-utilisation of the advance receipt, offer to return the

sum or with consent retain it to be utilised when the engine

crank shaft was available. Only if such course was adopted,

the appellant could have been heard to put forth such a

plea, not otherwise.
23.    The learned senior counsel for the respondent has on

this aspect relied on the decision in the case of
Sea Lark

Fisheries vs. United India Insurance Company & Anr.
,

(2008) 4 SCC 131 wherein the requirements of Marine

Insurance Policy and the implied warranty of seaworthiness

was considered and it was also held that as per
Section 19
of the Act, insurance is Uberrimae Fidei, which means that

the issuance of the policy is based on trust.
To the same

effect, the learned senior counsel for the respondent has

also relied on the decision in the case of Contship

Container Lines Ltd. vs. D.K. Lall & Ors., (2010) 4 SCC
256.
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 31
24.   Therefore, keeping in view the consideration made by

us hereinabove and also taking note of the provisions

relating to warranty and the manner in which the

Classification Certificate is issued, in the instant facts the

appellant had failed to establish that the warranty class had

not been breached by them and in that context the

seaworthiness or otherwise at the point of accident is not of

relevance. In that circumstance, we are of the opinion that

the NCDRC having considered the relevant aspects of the

matter    in   its   correct   perspective   has   arrived    at    its

conclusion, which would not call for interference.
25.      Accordingly, the appeal being devoid of merit is

dismissed with no order as to costs.
26.      Pending application, if any, shall stand disposed of.
….……………………….J.
                                             (A.S. BOPANNA)

                                             ….……………………….J.
                                             (M.M. SUNDRESH)
New Delhi,
August 09, 2023
C.A. No.7228/2015
Page 32