[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
We The Women Of India vs Union Of India on 18 August, 2023
Author:
S. Ravindra Bhat
Bench:
Aravind Kumar
,
S. Ravindra Bhat
1


                                                                                   REPORTABLE
2023INSC745
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                     WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 427 OF 2022

             BACHPAN BACHAO ANDOLAN                                              ...APPELLANT(S)

                                                        VERSUS

             UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                                 ...RESPONDENT(S)


                                                   JUDGMENT
S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J.
1.             The enactment and bringing into force of
The Protection of Children from

             Sexual Offences Act, 2012
(hereafter ‘Act’ or ‘
POCSO Act
’) was not merely in

             furtherance of this country’s commitment to international instruments, but its

             resolve to and attempt at creating a world as secure and as free from fear, for the

             most innocent and vulnerable section of its citizens, i.e., children and young

             adults. Behaviour - physical, verbal, and non-verbal, ranging from what

             discomfits a child to as horrifying as rape and physical sexual abuse have been

             criminalized. Special mechanisms to provide access to the justice delivery

             system, and ensure speedy justice, have been devised. Yet, a society’s

             commitment to such a cause does not cease by mere enactment of any law, but
Signature Not Verified
its willingness, and those governing and administering it, to create and ensure
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2023.08.19
10:13:51 IST
Reason:
effective overall frameworks which support and strengthen its institutions.
2
2.      The present writ petition, arose from the strife caused to an individual

victim in her painstaking struggle for justice while navigating the police,

investigation stage, and court processes, for the prosecution of an offence under

the
POCSO Act
. At numerous stages, she was revictimized, and faced severe

hardships; the issues arising from the individual case, have been dealt with by

way of continuing mandamus, wherein this court through a series of orders has

monitored the aspects requiring special attention. During those proceedings, it

was noticed that the role of a ‘support person’ as envisaged 1 in the Protection of

Children from Sexual Offences Rules, 2020 (hereafter ‘POCSO Rules, 2020’),

despite being a progressive step – remains unfulfilled, or is given effect to, in a

partial or ad-hoc manner, thus limiting its positive potential in offering support

to victims and their families.
3.      From the point of registering an FIR/complaint under the
POCSO Act
,

the victim and their family are required to interact with the police machinery,

medical officers and hospitals, the Magistrate, Special Court and/or Juvenile

Justice Board (hereafter ‘JJB’), the concerned Child Welfare Committee

(hereafter ‘CWC’), and other stakeholders – which in itself can be daunting and

overwhelming (over and above the already traumatic experience of the crime

itself), often dissuading them from pursuing the case altogether. Noticing the

need for support at various stages, the role of a ‘support person’ was

institutionalised in the POCSO Rules, 2020, to fill this lacuna:
1Introduced first in the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Rules, 2012 which has since been repealed
and substituted by the far more detailed Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Rules, 2020.
3
“2. Definitions.––(1) In these rules, unless the context otherwise
          requires,–
          […]
(f) “support person” means a person assigned by the Child Welfare
          Committee, in accordance with sub-rule (7) of rule 4, to render
          assistance to the child through the process of investigation and trial, or
          any other person assisting the child in the pre-trial or trial process in
          respect of an offence under the Act;
4. Procedure regarding care and protection of child.–
             […]
             (8) The CWC, on receiving a report under sub-section (6) of
section
          19
of the Act or on the basis of its assessment made under sub-rule (5),
          and with the consent of the child and child’s parent or guardian or other
          person in whom the child has trust and confidence, may provide a
          support person to render assistance to the child in all possible manner
          throughout the process of investigation and trial, and shall immediately
          inform the SJPU or Local Police about providing a support person to
          the child.
5. Interpreters, translators, special educators, experts and support
          persons.–
              […]
              (6) Support person may be a person or organisation working in the
          field of child rights or child protection, or an official of a children’s
          home or shelter home having custody of the child, or a person employed
          by the DCPU:
Provided that nothing in these rules shall prevent the child and
          child’s parents or guardian or other person in whom the child has trust
          and confidence from seeking the assistance of any person or
          organisation for proceedings under the Act.”


Clearly delineating the scope of assistance to be rendered by a support person,

the Rules also stipulate that if the CWC, in contravention of its duties fails to

appoint one, or for whatever reason, the child victim and their family wish to

engage someone else, they are free to seek assistance from a qualified support

person externally [ref: proviso to Rule 5(6)]. Termination of their services, for

whatever reason, is also covered under Rule 4(11).
4.    A support person is to provide information, emotional and psychological

support, and practical assistance which are often crucial to the recovery of the
4
child. This can go a long way in helping them cope with the aftermath of the

crime and with the strain of any criminal proceedings – in many ways a support

person, acts as guardian ad litem for the child.2 The specific roles and

responsibilities, that are expected to be fulfilled are as follows:
4. Procedure regarding care and protection of child.–
                 […]
                 (9) The support person shall at all times maintain the confidentiality
             of all information pertaining to the child to which he or she has access
             and shall keep the child and child’s parent or guardian or other person
             in whom the child has trust and confidence, informed regarding the
             proceedings of the case, including available assistance, judicial
             procedures, and potential outcomes. The Support person shall also
             inform the child of the role the Support person may play in the judicial
             process and ensure that any concerns that the child may have, regarding
             child’s safety in relation to the accused and the manner in which the
             Support person would like to provide child’s testimony, are conveyed to
             the relevant authorities.
(12) The CWC shall also seek monthly reports from support person
             till the completion of trial, with respect to condition and care of child,
             including the family situation focusing on the physical, emotional and
             mental wellbeing, and progress towards healing from trauma; engage
             with medical care facilities, in coordination with the support person, to
             ensure need-based continued medical support to the child, including
             psychological care and counseling; and shall ensure resumption of
             education of the child, or continued education of the child, or shifting of
             the child to a new school, if required.
(13) It shall be the responsibility of the SJPU, or the local police to
             keep the child and child’s parent or guardian or other person in whom
             the child has trust and confidence, and where a support person has been
             assigned, such person, informed about the developments, including the
             arrest of the accused, applications filed and other court proceedings.
                 (14) SJPU or the local police shall also inform the child and child’s
             parents or guardian or other person in whom the child has trust and
             confidence about their entitlements and services available to them under
             the Act or any other law for the time being applicable as per Form-A. It
             shall also complete the Preliminary Assessment Report in Form B within
             24 hours of the registration of the First Information Report and submit it
             to the CWC.
(15) The information to be provided by the SJPU, local police, or
             support person, to the child and child’s parents or guardian or other
             person in whom the child has trust and confidence, includes but is not
             limited to the following:-
2Model Guidelines under
Section 39
of The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012, issued by
the    Ministry     of     Women        and  Child  Development,      Government      of    India, p.  50.
<https://wcd.nic.in/sites/default/files/POCSO-ModelGuidelines.pdf> (last accessed on 15.08.2023).
5
(i) the availability of public and private emergency and crisis
         services;
(ii) the procedural steps involved in a criminal prosecution;
(iii) the availability of victim’s compensation benefits;
(iv) the status of the investigation of the crime, to the extent it is
         appropriate to inform the victim and to the extent that it will not
         interfere with the investigation;
(v) the arrest of a suspected offender;
(vi) the filing of charges against a suspected offender;
(vii) the schedule of court proceedings that the child is either
         required to attend or is entitled to attend;
(viii) the bail, release or detention status of an offender or suspected
         offender;
(ix) the rendering of a verdict after trial; and (x) the sentence
         imposed on an offender.
5. Interpreters, translators, special educators, experts and support
         persons.–
            […]
            (10) The interpreter, translator, special educator, expert, support
         person or person familiar with the manner of communication of the
         child engaged to provide services for the purposes of the Act shall be
         unbiased and impartial and shall disclose any real or perceived conflict
         of interest and shall render a complete and accurate interpretation or
         translation without any additions or omissions, in accordance with
section 282
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).
            (11) In proceedings under
section 38
, the Special Court shall
         ascertain whether the child speaks the language of the court adequately,
         and that the engagement of any interpreter, translator, special educator,
         expert, support person or other person familiar with the manner of
         communication of the child,
            (12) Any interpreter, translator, special educator, expert or support
         person appointed under the Act shall be bound by the rules of
         confidentiality, as described under section 127 read with
section 126
of
         the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872).
10. Procedure for imposition of fine and payment thereof.––
            (1) The CWC shall coordinate with the DLSA to ensure that any
         amount of fine imposed by the Special Court under the Act which is to be
         paid to the victim, is in fact paid to the child.
(2) The CWC will also facilitate any procedure for opening a bank
         account, arranging for identity proofs, etc., with the assistance of DCPU
         and support person.”
5.    In addition to maintaining confidentiality of all information, and

addressing the concerns of the child and family, the support person is

responsible for accompanying the child during recording of statement, medical
6
examination, depositions3, and to assist in all other interactions at the

investigation, pre-trial, and trial stage. The support person is to make available

public or private emergency and crisis services; ensure availability of free legal

aid; provide assistance with navigating the victim compensation scheme; track

the status of investigation, arrest, and filing of charges of the accused person;

follow the dates of the court proceedings to enable the victim or family to attend

as required; and be abreast of any other developments such as grant of bail,

detention status, etc. of the accused.
6.      A support person – whether involved from the early stages of lodging a

report or brought on board shortly thereafter - can play a tremendous role in

offering encouragement, reassurance, and guidance, merely from their

knowledge of the legalese, armed with a compassionate child-friendly approach.

Their potential in providing moral support and guidance, which directly

translates to better and more just outcomes both in terms of prosecution, and

rehabilitation, cannot be overstated. To fulfil their role as envisaged, their

primary focus, must be the child’s immediate care and protection, and to play

the role of a helpful intermediary between the child, its family/guardian, and the

various institutional stakeholders and authorities. In these interactions, the

support person, should bear in mind the principles enunciated in
Section 3
of the

Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 while engaging

with the child victim, and their families. These include – the principles of

3The importance of a support person accompanying the child victim at the time of recording statement and
deposition, has also been recognised in the Witness Protection Scheme, 2018.
7
dignity and worth, participation, best interest, safety, positive measures, non-

stigmatising semantics, non-waiver of rights, equality and non-discrimination,

and right to privacy and confidentiality.
7.      There are numerous aids prepared, to help in understanding the role of the

support person, and how to maximise their impact. The Ministry of Women and

Child Development released the Model Guidelines under Section 39 of The

Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 20124 (hereafter ‘Model

Guidelines’) which offers detailed guidance for the use of professionals and

experts under the
POCSO Act
(albeit issued in 2013, i.e., prior to the POCSO

Rules, 2020). Similarly, another useful resource tailored specifically for the use

of support persons, is the ‘Handbook for Support Persons 2021 – Assisting

Child Victims of Sexual Violence’5 which is a handy open access resource,

available for download from the internet. These resources, comprehensively

elucidate child-friendly best practices, and explain what not do, as a support

person, in a lucid and accessible manner.
8.      It is pertinent to mention that the POCSO Rules, also contain ‘Form-A’

which as per Rule 4(14) is to be handed over to the child victim,

parents/guardian, or any other person in whom the child trusts, to inform them

of the entitlements the child victim must receive as information and services.

This form re-emphasises the importance of a support person in each case, and is

4<https://wcd.nic.in/sites/default/files/POCSO-ModelGuidelines.pdf> (last accessed on 15.08.2023).
5Published by Enfold, Prerana and UNICEF, this handbook was launched on 10.03.2022, and is available on
open access terms: <https://enfoldindia.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/Handbook-for-Support-Persons-2021-
Released-on-10_3_2022.pdf> (last accessed on 15.08.2023).
8
also indicative of the stages at which such a support person can play a role in:
FORM-A
     Entitlement of children who have suffered sexual abuse to receive information
     and services
1. To receive a copy of the FIR.
2. To receive adequate security and protection by Police.
3. To receive immediate and free medical examination by civil
             hospital/PHC etc.
4. To receive Counseling and consultation for mental and
             psychological well being
5. For Recording of statement of child by woman police officer at
             child’s home or any other place convenient to child
6. To be moved to a Child Care Institution where offence was at home
             or in a shared household, to the custody of a person whom child
             reposes faith.
7. For Immediate aid and assistance on the recommendation of CWC.
8. For being kept away from accused at all times, during trial and
             otherwise.
9. To have an interpreter or translator, where needed.
10. To have special educator for the child or other specialized person
             where child is disabled.
11. For Free Legal Aid.
12. For Support Person to be appointed by Child Welfare Committee.
13. To continue with education.
14. To privacy and confidentiality.
15. For list of Important Contact No.’s including that of the District
             Magistrate and the Superintendent of Police.
(emphasis
             supplied)
9.      The specific Rules discussed hereinabove, read with ‘Form – A’, confirm

that the availability of services of a support person is not merely directory or

suggestive – but a legal entitlement. While this framework created by the Rules,

in furtherance of supporting victims of child abuse under the
POCSO Act
, is

truly laudatory, it also requires proactive action from the State to shore up

infrastructure and train human resources, accordingly – to bridge the gap

between this entitlement on paper, and on-ground reality. This court in
9
Alarming Rise in the Number of Reported Child Rape Incidents, In re 6, recorded

that as per the Supreme Court Registrar’s report prepared in November 2019, a

support person had been appointed only in 4% of POCSO cases. Much is yet to

be done, therefore, for a declaration by this court of the mandatory nature of the

appointment of support person (subject only to the consent of the child,

guardian, or the person in whom the child trusts, as the case may be), to carry

any weight. It is necessary that steps are taken to ensure that the
POCSO Act
and the mechanisms it creates, are functioning and effective.
10.     The existing monitoring framework is spelt out in Rule 12, which is

extracted below, for the ease of reference:
“12. Monitoring of implementation of the Act.––
             (1) The National Commission for the Protection of Child Rights
             (hereafter referred to as “N
CPC
R”) or the State Commission for the
             Protection of Child Rights (hereafter referred to as “S
CPC
R”), as the
             case may be, shall in addition to the functions assigned to them under
             the Commissions for
Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005
(4 of 2006),
             perform the following functions for implementation of the provisions of
             the Act––
(a) monitor the designation of Special Courts by State Governments;
(b) monitor the appointment of the Special Public Prosecutors by the
             State Governments;
(c) monitor the formulation of the guidelines described in
section 39
of
             the Act by the State Governments, for the use of non-governmental
             organisations, professionals and experts or persons having knowledge of
             psychology, social work, physical health, mental health and child
             development to be associated with the pre-trial and trial stage to assist
             the child, and to monitor the application of these guidelines;
(d) monitor the designing and implementation of modules for training
             police personnel and other concerned persons, including officers of the
             Centre and State Governments, for the effective discharge of their
             functions under the Act;
(e) monitor and support the Central Government and State Governments
             for the dissemination of information relating to the provisions of the Act
             through media including the television, radio and print media at regular


6(2020) 7 SCC 108: Order dated 13.11.2019 in Suo Motu Writ Petition (Crl) No. 1/2019 with Writ Petition (C)
No. 819/2019.
10
intervals, so as to make the general public, children as well as their
               parents and guardians aware of the provisions of the Act.
(f) call for a report on any specific case of child sexual abuse falling
               within the jurisdiction of a CWC.
(g) collect information and data on its own or from the relevant agencies
               regarding reported cases of sexual abuse and their disposal under the
               processes provided under the Act, including information on the
               following:-
(i) number and details of offences reported under the Act;
(ii) whether the procedures prescribed under the Act and rules were
                   followed, including those regarding timeframes;
(iii) details of arrangements for care and protection of victims of
                   offences under this Act, including arrangements for emergency
                   medical care and medical examination; and,
(iv) details regarding assessment of the need for care and protection
               of a child by the concerned CWC in any specific case;
(h) use the information so collected to assess the implementation of the
               provisions of the Act. The report on monitoring of the Act shall be
               included in a separate chapter in the annual report of the N
CPC
R or the
               S
CPC
R.
(2) The concerned authorities mandated to collect data, under the Act,
               shall share such data with the Central Government and every State
               Government, N
CPC
R and S
CPC
Rs.”
11.         In view of what is required under the POCSO Rules, this court hereby

issues the following directions:
In furtherance of the mandate of
Section 39
of the POCSO Act 7, the Principal

Secretary to the Department of Women and Child Welfare, in the State of Uttar

Pradesh shall convene a meeting within the next six weeks to review the facts,

take action, and frame rules/guidelines as necessary, on the following:
i.     Assess capabilities in the state with respect to the support persons
              ecosystem for the selection, appointment, need for special
              rules/guidelines/Standard Operating Procedure in regard to their



7“
Section 39
. Guidelines for child to take assistance of experts, etc.- Subject to such rules as may be made in
this behalf, the State Government shall prepare guidelines for use of non-governmental organisations,
professionals and experts or persons having knowledge of psychology, social work, physical health, mental
health and child development to be associated with the pre-trial and trial stage to assist the child.”
11
appointment/empanelment, training, career advancement and terms
       and conditions of employment;
ii.   To achieve the purpose in (i) above, require the presence of the
       Chairperson, of the State Commission for the Protection of Child
       Rights (S
CPC
R), Secretary, State Legal Service Authority, senior-most
       President of a JJB and senior-most Chairperson of a CWC in the state,
       and a representative from the State Commission for Women;
iii.   Prior to this meeting, details may be called from each District Child
       Protection Unit (DCPU), as to the list of support persons maintained
       by it as per Rule 5(1) – which is to include the names of persons or
       organisations working in the field of child rights or child protection,
       officials of children’s homes or shelter homes having custody of
       children, and other eligible persons employed by the DCPU [as
       prescribed under Rule 5(6)];
iv.    After due consultations, frame such rules, or guidelines, as are
       necessary, relating to the educational qualifications and/or training
       required of a support person [over and above the stipulation in Rule
       5(6)], and parameters to identify the eligible institutions or NGOs in
       the state, which can be accredited to depute qualified support persons,
       and consequently be added to the District Child Protection Unit
       (DCPU) directory as contemplated in Rule 5(1);
v.    Ensure that the DCPU or CWC, as the State authorities may deem fit,
       is tasked with conducting periodic training for all support persons in
       the DCPU directory to impart knowledge not only on the Act, Rules,
       and the legal and court procedures involved in prosecuting a POCSO
       case, but also more fundamentally on communicating and assisting the
       children of various ages and backgrounds, with the sensitivity it the
       role demands;
vi.    In the guidelines framed, ensure that a reporting mechanism through
       appropriate formats are prepared, to enable the support persons to send
       monthly reports as per Rule 4(12) to the concerned CWC, which
12
should then be compiled and sent to the S
CPC
R, and the state
             government;
vii.     Prepare a framework, in the form of a Standard Operating Procedure
             (SOP) to ensure proper implementation of Rule 12 of the POCSO
             Rules, 2020, for reporting by the respective CWCs on the specific
             heads of information collected by them, on monthly basis. This shall
             include the number of cases, where support persons have been
             engaged in trials and inquiries throughout the state. The information
             should also reflect whether they were from the DCPU directory, or
             with external help from an NGO. Such list shall be reviewed on
             monthly basis by the S
CPC
R;
viii.     The SOP prepared, and guidelines framed, are to be communicated to
             all JJBs and CWCs within a week of its preparation;
ix.     Lastly, it is important to acknowledge that support persons who are
             independent trained professionals, would need to take up tasks which
             require intensive interactions in often, hostile environments, and
             consequently deserve to be paid adequate remuneration. Therefore,
             though the Rules8 state that such personnel should be paid equivalent
             to a skilled worker as per the
Minimum Wages Act, 1948
, this court is
             of the opinion that the remuneration paid for the duration of the work,
             should be commensurate to the qualifications and experience of these
             independent professionals, having regard to the salaries paid to those
             with comparable qualifications employed by the government, in PSUs,
             or other institutions run by the government (e.g. hospitals), and this
             too may be considered in the meeting to be convened by the Principal
             Secretary.
The Model Guidelines (supra) issued by the Ministry of Women and Child

Development, Government of India, albeit prepared prior to the amended
8As per the Rules, the support persons listed in the District Child Protection Unit directory are to be
remunerated emoluments equivalent to a skilled worker as per the
Minimum Wages Act, 1948
from the funds
maintained under
Section 105
of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 or from other
funds placed at the disposal of the DCPU [ref: Rule 5(7) and (8) of POCSO Rules, 2020].
13
POCSO Rules, 2020, may offer some assistance in the framing of guidelines as

directed above.
12.   In crimes against children, it is not only the initiating horror or trauma

that is deeply scarring; that is aggravated by the lack of support and

handholding in the days that follow. In such crimes, true justice is achieved not

merely by nabbing the culprit and bringing him to justice, or the severity of

punishment meted out, but the support, care, and security to the victim (or

vulnerable witness), as provided by the state and all its authorities in assuring a

painless, as less an ordeal an experience as is possible, during the entire process

of investigation, and trial. The support and care provided through state

institutions and offices is vital during this period. Furthermore, justice can be

said to have been approximated only when the victims are brought back to

society, made to feel secure, their worth and dignity, restored. Without this,

justice is an empty phrase, an illusion. The POCSO Rules 2020, offer an

effective framework in this regard, it is now left to the State as the biggest

stakeholder in it – to ensure its strict implementation, in letter and spirit.
13.   The State of Uttar Pradesh is hereby directed to file a report of

compliance of these directions on or before 04.10.2023. The Ministry of Women

and Child Development, Government of India, is requested to bring this

judgment to the notice of the N
CPC
R, which in turn is directed to file – in

furtherance of its obligation under Rule 12(1)(c) – a consolidated status report

outlining the progress of all States in framing of guidelines as prescribed under
14
Section 39
of the POCSO Act, by 04.10.2023. The Union of India and the

N
CPC
R shall also file an affidavit in this regard before 4.10.2023. A copy of

this order shall be marked directly by the Registry to the Union Secretary,

Department of Women and Child Development and Chairperson N
CPC
R, for

necessary action.
14.   List the writ petition next on 06.10.2023.
...............................................J.
                                                   [S. RAVINDRA BHAT]




                                                   ..............................................J.
                                                   [ARAVIND KUMAR]
NEW DELHI,
AUGUST 18, 2023.