[Cites
13
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Mala Etc. Etc. vs The State Of Punjab on 17 August, 2023
Author:
Bela M. Trivedi
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
,
Bela M. Trivedi
2023INSC735                                                               REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3992-4000/2011


                      MALA ETC. ETC.                                 ..... APPELLANT(S)


                                                VERSUS


                      STATE OF PUNJAB AND OTHERS                ..... RESPONDENT(S)

                                                 WITH

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5218 OF 2011


                      BADDAR KUMAR MEHTA (DEAD) THR. LRS.            .... APPELLANT(S)


                                                VERSUS


                      STATE OF PUNJAB AND ANOTHER               .....RESPONDENT(S)

                                                 WITH

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5219 OF 2011

                      RAJNI SHARMA                                   .... APPELLANT(S)

Signature Not Verified                          VERSUS
Digitally signed by
Deepak Guglani
Date: 2023.08.17
14:23:58 IST
Reason:


                      STATE OF PUNJAB AND ANOTHER               ..... RESPONDENT(S)


                                                   1
                                      WITH

                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10693 OF 2011

     SHRIMATI CHINDO                                   ...APPELLANT(S)

                                    VERSUS


     STATE OF PUNJAB AND ANOTHER                         ..... RESPONDENT(S)


                                 JUDGMENT
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J.
1.    This batch of 12 appeals arise out of the common judgment and order

      dated 17.08.2010 passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at

      Chandigarh in Civil Writ Petition No.20433/2009 and others (in all 40

      writ petitions). Before the High Court, 14 writ petitions were filed by the

      land owners and 26 writ petitions were filed by the Improvement Trust,

      Hoshiarpur. Vide the impugned judgment, the High Court allowed the

      writ petitions filed by the land owners by enhancing the market value of

      the acquired land to Rs.2,000/- per marla and granted all statutory

      benefits available under the
Land Acquisition Act
1894 (hereinafter

      referred to as the said Act). The High Court also granted the benefit of

      Rs.400/- at 10% per marla to the assessed amount for two years.
2
Meaning thereby, the High Court accorded the total amount of

     compensation payable to the land owners at Rs.2,400/- per marla

     along with all statutory benefits available under the Act. The High Court

     dismissed the writ petitions filed by the Improvement Trust.
2.   The Hoshiarpur Improvement Trust (Respondent No.3 herein)

     prepared a scheme for the purpose of Development Scheme

     (residential) under
Sections 24
,
25
and
28
of the Punjab Town

     Improvement Act 1922 in an area admeasuring 291 kanals 7 marlas

     situated within the Municipal limits in village Purhiran and Sutehri. Out

     of the said land, 230 kanals 9 marlas belonged to the Municipal

     Committee, Hoshiarpur, which were taken over by the Respondent

     No.2, Land Acquisition Collector (Improvement Trust) through

     negotiations. To acquire the rest of the lands admeasuring 59 kanals 3

     marlas, a notification under Section 36 of the Improvement Act was

     issued on 29.07.1994. After completing the formalities of hearing the

     objections etc, the notification under Section 41 of the Improvement

     Act was issued on 10/14.07.1995. The respondent/ Land Acquisition

     Collector passed an award on 11.07.1997 awarding the compensation

     at Rs 1.07 lakhs per acre for Chahi (Rs.668.75 per marla) and Rs.1.10

     lakh per acre for the remaining kinds of lands (Rs.687.50 per marla) for
3
village Purhiran and Rs.1.50 lakh per acre for all kinds of land

     (Rs.714.30 per marla) for the village Sutehri. The Land Acquisition

     Collector also assessed Rs. 46,61,760/- for 52 structures/buildings

     standing at the spot, Rs.70,300/- towards the cost of tube wells,

     Rs.30,069/- towards fruit bearing trees and Rs.37,824.54 paisa

     towards compensation of rest of the trees existing at the spot. The

     Land Acquisition Collector further awarded the statutory benefits under

     the said Act. The Land owners being dissatisfied by the award passed

     by the respondent (LAC) had preferred reference under
Section 18
of

     the said Act. The Reference Court/Tribunal vide common award dated

     17.04.2009 enhanced the compensation from Rs.668.75/- per marla to

     Rs.1337.50 per marla for the land Chahi and from Rs.687.50/- per

     marla to Rs. 1375/- per marla for remaining kinds of land in village

     Purhiran, and enhanced the compensation from Rs.714.30 to

     Rs.1428.60 per marla for all kinds of land for the village Sutehri. The

     Tribunal further awarded the statutory benefits under the Act.
3.   The petitioners/land owners being dissatisfied by the said award

     passed by the Reference Court/Tribunal, preferred fourteen Civil writ

     petitions before the High Court. The respondent Improvement Trust

     also filed 26 writ petitions challenging the said award passed by the
4
said Tribunal. The High Court disposed of all the writ petitions vide the

      impugned common judgment as stated hereinabove.
4.    The Learned Senior Advocate Mr. P.S. Patwalia for the appellants

      submitted that the lands in question were being used both for

      commercial and residential purposes and the High Court had erred in

      not relying upon the sale deeds executed for the shops prior to the

      date of acquisition, which showed continuous rise in the prices.
5.    He further submitted that the High Court had committed gross error in

      applying one third cut on the assessed market value of Rs.3,000/- per

      marla, towards development charges though admittedly the lands

      acquired were situated within the Municipal limits of the villages. The

      structures/buildings standing thereon, clearly established that the

      acquired lands were neither undeveloped nor underdeveloped lands.

      He relied upon the case of
Haryana State Industrial Development

      Corporation vs. Pran Sukh and Others1
to buttress his submissions.
6.    The learned counsel for the respondent state however submitted that

      when a large chunk of land is being acquired, a suitable deduction is

      required to be made towards the development charges as per the

      settled legal position, which has rightly been done by the High Court.



1 (2010) 11 SCC 175
5
7.   In view of the above, let us see whether the impugned judgment

     warrants any inference of this Court exercising extraordinary

     jurisdiction under
Article 136
of the Constitution of India. Undoubtedly,

     a plenary jurisdiction exercisable on assuming appellate jurisdiction

     has been conferred upon the Supreme Court under
Article 136
,

     nonetheless it is an extraordinary jurisdiction which must be exercised

     in exceptional circumstances and that too with great care and caution.
8.   The guiding principles for determining the market value of the land at

     the date of the publication of the notification under
Section 4(1)
in view

     of
Section 23(1)
of the said Act, are well settled by this Court in catena

     of decisions. Accordingly, the determination of market value is the

     process of predicting an economic event that is assuming a price a

     willing vendor would offer to a willing purchaser in normal market

     conditions, but not an event of anxious dealing at arm’s length nor a

     facade of sale nor fictitious sale brought about in quick succession or

     otherwise to inflate the market value. No doubt, for ascertaining the

     market value of the land, its existing condition, location and user, its

     proximity to residential, commercial or industrial area etc. are the major

     factors required to be considered. The size and nature of the lands

     acquired and size and nature of the lands in respect of which sale
6
instances are produced on record, also would be an important aspects

     in as much as normally the sale instances of small piece of land can

     not form reasonable basis to determine the market value of large

     chunk of land, unless suitable deductions are made in respect of

     development charges. How much deductions should be made would

     depend on the nature of land, its topography, special features and

     state of its development so as to make it suitable for the purpose for

     which it is acquired.
9.   In the instant cases, the Tribunal after recording the submissions of the

     counsels for the parties and recording the sale instances on record,

     without any further analysis of evidence or discussion, abruptly

     enhanced the market rates of the acquired lands to almost double the

     rates at which the compensation was assessed by the Land

     Acquisition Collector. The Tribunal enhanced the rates from Rs.

     668.75/- to Rs. 1337.50/- per marla for the land Chahi and from Rs.

     687.50/- to Rs. 1375/- per marla for the remaining kinds of land for the

     village Purhiran, and enhanced from Rs. 714.30/- to Rs. 1428.60/- per

     marla for all kinds of land for village Sutehri. The said rates have been

     further enhanced by the High Court to Rs. 3,000/- per marla for all the

     lands in question.
7
10. Though the Learned Senior Counsel Mr. Patwalia had sought to submit

    that the High Court had failed to consider the sale instance of the shop

    executed in close proximity of the date on which the lands in question

    were acquired, we do not find any merit in the said submission. The

    High Court has duly considered all the sale instances in the light of

    other evidence on record and after duly reasoning out as to why the

    other sale instances should not be relied upon, has relied upon the

    sale instances dated 31.08.1992 (Ex. P/30) and dated 14.08.1992 (Ex.

    P/32) which were executed in close proximity to the date on which the

    lands in question were acquired. The solitary sale instance of shop has

    rightly been ignored, the other sale instances more germane and

    relevant of the lands situated in nearby area of the area of acquisition

    being available on record.
11. The next submission made by Mr. Patwalia with regard to the one third

    cut imposed by the High Court has also hardly any force. The High

    Court after determining the market value of the lands acquired at Rs.

    3000/- per marla, has deducted one third amount therefrom towards

    the development charges taking into consideration the settled legal

    position. It is well settled position of law that while determining the

    deduction for development charges, the courts should keep in mind the
8
nature of land, area under acquisition, whether the land is developed

      or not, if developed to what extent, the purpose of acquisition etc.

      Though, it is true that while determining the market value of large

      chunk of land, the value of smaller pieces of land could be taken into

      consideration, however, after making appropriate deduction in the

      value of lands or setting apart land required for carving out roads,

      leaving open spaces, plotting out smaller plots etc. The percentage of

      deduction or the extent of area required to be set apart has to be

      assessed by the courts having regard to the size, shape, situation,

      user etc. of the lands acquired. It is essentially a kind of guess work

      the courts are expected to undertake.
12.
In
Chimanlal Hargovinddas v. Special Land Acquisition Officer,

      Poona and Anr.2
, this Court held as under:
“8. ……. The first two grounds are devoid of merit. It
                     is common knowledge that when a large block of
                     land is required to be valued, appropriate deduction
                     has to be made for setting aside land for carving out
                     roads, leaving open spaces, and plotting out smaller
                     plots suitable for construction of buildings. The extent
                     of the area required to be set apart in this connection
                     has to be assessed by the court having regard to the
                     shape, size and situation of the concerned block of
                     land etc. There cannot be any hard and fast rule as
                     to how much deduction should be made to account
                     for this factor. It is essentially a question of fact
                     depending on the facts and circumstances of each


2 (1988) 3 SCC 751
9
case. It does not involve drawing upon any principle
                      of law.”
13.
In
Lal Chand v. Union of India and Anr.3
, this Court held that:
“14. The “deduction for development” consists of two
                      components. The first is with reference to the area
                      required to be utilised for developmental works and
                      the second is the cost of the development works. For
                      example, if a residential layout is formed by DDA or
                      similar statutory authority, it may utilise around 40%
                      of the land area in the layout, for roads, drains,
                      parks, playgrounds and civic amenities (community
                      facilities), etc.
15. The development authority will also incur
                      considerable expenditure for development of
                      undeveloped land into a developed layout, which
                      includes the cost of levelling the land, cost of
                      providing roads, underground drainage and sewage
                      facilities, laying water lines, electricity lines and
                      developing parks and civil amenities, which would be
                      about 35% of the value of the developed plot. The
                      two factors taken together would be the “deduction
                      for development” and can account for as much as
                      75% of the cost of the developed plot.
16 to 21…….
22. Some of the layouts formed by the statutory
                      development authorities may have large areas
                      earmarked for water/sewage treatment plants, water
                      tanks, electrical substations, etc. in addition to the
                      usual areas earmarked for roads, drains, parks,
                      playgrounds and community/civic amenities. The
                      purpose of the aforesaid examples is only to show
                      that the “deduction for development” factor is a
                      variable percentage and the range of percentage
                      itself being very wide from 20% to 75%.”


3 (2009) 15 SCC 769
10
14. This Court in the judgment reported as
Kasturi and Ors. v. State of

      Haryana4
, held that there may be various factual factors which may

      have to be taken into consideration while applying the cut in payment

      of compensation towards developmental charges, maybe in some

      cases it is more than 1/3rd and in some cases less than 1/3rd. This

      Court held as under:
“7 ……. However, in cases of some land where there
                      are certain advantages by virtue of the developed
                      area around, it may help in reducing the percentage
                      of cut to be applied, as the developmental charges
                      required may be less on that account. There may be
                      various factual factors which may have to be taken
                      into consideration while applying the cut in payment
                      of compensation towards developmental charges,
                      maybe in some cases it is more than 1/3rd and in
                      some cases less than 1/3rd. It must be remembered
                      that there is difference between a developed area
                      and an area having potential value, which is yet to be
                      developed. The fact that an area is developed or
                      adjacent to a developed area will not ipso facto make
                      every land situated in the area also developed to be
                      valued as a building site or plot, particularly when
                      vast tracts are acquired, as in this case, for
                      development purpose.”
15. The High Court in the impugned judgment after applying the ratio of

      decisions in case of Brig.
Sahib Singh Kalha and Ors vs. Amritsar

      Improvement Trust and Others5
and other decisions to the facts of

      these cases, came to the conclusion that a cut of one third was
4 (2003) 1 SCC 354
5 AIR (1982) SC 940
11
required to be imposed on the amount of compensation awarded by it.

    When the impugned judgment of High Court reveals that the High

    Court has taken into consideration the relevant factors prescribed

    under the Act, as interpreted by this Court, the assessment of market

    value so determined does not warrant any interference of this Court in

    the appeals under
Article 136
of the Constitution of India.
16. In that view of the matter, the appeals being devoid of merits are

    dismissed.
…..................................J.
                                                          [BELA M. TRIVEDI]



                                                    …..................................J.
                                                        [DIPANKAR DATTA]
NEW DELHI;
August 17, 2023
12