[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M.Sivadasan (Dead) Through Lrs. vs A.Soudamini (D) Through Lrs And Others on 28 August, 2023
Author:
C.T. Ravikumar
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
,
C.T. Ravikumar
1


2023INSC774

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.254 OF 2010




             M. SIVADASAN (DEAD) THROUGH LRs. & ORS                     …APPELLANTS

                                                      Versus


             A. SOUDAMINI (DEAD) THROUGH LRs. & ORS. …RESPONDENTS

                                                  JUDGMENT
1.             The appellants had filed a suit for partition and mesne

                            profit way back in the year 1988, before the Court of

                            Principal Munsif, Kozhikode­I, Kerala, claiming ancestral

                            rights over the property comprising of Items 1 & 2 in Plaint

                            Schedule A; property admeasuring 33 ½ cents and 42

                            cents respectively.   The Trial Court dismissed the suit of

                            the plaintiffs/appellants vide its Order and Judgment

                            dated 03.02.1993 on the ground that the land along with

                            the house sought to be partitioned is an agricultural land

                            on which the plaintiffs/appellants, cannot claim any right.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Vijay Kumar
Date: 2023.08.28
16:14:37 IST
Reason:
This finding of the Trial Court was upheld by the First

                            Appellate Court, and finally by the High Court of Kerela by
2
the impugned Judgment dated 29.01.2009 in second

     appeal. In short, the present appellants have lost from all

     the Courts below.
2.   The   contesting    parties   before   this   Court   belong   to

     “Thiyyas” community of Kozhikode, Kerala who were

     governed by Hindu Mitakshara law. The admitted position

     is that amongst “Thiyyas” of Kozhikode, ancestral property

     devolves only on the male children; daughters, have a right

     of maintenance till the time of their marriage. We are

     speaking here of the rights, including possession as it

     existed prior to the
Hindu Succession Act, 1956
. The

     plaintiff/appellant had filed a civil suit before the court of

     Munsif for partition of the property which has a total area

     of 75 ½ cents. Built on the land is the ancestral residential

     house of the parties. The suit of partition was dismissed

     by the trial court holding that Hindu Women’s Right to

     Property Act, 1937 was not applicable to agricultural land,

     till its amendment in the year 1946 and the succession to

     the said property had opened in the year 1942 itself which

     precedes the date of amendment.
3
3.      The property originally belonged to Sami Vaidyar. On his

        death in the year 1942, it devolved on his male successor

        son Sukumaran. Rights on the property are being claimed

        presently by the progenies or daughters of Sami Vaidyar

        through their mother Choyichi, who was the widow of Sami

        Vaidyar. The claim of the plaintiff was that Choyichi (who

        died in the year 1962) had a right, though a limited right

        under the Hindu Mitakshara law as well as by virtue of

        Hindu Women’s Right to Property Act, 1937 which

        blossomed into full­fledged right under
Section 14
sub­

        section (1) of
Hindu Succession Act, 1956
which is

        reproduced below:
14. Property of a female
                     Hindu to be her absolute
                     property.—(1) Any property
                     possessed by a female Hindu,
                     whether acquired before or
                     after the commencement of this
                     Act, shall be held by her as full
                     owner thereof and not as a
                     limited owner
4. This argument of the plaintiff was rejected by the Trial

       Court and the same was upheld by the First Appellate Court

       as well as by the Second Appellate Court on the reasoning
4
that after the death of Sami Vaidyar, his son Sukumaran

succeeded in the property in year 1942 itself. Thereafter,

Sukumaran and later the children succeeding Sukumaran

had the right over the property which undisputedly

remained in their possession.
Section 14
sub­Section (1)

had no application in this case. The essential ingredient of
Section 14
sub­Section (1) is possession over the property.

Admittedly the plaintiff was never in possession of the

property. The possession was always that of the defendant

and therefore
Section 14
sub­Section (1) would not be

applicable.   In Ram Vishal (dead) by lrs. and
Ors. v.

Jagan Nath & Another
. reported in (2004) 9 SCC 302 the

position of possession being a pre­requisite to sustain a

claim under sub­section (1) of
Section 14
of the 1956 Act

was confirmed in Para 16 which is quoted below:
‘16. In our view, the authority
              in Raghubar Singh case [(1998)
              6 SCC 314] can be of no
              assistance to the respondent.
As has been held by this Court,
              a pre­existing right is a sine
              qua non for conferment of a full
              ownership under
Section 14
of
              the Hindu Succession Act. The
              Hindu female must not only be
5
possessed of the property but
                  she must have acquired the
                  property.   Such     acquisition
                  must be either by way of
                  inheritance or devise, or at a
                  partition  or    “in    lieu   of
                  maintenance or arrears of
                  maintenance” or by gift or by
                  her own skill or exertion, or by
                  purchase or by prescription…’
                  [Emphasis Supplied]
5.   As per the law as it existed at their relevant time the

     property which was an agricultural property would devolve

     upon the male child and daughters would get only a

     limited right to maintenance till, they were married and the

     widow would be entitled to maintenance from the income

     from the property till her death or remarriage. As per the

     family Settlement Deed dated 12.03.1938 which was relied

     upon by both the parties, the property in dispute was

     specifically allotted to Sami Vaidyar and his only son

     Sukumaran.     Therefore, the widow of Sami Vaidyar i.e.,

     Choyichi will not have any right over the property.     The

     findings of all the courts below were that Choyichi was

     never in possession of the property and therefore she
6
would not get the right, as claimed by her under
Section

     14(1)
of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956.
6.   We have heard at length Mr. P.N. Raveendran and Mr.

     Sudhivasudevan, learned senior counsel appearing on

     behalf of the appellants and Mr. V. Chitambaresh, learned

     senior counsel, for the respondents/defendants. The effort

     of the learned senior counsel for the appellants here was to

     persuade us to reappreciate the entire case on facts, on

     which three Courts have given the same findings. The

     learned Counsel would argue that the determination of the

     land in question as an agricultural land has been wrongly

     done by all the three Courts.     The argument which has

     been put forward by the learned senior counsel before us is

     on the reasoning that merely because the land has a few

     coconut trees, that will not make it an agricultural land, as

     in Kerela, coconut trees are found everywhere even in the

     urban residential properties and their presence itself will

     not make the land an agricultural land.
7.   The land in question undoubtedly has coconut trees on it,

     most of them are very old but fruit bearing, and moreover

     in revenue records, the land is described as “theaattam”
7
i.e., “garden”. This would mean that the land in question

     may be put for agricultural use.        Theoretically, it is

     possible that a land which is recorded as “theaattam” may

     not be actually put for agricultural use. All the same, in

     the present case, the overwhelming evidence which has

     been duly appreciated by the three Courts below clearly

     prove that the land was indeed an agricultural land. We

     therefore find no reason to take a different view at this

     stage.
8.   We must state here that this case is here before us in a

     Special Leave Petition filed under
Article 136
of the

     Constitution of India. It is true that leave has been granted

     in this case.    Nevertheless, the settled legal position

     remains that even after leave is granted and appeal is

     admitted, the appellants must show that exceptional and

     special circumstances exist to reverse the findings, or grave

     injustice will be done if the decision under challenge is not

     interfered with. We do not find any special circumstances

     here which may warrant our interference.        [See
Pritam

     Singh v. State
, AIR (1950) SC 169: (
1950) SCR 453, Hem

     Raj v. State of Ajmer
AIR (1954) SC 462: (
1954) SCR
8
1133, Bengal Chemical & Pharmaceutical Works Ltd.

     v. Employees
, AIR (1959) SC 633: 1959 Supp (2) SCR 136:
(
1959) 1 LLJ 413, Municipal Board, Pratabgarh and

     Anr. v. Mahendra Singh Chawla and Ors.
(1982) 3 SCC

     331: (
1983) SCC (L&S) 19, Taherakhatoon (dead) by LRs

     v. Salambin Mohammad
(1999) 2 SCC 635].
9.   There is another aspect of the matter. Admittedly the

     defendants have all along been in possession of the

     property. The finding of adverse possession in favour of the

     defendants by the Trial Court, was never challenged by the

     plaintiffs/appellants before the First Appellate Court.   We

     refer here the observations of the High Court which are as

     under:
“10…It is pertinent to note that
                 the findings of the trial court
                 that the rights, if any, of the
                 plaintiffs have been lost by
                 adverse possession and ouster
                 does not appear to have been
                 assailed    before    the    lower
                 appellate court.       The lower
                 appellate court also did not
                 interfere with the said finding…”
9
Consequently, even if we keep nature of the land aside for

       a while, the present appeal is liable to be dismissed on this

       ground alone.
10.    The concurrent findings on facts by the Trial Court and the

       First Appellate Court have been reaffirmed in second

       appeal by the High Court, yet by and large the entire

       submissions of the appellants is nothing but a persuasion

       before this Court for reappraisal of the case on facts.
11.    In view of the above discussion, the judgment of the Trial

       Court and First Appellate Court, affirmed by the High

       Court in second appeal on 29.01.2009 is upheld and the

       present appeal is hereby dismissed. The order granting

       status quo by this Court dated 06.01.2010 stands vacated.

       No order as to costs.
…………………………..J.
                                              [C.T. RAVIKUMAR]


                                              …………………………..J.
                                             [SUDHANSHU DHULIA]


      AUGUST 28, 2023.
NEW DELHI