[Cites
1
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Jagpal Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 29 August, 2023
Author:
Pankaj Mithal
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
,
Abhay S. Oka
2023INSC777


                                                                 NON­REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                           SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) No.31526 OF 2017


          JAGPAL SINGH                                                 …PETITIONER

                                                VERSUS


          THE STATE OF U.P. & ORS.                                    …RESPONDENTS



                                           JUDGMENT
PANKAJ MITHAL, J.
1.              Shri Parthiv K. Goswami, learned senior counsel for the

                         petitioner and Shri Tanmaya Agarwal, learned counsel for the

                         respondents were heard on merits.
2.              Under challenge is the judgment and order dated 04.09.2017
Signature Not Verified
passed by the Division Bench of the High Court whereby the
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Special Appeal was allowed after setting aside the judgment
Date: 2023.08.29
18:50:05 IST
Reason:
1
and order of the learned Single Judge dated 31.10.2012

     allowing the Writ Petition No.25718 of 2011.
3.   The result of the impugned order is that the services of the

     petitioner who was appointed as the temporary Collection Peon

     stood terminated, notwithstanding, the subsequent promotion

     earned by him on the post of Collection Amin on the strength

     of his continued working under the interim order passed by

     the High Court.
4.   The petitioner was appointed as a temporary Collection Peon

     on 01.02.1996. The appointment letter clearly stated that the

     services of the petitioner were purely temporary and that he

     could be removed without any notice. The services of the

     petitioner as temporary Collection Peon were terminated

     simpliciter vide order dated 30.11.1998 with one month’s

     notice and salary & allowances.
5.   Aggrieved by the termination of his services, petitioner filed a

     Writ Petition No.42216 of 1998 (
Jagpal Singh vs. District

     Magistrate, Etawah and others
). The said Writ Petition was
2
dismissed on 15.07.1999 by the learned Single Judge in limine

     with the observation that since the petitioner is purely a

     temporary appointee, as is evident from his appointment

     letter, he has no right to the post.
6.   Not satisfied by
the above decision
, petitioner preferred Letters

     Patent Appeal i.e. Special Appeal No.740 of 1999 and obtained

     an interim order on 19.08.1999 staying the operation of the

     order of termination of his services. The petitioner, on the

     strength of the aforesaid order, continued to function as

     temporary Collection Peon. In view of his continued service,

     ignoring the fact that his services actually stood terminated

     and that he was working only under an interim order, the

     petitioner was promoted on 05.10.2009 on the post of

     Collection Amin by the District Selection Committee. The

     Special Appeal was unfortunately dismissed in default on

     25.08.2009. Consequent to the dismissal of the Special

     Appeal, a detailed order was passed by the Sub­Divisional

     Magistrate, Bharthana, on 01.03.2011 notifying that as the

     services of the petitioner had been terminated and the said
3
order has attained finality with the dismissal of the Special

     Appeal, consequently the promotion of the petitioner was

     meaningless. Accordingly, petitioner stood reverted to the post

     of Collection Peon and his service also stood determined as

     earlier.
7.   It may not be out of context to mention here that the petitioner

     after the dismissal of the Special Appeal, for want of

     prosecution, applied for recall of the order and the Special

     Appeal was restored on 11.03.2011 but again it was got

     dismissed as withdrawn vide order dated 15.04.2011. In short,

     the Special Appeal arising from the Writ Petition challenging

     the termination of the petitioner stood finally dismissed with

     no relief to the petitioner. The services of the petitioner as

     temporary Collection Peon accordingly stood determined as far

     back as on 30.11.1998 which order became final and

     conclusive.
8.   Consequent to the order of the Sub­Divisional Magistrate

     dated 01.03.2011 notifying termination of the services of the

     petitioner in the wake of the earlier termination order
4
becoming final, petitioner filed Writ Petition No.25718 of 2011

     challenging the same. The said Writ Petition was allowed by

     the learned Single Judge vide judgment and order dated

     31.10.2012 observing that the promotion granted to the

     petitioner was not hedged by any condition, therefore, once the

     petitioner had been promoted from the temporary post of

     Collection Peon to the post of Collection Amin, his services

     were not liable to be treated as determined.
9.   The aforesaid order of the learned Single Judge was assailed

     by the State of UP & others by means of Special Appeal

     Defective No.392 of 2013 and the same has been allowed by

     the order impugned dated 04.09.2017 on the ground that the

     learned Single Judge had failed to appreciate that the

     continuance of the petitioner as temporary Collection Peon

     and his consequential promotion as Collection Amin was only

     on the basis of the interim order operating in the Special

     Appeal though the services of the petitioner stood terminated.

     The court further observed that once the services of the

     petitioner stood terminated on 30.11.1998 and the Writ
5
Petition challenging the same had been dismissed as also the

    Special Appeal thereof, the petitioner went out of service and

    the very continuance of service of the petitioner on the

    strength of interim order which merged in the final order of

    dismissal of Special Appeal, lost all significance.
10. The submission of learned senior counsel for the petitioner

    Shri Parthiv K. Goswami is that the person who has continued

    for so long, may be in view of the interim order operating in his

    favour, cannot be thrown out in a cursory manner when a

    conscious decision had been taken to promote him as

    Collection Amin. Defending the impugned order, Shri Tanmaya

    Agarwal, learned counsel for the respondents had submitted

    that once the very foundation on which the petitioner was

    working    had   gone,    his       continuance   in   service   and

    consequential promotion is of no effect. The petitioner has no

    right to continue in service either as Collection Amin or as

    temporary Collection Peon after his termination was held to be

    valid and was not interfered with by the courts.
6
11. The facts, as narrated above, clearly establish that the

     petitioner was appointed simply as a temporary Collection

     Peon and his services were determined simpliciter within three

     years vide order dated 30.11.1998. The said order, terminating

     the services of the petitioner, is final and conclusive. It has not

     been disturbed by any court of law. However, the petitioner

     continued to function as temporary Collection Peon on the

     strength of an interim order passed in Special Appeal which

     was ultimately dismissed. Therefore, any promotion given to

     the petitioner consequent to his continuance in service on the

     strength of the interim order would automatically fall to the

     ground once the Special Leave Petition is dismissed and the

     termination order attains finality.
12. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, we are of the

     opinion that the view expressed by the Division Bench of the

     High Court in allowing the appeal, is well within the four

     corners of law which order does not suffer from any material

     illegality or irregularity. The Division Bench has rightly set

     aside the judgment and order of the learned Single Judge
7
dated 31.10.2012 by which the writ petition was allowed in

    complete ignorance of the fact that the services of the

    petitioner stood determined long back and that the petitioner

    is not entitled to any benefit on the basis of his subsequent

    promotion which automatically falls with the termination

    attaining finality. Accordingly, we find no merit in the Special

    Leave Petition and the same is dismissed, however, the

    respondents shall not initiate any recovery of the salary drawn

    by the petitioner for the period he has actually worked.
……………………….. J.
(ABHAY S. OKA)




                                             ……………………….. J.
(PANKAJ MITHAL)
NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 29, 2023.
8