[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Moorthy vs State Of Tamil Nadu Rep. By The Secretary on 18 August, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
,
Abhay S. Oka
2023INSC739


                                                           NON­REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.975 of 2011

                            Moorthy                             …..Appellant

                                                  Versus

                            State of Tamil Nadu              …..Respondent


                                            JUDGMENT
Abhay S. Oka, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1.   The appellant was convicted for the offences
                            punishable under
Sections 302
and
201
of the
                            Indian Penal Code (for short, ‘
IPC
’).      He was
                            sentenced to undergo life imprisonment for the
                            offence punishable under
Section 302
and rigorous
                            imprisonment for seven years for the offence
                            punishable under
Section 201
, IPC.      Sentences
                            were ordered to run concurrently.     The appeal
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
preferred by the appellant has been dismissed by
   Anita Malhotra

                            the High Court by the impugned judgment.
   Date: 2023.08.18
   16:47:01 IST
   Reason:
Crl.A.No.975 of 2011
Page 1 of 11
2.      The deceased Shanthi was the wife of the
               appellant. According to the prosecution case, the
               appellant suspected that the deceased had illicit
               intimacy with one Peethambaram.          On 29 th May
               2006 at about 9:00 p.m., the appellant took the
               deceased to the bank of Ponnai River and assaulted
               her with a stick. The said Shanthi succumbed to
               the injuries. He buried the dead body in the same
               place. PW Nos.3 and 4 are the parents of the
               deceased who were enquiring with the appellant
               about the whereabouts of the deceased. However,
               the appellant told them that the deceased was
               missing.
3.      The prosecution relied upon the extra­judicial
               confession made by the appellant before PW­1
               Ganesan     Perumal    in    the   presence   of     PW­2
               Tyagarajan Kannan.          Secondly, the prosecution
               relied upon the recovery of the dead body and the
               stick allegedly used as a weapon of assault at the
               instance of the appellant. Thirdly, according to the
               prosecution, the skeleton was identified by PW
               nos.3 and 4 on the basis of the clothes thereon.
SUBMISSIONS
4.  The main submission of the learned counsel
               appearing for the appellant is that PW nos.1 and 2
Crl.A.No.975 of 2011
Page 2 of 11
were       complete        strangers          to   the         appellant.
Moreover, the alleged extra­judicial confession was
               made by the appellant before the said two witnesses
               2 months and 11 days after the date of the
               incident.       The learned counsel further submitted
               that the conduct of PW­1 who was the Village
               Administrative Officer, does not inspire confidence
               as he immediately did not report the matter to the
               police. The learned counsel further submitted that
               the      identity     of   the     body/skeleton               was    not
               established.        He submitted that recourse was not
               taken to DNA test for identification of the skeleton.
               He      also   submitted         that    there       is    a    material
               discrepancy in the evidence of PW­18 Investigating
               Officer and PW­1 about the place from which the
               stick, which was the weapon of offence, was
               discovered.         He pointed out that PW nos.8 to 11
               who were cited as witnesses to support the theory
               of      last   seen    together,        did    not        support     the
               prosecution.
5.        Dr. Joseph Aristotle, the learned counsel
               appearing for the State submitted that there are no
               major discrepancies and contradictions in the
               version of PW nos.1 and 18.                    He submitted that
               though PW­8 was declared as hostile, his evidence
Crl.A.No.975 of 2011
Page 3 of 11
cannot be discarded in its entirety.        He placed
               reliance on a decision of this Court in the case of
Rameshbhai Mohanbhai Koli & Ors. v. State of
               Gujarat1
. He submitted that the discovery of the
               dead body at the instance of the appellant is a very
               important circumstance against the accused.
He
               relied upon a decision of this Court in the case of
Anuj Kumar Gupta v. State of Bihar2
.
OUR VIEW
6.      Firstly, we will deal with the prosecution case
               about the extra­judicial confession.       As regards
               extra­judicial confession, the law has been
laid
               down by
this Court in the case of
Pawan Kumar
               Chourasia v. State of Bihar3
. In paragraph 5 it is
               held thus :
“5. As far as extra­judicial confession is
                       concerned, the law is well settled.
                       Generally, it is a weak piece of
                       evidence. However, a conviction can
                       be sustained on the basis of extra­
                       judicial confession provided that the
                       confession is proved to be voluntary
                       and truthful. It should be free of any
                       inducement. The evidentiary value of
                       such confession also depends on the

         1 (2011) 11 SCC 111
         2 (2013) 12 SCC 383
         3 2023 SCC OnLine SC 259
Crl.A.No.975 of 2011
Page 4 of 11
person to whom it is made. Going by
                        the natural course of human conduct,
                        normally, a person would confide
                        about a crime committed by him only
                        with such a person in whom he has
                        implicit faith. Normally, a person
                        would not make a confession to
                        someone who is totally a stranger to
                        him. Moreover, the Court has to be
                        satisfied with the reliability of the
                        confession    keeping   in   view   the
                        circumstances in which it is made. As a
                        matter of rule, corroboration is not
                        required. However, if an extra­judicial
                        confession is corroborated by other
                        evidence on record, it acquires more
                        credibility.”
                                       (emphasis added)
7.       We have perused the evidence of PW­1
               Ganesan        who       was      posted     as     the       Village
               Administrative          Officer     at   the      time       of   the
               commission         of    the      offence.        He     was      not
               permanently posted in Village Seekkarajapuram as
               he stated that at the time of recording of evidence,
               he was transferred as Village Administrative Officer
               to      Ranipet.        PW­1      admitted     in      the    cross­
               examination that he did not know the appellant
               before he came to him and allegedly made the
               extra­judicial confession.           The incident is of 29 th
               May 2006 but the alleged extra­judicial confession
               was made on 10th August 2006. It is impossible to
Crl.A.No.975 of 2011
Page 5 of 11
understand why would the appellant meet the
               Village Administrative Officer, who was a total
               stranger to him, more than two months after the
               incident for making a confession.     PW­1 and the
               appellant were not known to each other till 10 th of
               August 2006.      Normally an accused will confide
               only with a person in whom he has implicit faith.
               He would not go to a stranger to make a confession
               of guilt.   The fact that the alleged confession was
               made by him more than two months after the
               incident makes it more suspicious.
8.      PW­1 claims that he recorded the statement
               of the appellant and took a thumb impression of
               the appellant. There is no evidence adduced by the
               prosecution to prove the thumb impression. PW­1
               claims that after making the confession, the
               appellant took him to the place of the incident
               which is located near the railway overbridge on the
               bank of the river Ponnai.    PW­1 did not take the
               appellant to the police station after the alleged
               confession was made. He admittedly did not inform
               the police immediately after recording the alleged
               extra­judicial confession.    PW­1 claims that he
               visited the place of incident with the appellant who
               showed him the scene of the alleged offence. Only
Crl.A.No.975 of 2011
Page 6 of 11
thereafter he took the appellant to the police. It is
               also pertinent to note that in his cross­examination,
               PW­1 admitted that there were 6­7 huts near the
               place of residence of the appellant and the families
               residing therein belonged to the same caste as that
               of the appellant. Thus, there were people around
               before whom the appellant could have confessed.
9.       PW­2 was working as an Assistant with PW­
1.      He has deposed on the same lines as PW­1.
               However, it is not the case of the prosecution that
               the appellant confided with PW­2. He was present
               when the appellant allegedly made an extra­judicial
               confession and was recorded by PW­1. He stated
               that he along with PW­1 were taken by the
               appellant to the place where he committed murder
               and buried the body.        He claimed in the cross­
               examination that he knew the appellant before the
               incident but the appellant did not confide before
               him.
10.      Extra­judicial confession is always a weak
               piece of evidence and in this case, for the reasons
               which we have recorded earlier, there is serious
               doubt about the genuineness of the prosecution
               case      regarding   the   extra­judicial   confession.
               Therefore, the prosecution case about the extra­
Crl.A.No.975 of 2011
Page 7 of 11
judicial confession does not deserve acceptance.
11.     Now we consider the evidence of PW­18 who
               is the Investigating Officer. He stated that the dead
               body was found at a depth of 2 ft. after digging. He
               stated in the cross­examination that the stick
               allegedly used by the appellant as a weapon of
               assault was recovered from a bush at a distance of
               50 feet from the place where the dead body was
               found. He accepted in the cross­examination that
               none    of   the   relatives   had   lodged   a   missing
               complaint.
12.     As far as the alleged recovery of the dead
               body at the instance of the appellant is concerned,
               we must note that the dead body was recovered
               from a place which was accessible to all.          A day
               prior to the alleged discovery at the instance of the
               appellant, PW nos.1 and 2 had gone to the place
               where the dead body was found. It is not the case
               of the prosecution that the place where the dead
               body was buried was accessible and known only to
               the appellant. This also raises serious doubt about
               the theory of the prosecution about the discovery of
               the body at the instance of the appellant.
Crl.A.No.975 of 2011
Page 8 of 11
13.     PW nos.3 and 4 have deposed mainly on the
               issue of the identity of the dead body as they were
               present    when     the   dead   body   was   recovered.
               However, the body had decomposed and only the
               skeleton was exhumed. In the cross­examination,
               PW­3 Rajagopalan, the father of the deceased,
               stated that the appellant came to him one month
               prior to the date of knowledge of the murder of his
               daughter.        PW­3 stated that at that time the
               appellant asked him whether he had murdered the
               deceased. He stated that the appellant went to the
               police station to lodge a complaint. PW­3 accepted
               that he did not search for his daughter and did not
               file any missing complaint. This conduct of PW­3 is
               not natural.
14.     If we peruse the evidence of PW­1 and PW­18,
               the recovery of the weapon of the offence at the
               instance    of    the   appellant   becomes   extremely
               doubtful. PW­1 deposed that the stick was buried
               1 ft deep in the river bank about 5 ft away towards
               the west of the place in which the body was buried.
               However, PW­18 stated that the stick was recovered
               from a bush at a distance of about 50 ft. on the
               north of the place where the dead body was buried.
               This also makes the prosecution case vulnerable as
Crl.A.No.975 of 2011
Page 9 of 11
far as the discovery of the stick at the instance of
               the appellant is concerned.
15.     Though the respondent tried to rely upon the
               evidence of PW­8 who has been declared hostile, we
               find that he had made a general statement that he
               had seen the appellant and deceased together two
               years    back.    Moreover,   the   other   witnesses
               examined to prove the last seen together theory
               were declared hostile. Thus, the prosecution could
               not establish the last seen together theory.
16.     There is serious doubt about the genuineness
               of the prosecution case regarding the recovery of a
               dead body at the instance of the appellant and the
               recovery of the alleged instrument of the offence at
               the instance of the appellant. Most importantly, for
               the reasons we have recorded earlier, it is not
               possible to accept the case of the prosecution which
               is entirely based on the extra­judicial confession
               made by the appellant.     Thus, there was no legal
               evidence on record to convict the appellant. In any
               case, the guilt of the appellant has not been proved
               beyond a reasonable doubt.
17.     Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.         The
               judgment and order dated 31st March 2008 passed
               by the Court of Additional District and Sessions
Crl.A.No.975 of 2011
Page 10 of 11
Judge in Sessions Case No.24 of 2008 as well as
               the impugned judgment and order dated 28th
               January 2009 passed by the High Court of
               Judicature at Madras in Criminal Appeal No.394 of
               2008 are hereby set aside and the appellant is
               acquitted of the offences alleged against him.
18.     As the appellant is on bail, his bail bonds
               stand cancelled.
……………………………J.
                                          [ABHAY S. OKA]


                                          ..…………………………J.
                                          [SANJAY KAROL]

               New Delhi
               August 18, 2023.
Crl.A.No.975 of 2011
Page 11 of 11