[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Pradyuman Bisht vs Union Of India on 11 August, 2023
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
,
S. Ravindra Bhat
NON-REPORTABLE
2023 INSC 706
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                CRIMINAL/CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                 WRIT PETITION (CRL.) NO. 99/2015

     PRADYUMAN BISHT                                                           …PETITIONER

                                                      VS.

     UNION OF INDIA & ORS                                                    …RESPONDENTS

                                                      With

     Contempt Petition (C) No. 353/2020 in Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 99/2015
     Special Leave Petition (C) No. 2952/2020
     Suo Moto Writ (Crl.) No. 2/2021
     Writ Petition (C) No. 867/2021
     Writ Petition (C) No. 1422/2019


                                                  ORDER
1.             Would not hope for the litigants who visit the temples of justice dwindle, if

                  the very halls of justice lack the shield of security? How can the litigants

                  secure justice for them when those entrusted to render justice are

                  themselves insecure? These are questions which disturb us to no end,

                  considering certain recent happenings involving firing of gun shots within

                  the precincts of courts in India.
2.             It is appalling that court premises in the national capital itself, in the past
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
satish kumar yadav
17:35:30 IST
Reason:
year or so, have witnessed at least three major incidents of gunfire.
   Date: 2023.08.11




                  Preserving the sanctity of a court as a space where justice is administered
1
and the rule of law upheld being non-negotiable, it is critical that judicial

     institutions take comprehensive steps to safeguard the well-being of all

     stakeholders. Such incidents, that too in court premises, are deeply

     concerning and pose significant risks to the safety of not only judges but

     lawyers, court staff, litigants and the general public.
3.   We are also not oblivious of another incident of not too distant an origin. On

     28th July, 2021, tragically, an Additional Sessions Judge posted at Dhanbad

     in the state of Jharkhand was hit by an auto-rickshaw while taking a

     morning walk and he succumbed to his injuries. It is suspected that the

     incident is not merely a hit and run incident, but there is something more

     than what meets the eyes. However, since the proceedings are not finally

     concluded, we refrain from dilating on such incident. Suffice it to note that

     lives of judges, off the court, of late are also not entirely safe and secure.
4.   Countless incidents of lapses in court security have occurred where the

     safety of witnesses and court records have been jeopardized. It is,

     therefore, essential that security protocols and measures be implemented

     and strictly enforced to prevent such incidents from occurring in the first

     place.
5.   We are also conscious of the fact that lapses in court security have often

     occurred in court complexes despite such courts having modern security

     measures in place including CCTV cameras. This is indicative of the fact that

     systemic measures are necessary to maintain the faith of all stakeholders

     in the judicial system. To our mind, mere installation of CCTV cameras may

     not be enough and something more is required in public interest to check
2
activities which compromise the safety and security of all stakeholders of

     the justice delivery system, particularly in court complexes. However, this

     does not undermine the importance of immediate measures that need to be

     carried out by the relevant authorities to address immediate issues while

     the wheels of long-term solutions are set in motion.
6.   We are presently seized of a contempt petition filed by the petitioner arising

     out of alleged wilful and deliberate violation of this Court’s orders1 in Writ

     Petition (Criminal) No. 99/2015, whereby various directions were issued by

     this Court related to the installation of CCTV cameras in court complexes.

     It is noted that the writ petition is pending.
7.   We are concerned with the following two issues which have been posed

     before us by the petitioner by instituting the writ petition in public interest:
a) Installation of CCTV cameras and other measures to ensure security

          within court premises; and
b) Audio-visual facility to record evidence and testimonies during trial.
8.   The issues raised, in the present-day scenario, are indeed serious and have

     far-reaching consequences. We have heard several learned senior counsel

     and counsel appearing on behalf of parties. Various suggestions/status

     reports from the High Courts and other stakeholders across the country,

     which have since been received, were looked into. We have also taken on

     record the report submitted to us by the Amicus Curiae Mr Siddharth Luthra,

     learned senior counsel, who has by his painstaking efforts prepared a
1
Dated 28th March, 2017, 14th August, 2017, 23rd November, 2017, 13th February, 2018, and 5th
April, 2018
3
comprehensive report considering the concerns and comments of various

      stakeholders.
9.    It was, inter alia, suggested that there is a need to establish a consistent

      dialogue with the respective State Governments in order to ensure timely

      disbursement of funds and other assistance; these are underlying systemic

      concerns, and if left unaddressed, will stall the implementation of security

      measures. Further, several security measures such as the issuance of court

      identity cards, installation of CCTV cameras and baggage scanners,

      regulation   of   footfall   in   court   complexes,   deployment   of   security

      personnel/relevant officers, and introducing other emergency measures

      were also suggested.
10.   Since safety and security of stakeholders in the judicial process is non-
negotiable, we deem it appropriate considering the aforesaid suggestions

      and having regard to the concerns and their larger ramifications which have

      been highlighted above, to lay down the following guidelines in the interest

      of justice in furtherance of the previous orders of this Court referred to

      above:
Security Measures
a) There ought to be a security plan in place, in line with the

          recommendations herein, to be prepared by the High Courts in

          consultation with the Principal Secretaries, Home Departments of each

          State Government and the Director Generals of Police of the

          States/Union Territories or the Commissioners of Police wherever a

          court complex is within the jurisdiction of a Police Commissionerate, as
4
the case may be, which should be timely implemented at the state &

  district levels covering District Headquarters and other courts in

  outlying areas as well.
b) The security plan may include proposal for setting up of permanent

  Court Security Unit(s) in each complex, indicating the strength and

  source of drawing of manpower including armed/unarmed personnel

  and supervisory officer(s) for each such unit, the minimum term and

  mode of deployment of such manpower, list of duties and additional

  financial benefits for such manpower, as may be offered to secure their

  willingness to serve in such Units, special modules for training and

  sensitizing   such   manpower   in     matters   of   Court   security,   and

  miscellaneous matters related to such Units;
c) The schematics of CCTV camera installation will have to be laid down

  on a district-wise basis where the respective State Governments should

  provide the requisite funds for the execution of such a plan in a timely

  manner.
d) In newly constructed court complexes, there appears to be a lack of

  consistency regarding the installation of CCTV cameras, whether it

  should be done before or after inauguration. We emphasize that the

  installation of CCTV cameras should be an integral part of the

  construction project of courts, and therefore should be prioritized.
e) To address concerns regarding data and privacy, as rightly highlighted

  by Mr Luthra, the High Courts may take appropriate measures or draft

  necessary guidelines in this regard.
5
f) Further, upon the finalisation of the security plan, the High Courts may

   entrust the responsibility of installation and maintenance of the CCTV

   cameras with the concerned District and Sessions Judges for a more

   realistic analysis of local requirements.
g) Keeping in mind the lax security measures at entry-exit points within

   several court complexes, we deem it necessary to recommend that

   these points may be secured by constant monitoring with the help of

   adequate security equipment. In this regard, the courts may consider

   putting in place security measures such as deployment of adequate

   police   personnel,   security   stickers   for   vehicles,   frisking,   metal

   detectors, baggage scanners, court-specific entry passes, and biometric

   devices to enhance overall security. Other security measures may

   include regulating the use of court premises as thoroughfares, if

   necessary, even by way of total prohibition.
h) There have been various concerns regarding the operation of various

   shops and vendors within court premises which may result in potential

   security lapses. In this regard, the relevant authorities may keep a strict

   check on the relevant permissions required for their continued

   operations.
i) It may be ensured that emergency measures like ambulances, medical

   facilities and firefighting services are immediately available and

   modernised within court complexes and unimpeded access of such

   vehicles to the premises is assured at all times. This includes ensuring
6
unhindered movement and keeping the court complex vicinity free from

          traffic and parking congestion.
11.   We now turn to digitisation of judicial infrastructure.
Digitisation of Judicial Infrastructure:
a) This Court has, on multiple occasions, stressed the need for digitisation

          of judicial infrastructure, particularly at district levels. We have been

          apprised that at present, there are many courts which lack facilities to

          live stream court proceedings as well as facilities to record trials. We

          desire that these issues are looked into, in the right earnest by the High

          Courts.
b) With a futuristic vision, we need to progress with implementing fresh

          and innovative ideas so that the possibility of any untoward incident in

          any court premises is avoided. Initiatives like Audiovisual (AV)

          technology/Videoconferencing (VC) facility for recording of evidence

          and testimonies in trial, live-streaming of court proceedings at all levels,

          establishing e-SEWA Kendras, particularly in remote areas may also be

          considered accordingly.
12.   We leave it to the discretion of the Chief Justices of the High Courts to

      decide, looking at the concerns related to safety and security within Court

      complexes, if the matter of addressing such concerns is to be delegated to

      the respective State Court Management Systems Committee or to a

      specially constituted committee with members drawn from various quarters

      (such as judges/judicial officers, the civil and police administration, the

      municipal corporations/municipalities, the members of the bar, the
7
members of the registry and the staff, etc.), as the case may be. It has not

      escaped our notice that many of these court management system

      committees, which were envisaged to ensure better management of courts

      and cases, have largely been dysfunctional. While we are not presently

      called upon to scrutinise the functioning of the court management system

      committees, we nonetheless deem it expedient to observe that the services

      of these committees could be of utility since it is court management which

      is under consideration.
13.   While the pandemic caused by COVID-19 has accelerated the penetration

      of technology in courts, considerable work needs to be yet accomplished,

      particularly at the district and the taluka levels. Hopeful of the aforesaid

      recommendations paving the way for securing the safety of all stakeholders

      as well as facilitating safe environment for fair, free and effective access to

      justice and progress of trial without any party/witness being under fear of

      being harmed, we impress upon the High Courts to prioritize these issues

      and take appropriate measures at the earliest, if not already taken.
14.   It is trite to mention that various High Courts and other court complexes

      have already in place several measures including installation of CCTV

      cameras    at   all   tiers.   We,   therefore,   make   it   clear   that   these

      recommendations are only meant for those courts which are yet to put in

      place adequate measures for tackling any untoward incident.
15.   We are also very well aware that there have been multiple directions issued

      by this Court on several previous occasions. However, failure in their timely

      implementation has given rise to the incidents noted at the beginning of
8
this   order.   Resultantly,   we   find   it   necessary   to   reiterate   our

      recommendations, however broadly, in order to expedite enforcement of

      suitable security measures including the installation of CCTV cameras within

      court premises as well as the long-pending issue of digitization of the courts.
16.   Copies of this order shall be furnished by the registry to the Registrar

      General of each of the High Courts for being placed before the respective

      Chief Justices. Further, the High Courts shall ensure that periodic monthly

      reports are placed before the Chief Justice regarding availability of the

      measures and their updated status for timely corrective intervention.
17.   Preliminary action-taken reports on the aspect of security measures as well

      as digitisation in line with the aforesaid guidelines may be filed by the High

      Courts by 10th October, 2023.
18.   List the writ petitions together with the contempt petition and other

      connected matters for further consideration on 12th October, 2023.
……………………………,J.
(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)



                                                           .……………………………,J.
(DIPANKAR DATTA)

 New Delhi;
11TH August, 2023.
9