[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs K. Pushpavanam on 11 August, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
,
Abhay S. Oka
2023 INSC 701


                                                                         NON­REPORTABLE

                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                            CIVIL APPEAL NO.5049 OF 2023
                                 (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 478 of 2022)



                            Union of India & Ors.                              … Appellants


                                                             v.


                            K. Pushpavanam & Ors.                            ... Respondents




                                                      J U D G M E N T
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1.      Leave granted.
2.      This appeal takes exception to the judgment and order
                            dated 17th August 2021 passed by the High Court of Madras
                            at Madurai Bench in a writ petition filed by the first
                            respondent. A petition was filed by the first respondent
Signature Not Verified
seeking a writ of mandamus in the following terms:
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2023.08.11
16:17:57 IST
Reason:
Special Leave Petition (C) No.478 of 2022                                            Page 1 of 11
“…….Therefore I most respectfully pray
                              that this Hon'ble Court may be pleased to
                              direct the Respondent No.1 to appoint the
                              Chairman and other members of the 22nd
                              Law Commission constituted through the
                              notification   in   number      F.    No.A­
                              45012/1/2018­Admn.       Ill   (LA)   dated
                              21.02.2020 in accordance with law within
                              the time stipulated by this Hon'ble Court.
Therefore I most respectfully pray that
                              this Hon'ble Court may be pleased to
                              issue writ of mandamus or any other Writ
                              or direction or order in nature of writ,
                              directing the respondents, to propose a
                              comprehensive legislation in the field of
                              'Torts and State Liability' as per the
                              directions of Hon'ble Supreme Court of
                              India in "
MCD V. Uphaar Tragedy Victims
                              Assn
(2011) 14 SCC 481” and “Vadadora
                              Municipal Corporation V. Purshotam v
                              Murjani and Others (2014) 16 SCC 14” in
                              accordance with law within the lime
                              stipulated by this Hon'ble Court………..”
3.       Before the writ petition filed by the first respondent was
            taken up for final hearing, following queries were made by the
            High Court to the respondents in the writ petition (appellants
            herein). The said queries read thus :­
Special Leave Petition (C) No.478 of 2022                                         Page 2 of 11
“(a)     In     how    many     judgments,    the
                              Constitutional Courts have recommended
                              for enactment of new laws or amendments
                              of the existing Acts, so far?
(b) How many orders have been acted
                              upon          and   suitable   Acts/Rules     and
                              amendments to the existing Acts, have
                              been done so far and what are all the new
                              Acts/Rules and the amendments made so
                              far?
(c) How many judgments are being acted
                              upon and suitable Acts/ Amendments are
                              in the process of enactment?
(d) When will the Parliament will bring a
                              comprehensive suitable legislation in the
                              field of 'Torts and State Liability' for
                              violation of fundamental rights of the
                              citizens at the hands of the State and its
                              officials?
(e)    Whether        the   Central   and    State
                              Governments           are   having    appropriate
Wings to note down the judgments/orders
                              of the Constitutional Courts, wherein
                              suggestions for enacting new Acts or
                              amendments have been enacted/proposed
                              or recommended?
Special Leave Petition (C) No.478 of 2022                                          Page 3 of 11
(f) If there is no such Wing, when such
                              Wing will be established to bring those
                              suggestions to the higher­ups or policy
                              makers to act upon suggestions given by
                              Courts?
(g) When does the Central Government
                              appoint Chairman and Members of 22nd
                              Law Commission of India?”
4.       After hearing the parties, by the impugned judgment,
            the Court issued the following directions:
(1) This Court directs the Government to
                              consider introducing a bill, similar to
                              which has been introduced in the year
                              1965 viz., "Liability in Tort" bill introduced
                              in 1965 and re­introduced 1967 and got
                              lapsed due to dissolution of Parliament
                              during 1970, taking into account the
                              present scenario, within a period of six
                              months.
(2) There shall be a direction to the
                              Central Government to take a decision
                              with regard to the suggestion for making
                              Law Commission either as a statutory
                              body or constitutional body within a
                              period of six months.
Special Leave Petition (C) No.478 of 2022                                      Page 4 of 11
(3) The Central Government shall allot
                              more funds to the Law Commission for
                              research and more infrastructures to Law
                              Commission of India at the earliest.
(4) The Respondents shall appoint the
                              Chairman      and    Members      of    Law
                              Commission of India within three months
                              from the date of receipt of a copy of this
                              order, failing which Respondents 1 & 3
                              shall appear before this Court.
(5) The Respondents shall appoint a
                              "Nodal Officer", who is well qualified in
                              law, in each department, to note down the
                              Courts' recommendations to bring to the
                              knowledge of the Policy­Makers of each
                              department by way of periodical reports
                              within a period of six months from the
                              date of receipt of copy of this order, so
                              that policy decision would be taken.”

            SUBMISSIONS
5.       Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned ASG urged in support of
            the Civil Appeal that the High Court has issued a writ of
            mandamus which in substance directs the legislature to
            legislate in a particular manner.          Her submission is that a
            writ court cannot compel the Central Government to take a
            decision on the question whether the Law Commission
Special Leave Petition (C) No.478 of 2022                                         Page 5 of 11
appointed by it should be conferred the status of either a
            constitutional body or a legislative body. She pointed out that
            as far as the 4th direction in the impugned judgment is
            concerned, the 22nd Law Commission has been constituted by
            a notification dated 9th November 2022 by appointing a retired
            Chief Justice of a High Court as the Chairperson and other
            members. Learned ASG pointed out that a compliance
            affidavit annexing a copy of the notification is filed on record.
6.       The learned counsel appearing for the first respondent
            submitted that in fact, the first direction issued by the High
            Court does not compel the legislature to legislate on the
            subject of “Liability in Tort”. It only directs consideration of
            the prayer made by the first respondent to enact such a law.
            Learned counsel further submitted that even the 2nd direction
            does not issue any writ of mandamus directing the legislature
            to legislate in a particular manner. Learned counsel relying
            upon various decisions submitted that the Constitutional
            Courts have always recommended that either a legislation
            should be made on a particular subject or the existing
            legislation         should      be    amended.    The    power    of   the
            Constitutional Court to make such recommendation has been
            consistently exercised by this Court. He gave illustrations in
            the form of several reported judgments of this Court. He
            submitted that if nodal officers, as directed in the 5 th direction
            are appointed, it will facilitate the Central Government to
            effectively         consider         recommendations    made     by    the
            Constitutional Courts on the issue of legislations. Therefore,
Special Leave Petition (C) No.478 of 2022                                                Page 6 of 11
the 5th direction cannot be faulted with. The learned counsel
            submitted that all five directions issued under the impugned
            judgment do not transgress the limits on exercise of
            jurisdiction of the High Court under
Article 226
of the
            Constitution of India. He pointed out that according to the
            appellants, the 4th direction has been complied with.           He
            relied upon several decisions of this Court in support of his
            submissions.
OUR VIEW
7.       We have given careful consideration to the submissions.
            The first respondent urged that it is necessary for the
            legislature to introduce a law dealing with “Liability in Tort”.
            On the basis of the prayer made by the first respondent, a
            direction has been issued to the Central Government to
            consider of introducing of a bill on the subject, and outer limit
            of six months has been fixed by the High Court.
8.       As far as the law of torts and liability thereunder of the
            State is concerned, the law regarding the liability of the State
            and individuals has been gradually evolved by Courts. Some
            aspects of it find place in statutes already in force.      It is a
            debatable issue whether the law of torts and especially
            liabilities under the law of torts should be codified by a
            legislation. A writ court cannot direct the Government to
            consider introducing a particular bill before the House of
            Legislature within a time frame. Therefore, the first direction
            issued under the impugned judgment was unwarranted.
Special Leave Petition (C) No.478 of 2022                                         Page 7 of 11
9.       As regards the 2nd direction, it must be remembered that
            when a litigant seeks a writ of mandamus, he must show a
            right existing in his favour and the corresponding obligation
            of the State to ensure that the litigant is able to exercise the
            said right. There is no right vested in the applicant to claim
            that the Law Commission set up by the Central Government
            should be given constitutional or statutory status.      21 Law
            Commissions have already functioned and submitted reports.
            Whether Law Commission should be given a status under the
            Constitution or under a Statute is a major policy decision to
            be taken by the Central Government. It is only the Central
            Government which can take a call on this issue. Therefore,
            the 2nd direction was uncalled for.
10.      As regards the 3rd direction, the prayer was pre­mature
            as when the writ petition was filed, 22nd Law Commission was
            not even constituted. Now, it has been constituted under the
            notification dated 9th November 2022. We have perused the
            notification dated 21st February 2020 under which the Central
            Government decided to constitute 22nd Law Commission. We
            have carefully perused the terms of reference of the 22 nd Law
            Commission. The terms of Reference are very wide which
            expect the Law Commission to make recommendations on
            various important aspects such as identification of obsolete
            laws, and identification of laws which are not in harmony
            with existing climate of economic liberalisation.        Another
            function is to suggest amendments to the existing laws. One
            of the important functions is to examine the laws which affect
Special Leave Petition (C) No.478 of 2022                                       Page 8 of 11
the poor and to carry out post­audit for socio­economic
            legislations. Another duty entrusted to the Law Commission is
            to revise Central Acts of general importance so as to simplify
            them and remove anomalies, ambiguities and inequities.
            Clause 9 of the said notification provides that the Commission
            may develop a partnership network with reputed Law
            Universities/Law Schools and policy research institutions in
            the      country         and    abroad.   Clause   10   empowers   the
            Commission to engage consultants/legal consultants for
            specific projects depending on the nature and urgency. There
            cannot be any doubt that if such vast functions are to be
            discharged by the 22nd Law Commission, it will require
            adequate monetary support in the form of grants. Unless
            adequate funds are provided, the Law Commission will not be
            able to discharge its functions. As and when the requisition is
            sent by the 22nd Law Commission for requisitioning funds, the
            Central Government will have to consider the said proposal
            and ensure that the Law Commission does not become
            ineffective on account of its failure to sanction adequate
            funds.
11.      As regards the 5th direction, whether a nodal officer
            should be appointed or not, is a matter to be decided by the
            Central Government. The Court cannot compel the Central
            Government to appoint a nodal officer. All the departments of
            the Government have adequate notice of the judgments of
            Constitutional Courts in which recommendations are made
Special Leave Petition (C) No.478 of 2022                                            Page 9 of 11
for the amendment of any legislation. Therefore, the 5th
            direction is unwarranted.
12.      The law regarding power of the writ court to issue a
            mandate to the legislature to legislate is well settled. No
            Constitutional Court can issue a writ of mandamus to a
            legislature to enact a law on a particular subject in a
            particular manner. The Court may, at the highest, record its
            opinion or recommendation on the necessity of either
            amending the existing law or coming out with a new law. The
            law has been laid down in this behalf in several decisions
            including a decision of this Court in the case of Supreme
            Court
Employees’ Welfare Association v. Union of India
            & Anr.1
and
State of Jammu and Kashmir v. A.R. Zakki
and others2 The only exception is where the Court finds that
            unless a rule making power is exercised, the legislation
            cannot be effectively implemented.
13.      In the light of the aforesaid discussion, we pass the
            following order :­

                         a. Directions 1, 2 and 5 are quashed and set aside.
However, the Central Government will treat the
                              said directions as recommendations made by the
                              Court;
1 (1989) 4 SCC 187
            2 (1992) Supp (1) SCC 548
Special Leave Petition (C) No.478 of 2022                                      Page 10 of 11
b. As and when the 22nd Law Commission submits
                              the requisition for grant of funds, the Central
                              Government will consider such requisition at the
                              earliest considering the importance of the tasks
                              assigned to the Law Commission.           The Central
                              Government      must      ensure   that    the       Law
                              Commission     does     not   become   ineffective    on
                              account of lack of funds;
c. The 4th direction has been already worked out, as
                              discussed above;
d. The impugned judgment and order is modified on
                              above terms and the writ petition filed by the first
                              respondent stands disposed of accordingly; and

                         e. Civil Appeal is, accordingly, allowed. There will be
                              no order as to costs.
………………..…….J.
                                                             (Abhay S. Oka)

                                                             ..………………..…...J.
                                                             (Sanjay Karol)

            New Delhi;
August 11, 2023.
Special Leave Petition (C) No.478 of 2022                                                Page 11 of 11