[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Satbir Singh vs The State Of Haryana on 29 August, 2023
1


2023INSC786
                                                                                                REPORTABLE
                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                           CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.     OF 2023
                                          (@ OUT OF SLP(Crl.) No.1258/2022)

        SATBIR SINGH                                                                         Appellant(s)

                                                            VERSUS

        STATE OF HARYANA & ORS.                                                             Respondent(s)

                                                       J U D G M E N T
AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH, J.
Heard learned counsel appearing for the parties.
2.                  Leave granted.
3.                  The present appeal has been filed against the order dated

        14.12.2021 in CRMM No.40058/2021 (hereinafter referred to as

        the “Impugned Order”) passed by the High Court of Punjab &

        Haryana at Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as the “High

        Court”), by which the prayer for recall of the appellant as a

        witness                   in    the    trial    before       the   Court    below    for   further

        examination has been rejected.
4.                  The   brief       facts    relating       to   the     case   are   that    the

        appellant made a complaint against the accused that they,

        being ex-employees of his company, had stolen company data and
Signature Not Verified
used
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
such      data    to   manufacture        equipment,     which     was   being
Date: 2023.09.01
16:49:09 IST
Reason:
manufactured by the appellant’s company. During trial, before

        the                 Report     from     the    Central       Forensic    Sciences     Laboratory,
2
Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as “CFSL”) could come, the

evidence of the appellant was recorded. However, when the CFSL

expert who had prepared the Report was examined on 20.08.2021

by the Court, though he described the data which was found on

the hard disk(s) of the accused, but there was no reference as

to whether they were comparable to/same in regard to what was

allegedly stolen from the appellant’s company. Thus, under the

circumstances, the appellant was constrained to apply for his

recall as a witness, which was done within five days of the

evidence   of   the   CFSL   expert   being   recorded   i.e.,   on

25.08.2021. The same having been rejected, by the Trial Court

and the High Court, the matter is before this Court.
5.   Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that there

was no previous occasion for him during the course of the

trial to put any question with regard to comparison of data as

the CFSL expert had clearly taken a stand that he had not

submitted any report with regard to the comparison of the two

sets of data. It was submitted that the comparison of the two

sets of data was the main essence of the complaint and without

the same, the trial itself would be reduced to a farce.
6.   He further submitted that the courts erred in reckoning

the delay counting it from the date of first lodging of the

complaint though the same should have been considered from the

date the cause of action arose i.e., on 20.08.2021, and the
3
application was filed on 25.08.2021.
7.     Learned counsel for respondents no.2 to 9 submitted that

the appellant is only indulging in dilatory tactics as he has

every opportunity to make submissions, as he deems fit, during

arguments        which      are    yet     to    be    concluded.        Learned       counsel

further contented that the appellant cannot be, and should not

be allowed to, fill up the lacunae left in the earlier round,

at the current stage.
8.     Learned counsel for the State joined the proceedings via

video-conferencing.
9.
Section       3111
of    the     Code       of   Criminal      Procedure,         1973

(hereinafter         referred        to    as    the       “
CrPC
”)     has    engaged       this

Court’s attention before. We will advert to a few decisions of

recent vintage. While overturning an order of the High Court

allowing an application for recall of a witness, which was

rejected by the trial Court, this Court held as under, in
Ratanlal v Prahlad Jat
, (2017) 9 SCC 340:
‘17.In order to enable the court to find out the
      truth and render a just decision, the salutary provi-
      sions of Section 311 are enacted whereunder any court
      by exercising its discretionary authority at any stage
      of inquiry, trial or other proceeding can summon any
      person as witness or examine any person in attendance
      though not summoned as a witness or recall or re-
1
311. Power to summon material witness, or examine person present.—Any Court may, at any
stage of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code, summon any person as a witness, or
examine any person in attendance, though not summoned as a witness, or recall and re-examine any
person already examined; and the Court shall summon and examine or recall and re-examine any
such person if his evidence appears to it to be essential to the just decision of the case.
4
examine any person already examined who are expected
to be able to throw light upon the matter in dispute.
The object of the provision as a whole is to do
justice not only from the point of view of the accused
and the prosecution but also from the point of view of
an orderly society. This power is to be exercised only
for strong and valid reasons and it should be exer-
cised with caution and circumspection. Recall is not a
matter of course and the discretion given to the court
has to be exercised judicially to prevent failure of
justice. Therefore, the reasons for exercising this
power should be spelt out in the order.
18. In Vijay Kumar v.State of U.P.[Vijay Kumar
v.State of U.P., (2011) 8 SCC 136 : (2011) 3 SCC (Cri)
371 : (2012) 1 SCC (L&S) 240], this Court while ex-
plaining scope and ambit of
Section 311
has held as
under: (SCC p. 141, para 17)
     “17.Though
Section 311
confers vast discretion
   upon the court and is expressed in the widest
   possible terms, the discretionary power under
   the said section can be invoked only for the
   ends of justice. Discretionary power should be
   exercised consistently with the provisions of
   [
CrPC
] and the principles of criminal law. The
   discretionary power conferred under
Section 311
has to be exercised judicially for reasons
   stated by the court and not arbitrarily or ca-
   priciously.”
19.In Zahira Habibullah Sheikh (5) v. State of Gu-
jarat [Zahira Habibullah Sheikh (5) v.State of Gu-
jarat, (2006) 3 SCC 374 : (2006) 2 SCC (Cri) 8] ,
this Court has considered the concept underlying un-
der
Section 311
as under: (SCC p. 392, para 27)
     “27.The object underlying
Section 311
of the
   Code is that there may not be failure of justice
   on account of mistake of either party in bring-
   ing the valuable evidence on record or leaving
   ambiguity in the statements of the witnesses ex-
   amined from either side. The determinative
   factor is whether it is essential to the just
   decision of the case. The section is not limited
   only for the benefit of the accused, and it will
   not be an improper exercise of the powers of the
   court to summon a witness under the section
   merely because the evidence supports the case of
5
the prosecution and not that of the accused. The
   section is a general section which applies to
   all proceedings, enquiries and trials under the
   Code and empowers the Magistrate to issue sum-
   mons to any witness at any stage of such pro-
   ceedings, trial or enquiry. In
Section 311
the
   significant expression that occurs is “at any
   stage of any inquiry or trial or other proceed-
   ing under this Code”. It is, however, to be
   borne in mind that whereas the section confers a
   very wide power on the court on summoning wit-
   nesses, the discretion conferred is to be exer-
   cised judiciously, as the wider the power the
   greater is the necessity for application of ju-
   dicial mind.”
20.In State (NCT of Delhi) v. Shiv Kumar Yadav
[State (NCT of Delhi
) v. Shiv Kumar Yadav, (2016) 2
SCC 402 : (2016) 1 SCC (Cri) 510], it was held thus:
(SCC pp. 404g-405a)
     “… Certainly, recall could be permitted if
   essential for the just decision, but not on
   such consideration as has been adopted in the
   present case. Mere observation that recall was
   necessary “for ensuring fair trial” is not
   enough unless there are tangible reasons to
   show how the fair trial suffered without re-
   call. Recall is not a matter of course and the
   discretion given to the court has to be exer-
   cised judiciously to prevent failure of justice
   and not arbitrarily. While the party is even
   permitted to correct its bona fide error and
   may be entitled to further opportunity even
   when such opportunity may be sought without any
   fault on the part of the opposite party, plea
   for recall for advancing justice has to be bona
   fide and has to be balanced carefully with the
   other relevant considerations including un-
   called for hardship to the witnesses and un-
   called for delay in the trial. Having regard to
   these considerations, there is no ground to
   justify the recall of witnesses already ex-
   amined.”
21. The delay in filing the application is one of
the important factors which has to be explained in
the application. In Umar Mohammad v. State of Ra-
jasthan [Umar Mohammad v.State of Rajasthan, (2007)
6
14 SCC 711 : (2009) 3 SCC (Cri) 244] , this Court has
    held as under: (SCC p. 719, para 38)
         “38. Before parting, however, we may notice
       that a contention has been raised by the
       learned counsel for the appellant that PW 1 who
       was examined in Court on 5-7-1994 purported to
       have filed an application on 1-5-1995 stating
       that five accused persons named therein were
       innocent. An application filed by him purported
       to be under
Section 311
of the Code of Criminal
       Procedure was rejected by the learned trial
       Judge by order dated 13-5-1995. A revision pe-
       tition was filed thereagainst and the High
       Court also rejected the said contention. It is
       not a case where stricto sensu the provisions
       of
Section 311
of the Code of Criminal Proced-
       ure could have been invoked. The very fact that
       such an application was got filed by PW 1 nine
       months after his deposition is itself a pointer
       to the fact that he had been won over. It is
       absurd to contend that he, after a period of
       four years and that too after his examination-
       in-chief and cross-examination was complete,
       would file an application on his own will and
       volition. The said application was, therefore,
       rightly dismissed.”’
10.
In
Manju Devi v State of Rajasthan
, (2019) 6 SCC 203, this

Court emphasized that a discretionary power like
Section 311
,

CrPC is to enable the Court to keep the record straight and to

clear   any   ambiguity   regarding   the   evidence,   whilst   also

ensuring no prejudice is caused to anyone.
A note of caution

was sounded in
Swapan Kumar Chatterjee v Central Bureau of

Investigation
, (2019) 14 SCC 328 as under:
‘10.The first part of this section which is per-
    missive gives purely discretionary authority to the
    criminal court and enables it at any stage of in-
    quiry, trial or other proceedings under the Code to
    act in one of the three ways, namely, (i) to summon
7
any person as a witness; or (ii) to examine any per-
      son in attendance, though not summoned as a witness;
      or (iii) to recall and re-examine any person already
      examined. The second part, which is mandatory, im-
      poses an obligation on the court (i) to summon and
      examine or (ii) to recall and re-examine any such
      person if his evidence appears to be essential to the
      just decision of the case.
11.It is well settled that the power conferred un-
      der
Section 311
should be invoked by the court only
      to meet the ends of justice. The power is to be exer-
      cised only for strong and valid reasons and it should
      be exercised with great caution and circumspection.
      The court has vide power under this section to even
      recall witnesses for re-examination or further exam-
      ination, necessary in the interest of justice, but
      the same has to be exercised after taking into con-
      sideration the facts and circumstances of each case.
      The power under this provision shall not be exercised
      if the court is of the view that the application has
      been filed as an abuse of the process of law.
12.Where the prosecution evidence has been closed
      long back and the reasons for non-examination of the
      witness earlier are not satisfactory, the summoning
      of the witness at belated stage would cause great
      prejudice to the accused and should not be allowed.
      Similarly, the court should not encourage the filing
      of successive applications for recall of a witness
      under this provision.’
11.
In
Harendra Rai v State of Bihar
, 2023 SCC OnLine SC

1023, a 3-Judge Bench of this Court was of the opinion that
Section 311
, CrPC should be invoked when ‘… it is essential

for the just decision of the case.’
12.   Having considered the matter and surveyed the law supra,

the Court finds that a case for interference has been made

out. Under the peculiar facts of the present case, the request

for   recall   of   the   appellant       under
Section   311
,   CrPC   was
8
justified, as at the relevant point of time in his initial

deposition,     there    was     no    occasion    for    him     to   bring    the

relevant     facts    relating    to    similarity       of    data    before   the

Court, which arose after the CFSL expert was examined.
13. Further, we find that if opportunity is given for re-
examination, respondents no.2 to 9 will not be prejudiced as

they   will    have     ample     opportunity       to        cross-examine     the

appellant. We have noted their apprehension apropos delay and

issued appropriate direction infra.
14. In view of the above, the appeal is allowed. The orders

of the Courts below are set aside. The application of the

appellant under
Section 311
, CrPC for his recall to be further

examined as a witness stands allowed. The same be done on a

date to be fixed by the Trial Court, within six weeks from

today. The trial will be brought to conclusion within 9 months

from   the     date     of     receipt       of   this    judgment.       Pending

applications are disposed of.
…………………………………………………J.
                                                     [AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]



                                                         …………………………………………………J.
                                                         [S.V.N. BHATTI]

NEW DELHI
AUGUST 29, 2023