[Cites
14
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Ramathal And Ors. vs K.Rajamani (Dead) Through Lrs And Anr. on 17 August, 2023
Author:
Vikram Nath
Bench:
Vikram Nath
2023INSC737




                                                                   REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8830 OF 2012



                            RAMATHAL & ORS.                 …APPELLANT(S)

                                                   VERSUS

                            K. RAJAMANI (DEAD)
                            THROUGH LRS & ANR.              …RESPONDENT(S)



                                              JUDGMENT
VIKRAM NATH, J.
1.   The present appeal by the plaintiffs assails the
                                 correctness of the judgment and order dated
                                 21.11.2008 passed by the Madurai Bench of the
                                 Madras High Court, whereby Second Appeal No.
                                 648 of 2002 titled
“N.Krishnasamy Mudaliar (D)
                                 and Ors. Vs. Ramathal and Ors.”
was allowed,
                                 after setting aside the judgement of the First
                                 Appellate Court, the order of the Trial Court was
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SONIA BHASIN
Date: 2023.08.18
11:25:47 IST
Reason:
1
restored, and the suit of the plaintiff (present
     appellant) was dismissed.
2.   The dispute relates to 110 cents of land at No.
     95, East Ayakudi Village, Palani, Tamil Nadu
     which originally belonged to the first plaintiff,
     Natchimuthu. He had executed a gift deed in
     favour of his first wife, Ramathal in respect of 50
     cents of land. The suit was filed jointly by
     Natchimuthu and his wife Ramathal, described
     as plaintiff nos. 1 and 2, respectively.
3.   In the same village Ayakudi, one Krishnasamy
     and his two sons, Rajamani and Sakthivelu, were
     also residing and were well known to the
     plaintiffs. The plaintiffs, being illiterate and
     having no other source of income, requested
     Rajamani to develop the land in suit into several
     plots after obtaining necessary permissions from
     the Government officials so that the said plots
     could be sold to generate revenue for the
     plaintiffs. In lieu of this service, they offered five
     cents of land as consideration to Rajamani.
2
4.   A Power of Attorney dated 05.09.1986 was
     executed in favour of Rajamani by the plaintiffs
     for the aforesaid purpose. The said deed was
     produced before the Registering Authority on
     17.09.1986 and was registered on 19.09.1986.
     According to the plaintiffs, Rajamani taking
     advantage of their illiteracy and simplicity, in
     addition to the purpose for which the plaintiffs
     had requested for executing the Power of
     Attorney, additionally got two more clauses
     added to it. Firstly, the Attorney would have the
     right to sell the property, and secondly, to make
     endorsements in the required documents for
     Patta transfer.
5.   On the date, the Power of Attorney was registered
     i.e.19.09.1986, Rajamani executed two sale
     deeds: one in favour of his father, Krishnasamy
     for 50 cents of land, and the other in favour of
     his younger brother, Sakthivelu for 50 cents of
     land. Both sale deeds were undervalued, as the
     sale consideration was shown to be Rs. 6,000/-
     per sale deed, and due stamp duty was paid
     thereon. However, as per the guideline value of
3
the property, the first sale ought to have been
     valued at Rs. 15,000/- and the second sale at Rs.
     7,500/-. In view of the deficiency of stamp duty
     on account of undervaluation, both documents
     were impounded by the authorities.
6.   Sometime in 1988, Krishnasamy and his two
     sons,   Rajamani      and    Sakthivelu,        started
     interfering with possession of the land in suit. It
     was only then that the plaintiffs came to know
     about the two sale deeds executed by Rajamani
     in favour of his father and brother. They also
     threatened the plaintiffs of initiating criminal
     proceedings against them. On 25.04.1991, the
     plaintiffs obtained a certified copy of the Power of
     Attorney, and soon thereafter, the plaintiffs came
     to know of the mischief committed by Rajamani
     for incorporating the power to sell, create
     mortgage, execute sale deed, settlement deed, gift
     deed,   exchange    deed    and   also     to    make
     endorsements for Patta transfer, and if needed,
     to divide the suit property into plots after
     obtaining layout approval from the concerned
     authority and to take further action thereof.
4
7.   The plaintiffs were thus compelled to initiate legal
     proceedings. They issued a legal notice through
     their counsel on 29.04.1991, which despite being
     served, no reply was given. In October 1991, the
     plaintiffs instituted a suit for declaration as the
     absolute owners of the suit properties and also
     for consequential relief of permanent injunction
     on the ground that there was misrepresentation
     in the General Power of Attorney. This was
     registered as Original Suit No. 839 of 1991 in the
     Court   of   the   District   Munsiff   at   Palani.
     Krishnasamy, the father, was arraigned as
     defendant no. 1, Rajamani, the Attorney, was
     arraigned as defendant no. 2 and Sakthivelu was
     arraigned as defendant no. 3. Defendant nos. 1
     and 2 only filed their written statements while
     Defendant no. 3 chose not to contest the suit,
     and no written statement was filed on his behalf.
8.   Both the parties led evidence, both documentary
     as well as oral. The Trial Court, vide judgment
     and order dated 06.01.1998, dismissed the suit
     relying upon the contents of the Power of
     Attorney to be genuine. It did not accept the plea
5
of the plaintiffs that defendant no. 2 had
      misrepresented      and        played   mischief    by
      incorporating the power to sell and other clauses
      of transfer of Patta etc., which according to the
      plaintiffs they had never authorised.
9.    The plaintiffs preferred a First Appeal before the
      Sub-Court at Palani which was registered as A.S.
      No. 28 of 1998. During the pendency of the
      appeal, the first plaintiff died and his legal heirs
      were brought on record. The First Appellate
      Court framed points for consideration including
      the point of non est factum and after due analysis
      and appreciation of the evidence, both oral and
      documentary, it came to the conclusion, that the
      contents    of   Power    of    Attorney    had    been
      fraudulently     incorporated     without   any    due
      authorisation only to deprive plaintiffs of their
      valuable rights. The appeal was allowed and the
      suit was decreed. The First Appellate Court
      recorded following findings:
(i).   The contents of the two sale deeds executed
            by the Attorney on the day of the registration
            of the Power of Attorney is a relevant fact
6
against the defendants and showed their
       conduct to be malicious.
(ii). The sale deeds had been undervalued and
       did not reflect the market value. Even the
       guideline value was not reflected as a result
       of which the sale deeds were impounded.
(iii). The deficient stamp duty was paid in 1995
       and 1997 to get the sale deeds regularised
       and be released, which was after nine and
       eleven years respectively from the date of its
       execution. This was also much later than
       institution of the suit by the plaintiffs in
       1991.
(iv). The sale consideration reflected in the sale
       deeds was also much less than the guideline
       value, and even if it was paid to the plaintiffs,
       it was not a reasonable consideration for the
       land in suit.
(v).   The defendants had taken undue advantage
       of their illiteracy and resourcefulness to
       deprive the plaintiffs of their valuable land,
       they    being   illiterate   and   simple   rustic
       villagers.
7
(vi). The revenue documents produced by the
       defendants     were    from      a   period,   post
       institution of the civil suit.
(vii). The original Power of Attorney was never
       produced, and it was alleged that the same
       had been lost.
(viii). The defendants failed to prove that the
       plaintiffs knowingly and willingly, having
       understood the contents of the Power of
       Attorney, had executed the same.
(ix). The principle of non est factum was decided
       in favour of the plaintiffs.
10. The judgement and order of the First Appellate
   Court dated 13.02.2002 was carried in Second
   Appeal before the High Court and was registered
   as Second Appeal No.648 of 2002. The High
   Court framed the following question of law:
“Whether the first appellate court, in the absence
   of any issue having been framed by the trial court
   or by itself and also in the absence of relevant
   pleadings concerning the plea of non est factum
   relating to Ex. A1, was justified in giving a finding
   in favour of the plaintiffs?” and decided the same
   in favour of the defendants.
8
11. The High Court was of the view that before the
    Trial Court, there was neither any pleading nor
    any issue was framed with regard to the plea of
    non est factum and as such the First Appellate
    Court committed an error in determining the
    said plea in favour of the plaintiffs. The High
    Court,    vide   judgement   dated   21.11.2008,
    accordingly allowed the appeal, and after setting
    aside the judgement of the First Appellate
    Court, restored the order of the Trial Court and
    dismissed the suit. Against the said order, the
    present appeal has been preferred by the
    plaintiffs.
12. We have heard learned counsel for the parties
   and perused the material on record.
13. The submissions of the learned counsel for the
   appellants are briefly summarised as under:
(i). The case of the plaintiffs, from the very
       beginning, was to the effect that they had
       only executed the Power of Attorney for the
       limited purpose of development of the land
9
by dividing it into smaller plots and to obtain
     necessary permissions from the authorities.
(ii). They had never executed the Power of
     Attorney authorizing the defendant no. 2 to
     sell, to create mortgage, to execute gift deed,
     settle the land in dispute or to sign the
     transfer of grant of Patta. Such clauses had
     been     mischievously          and   surreptitiously
     added by the defendant no. 2 taking undue
     advantage of the simplicity and illiteracy of
     the plaintiffs.
(iii). The   plaintiffs      never    handed    over   the
     possession of the land in dispute and
     throughout continued in possession of the
     same.
(iv). The conduct of the Attorney, defendant no.
2, in transferring the land to his own father
     and brother on the very day the Power of
     Attorney was registered shows that there was
     malice on the part of the Attorney. The
     defendant         no.      2     was      apparently
     apprehensive that in case if the plaintiffs
     came to know of the contents of the Power of
     Attorney, which authorises defendant no. 2
10
to sell the land, they would have cancelled it.
So, without taking any chances as any delay
               would frustrate his malicious intent, he
               executed the sale deed in favour of his own
               father and brother for a nominal amount.
(v). The        First   Appellate   Court   had   rightly
               determined the plea of non est factum as one
               of the points of consideration, which was
               based upon the pleadings and did not require
               any specific issue to be framed but the same
               would be squarely covered as part of the
               issues already framed.
(vi). The High Court fell in error in holding that
               there was no pleading, which is contrary to
               the record.
(vii). Reliance has been placed upon the following
               judgements by learned counsel for the
               appellant in support of his submissions:
a) Smt. Bismillah vs. Janeshwar Prasad
                         and Others1,
1
(1990) 1 SCC 207
11
b) Sri Sinna Ramunuja Jeer and Others
                         vs. Sri Ranga Ramanuja Jeer and
                         Another2
,
c) Randhir Kaur vs. Prithvi Pal Singh
                         and Others3
.
14. On the other hand, submissions advanced on
         behalf of the respondents are summarised as
         under:
(i). The plaintiffs, having admitted the execution
               of the Power of Attorney, its contents could
               not be disputed.
(ii). The plaintiffs, having pleaded that they
               acquired knowledge of the Power of Attorney
               in 1988, did not take any action for either
               revoking the Power of Attorney or for
               cancellation of the sale deed, or any criminal
               action, and it was almost after three years
               that the suit was instituted in the year 1991.
(iii). The First Appellate Court did not reverse the
               findings of the Trial Court that the sale
               consideration of Rs. 12,000/- was paid to the
2
(1962) 2 SCR 509
3
(2019) 17 SCC 71
12
plaintiffs. The finding on possession was in
    favour of the defendants, as the plaintiffs did
    not produce any documentary evidence to
    prove    their   possession,    whereas     the
    defendants had filed documents (D-03 to D-
14) to establish their possession.
(iv). The plaintiffs had wrongly pleaded that they
    were illiterate, whereas in fact the High Court
    had recorded the finding that they are
    literate and were ably assisted by their
    brothers and cousins in executing the Power
    of Attorney. The plaintiffs did not plead any
    kind of fraud by the defendants.
(v). The Power of Attorney being a registered
    document, its contents would be deemed to
    be correct unless proven otherwise. There is
    a presumption of the correctness of the
    contents of the Power of Attorney.
(vi). The suit was not maintainable as no relief
    was claimed for setting aside the Power of
    Attorney or for cancellation of the sale deed.
(vii). The application of doctrine of non est factum
    would not arise in view of the plaintiff
13
admitting the execution of the Power of
             Attorney.
(viii).The plaintiff cannot turn around and take a
             contrary stand after having received the sale
             proceeds and handing over possession to the
             defendants.
(ix). The scope of the present appeal before this
             Court is very limited, and unless exceptional
             and special circumstances are shown to
             establish the perversity in the judgement of
             the High Court, no interference is called for.
             The appeal deserves to be dismissed.
(x). Reliance has been placed upon the following
             judgments in support of his submissions:
a) Prem Singh & Ors. vs. Birbal & Ors.4
,
b) Pentakota Satyanarayana vs. Pentakota
                 Seetharatnam5
,
c) ITC Limited vs. State of Uttar Pradesh &
                 Ors.6
,
d) M.M.S. Investments, Madurai & Ors. Vs.
                 V. Veerappan & Ors.7
,
4
2006 (5) SCC 353
5
2005 (8) SCC 67
6
2011 (7) SCC 493
7
2007 (9) SCC 660
14
e) I.S. Sikandar (dead) by LRs vs. K.
                 Subramani & Ors.8
,
f) C.     Chandramohan     vs.    Sengottaiyan
                 (Dead) by LRs & Ors.9
,
g) Cauvery Coffee Traders, Mangalore vs.
                 Hornor     Resources         (International)
                 Company Limited10
,
h) Taherakhatoon (D) by LRs. vs. Salambin
                 Mohammed11
15. As the High Court proceeded to record a finding
      that there was neither any pleading nor any issue
      framed regarding the plea of non est factum, it
      would be appropriate to first deal with the
      contents of the plaint.
16. It is specifically averred in paragraph No.6 of the
      plaint that only intention for executing the Power
      of Attorney in favour of defendant No.2 was for
      developing the property in question into smaller
      plots and to get necessary approvals for the same
      from the relevant authorities. In paragraph 10 of
      the plaint, it is clearly stated that the plaintiffs
8
2013 (15) SCC 27
9
2000 (1) SCC 451
10
2011 (10) SCC 420
11
1999 (2) SCC 635
15
were illiterate and had no means to get the above
   exercise carried out and as the defendant No.2
   was well versed in dealing with Government
   Authorities, he could have helped them in
   developing the plots. Further, it was specifically
   stated in paragraph 10 that after reading the
   documents in 1991, the plaintiffs realized that
   the    defendant   had   two    additional    clauses
   incorporated authorizing him to sell, gift, settle
   the plots in question and also to execute
   wherever necessary transfer of Patta Deeds. This
   was never the intention. These two additional
   rights recorded in the Power of Attorney deed was
   never intended nor conveyed nor informed. It is
   also stated in the plaint that taking advantage of
   illiteracy and simplicity of the plaintiffs, such
   rights have been incorporated in the Power of
   Attorney.
17. A plea of non est factum can be taken by an
   executor or signatory of the deed to plead that the
   said     document        is     invalid      as   its
   executor/signatory    was      mistaken   about   its
   character at the time of executing/signing it. It is
16
a latin maxim which literally means “it is not the
    deed.” A plea of non est factum is a defence
    available in Contract Law allowing a person to
    escape the effect of a document which she/he
    may have executed/signed.
18. As already noted above, the plea of non est factum
    basically means, “it is not my deed.” The said plea
    has been a subject matter of consideration of this
    court in the case of Bismillah v Janeshwar
    Prasad      (supra).    In    the     said    case,   the
    plaintiff/appellant therein had claimed herself to
    be a Pardanashin lady and on the representation
    of the defendant/respondents, had appointed
    them as agent to manage the estate under a
    written document which was drafted in Hindi, a
    language not known to her. Later on, she
    discovered that it contained an unauthorized
    clause empowering sale of properties. Taking
    advantage of the same, the said agents had
    executed fraudulent and elusive sale of the said
    property.     The      said    case     set    up     the
    plaintiff/appellant was considered and dealt with
    in paras 12 and 13 of the report. A further issue
17
which this Court considered in the said case was
         a       distinction    between    fraudulent   mis-
         representation        as to   the character of the
         document and fraudulent misrepresentation as
         to the contents thereof. Such defense of non est
         factum was held to be available only where the
         mistake was as to the very nature or character as
         to the transaction.
This Court also relied upon an
         earlier decision in the case of
Ningawwa v.
         Byrappa12
.
This Court further
placed reliance
         upon
the judgement of the House of Lords in case
         of Saunders v Anglia Building Society13 to fine
         tune the distinction between the document being
         void or voidable. Paras 11 to 15 of Bismillah
         (supra) are reproduced hereinunder:
“11. The assumption underlying the
                reasoning of the High Court is that if the
                action had really been one based on the
                need for the cancellation of the deeds,
                without which possession could not be
                granted, the civil court would have had
                jurisdiction. The cause of action in the
                appellant's suit does admit of being
                brought within this class of cases.
12
AIR 1968 SC 956
13
(1970) 3 ALL ER 961
18
12. The common law defence of non est
factum to actions on specialities in its
origin was available where an illiterate
person, to whom the contents of a deed
had been wrongly read, executed it under
a mistake as to its nature and contents,
he could say that it was not his deed at
all. In its modern application, the doctrine
has been extended to cases other than
those of illiteracy and to other contracts
in writing. In most of the cases in which
this defence was pleaded the mistake was
induced by fraud; but that was not,
perhaps, a necessary factor, as the
transaction is “invalid not merely on the
ground of fraud, where fraud exists, but
on the ground that the mind of the signor
did not accompany the signature; in other
words, that he never intended to sign, and
therefore, in contemplation of law never
did sign, the contract to which his name
is appended”
13. Authorities   drew     a   distinction
between fraudulent misrepresentation as
to the character of the document and
fraudulent misrepresentation as to
the contents thereof. It was held that the
defence was available only if the mistake
was as to the very nature or character of
the transaction.
14. In Foster v. Mackinnon [(1869) LR 4
CP 704 : 38 LJCP 310] , Mackinnon, the
defendant was induced to endorse a bill of
19
exchange on the false representation that
it was a guarantee similar to one he had
signed on a previous occasion. He was
held not liable when sued even by an
innocent endorsee of the bill. Byles, J.
said:
“... The defendant never intended to
   sign that contract or any such
   contract. He never intended to put his
   name to any instrument that then was
   or thereafter might become negotiable.
   He was deceived, not merely as to the
   legal effect, but as to the ‘actual
   contents’ of the instrument.”
15. This decision was referred to with
approval by this Court in Ningawwa v.
Byrappa [(1968) 2 SCR 797 : AIR 1968 SC
956] . It was observed: (SCR pp. 800-01)

    “It is well established that a contract
    or other transaction induced or
    tainted by fraud is not void, but only
    voidable at the option of the party
    defrauded. Until it is avoided, the
    transaction is valid, so that third
    parties without notice of the fraud
    may in the meantime acquire rights
    and interests in the matter which
    they may enforce against the party
    defrauded.”

  This would be a voidable transaction.
But the position was held to be different if
20
the fraud or misrepresentation related to
the character of the document. This court
held: (SCR p. 801)

    “The legal position will be different if
    there       is       a       fraudulent
    misrepresentation not merely as to the
    contents of the document but as to its
    character. The authorities make a
    clear distinction between fraudulent
    misrepresentation as to the character
    of the document and fraudulent
    misrepresentation as to the contents
    thereof. With reference to the former,
    it has been held that the transaction
    is void, while in the case of the latter,
    it is merely voidable.”
                       (emphasis supplied)

  However the House of Lords in
Saunders v. Anglia Building Society [1971
AC 1004 : (1970) 3 All ER 961] reviewed
the law and held that the essential
features of the doctrine, as expressed by
Byles, J. in Foster v. Mackinnon [ Chitty
on Contracts, 25th edn., p. 341] , had
been correctly stated. Lord Reid, however,
observed: (AC headnote at p. 1005)

    “The plea of non est factum could not
    be available to anyone who signed
    without taking the trouble to find out
    at least the general effect of the
    document. Nor could it be available to
    a person whose mistake was really a
21
mistake as to the legal effect of the
             document. There must be a radical or
             fundamental difference between what
             he signed and what he thought he
             was signing.””
19. The ingredients of the plea of non est factum as
    laid down not only in the case of Bismillah
    (supra) are existing in the present case, but also
    the three parameters as can be deduced from
    Saunders(supra) were in existence in the present
    case as well. The aforementioned test for a
    successful plea of non est factum requires that:
A. The person pleading non est factum must belong
     to "class of persons, who through no fault of
     their   own,     are   unable   to   have    any
     understanding of the purpose of the particular
     document because of blindness, illiteracy or
     some other disability". The disability must be
     one requiring the reliance on others for advice
     as to what they are signing. As Lord Pearson
     had aptly put:
“In my opinion, the plea of non est factum
        ought to be available in a proper case for
        the relief of a person who for permanent or
        temporary reasons (not limited to
22
blindness or illiteracy) is not capable of
     both     reading       and      sufficiently
     understanding the deed or other document
     to    be    signed.      By    “sufficiently
     understanding” I mean understanding at
     least to the point of detecting a
     fundamental difference between the
     actual document and the document as the
     signer had believed it to be.”



B. “The "signatory must have made a fundamental
  mistake as to the nature of the contents of the
  document being signed", including its practical
  effects. Lord Wilberfore has succinctly put this
  aspect:
“In my opinion, a document should be held
     to be void (as opposed to voidable) only
     when the element of consent to it is totally
     lacking, that is, more concretely, when the
     transaction which the document purports
     to effect is essentially different in
     substance or in kind from the transaction
     intended”


C. The   document   must    have   been    radically
  different from one intended to be signed. As
  Lord Reid Remarked in the judgement:
23
“There must, I think, be a radical
          difference between what he signed and
          what he thought he was signing — or one
          could use the words “fundamental” or
          “serious” or “very substantial.” But what
          amounts to a radical difference will
          depend on all the circumstances.”



All these three criteria are clearly pleaded and made
out in the instant case as well.
20. In the present case, the defendant respondent
    had taken a plea which the High Court had given
    due consideration that the plaintiff appellant had
    not sought any relief either for declaration of the
    Power of Attorney as void as also the cancellation
    of the sale deeds. Law is well settled that where
    it is alleged that the document of sale is void,
    then no cancellation would be necessary and
    such a document can be ignored under law.
    Cancellation of a sale deed would be necessary
    only where it is alleged to be voidable on facts.
    The     present   case    the   fraudulent    mis-
    representation was not only to the contents of the
    document but also to the character of the
    document. Thus, the reasoning given by the High
24
Court contrary to the settled legal position
         cannot be sustained.
21. From a perusal of the plaint, it is more than clear
         that the plea of non est factum was well pleaded,
         in clear and strict terms. Whether or not the
         plaintiffs were able to prove it would be a different
         question but the fact that it was pleaded is more
         than apparent. The High Court was thus not
         right in recording the finding that plaintiffs did
         not plead with respect to the plea of non est
         factum.
22. It would be appropriate at this stage itself to refer
         to the settled legal position on the above aspect.
         This Court in the case of
Bhagwati Prasad vs.
         Chandramaul14
very aptly put that the question
         for the Courts to consider in such matters is
         whether the parties knew that the matter in
         question was involved and whether they led
         evidence about it. We may profitably extract para
         10 of the aforesaid report:
14
AIR 1966 SC 735
25
“10. But in considering the application of this
doctrine of the facts of the present case, it is
necessary to bear in mind the other principle that
considerations of form cannot over-ride the
legitimate considerations of substance. If a plea is
not specifically made and yet it is covered by an
issue by implication, and the parties knew that
the said plea was involved in the trial, then the
mere fact that the plea was not expressly taken in
the pleadings would not necessarily disentitle a
party from relying upon it if it is satisfactorily
proved by evidence. The general rule no doubt is
that the relief should be founded on pleadings
made by the parties. But where the substantial
matters relating to the title of both parties to the
suit are touched, though indirectly or even
obscurely, in the issues, and evidence has been
led about them, then the argument that a
particular matter was not expressly taken in the
pleadings would be purely formal and technical
and cannot succeed in every case. What the Court
has to consider in dealing with such an objection
is : did the parties know that the matter in
question was involved in the trial, and did they
lead evidence about it? If it appears that the
parties did not know that the matter was in issue
at the trial and one of them has had no
opportunity to lead evidence in respect of it, that
undoubtedly would be a different matter. To allow
one party to rely upon a matter in respect of which
the other party did not lead evidence and has had
no opportunity to lead evidence, would introduce
considerations of prejudice, and in doing justice
to one party, the Court cannot do injustice to
another.”
26
23. The said ratio has been followed by this Court in
         2008, by a two-judge Bench in the case of
Bachhaj Nahar vs. Nilima Mandal and Another15
.
This Court in clear terms stated the object and
         purpose of pleadings and issues. Para 12 of the
         said report is reproduced hereinunder:
“12.       The object and purpose of pleadings and
                issues is to ensure that the litigants come to trial
                with all issues clearly defined and to prevent cases
                being expanded or grounds being shifted during
                trial. Its object is also to ensure that each side is
                fully alive to the questions that are likely to be
                raised or considered so that they may have an
                opportunity of placing the relevant evidence
                appropriate to the issues before the court for its
                consideration. This Court has repeatedly held that
                the pleadings are meant to give to each side
                intimation of the case of the other so that it may
                be met, to enable courts to determine what is
                really at issue between the parties, and to prevent
                any deviation from the course which litigation on
                particular causes must take.”
24. It would be relevant to refer to the issues framed
         by the Trial Court, as the High Court also
         observed that no issue on the plea of non est
         factum was framed by the Trial Court.
15
(2008) 17 SCC 491
27
25. The Trial Court had framed the following four
    issues:
“(i) Whether the plaintiffs are the absolute
               owner of the suit property?
(ii) Whether the plaintiffs are in possession
               and enjoyment of the suit property?
(iii) Whether the plaintiffs are entitled for
                the decree as prayed for?
(iv) To what relief the plaintiffs are entitled?”
26. The first two issues would cover the issue of non
    est factum as an integral part of it when the
    plaintiffs claimed to be the absolute owners
    thereby denying not only the correctness of the
    Power of Attorney but also subsequent execution
    of the sale deed by the Attorney (defendant No.2)
    in favour of his own father and brother on the
    date of the registration of the deed of Attorney.
    Even otherwise once evidence is led with respect
    to the pleadings, non-framing of issues could not
    have proved fatal so as to record dismissal of the
    suit. The plaintiff No.1, who had entered the
    witness box, had fully supported his pleadings,
    as per the plaint. The First Appellate Court
    proceeded to deal with the same or, in other
    words, proceeded to consider the pleadings as
28
also the evidence led on record to arrive at the
   finding that the contents of the Power of Attorney
   were not as per the understanding between the
   plaintiff and the defendant No.2.
27. The conduct of defendant No.2, the Attorney
   would also draw an adverse inference against the
   defendant and an inference in favour of the
   plaintiffs’ pleading. The defendant No.2, on the
   date the Power of Attorney got registered,
   proceeded to transfer the land in question in
   favour of his father and brother for a highly
   underestimated value much less from the
   guideline value what to say of the market value.
   The market value as alleged would be more than
   Rs.3 Lakhs at the relevant time. The guideline
   value was estimated to be Rs.22,500/- whereas
   the transfer was affected for a consideration
   shown as Rs.12,000/-. The defendant failed to
   explain this conduct of his of being in such a
   haste to transfer the property on the same day to
   his own father and brother. The deficiency in
   stamp duty due to under valuation was also not
   cleared as the document had been impounded by
   the Registering Authority and it was after nine to
29
eleven years that the deeds were got released
    after paying the stamp duty, as per the value
    determined    by   the    Assessing   Authority.
    Apparently, the defendants were waiting for the
    outcome of the suit and in case if they were to
    lose, they would not like to invest or spend any
    further amount on stamp duty so they chose not
    to pay till almost the Trial Court dismissed the
    suit.
28. The Power of Attorney did not confer possession
    on the defendant No.2. The plaintiffs continued
    to assert that they were in possession whereas
    the defendants claimed to be in possession
    pursuant to the sale deed. A finding has also
    come to the effect that the consideration of
    Rs.12,000/- was paid to the plaintiffs, which the
    plaintiffs have denied. The question would be as
    to whether the consideration was just and
    adequate for the property which was transferred
    by the Attorney holder.
29. The consideration has not been paid either in the
    bank account or by Cheque or Demand Draft but
    in cash, so, therefore, whether it was actually
30
paid or not would be dependent upon the
   acceptance of either of the oral statements by the
   plaintiffs or the defendants. The statement of the
   defendants considering their conduct, would be
   placed at a lesser pedestal in terms of its
   genuineness as compared to that of the plaintiffs.
   There is no documentary evidence as such
   (receipt or any such thing) signed by the plaintiffs
   of having received any consideration. Thus,
   possession cannot be said to have been validly
   transferred to the defendant and the lawful
   possession would still remain with the plaintiff.
   The First Appellate Court had appreciated and
   analyzed the evidence on record, both oral and
   documentary, to record a finding that plea of non
   est factum was proved.
30. The case law relied upon by the defendant-
   respondents are basically for the proposition that
   a registered document be presumed to be correct
   not only of its execution but also of its contents.
   As already discussed above, once the First
   Appellate Court, after appreciating and analysing
   the evidence on record came to the conclusion
31
that the plea of non est factum was proved, the
    said finding, being a finding of fact, ought not to
    have been interfered by the High Court in Second
    Appeal. The Power of Attorney, having been
    found to be invalid, any further action taken
    pursuant to it, cannot also be held to be valid.
    Therefore, the judgments relied upon by the
    defendant respondents are of no assistance to
    them.
31. The High Court, while exercising its power under
Section 100
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
    exceeded its jurisdiction in disturbing the pure
    findings of fact and that too on incorrect
    appreciation and reading of the pleadings. Non-
    framing of an issue, which is otherwise covered
    in a broader issue and for which there was
    sufficient pleading and evidence, the suit could
    not have been dismissed on that ground.
32. For all the reasons recorded above, the appeal
    succeeds    and   is   allowed.   The   impugned
    judgment of the High Court is set aside and that
32
of the First Appellate Court is maintained. The
    suit of the appellants stands decreed.
33. No order as to costs.
34. Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
….………………………………..J.
                                    (VIKRAM NATH)



                      ……………………………………J.
                      (AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH)



NEW DELHI
AUGUST 17, 2023
33