[Cites
12
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Wazir Khan vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 2 August, 2023
REPORTABLE

                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
2023 INSC 674                            CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1922-1923/2017


        WAZIR KHAN                                                          .....        APPELLANT(S)

                                               VERSUS

        STATE OF UTTARAKHAND                                                .....        RESPONDENT(S)


                                                        O R D E R
These appeals are at the instance of the appellant/convict –

        Wazir Khan and is directed against the judgment(s) and order(s)

        dated               25.07.2017   (conviction)          and   09.08.2017     (sentence)       resply

        passed by the High Court of Uttarakhand at Nainital in Government

        Appeal No. 10 of 2011, by which the High Court allowed the appeal

        filed by the respondent – State of Uttarakhand and thereby reversed

        the judgment and order of acquittal passed by the trial court.
The deceased – Bushra was the wife of the appellant/convict –

        Wazir Khan. The appellant/convict – Wazir Khan was put to trial in

        the Court of Additional Sessions Judge, Roorkee, District Haridwar,

        Uttarakhand in Sessions Trial No. 158 of 2007 for the offence

        punishable under
Section 302
and
201
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860

        (for short “
IPC
”).                It    is   the   case      of   the    prosecution     that    the

        appellant/convict                –   Wazir      Khan    committed       murder    of   his   wife   –

        Bushra by inflicting injuries all over her body with a knife.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SWETA BALODI
Date: 2023.08.05
10:57:15 IST
Reason:
It appears that one, Mohd. Hayyat informed the police on

        telephone on 23.07.2007 that the deceased/wife of the appellant had
1
been murdered in her house. This incident appears to have occurred

during   the   intervening        night    of   22.01.2007    and   23.01.2007.   The

inquest panchnama of the dead body of the deceased was drawn. The

body of the deceased was, thereafter, sent for post-mortem. The

post-mortem report on record reveals that there were as many as 17

incised wounds on all over the body. The appellant – Wazir Khan was

arrested by the police and taken into custody. Upon completion of

the investigation, charge sheet was filed. The appellant – Wazir

Khan pleaded not guilty to the charge and claimed to be tried.
The prosecution examined as many as 10 witnesses, and also

led documentary evidence in support of its case. In the statement

of the appellant – Wazir Khan recorded under
Section 313
of the

Cr.P.C., he stated that on the date of the incident, his wife was

killed by the robbers. In his further statement, he also stated

that while the robbers killed his wife, he too suffered injuries at

the hands of the robbers.
The trial court upon appreciation of the oral as well as the

documentary evidence came to conclusion that the prosecution had

failed to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt and accordingly

acquitted the appellant – Wazir Khan of all the charges.
The respondent – State, being aggrieved and dissatisfied by

the judgment and order of acquittal passed by the trial court, went

in appeal before the High Court. The High Court found the judgment

and   order    of   the   trial    court    to   be    perverse,    and   accordingly

reversed the acquittal and held the appellant – Wazir Khan guilty

of the offence of murder of his wife.
In   such    circumstances     referred        to   above,   the   appellant   –
2
Wazir Khan is here before this Court by way of present appeals.
Dr. Rajesh Pandey, the learned senior counsel appearing for

the appellant, vehemently submitted that the High Court committed a

serious error in disturbing a well reasoned judgment of acquittal

passed by the trial court.          He submitted that the High Court would

be justified in reversing the acquittal only upon satisfaction that

the trial court’s judgment is perverse or based on no evidence.              He

would also submit that the entire case hinges on circumstantial

evidence.          He   submitted    that     there   are   no    incriminating

circumstances emerging on the record of this case, so as to connect

the appellant with the crime. He would submit that just because the

deceased happened to be the wife of the appellant and the incident

occurred in his house, by itself, is not sufficient to hold the

appellant guilty of the offence of murder.
He submitted that none of the prosecution witnesses who have

been examined could be termed as reliable witnesses.
He also submitted that the weapon of offence, clothes etc.,

though collected during the course of investigation yet were not

sent   to    the    Forensic   Science       Laboratory   (FSL)   for   chemical

analysis.    He pointed out that there is no serological test report

on record.
In such circumstances referred to above, the learned senior

counsel appearing for the appellant prays that there being merit in

the present appeals and same may be allowed and the appellant –

Wazir Khan may be acquitted of all the charges.
On the other-hand, Mr. Abhishek Atery, the learned counsel

appearing on behalf of the respondent – State vehemently opposed
3
the present appeals and submitted that there is no error, not to

speak of any error of law said to have been committed by the High

Court in reversing the judgment and order of acquittal passed by

the trial court. He would submit that the accused has not disputed

his presence in the house at the time of the incident. He submitted

that   it   is   for   the   appellant/accused    to   explain    what    exactly

happened on the date of the incident. He would submit that if

something happens within the four walls of the house, then only the

appellant/accused can explain, as it could be said to be something

within his special knowledge.
He further pointed out that the weapon of offence i.e. the

bloodstained knife, was also recovered from the house itself at the

instance of the appellant/accused. The learned counsel took support

of
Section 106
of the Evidence Act, 1872 (for short “the Act,

1872”) and submitted that where some facts are within the knowledge

of any person, the burden of proving that fact is upon him. If the

defence taken by the accused is found to be false then it would be

an additional circumstance going against the convict.
In such circumstances referred to above, he prays that there

being no merit in the present appeals, the same may be dismissed.



ANALYSIS: -
Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties

and having gone through the materials on record, the only question

that   falls     for   our   consideration   is   whether   the    High     Court

committed any error in passing the impugned judgment and order.
4
We     take     into   consideration          the   following        circumstances

emerging from the record of the case :-
1. The deceased was the wife of the appellant – Wazir

       Khan.    It    appears   that   the       marital      relations    of   the

       appellant – Wazir Khan with the deceased were strained.
2. The      appellant    –   Wazir       Khan   has    not   disputed    his

       presence in the house at the time of the incident.
However, he has put forward a defence that robbers got

       into his house and killed his wife. He has also gone to

       the extent of saying that while his wife was being

       attacked by the robbers, he too suffered injuries.
3. In the aforesaid context, we may only say that there

       is nothing on record to indicate that the appellant –

       Wazir       Khan   had   suffered        any    injuries.     The    entire

       defence put forward by the appellant – Wazir Khan ,

       could be termed as false defence.
4.   There were as many as 17 incised wounds on the body

       of   the     deceased.   On   the        next   day,   when   the    police

       brought the appellant – Wazir Khan at the scene of the

       occurrence, he pointed out the place where the knife

       was left behind. The weapon of offence was recovered

       from the place of incident itself.
5
Here is a case, wherein the prosecution could be said to have

laid the legal foundation for the purpose of invoking
Section 106
of the Act, 1872. Undoubtedly, the burden is on the prosecution to

prove the guilt of the appellant – Wazir Khan beyond reasonable

doubt. If the prosecution fails to discharge its initial burden

beyond reasonable doubt, the appellant – Wazir Khan has to be

acquitted.      It is settled law that the prosecution cannot take

recourse   of
Section     106
of   the   Act,   1872   without      laying   any

foundational facts.         However, in the case on hand, we are convinced

that the foundational facts laid by the prosecution are sufficient

to invoke
Section 106
of the Act, 1872.
On the other hand, the defence of the appellant – Wazir Khan

of   robbery    and   the    robbers    attacking    his    wife,   is   completely

falsified.
The question of burden of proof, where some facts are within

the personal knowledge of the accused, was examined by this Court

in the case of
State of West Bengal v. Mir Mohammad Omar
and ors.,

reported in (2000) 8 SCC 382.
In the
State of West Bengal
(supra), the assailants forcibly

dragged the deceased Mahesh from the house where he was taking

shelter on account of the fear of the accused, and took him away at

about 2:30 in the night. The next day in the morning, his mangled

body was found lying in the hospital. The trial Court convicted the

accused under Section 364, read with
Section 34
of the IPC, and

sentenced them to ten years rigorous imprisonment. The accused pre-
6
ferred an appeal against their conviction before the High Court and

the State also filed an appeal challenging the acquittal of the ac-

cused for the charge of murder. The accused had not given any ex-

planation as to what happened to Mahesh after he was abducted by

them. The learned Sessions Judge, after referring to the law on

circumstantial evidence, had observed that there is a missing link

in the chain of evidence after the deceased was last seen together

with the accused persons, and the discovery of the dead body in the

hospital, and concluded that the prosecution had failed to estab-

lish the charge of murder against the accused persons beyond any

reasonable doubt.
This Court took note of the provisions of
Section 106
of the

Evidence Act, and laid down the following principles in paragraphs

31 to 34 of the report:
"31. The pristine rule that the burden of proof is on
     the prosecution to prove the guilt of the accused
     should not be taken as a fossilised doctrine as though
     it admits no process of intelligent reasoning. The
     doctrine of presumption is not alien to the above
     rule, nor would it impair the temper of the rule. On
     the other hand, if the traditional rule relating to
     burden of proof of the prosecution is allowed to be
     wrapped in pedantic coverage, the offenders in serious
     offences would be the major beneficiaries and the so-
     ciety would be the casualty.
32. In this case, when the prosecution succeeded in
     establishing the afore-narrated circumstances, the
     court has to presume the existence of certain facts.
     Presumption is a course recognised by the law for the
     court to rely on in conditions such as this.
33. Presumption of fact is an inference as to the ex-
     istence of one fact from the existence of some other
     facts, unless the truth of such inference is dis-
     proved. Presumption of fact is a rule in law of evi-
7
dence that a fact otherwise doubtful may be inferred
     from certain other proved facts. When inferring the
     existence of a fact from other set of proved facts,
     the court exercises a process of reasoning and reaches
     a logical conclusion as the most probable position.
     The above principle has gained legislative recognition
     in India when Section 114 is incorporated in the Evi-
     dence Act. It empowers the court to presume the exis-
     tence of any fact which it thinks likely to have hap-
     pened. In that process the court shall have regard to
     the common course of natural events, human conduct
     etc. in relation to the facts of the case.
34. When it is proved to the satisfaction of the court
     that Mahesh was abducted by the accused and they took
     him out of that area, the accused alone knew what hap-
     pened to him until he was with them. If he was found
     murdered within a short time after the abduction the
     permitted reasoning process would enable the court to
     draw the presumption that the accused have murdered
     him. Such inference can be disrupted if the accused
     would tell the court what else happened to Mahesh at
     least until he was in their custody."
Applying the aforesaid principles, this Court while maintain-

ing the conviction under Section 364 read with
Section 34
of the

IPC, reversed the order of acquittal under Section 302 read with
Section 34
of the IPC, and convicted the accused under the said

provision and sentenced them to imprisonment for life.


    In a case based on circumstantial evidence where no eye wit-

ness is available, there is another principle of law which must be

kept in mind. The principle is that when an incriminating circum-

stance is put to the accused and the said accused either offers no

explanation or offers an explanation which is found to be untrue,

then the same becomes an additional link in the chain of circum-

stances to make it complete. This view has been taken in a catena

of decisions of this Court, namely,
Nika Ram v. State of Himachal

Pradesh
, AIR 1972 SC 2077, Ganesh Lal v. State of Rajasthan, (
2002)
8
1 SCC 73, and State of U.P. v. Dr. Ravindra Prakash Mittal
, AIR

1992 SC 2045.
When the attention of the convict appellant – Wazir Khan was

drawn to the incriminating circumstances that inculpated him in the

crime, he failed to offer appropriate explanation or gave a false

answer. The same can be counted as providing a missing link for

completing a chain of circumstances.
Where an accused is alleged to have committed the murder of

his wife and the prosecution succeeds in leading evidence to show,

like in the present case, that shortly before the commission of the

crime they were seen together or the offence took place in the

dwelling home where the husband also normally resided, it has been

consistently held that if the accused does not dispute his presence

at home at the relevant time and does not offer any explanation how

the wife received injuries or offers an explanation which is found

to be false, it is a strong circumstance which indicates that he is

responsible for commission of the crime.
A great deal of argument was canvassed on behalf of the ac-

cused on the point of proof beyond reasonable doubt. According to

the learned advocate appearing for the accused, the case at hand is

one which could not be said to have been proved by the prosecution

beyond reasonable doubt and, therefore, the accused is entitled to

the benefit of doubt.
9
In the aforesaid context, we may profitably quote the follow-

ing observations made by this Court in para 13 in the case of
Dharm

Das Wadhwani v. The State of Uttar Pradesh
, AIR 1975 SC 241:
"13. The question then is whether the cumulative ef-
      fect of the guilt pointing circumstances in the
      present case is such that the court can conclude, not
      that the accused may be guilty but that he must be
      guilty. We must here utter a word of caution about
      this mental sense of 'must' lest it should be confused
      with exclusion of every contrary possibility. We have
      in S.S. Bobade v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1973 SC
      2622, explained that proof beyond reasonable doubt
      cannot be distorted into a doctrine of acquittal when
      any delicate or remote doubt flits past a feeble mind.
      These observations are warranted by frequent acquit-
      tals on flimsy possibilities which are not infre-
      quently set aside by the High Courts weakening the
      credibility of the judicature. The rule of benefit of
      reasonable doubt does not imply a frail willow bending
      to every whiff of hesitancy. Judges are made of
      sterner stuff and must take a practical view of legit-
      imate inferences flowing from evidence, circumstantial
      or direct. At the same time, it may be affirmed, as
      pointed out by this Court in Kali Ram v. State of Hi-
      machal Pradesh, AIR 1973 SC 2773, that if a reasonable
      doubt arises regarding the guilt of the accused, the
      benefit of that cannot be withheld from him."
(emphasis supplied)

      Cases   are   frequently    coming   before    the   Courts     where   the

husbands, due to strained marital relations and doubt as regards

the character, have gone to the extent of killing the wife. These

crimes are generally committed in complete secrecy inside the house

and it becomes very difficult for the prosecution to lead evidence.

Like the present case, no member of the family, even if he is a

witness of the crime, would come forward to depose against another

family member.
If an offence takes place inside the four walls of a house

and   in   such   circumstances   where    the    assailants   have    all    the
10
opportunity to plan and commit the offence at the time and in the

circumstances of their choice, it will be extremely difficult for

the prosecution to lead evidence to establish the guilt of the

accused, if the strict principle of circumstantial evidence, is

insisted upon by the Courts. Reference could be made to a decision

of this Court in the case of
Trimukh Maroti Kirkan Vs. State of

Maharashtra
, reported in 2007 Criminal Law Journal, page 20, in

which this Court observed that a Judge does not preside over a

criminal trial merely to see that no innocent man is punished. This

Court proceeded to observe that a Judge also presides to see that a

guilty man does not escape. Both are public duties. The law does

not enjoin a duty on the prosecution to lead evidence of such

character, which is almost impossible to be led, or at any rate,

extremely difficult to be led. The duty on the prosecution is to

lead such evidence, which it is capable of leading, having regard

to the facts and circumstances of the case.
In such circumstances
referred to above
, we are of the view

that we should not disturb the impugned judgment and order passed

by the High Court.
Accordingly the appeals are dismissed.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
..................J.
                                                   (J.B. PARDIWALA)



                                               ..................J.
                                                      (MANOJ MISRA)
NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 02, 2023.
11