[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The Sarpanch vs Manveer Singh on 18 August, 2023
2023INSC769                                               NON-REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 5281 OF 2023
                                 (@ SLP(C) No(S). 8655 OF 2022)

             THE SARPANCH,
             GRAM PANCHAYAT, LONGWALA
             PANCHAYAT SAMITI, PILIBANGA,
             DISTRICT HANUMANGARH, RAJASTHAN ..APPELLANT(S)

                                              VERSUS

             MANVEER SINGH AND OTHERS                     ..RESPONDENT(S)
                                               WITH
                            CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 621 OF 2023

                                               IN
                               (S.L.P.(CIVIL) NO(S). 8655 OF 2022)

                                        J U D G M E N T
S.V.N. BHATTI, J.
1.              Leave granted.
2.              The Sarpanch, Gram Panchayat, Longewala,

             District Hanumangarh, Rajasthan/ Respondent No.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SWETA BALODI
Date: 2023.08.24
4 in Writ Petition No. 6557 of 2020 on the file
   17:56:57 IST
   Reason:
of the High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan is
1
the Appellant. The appeal arises from the Order

dated 24.01.2022.
3.    The First Respondent in the Civil Appeal

filed Writ Petition No. 6557 of 2020, canvassing

the public interest of the villagers of the

Longewala before the High Court. The following

chronology is noted:
On    05.08.2019,   the   Panchayat    passed     a

resolution for upgrading the infrastructure of

the    old    Panchayat   Bhawan   from     the    budget

sanctioned by the Zila Parishad, Hanumangarh.
On 11.12.2019, the Zila Parishad sanctioned

the proposal to upgrade the infrastructure of

the old Panchayat Bhawan.
The    Appellant    representing       the     Gram

Panchayat, on 15.03.2020, issued a work order to

one M/s A-One Construction Company to upgrade

the infrastructure of old Panchayat Bhawan.
2
4.   The        expression         ‘upgradation               of

infrastructure’ in the preceding narrative is

repetitive    and    necessary     in    as     much   as    the

Appellant as available from the record deviated

from the resolution, sanction/ work order and

constructed      a   new      building     for      the     Gram

Panchayat in the playground of a school run by

the Education Department in the Village. The

First Respondent states and established in the

High Court that the plot of land, where new

building is constructed, is recorded in the name

of the Education Department. The two glaring

mistakes   in    law    are    that,     (i)    sanction      is

obtained for upgradation of existing structure,

but a new building is brought into existence.
(ii) the Gram Panchayat without a right in the

land   recorded        in   the    name        of   Education

Department is taken over without recourse to

law. The consequences are that the village is
3
deprived of the playground and in the name of

upgrading     infrastructure,             a   new   building       is

brought into existence. The above is the gist of

the case of the Writ Petitioner and accepted by

the Impugned Judgment. The Appellant could not

establish     that   the    findings           recorded    in     the

Judgment impugned warrant the interference of

this Court. We are not in detail referring to

the stand of the Appellant for good reasons.

Another     reason      for         being       brief     on      the

introductory circumstances is that during the

pendency of the SLP, a few developments ex-post

facto remedying partially the arbitrary exercise

of power by the Appellant and Vikas Adhikari

have   been    taken       up       and       completed.        These

developments are noted in the following paras.
5.   Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the

Appellant     informs      the       Court       that      by     the

Construction of the Gram Panchayat building, the
4
land standing in the Education Department's name

is   no    doubt    taken       over.     The   comfort    of   a

playground is also denied to the school-going

children and the villagers. Without a challenge

to the findings in the Judgment under Appeal, he

suggests     that       the    Court    may     take    note    of

subsequent developments substantially remedy the

grievance canvassed in the Writ Petition and

pass orders as are deemed necessary.
6.   The    Counsel           appearing     for    the     First

Respondent does not dispute that the playground

is earmarked and made available for the school

children of `. He argues that still the principal

grievance of demolishing a structure raised in

contravention of approvals must be examined by

this   Court.      We    have    also     heard   the    Learned

Counsel appearing for the State of Rajasthan. On

instructions, we are informed that the inquiry,

as directed by the High Court, is underway and
5
will be expeditiously completed. For the view we

take and for proper appreciation, a few of the

findings we are confirming by this Judgment are

excerpted,

         “the Rajiv Gandhi Sewa Kendra which exists
      in the land of the playground. However, the
      Appellant too was not in a position to
      dispute the fact that as per the proposal
      (Annexure-5),    the    technical    sanction
      (Annexure-6),    the    financial    sanction
      (Annexure-7), and the work order (Annexure-
8), the approval was made for upgradation of
      the infrastructure of the old Gram Panchayat
      Bhawan and none of these documents indicates
      that a new Panchayat Bhawan would be
      constructed. Thus, the respondents have also
      not offered any justification whatsoever for
      the construction of the new Panchayat Bhawan
      when the existing building was constructed
      just ten years ago and there is no such
      information that the said building is not
      suitable for the Panchayat activities or that
      there are any such deficiencies in the said
      building which can render it unfit for use.

          The fact regarding the construction of
      the new Panchayat Bhawan being without
      sanction and that the location of the site
      is a playground is admitted. In the reply
      filed to the writ petition, the State
      Government has taken a plea that the writ
      petition has been filed at a highly belated
      stage.
In wake of the above facts, we feel that
      inquiry deserves to be made regarding the
      conduct of respondent No.2 Vikas Adhikari and
      respondent No.4 Sarpanch, who abused their
6
powers and acted beyond jurisdiction while
       raising the construction of the new Panchayat
       Bhawan totally against the approved plan
       proposal and the sanction. As a consequence
       of the discussion made hereinabove, we have
       no   hesitation    in    holding    that    the
       construction of the disputed building on the
       land earmarked/reserved as a playground is
       illegal and contrary to the Panchayat’s
       proposal,    technical   sanction    and    the
       financial sanction, as well as the work order
       and hence, the same, has to be demolished at
       the cost and responsibility of the respondent
       No.2   Vikas   Adhikari,    Panchayat    Samiti
       Longewala and respondent No.4 Sarpanch, Gram
       Panchayat Longewala”.
7.   The above excerpts from the Impugned Judgment

indicate that the Appellant and Vikas Adhikari/

Respondent       No.   5,    have    not   discharged    the

official function or duty in the manner expected

of   them   or     conforming       to   the   local   laws.

Therefore, the conclusions in the impugned Order

are certainly warranted and have been rightly

rendered     in    the      Judgment     impugned.     Having

observed, as indicated above, the appeal must

fail. In the case, we are persuaded by the

argument for the Senior Counsel for Appellant

that the subsequent developments, avoiding waste
7
of public money material etc., are taken note of

by this Court, and directions proportional to

the subsequent developments, are issued.
8.   Before considering the extent to which we can

modify    the    directions,     we       notice   that

constructing    a   building    in    a     playground,

particularly on a plot of land standing in the

name of the Education Department and without

administrative sanction, is of grave concern and

illegal. Gram Panchayat should represent the

public interest and not occupy vacant places,

parks,    and   grounds   for   its   infrastructure

projects. In a given case, if absolute necessity

is made out for a change of user of any of the

amenities/ open spaces, Gram Panchayat shall and

should comply with the requirements of the law.

The failure of duty and fixing of responsibility

are matters of inquiry; therefore, we do not

dwell on these matters more than the view already
8
expressed. Keeping in perspective the admitted

position    viz     a    Playground          is    earmarked        for

school     children,          demolition          of    a     building

constructed is avoidable. The directions issued

in Para VI of the Judgment under appeal are

substituted by the following direction,
(i)            The Secretary, Panchayati Raj
     Department shall initiate disciplinary
proceedings against respondent No. 2
Vikas     Adhikari          and    respondent           No.   4
Sarpanch           and     ensure       completion            of
     enquiry without further loss of time.
(ii)           The         State        of        Rajasthan/
     Respondent               No.       4     is         directed
     to     deposit       Rs.       10,00,000/-,            to   the
     credit       of      the       school        in   Longewala
village, within four weeks from receipt
     of the Order. The school shall utilize
     the amount so deposited for upgrading
     facilities in the school. The Competent
     Authority           considers          the        need      and
     requirements of girl students enrolled
     in       the        school         while           providing
9
upgradation         facilities.           The   detailed
proposal plan for utilization of Rs.
10,00,000/-,           is        submitted        to   the
District Collector, and on approval,
the works are carried out.
(iii)         The Competent Authority shall
conclude the enquiry directed against
the     Appellant           and     Vikas       Adhikari
Respondent         No.    2      within    four    months
from today.
(iv)          The           State          Government/
Respondent No. 4 is directed to recover
Rs. 10,00,000/- deposited in terms of
direction No. (ii), from persons found
guilty of arbitrary exercise of power
and     in     such      proportion        within      six
months from today.
(v)          The      District        Administration
ensures        that         the     playground         now
earmarked at Longewala shall continue
to serve the purpose of the playground.
(vi) The Impugned Judgment is modified
to the limited extent indicated above,
10
and accordingly, the Civil Appeal is
      allowed in part.
CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 621 OF 2023

    For the view we have taken in the Civil

Appeal, the Contempt Petition stands closed.
................J.
                                 [SANJIV KHANNA]




                              ................J.
                                 [S.V.N. BHATTI]

NEW DELHI;
AUGUST, 18 2023.
11