[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
S.S.Cold Storage India P.Ltd. vs National Ins.Co.Ltd. on 8 August, 2023
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
,
A.S. Bopanna
2023 INSC 689                                                                Non-Reportable

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2042/2012


             S.S. Cold Storage India Pvt. Ltd.                               … APPELLANT

                                                           VS.

             National Insurance Company Limited                              … RESPONDENT


                                                  JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
1.             The present appeal, under
Section 23
of the Consumer Protection Act,

                            1986 (for brevity, “CPA” hereafter) registers a challenge to the

                            judgment and order dated 13th September 2011 passed by the

                            National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, New Delhi (for

                            brevity, “NCDRC” hereafter), whereby Original Petition No. 80 of 1999

                            (for brevity, “Complaint” hereafter) filed by the Appellant was

                            dismissed.
2.             A decision herein, by virtue of being a first appeal, necessitates

                            looking at the facts in some depth. The relevant facts triggering the
Signature Not Verified
Complaint are noticed hereunder:
Digitally signed by
a. The Appellant is engaged in the business of operating a cold
   SWETA BALODI
   Date: 2023.08.08
   17:27:35 IST
   Reason:
storage facility (for brevity, “Facility” hereafter), the plant,
1
machinery, and stock whereof were continually insured by the

  Respondent.
b. The Appellant had obtained the following insurance policies

  from the Respondent between 1997 and 1998:

      i. Machinery Insurance Policy,

     ii. Refrigeration Plant (Stock) Policy (for potatoes) (for

         brevity, “Refrigeration Policy” hereafter),

     iii. Fire Policy (Comprehensive Fire Policy for the building,

         furniture plant, machinery, and installation),

     iv. Fire Policy (On stock of potatoes in the Facility).

c. Sometime around 3rd and 4th October 1997, there was leakage

  of ammonia gas in Chamber Nos. 1 and 2 of the Facility (for

  brevity,   “Chambers”      hereafter),   resulting   in   significantly

  elevated temperatures, and a foul smell, culminating in a

  closure of the Facility.
d. In the immediate aftermath of the incident of leakage of gas,

  on 4th October 1997 to be precise, the Appellant informed the

  Respondent and the District Horticulture Officer of the same,

  whilst requesting an inspection of the Facility.

e. The Appellant, on 10th October 1997, also wrote to the District

  Horticulture Officer to sell the potatoes that were stored in the

  affected Chambers in order to have the Chambers cleared.

f. The Appellant, on 14th October 1997, filed a claim with the

  Respondent claiming an amount of Rs.1,03,15,080/-. Therein,
2
the damage was claimed in respect of 85,956 bags of potatoes,

  each weighing around 80kg, where the amount claimed was

  calculated at Rs.150/- per quintal as per the stipulations of the

  Refrigeration Policy.
g. The District Horticulture Officer, on 18th October 1997, while

  responding to the Appellant’s letter dated 10th October 1997

  stated that the disposal of potatoes should be prioritised to

  prevent the spread of any disease or epidemic in the vicinity.

h. The Respondent meanwhile had instructed a surveyor named

  Mr. S.K. Agarwal to inspect the Facility. However, he expressed

  his inability to assess the Facility due to the magnitude of the

  damage.
i. Then the Respondent appointed another surveyor, M/s Mehta

  and Padamsey Surveyors Pvt. Ltd. (for brevity, “Surveyor”

  hereafter) to inspect the Facility. One Mr. A. Banerjee was sent

  by the Surveyor to visit the Facility from 23rd October 1997 to

  25th October 1997. On 27th October 1997, the Surveyor

  addressed a letter to the Appellant asking it to preserve the

  existing state of affairs in the Facility as the Chambers were

  inaccessible due to high temperature and the stench of

  ammonia.
j. After the Chambers were cleared of the ammonia gas, the

  Surveyor visited the Facility on 17th January 1998, to conduct

  the requisite inspection.
3
k. The Surveyor, by letter dated 10th March 1998, informed the

  Appellant that the incident had occurred due to decay, wear and

  tear, leading to leakage of ammonia gas. The pipe had given

  way along the seam, and that was attributable to decay, wear,

  and tear; hence the same was excluded as per the Refrigeration

  Policy.
l. On 22nd January 1999, the Respondent informed the Appellant

  that its claim had been repudiated by its competent authority.

m. The Appellant then instituted the Complaint before the NCDRC

  on 17th April 1999 claiming an amount of Rs.1,03,15,680/- and

  certain further amounts, upon the repudiation of its claim under

  the Refrigeration Policy. On 7th January 2010, the Appellant’s

  amended complaint was taken on record by the NCDRC,

  wherein the following relief was sought:
1. Respondent be ordered to pay to the complainant the
        claim amount of Rs.98,03,640/- (Rupees Ninety Eight
        Lakh Three Thousand Six Hundred and Forty only)
        towards the actual loss on account of stock (potato)
        damage;
2. Direct the Respondent no.1 to pay the complainant an
        amount of Rs.20,000/- towards the cost of the ammonia
        pipeline as per the insurance policy;
3. Award adequate compensation to the Complainant
        towards the financial losses suffered by the complainant
        due to the reason the Respondent did not settle the claim
        and withhold the claim amount, which resulted closure of
        instant cold storage for full one season, especially in view
4
of the fact that the complainant had to bear the penal
         interest   on   the   loan   taken   from   State   Financial
         Corporation/bank;
4. Award interest @18% from the date of instant incident
         i.e. 04.10.1997 and till the date of actual payment on the
         entire losses suffered by the complainant;
5. Award adequate compensation to the complainant on
         account of mental agony and torture, the complainant
         suffered and also as exemplary damages against unfair
         trade practices adopted by the Respondent;
6. Award legal costs and damages to the complainant;
n. The Respondent filed its reply to the aforesaid Complaint on 7th

   August 2000, placing on record the report of the Surveyor

   dated 3rd August 1998 (for brevity, “Surveyor’s Report”

   hereafter).
o. At the stage of evidence, on 19th April 2008, the Appellant

   placed on record before the NCDRC a report by one Mr. S.K.

   Ahuja, Chartered Engineer/Loss Assessor (for brevity, “Loss

   Assessor” hereafter), wherein inter alia it was stated that the

   crack in the pipes could not have been due to wear and tear.

p. Subsequently, the Appellant filed an application before the

   NCDRC to allow the inspection of the pipes, which had been

   removed from the Facility by the Surveyor, by two technical

   experts. The NCDRC, on 11th May 2009, allowed the Appellant’s

   application. Subsequently, the pipes were inspected (then in

   the custody of the Surveyor) in the presence of two technical

   experts, viz. (i) Dr. Manohar Prasad (a retired professor of IIT,
5
Kanpur) and (ii) Mr. K.K. Gupta (Chartered Engineer) on 25th

          July 2009 (for brevity, “Experts” hereafter when referred to

          jointly).
q. On 4th November 2009, the said Dr. Prasad submitted his

          report stating inter alia that the leakage of ammonia could only

          be termed as an accidental happening, and that the theory of

          it being due to normal wear and tear was not correct. On his

          part, Mr. Gupta submitted a report dated 6th November 2009

          where he concluded inter alia that the pipes could not have

          been termed as worn out as the material flowing through them

          was alkaline, and not corrosive like acid.
3.   After considering the pleadings as well as the other materials on

     record, the NCDRC opined that the Appellant had failed to establish

     deficiency by the Respondent in providing services and declined to

     grant compensation, as a consequence whereof it dismissed the

     Complaint filed by the Appellant as noted above. Certain salient

     observations made by the NCDRC in the impugned judgment are

     summarised below for convenience:
a. The NCDRC noted that the cracks in the pipes were thin

          (hairline) and had occurred at the joints. The pipes were not

          seamless as claimed by the Appellant; hence, the leakage of

          gas could not be due to a bursting of pipes.
6
b. Relying on the dictionary definition of burst, it was held by the

   NCDRC that there was no sudden burst in the pipe resulting in

   the leakage of ammonia.
c. The NCDRC also went on to reproduce certain findings from the

   Surveyor’s Report, indicating that the leakage of ammonia was

   attributable to the hairline opening along with welding joints in

   the pipe and that the same was due to wear and tear.

d. Further, the NCDRC reproduced certain portions of Mr. Gupta’s

   report to substantiate its conclusions that the leakage occurred

   due to normal wear and tear as the same had appeared after 5

   to 7 years of usage and were not due to any accident. Further,

   it noted that the report submitted by Mr. Gupta supported the

   view that there was no proper fusion of the welding joints along

   the welding line, and that this could have resulted in hairline

   cracks.
e. Also, the NCDRC observed that the “C Class” pipes claimed to

   be used by the Appellant, that purportedly had a lifespan of 20

   to 25 years, were not actually used in the Facility as the pipes

   used were not seamless and had welded joints.

f. Pertinently, the NCDRC noted that the expert opinions had been

   obtained after a span of more than 10 years, and they could

   not be given credence as the Experts had refrained from giving

   any definite opinion as to the real cause of the cracks. Further,

   the reports could not be treated as fully independent as the
7
choice of Experts was that of the Appellant’s. It also dismissed

          the allegations of collusion against the Respondent and the

          Surveyor as the same had not been substantiated by the

          Appellant.
g. The NCDRC went on to observe that the hairline cracks in the

          pipes, in all probability, had occurred due to wear and tear and

          gradual deterioration rather than a sudden burst. Since the

          damage was due to wear and tear, the other aspects of the

          claim did not require consideration as per Exception Clause 3

          of the Refrigeration Policy which excluded such an occurrence

          from the scope of the Refrigeration Policy.

       h. It was also noted by the NCDRC that the Appellant had made

          no payment to the potato growers and even the original and

          amended Complaint recorded no detail of any payment of such

          a nature; hence, the Appellant had suffered no loss in that

          respect.
4.   We have heard Mr. Vijay Hansaria, learned senior counsel appearing

     on behalf of the Appellant and Mr. Yogesh Malhotra, learned counsel

     appearing for the Respondent.
Contentions of the Appellant
5.   At the outset, Mr. Hansaria urged that the NCDRC had erred in holding

     that the hairline cracks along the welding joints of the pipes were

     attributable to wear and tear. He emphasised that the Refrigeration

     Policy had been issued to the Appellant after a thorough inspection
8
of the Facility, and that the same had been conducted only five

     months prior to the incident in question.
6.   Mr. Hansaria then submitted that the reports of three experts, viz.,

     Mr. Ahuja, Dr. Prasad, and Mr. Gupta, indicated that the cracks in the

     pipes were not due to normal wear and tear, but due to an accident.

     Further, he iterated that the Surveyor had not sent the extracted

     portion of the pipes to any approved laboratory for testing after the

     incident, and it was thus clear that the Surveyor’s views were not

     tenable.
7.   Next, Mr. Hansaria contended that the NCDRC fell in error by adopting

     an approach which is impermissible in law. Our attention was invited

     to the impugned judgment to show how selectively the NCDRC had

     relied on observations in the reports of Mr. Ahuja, Dr. Prasad and Mr.

     Gupta which tended to support the conclusions reached by it while

     brushing aside the observations which did not support such

     conclusions. According to him, the contents of the reports being

     inseparable the same could not have been accepted in part and

     rejected in part; either it had to be accepted as a whole or rejected

     in toto.
8.   Adverting to the findings of the NCDRC regarding the damage caused

     to the potatoes stored in the Facility, Mr. Hansaria submitted that the

     Respondent was contractually obliged to pay the amount claimed to

     the Appellant at the agreed rate of potatoes as per the Refrigeration

     Policy and that the Appellant had indeed suffered a loss. He indicated
9
that the potato growers, whose stocks were stored at the Facility,

      refused to take back the ammonia affected potatoes and also refused

      to clear their rental dues with the Appellant whilst litigation regarding

      the same was pending before the respective fora. In fact, a writ

      petition filed by the Appellant challenging recovery proceedings

      initiated by the potato growers is pending before the Allahabad High

      Court and that the Appellant still runs the risk of being burdened by

      orders of court to compensate the potato growers whose produce had

      been stored in the Facility.
9.    Contending that the Appellant has been unfairly treated by the

      Respondent and the NCDRC having failed to redress its lawful

      grievance on untenable grounds, the appeal ought to succeed and

      the Appellant be held entitled to relief as claimed before the NCDRC.

Contentions of the Respondent
10.   Mr. Malhotra urged this Court not to disturb the finding of the NCDRC

      in the impugned judgment that the leakage of ammonia was not due

      to any sudden burst or an accidental occurrence. He submitted that

      the Surveyor’s Report was clear in its findings that the leakage of

      ammonia was due to hairline openings along the welding joint of the

      pipes caused by normal wear and tear and, hence, was excluded by

      Exception Clause No. 3 of the Refrigeration Policy.
11.   Further, Mr. Malhotra pointed out that the Appellant had appointed

      the Experts after more than a decade of the incident, and that even

      their reports did not identify any specific cause of the hairline cracks.
10
He then submitted that the said reports did not add any credibility to

       the Appellant’s submissions and were rightly rejected.
12.    Mr. Malhotra also brought to our attention that the Appellant had not

       made any payments to the potato growers as of 24 th July 1998, and

       that there was no loss caused to the Appellant as the stock was not

       owned by it.
13.    Resting on the aforesaid contentions, Mr. Malhotra submitted that the

       appeal being devoid of merits deserves outright dismissal.



Consideration of the cited decisions
14.    Both Mr. Hansaria and Mr. Malhotra invited our attention to several

       decisions of this Court, which we propose to consider hereafter before

       embarking on an appreciation and analysis of the evidence that was

       led by the parties before the NCDRC.
15.    The proper approach in a case of the present nature where there are

       multiple reports of surveyors and experts has been outlined in a

       catena of decisions of this Court. Presently, we wish to advert to the

       decisions cited by the parties.
a.
United India Insurance Company Limited vs. Kantika

              Colour Lab and Others1
, where this Court held that simply

              the happening of a covered event did not entitle the insured to

              claim reimbursement of the amount stated in the policy, and
1
(2010) 6 SCC 449
11
that only upon proof of actual loss could the insured claim

         reimbursement to the extent the same were established.
b. United India Insurance Co. Ltd. and Others vs. Roshan

         Lal Oil Mills Ltd and Others2, where this Court remanded the

         matter back to the NCDRC as due consideration was not placed

         on the joint survey report of the relevant incident on the basis

         of which the insurer had repudiated the claim of the insured;

         and that non-consideration of this important document resulted

         in a serious miscarriage of justice and vitiated the judgment of

         the NCDRC.
c.
Sikka Papers Limited vs. National Insurance Company

         Limited and Others3
, where this Court observed that a

         surveyor’s report was not the final word, and that there must

         be legitimate reasons for departing from such a report.
d.
Sri Venkateswara Syndicate vs. Oriental Insurance

         Company Limited and Another4
where this Court expounded

         on the duties of a surveyor, and the due importance to be given

         to his assessment. It was also observed that an insurance

         company was not bound by a surveyor’s report, but also could

         not go on appointing surveyors one after the other so as to get

         a tailormade report to its satisfaction. Further, in the case that

         it did appoint a second surveyor, satisfactory reasons for the
2
(2000) 10 SCC 19
3
(2009) 7 SCC 777
4
(2009) 8 SCC 507
12
same needed to be provided. It was also laid down that if the

         surveyor’s reports were prepared in good faith and with due

         application of mind – in the absence of any error or ill motive –

         the insurer was not expected to reject the same, and in the

         event of an arbitrary rejection of a surveyor’s report, the courts

         could intervene and correct the error committed by the insurer

         while repudiating the claim of the insured.
e.
New India Assurance Company Limited vs. Pradeep

         Kumar5
where it was observed that a surveyor’s report was not

         the last and final word. Further, it was not that sacrosanct that

         it could not be departed from, and that though it could be the

         foundation/basis of the settlement of a claim, it was not binding

         upon the insurer or the insured.
f.
New India Assurance Co. Ltd. vs. Luxra Enterprises (P)

         Ltd6
and
New     India      Assurance   Co.    Ltd.    vs.    Sri

         Buchiyyamma Rice Mill7
, where this Court relied on
Sri

         Venkateswara         Syndicate
(supra)   to   observe   that    a

         surveyor’s report may be rejected only due to the report

         containing inherent defects, it being arbitrary, excessive, and

         exaggerated,    or    any   such    cogent   reasons   before      the

         appointment of another surveyor.
5
(2009) 7 SCC 787
6
(2019) 6 SCC 36
7
(2020) 12 SCC 105
13
g.
National    Insurance       Company     Ltd.   vs.   Hareshwar

            Enterprises (P) Ltd and Others8
where this Court, relying on
Pradeep Kumar
(supra), observed that while the assessment

            of loss by an approved surveyor was a prerequisite for

            settlement of the claim, it was not the last and final word.

            Further, it was not that sacrosanct so as not to warrant a

            departure if necessary. Further, the report was not binding on

            either party, and could be taken on as evidence until more

            reliable evidence was brought on record to rebut the contents

            of the surveyor’s report.
h.
Khatema Fibres Ltd. vs. New India Assurance Company

            Ltd.9
where this Court, while discussing the scope of the

            expression deficiency, stated that the appellant should be able

            to establish either that the surveyor did not comply with the

            code of conduct in respect of its duties, responsibilities, and

            other professional requirements or that the insurer acted

            arbitrarily in rejecting the whole or a part of the surveyor's

            report.
It also reiterated the dicta of
Pradeep Kumar
(supra)

            as discussed hereinabove. Further, this Court held that a

            consumer forum, which was primarily concerned with an

            allegation of deficiency in service, cannot subject the surveyor's

            report to forensic examination. Once it was found that there
8
(2021) SCC OnLine SC 628
9
(2021) SCC OnLine SC 818
14
was no inadequacy in the quality, nature, and manner of

            performance of the duties and responsibilities of the surveyor,

            and that the report is not based on adhocism or vitiated by

            arbitrariness, then the jurisdiction of the forum to go further

            would stop.
Analysis
16.   The issue which arises for determination, in the present appeal, lies

      within a narrow compass, i.e., whether the NCDRC was justified in

      rejecting the Complaint of the Appellant holding that there is no

      deficiency of service on the part of the Respondent. While deciding

      this issue, we would necessarily be required to assess the relative

      weightage to be placed on the report of the Surveyor appointed by

      the Respondent as well as the reports of the Loss Assessor and the

      Experts appointed by the Appellants regarding the possible cause for

      leakage of ammonia gas. That there were four reports on record

      before the NCDRC, one from the side of the Respondent and three

      from the Appellant’s side, is not in dispute.
17.   As our discussion hereafter would reveal, much depends on the

      answer to the question as to what was the ‘make’ of the pipes that

      were installed in the Chambers and through which ammonia gas

      leaked. It would have been fair, just, and expedient if direct and not

      opinion evidence was placed before the NCDRC by the parties or if

      the NCDRC itself had called upon an expert to give his opinion on the

      make of the pipes in view of the NCDRC not accepting the Appellant’s
15
claim that it was of make Tata Steel C Grade Heavy Duty. The answer

      to such question would have been clinching. It would have been

      proper for us, in the light of the aforesaid circumstance, to remand

      the Complaint to the NCDRC for a fresh decision. However, having

      regard to the fact that the incident is more than 25 years old, and

      the parties also urged us to render a decision on the merits of this

      appeal, we proceed to decide the contentious issue by this judgment.
18.   At the outset, a reference to the Surveyor’s Report dated 3 rd August

      1998 is merited in some detail since it formed the foundation on

      which the impugned judgment and order of the NCDRC rests. Salient

      observations from the Surveyor’s report are quoted below:
18. Following the Insured’s advice, we were at Mehmoodabad
           on 17th Jan. 1998. We found the area around the cold storage
           was dumped with rotten potatoes. Though the Chamber No. I
           & II, were cleared of the rotten stocks even then the stench
           was unbearable. In order to identify the source of leakage, the
           Compressors were started and the source of leakage identified.
The leakage in both the Chambers were in the liquid ammonia
           pipeline laid out in the top most tier and a thin (hair breadth)
           opening found along the seam (welding joint) through which
           the Gas had leaked. The location of the leakage was identified
           in each Chamber as under:
Chamber No. I: Between Rack No. 199 and 200 as marked on
           the column.
Chamber No. II: Between Rack No. 4/15 & 4/16 as marked on
           the columns.
16
19. It did not require much of an explanation that the hairline
            opening along the welding joint was attributable to wear & tear
            (a contingency clearly excluded under the policy) […].
20. We would once refer to the fact that the hairline crack along
            the welding seam in the liquid Ammonia Pipeline in both
            Chamber Nos. I & II was attributable to the wear and tear of
            the Pipeline – expressly excluded from the scope of insurance
            as per the Policy Conditions. […]
23.    We     would      submit     once     again     that    the
            damage/decomposition of the stocks held in Chamber Nos. 1 &
            II of the Insured’s Cold Storage was not attributable to any of
            the insured peril under the Policy. It is entirely left to National
            Insurance Co. Ltd. to examine and decided as they deem fit
            and proper.
(emphasis ours)
19.   We have noticed that the averments made in paragraph 3(xxxvi) of

      the appeal have not been dealt with by the Respondent in its counter

      affidavit; only the first sentence being relevant, is quoted hereunder:
xxxvi) That on the perusal of the Reply filed to the Complaint
            and the report of M/s Mehta and Padamsey Surveyors Pvt. Ltd.,
            the Appellant came to know that neither a technical expert's
            opinion was obtained nor the pieces of pipes were sent to any
            laboratory by the said Surveyors before recommending the
            repudiation of the Appellant's claim by the said surveyors. […]
17
There being no rebuttal from the side of the Respondent, it stands to

      reason that the Surveyor’s Report was not based on any scientific

      investigation.
20.   As recorded in the Surveyor’s Report, construction works of Chamber

      Nos. 1 and 2 were completed in March 1990 and February 1992

      respectively, whereas the incident of leak of ammonia gas occurred

      in October 1997. It is trite to note that while the Surveyor’s Report

      does advert to certain construction specifications of the Facility but

      the said report makes little mention of the nature of the compound

      (acidic or alkaline) passing through the pipes, its effect on the pipes,

      and does not dwell at all on the potential causes of such a wear and

      tear despite only a few years having lapsed post installation. Further,

      there is no discussion as to the details of the manufacturer, the likely

      lifespan of such installed pipes, and whether such pipelines could

      have developed a hairline crack akin to that of a hair’s breadth within

      5/7 years of their installation. It is undisputed that the Surveyor did

      not send the pieces of damaged pipes to an expert or a laboratory to

      identify the cause of leak. There was neither any oral or documentary

      evidence to support the theory of wear and tear. Also, no reason, far

      less cogent reason, was furnished by the Respondent to arrive at the

      conclusion that the leakage of ammonia occurred due to simple wear

      and tear. Such omission assumes greater importance as the

      Respondent had inspected the Facility prior to renewal of the policies
18
(including the Refrigeration Policy) by the Appellant just a few

      months prior to the incident of gas leak, after which the policies were

      renewed. Significantly, the Appellant after initial purchase of the

      policy went on seeking renewal of the same year after year and the

      Respondent too, on its part, permitted such renewal at regular

      intervals prior to expiry accepting substantial sums as premia,

      lending credence to the argument on behalf of the Appellant that all

      such renewals were preceded by a satisfaction reached by the

      Respondent that providing insurance cover for the Facility would not

      expose it to any risk. More importantly, what is apparent on a perusal

      of the Surveyor’s Report is an ipse dixit that ammonia gas leaked

      because of wear and tear of the pipelines in the Chambers, rather

      than a conclusion drawn on the basis of a process of reasoning having

      regard to all relevant factors.
21.   Whilst considering the rival submissions, useful guidance can be

      drawn from the decisions of this Court in
Hareshwar Enterprises
(supra) and
Pradeep Kumar
(supra) where it was held that though

      the report of a surveyor appointed by the insurance company may be

      considered as evidence while settling a claim, more evidence on

      record could be used to rebut the contents of the same.
22.   In the instant case, the Appellant has placed on record reports of the

      Loss Assessor, and those of the Experts. No doubt, the said reports

      were not obtained in close proximity to the date of the incident of gas

      leak but at this juncture, we may remind ourselves that it was the
19
NCDRC which, vide its order dated 11th May, 2009, had allowed an

      application of the Appellant seeking permission to inspect the pipes,

      which were cut and kept in the custody of the Surveyor, for obtaining

      experts’ reports thereon. It is in pursuance thereof that the Experts

      submitted their reports. If inspection and subsequent reports at such

      distance of time were not to be of any worth, it defies logic as to why,

      in the first place, the application was allowed. Next, if the reports of

      the Experts did not qualify to be considered only because they had a

      belated look at the pipes, on the same analogy the observations

      made by the NCDRC on visual impression thereof a few days before

      delivery of judgment is liable to be discredited and invalidated on the

      self-same ground of delay. We thus find the approach of the NCDRC

      to be flawed.
23.   As Judges, we are not experts in the field of refrigeration of cold

      storages to opine on our own which of the two versions is correct and

      acceptable. This also applies to the members of the NCDRC. We are

      aghast to find that the members, who heard the Complaint, have

      made observations as if they were experts sitting in appeal on the

      reports of the Loss Assessor and the Experts. Within our limited

      jurisdiction, we are only entitled to draw inferences from the

      materials on record including the aforementioned reports, which the

      Respondent could not discredit, and say upon applying the test of

      preponderance of probabilities as to which of the two versions is more

      probable. Be that as it may, we intend to rely on certain general
20
observations made in the reports which the NCDRC did not discard

      with cogent reasons. Since the contents of the Surveyor’s Report and

      those reports placed on record by the Appellant conflict with each

      other, we have thought it prudent to separate the grain and the chaff.
24.   While it is true that the Experts’ reports were based on their visual

      impression of the pipes, it is equally true that it is the Appellant who

      had appointed them. The NCDRC rightly observed that the reports

      “cannot be treated as totally independent as it was the complainant

      who made a choice of his experts”; nevertheless, there are certain

      general observations in such reports to be noticed hereafter which do

      help us in our search for the truth.
25.   The Loss Assessor’s report states that for wear and tear to occur,

      there should have been a chemical active reaction of mechanical

      frictional force; hence, in the present case, due to the lack of such

      factors, the leakage of ammonia was not attributable to decay or

      wear and tear along the welding seam of the said pipes. It also

      discussed the kinds of materials ammonia would be corrosive to,

      where the steel of the present pipes does not find a mention. There

      is also a discussion on the make of the concerned pipes being of Tata

      Steel C Grade Heavy Duty, and those of its specifications as per the

      product catalogue. It then stated that as per the said specifications,

      the life of such pipes would be beyond 25 years, and to say that their

      failure was due to wear and tear within 10 years of installation does

      not hold good. It also remarked that any failure caused by wear and
21
tear would be preceded by marks of corrosion; further, the pipes were

      also said to be painted with anticorrosive paint for protection against

      deterioration. Hence, it was concluded, that leak of ammonia gas was

      a natural outcome not related to ageing or normal wear and tear.
26.   Dr. Prasad, in his report, while considering the thickness and class of

      pipes and the nature of ammonia, noted that there was no possibility

      of wear and tear. He went on to state that such C Class pipes operate

      without any issues for 20 to 25 years, and that the present sudden

      leakage of ammonia can only be explained as an accidental

      happening.
27.   Mr. Gupta’s report observed that the Facility was in conformity with

      all relevant safety norms prescribed for running such a cold storage

      facility. It further noted that the pipelines and equipment in the

      Facility (Chambers) were 5 to 7 years old as Chamber No. 1 was

      constructed in 1990 and Chamber No. 2 in 1992. Pertinently, Mr.

      Gupta observed that wear and tear would take place only when there

      was movement and friction between two objects. In the present case,

      his report stated that there was no sort of movement, vibration, or

      air resistance. He further pointed out that anhydrous ammonia

      flowing through the pipes, being alkaline, could not damage them,

      unlike an acidic compound which could attack the pipes. The report

      also proceeded to indicate that the lifespan of such mild steel pipes

      (C Class pipes) would be around 20 years and ruled against 5 to 7

      years old pipes being worn out.
22
28.   While the reports were such, on the one hand the NCDRC refused to

      give credence to the reports of the Loss Assessor and the Experts

      appointed by the Appellant on the ground that such reports, obtained

      belatedly, did not also contain any definite opinion as to what was

      the real cause of the cracks; yet, on the other hand, the NCDRC

      picked up stray observations contained in the reports to reject the

      claim of the Appellant. We are in agreement with Mr. Hansaria that it

      was not open to the NCDRC to rely on portions of the reports which

      supported its conclusions drawn from its visual impression of the

      pipes and discard the rest because the observations came in conflict

      with such conclusions. The NCDRC ought to have either accepted or

      rejected the reports in full and not accept/reject the same in part,

      since the contents were to be read as a whole, not being severable.
29.   In the light of Exception Clause 3 and in the context of the Complaint

      of the Appellant read together with the Expert’s reports, we are

      inclined to the view that wear and tear would generally refer to the

      expected deterioration of the plant and equipment caused by

      frictional force. The Surveyor’s Report is conspicuously silent on this

      aspect. The Surveyor identified the cause for the leak as wear and

      tear, without delving deep into the matter as to whether the pipes

      that were used were likely to develop such wear and tear within 7

      and 5 years of their installation in the two Chambers. There was

      nothing in the report to suggest that the Appellant had failed to

      maintain the Facility satisfactorily for inferring wear and tear. Thus,
23
there was absence of material resting whereon it could be pointed

      out by the Surveyor that even a normal and gradual wear and tear

      by passage of time resulted in the cracks developing on the surface

      of the pipes.
30.   Absence of consideration of relevant factors is, therefore, writ large

      on the Surveyor’s Report. The reports of the Loss Assessor and the

      Experts dwelled on general aspects of scientific observations relating

      to the absence of friction or movement when ammonia passes

      through the pipes and its alkalinity (non-acidic nature) not being

      corrosive to the pipes as well as the manufacturing details, and

      specifications of the pipes, which are conspicuous by their absence in

      the Surveyor’s report. It seems, all relevant factors were not

      considered in the proper perspective by the Surveyor, yet, such

      Surveyor’s Report was relied on by the Respondent to defeat the

      claim of the Appellant. The report having recorded the ipse dixit of

      the Surveyor, without any reference to the aforesaid aspects touched

      upon by the Loss Assessor and the Experts, the same is, in our

      opinion, not worthy of acceptance.
31.   The observation of the NCDRC that the pipes used in the Chambers

      were not seamless and had welding joints was apparently made to

      discard the reports of the Loss Assessor and the Experts. The Loss

      Assessor and the Experts had opined that the pipes were seamless.

      If at all the NCDRC had reason not to rely on the reports of the Loss

      Assessor and the Experts with regard to the make, quality, thickness,
24
and other features of the C Class Pipes, instead of relying on its

       opinion based on a visual impression of the pipes, it ought to have

       ordered an examination of the same by an independent expert in

       exercise of power conferred on it by
Section 22(1)
read with
Section

       13(4)(iv)
of the CPA. Although the said power is to be sparingly used,

       this was, in our opinion, a fit and proper case calling for exercise of

       the power. It seems to us that the NCDRC made observations in the

       impugned judgment as if its members were experts in the relevant

       field and clothed with authority to sit in appeal over the same.
32.    Considering all these factors and the attending circumstances and by

       applying the standard of proof of preponderance of probabilities, we

       feel inclined to lean in favour of the inference that the version of the

       Appellant, was more probable, i.e., that the leak of ammonia gas was

       not occasioned due to wear and tear (as claimed by the Respondent)

       but was the outcome of an accident10 which was not foreseen and

       beyond its control and not covered by any of the exceptions in the

       Refrigeration Policy (Exception Clause 3) so as to entitle the

       Respondent to claim immunity for the ultimate purpose of repudiating

       the insurance claim lodged by the Appellant.
33.    We hold that the NCDRC committed serious error by not giving the

       reports placed on record by the Appellant the extent of credence the

       same deserved. The manner in which the NCDRC dealt with such
10
Accident, according to the Cambridge Dictionary, is something bad that happens
       that is not expected or intended and that often damages something or injures
       someone.
25
reports was not proper and legal; major part of the reports could not

      have been rejected and only stray observations relied upon to

      support the conclusions. This is one of the foremost reasons which

      compels us to interfere with the impugned judgment and order. The

      other reason assigned by the NCDRC that the Appellant did not have

      to pay compensation to the potato growers is equally untenable. The

      Appellant has brought on record particulars of certain proceedings at

      the instance of the potato growers which, having reached the

      Allahabad High Court, is being pursued by it. In any event, the fact

      that the Appellant has not paid compensation to the potato growers

      as yet is hardly a factor for determining whether the Respondent was

      justified in repudiating the insurance claim on the basis of the

      Surveyor’s Report for damage caused to the stock of potatoes, which

      was duly insured, because of the accident.
34.   Repudiation of the insurance claim by the Respondent, on facts and

      in the circumstances, is held to amount to deficiency in service on its

      part. We, therefore, see no reason to accept any of the grounds

      assigned by the NCDRC for rejection of the Complaint.


Conclusion
35.   Since we have noticed, for the foregoing reasons, that the impugned

      judgment and order of the NCDRC, on merits, is indefensible and that

      there has indeed been a deficiency of service at the end of the

      Respondent, we are of the considered view that ends of justice would
26
be sufficiently served by granting to the Appellant a lumpsum amount

      of Rs. 2,25,00,000/- towards full and final settlement of the insurance

      claim. It is ordered accordingly. Let such amount be released by the

      Respondent to the Appellant within two months from date. Should

      there be a failure in this regard, the said amount shall carry interest

      @ 10% p.a. till the amount is paid.
36.   The present appeal is accordingly allowed to the extent as aforesaid

      and pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
37.   No costs.
..........................., J.
[A.S. BOPANNA]




                                                     ..........................., J.
[DIPANKAR DATTA]
  NEW DELHI;
8TH AUGUST, 2023.
27