[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Asma Shaw vs The Islamia College Of Science And ... on 8 August, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
,
Abhay S. Oka
2023 INSC 690


                                                                      NON­REPORTABLE

                                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                              CIVIL APPEAL NO.4951 of 2023

                                   Asma Shaw                               …..Appellant
                                                          Versus

                                   The Islamia College of
                                   Science & Commerce
                                   Srinagar Kashmir & Ors.             …..Respondents




                                                      JUDGMENT
Abhay S. Oka, J.
FACTS
1.   On the basis of an advertisement published by
                                   the 6th respondent – the University of Kashmir, the
                                   appellant applied for the post of Lecturer in the
                                   Academic Staff College of the 6 th respondent.   The 6th
                                   respondent appointed the appellant to the said post on
                                   tenure basis from 08th September 2001.           The 1st
                                   respondent­College which is a college fully aided by the
                                   State Government published an advertisement inviting
                                   applications for various posts including the post of
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Lecturer in English.   The appellant applied as an in­
   Date: 2023.08.08
   18:07:26 IST
   Reason:
Page 1 of 12
C.A.No.4951/23
service candidate and her application was forwarded by
       the Academic Staff College of the 6 th respondent to the
       1st   respondent.       Accordingly,     the    appellant    was
       appointed as a Lecturer in English on a regular
       temporary basis with the 1st respondent college w.e.f.
       16th June 2005. The appellant was initially appointed
       by the 6th respondent in the pay scale of Rs.8000­275­
       13500. The 1st respondent appointed the appellant in
       the same pay scale.       However, her pay admissible on
       the date of her appointment with the 1 st respondent was
       not protected.        Therefore, the appellant made a
       representation to the 1st respondent to grant pay
       protection.       On 02nd January 2012, the College
       Executive Committee of the 1st respondent took a
       decision not to grant pay protection to the appellant on
       the ground that the appellant was holding a tenure post
       of a limited duration with the Academic Staff College of
       the 6th respondent. The case of the appellant was again
       considered by the College Executive Committee of the
       first respondent on 28th October 2014 and the same
       decision was taken which was communicated to the
       appellant by a letter dated 26th November 2014.
2.        Being   aggrieved   by   the   said    decision,   the
       appellant preferred a writ petition in the High Court of
       Jammu & Kashmir. By judgment dated 24 th September
       2018, learned Single Judge allowed the petition and
Page 2 of 12
C.A.No.4951/23
directed the 1st respondent to grant benefit of pay
       protection to the appellant and to pay the consequential
       arrears.      By the impugned judgment dated 25 th
       February 2022, a Division Bench of the High Court
       interfered and dismissed the writ petition filed by the
       appellant.
SUBMISSIONS
3.        The learned counsel appearing for the appellant
       submitted that the appointment of the appellant was
       not on a tenure post but it was on a regular post. The
       initial appointment of the appellant was on a tenure
       basis and as per the Guidelines for Academic Staff
       Colleges issued by the University Grants Commission,
       after assessment of the performance of the appellant,
       the tenure of the appellant was extendable up to the
       age of 62 years. Learned counsel pointed out that as
       provided in the advertisement published by the 6 th
       respondent, the appellant was granted the benefit of
       Government         Provident     Fund­cum­Pension­cum­
       Gratuity. He submitted that in terms of Article 77­D of
       the Jammu & Kashmir Civil Service Regulations (for
       short, ‘the Regulations’) the appellant was entitled to
       the benefit of pay protection as she was not covered by
       an exception carved out in the form of third proviso to
       Article 77­D.     He would, therefore, submit that the
       Division Bench has committed an error by holding that
Page 3 of 12
C.A.No.4951/23
the post to which the appellant was appointed by the
       6th respondent was a temporary or ad­hoc post.
4.        Learned counsel appearing for the 1 st respondent
       while supporting the view taken by the Division Bench
       urged that the appointment of the appellant was not on
       a permanent basis but was for a fixed tenure.
       Therefore, the third proviso to Article 77­D was
       applicable. He submitted that in any event, Article 77­
       D was not applicable to the appellant as she was no
       longer in the employment of the 6 th respondent­
       University. He urged that the appointment made by the
       1st respondent of the appellant to the post of Lecturer
       was a fresh appointment and, therefore, there was no
       question of fixing her pay by protecting the pay which
       she was lastly drawing while working with the 6th
       respondent. His submission is that the view taken by
       the Division Bench was the correct view.
OUR VIEW
5.        We have carefully considered the submissions
       and perused the pleadings and the documents on
       record. Though the learned counsel appearing for the
       1st respondent tried to submit that the Regulations were
       not applicable to the appellant, such a stand was not
       taken either in the counter affidavit filed before the
       High Court or in the counter affidavit filed before this
       Court. In fact, in the counter affidavit filed by the
Page 4 of 12
C.A.No.4951/23
Principal of the 1st respondent, a specific stand has
       been taken that the appellant is disentitled to any pay
       protection as she does not meet the requirements of
       Article 77­D of the Regulations.           In clause (a) of
       paragraph 6 of the counter affidavit filed by the 2nd
       respondent, it is stated thus :
“6. … … …
(a) The Petitioner herein is not entitled
                     to any pay protection inasmuch as
                     her    case    does    not    meet     the
                     requirements of Article 77­D of the
                     Jammu and Kashmir Civil Service
                     Regulations, 1956, as is applicable to
                     the employees of the College, of
                     holding    a    post   on    substantive
                     capacity. The Petitioner was admittedly
                     working on tenure basis in the
                     University of Kashmir for a limited
                     period. A bare reading of the order
                     dated    08.09.2001     appointing     the
                     Petitioner as Lecturer in the University
                     makes it clear that the said appointment
                     was on tenure basis. The said post
                     being on tenure basis cannot be termed
                     ‘a post on substantive capacity’.       As
                     such, her previous service in the
                     University cannot be counted towards
                     her seniority and other service benefits.”

                                         (emphasis added)

       Thus, the stand of the 1st and 2nd respondents was that
       the staff of the 1st respondent was governed by Article
       77­D.       But, the case of the appellant falls in the
Page 5 of 12
C.A.No.4951/23
exception carved out by the third proviso to Article 77­
       D.     Thus, it was never in dispute that the said
       Regulations were applicable to the appellant while
       serving with the Academic Staff College of the 6th
       respondent and continued to apply even after she took
       up employment with the 1st respondent.
6.        Article 77­D deals with the fixation of pay in
       cases of direct recruits. Article 77­D starts with a non
       obstante clause which provides that notwithstanding
       anything contained in the Regulations, the provisions of
       Article 77­D shall govern the pay of a government
       servant who is appointed to another service/cadre or
       department on direct recruitment basis.          It provides
       that such a person shall draw pay at the minimum of
       the time scale. However, under the 1 st proviso, it is laid
       down       that   where   a   government       servant     was
       immediately before such appointment holding a post in
       substantive capacity and was drawing pay equal to or
       more than the time scale of the service, his pay at the
       time of subsequent appointment to the new post shall
       be regularized. In short, in such a case, the pay drawn
       by   the    government    servant   at   the   time   of   his
       appointment to another service remains protected. The
       third proviso is the exception to the rule contained in
       the main part of Article 77­D.           The 1st and 2nd
       respondents are relying upon the said proviso. It reads
Page 6 of 12
C.A.No.4951/23
thus :
“Provided also that the benefit of this rule
                 shall not be available to a person who at
                 the time of his appointment to the new
                 service/post was holding a post on adhoc
                 basis   or   was     working    against    a
                 leave/suspension or any other short term
                 vacancy.”

       Thus, the only question for consideration is whether the
       appellant was holding a post in Academic Staff College
       on    ad­hoc      basis   or   was   working    against    a
       leave/suspension or any other short­term vacancy. For
       the reasons which we have set out hereafter, the said
       question will have to be answered in favour of the
       appellant.
7.        We have perused the advertisement published by
       the 6th respondent for inviting applications to various
       posts (total 42). The post at serial no.2 is of Lecturer in
       the Academic Staff College for which the appellant had
       applied. There are three columns in the portion of the
       said advertisement which describes the posts. The 1 st
       column is of Department/Institute; the 2nd column
       contains the description of the posts and the 3rd column
       contains the number of posts. As against some of the
       posts, it is specifically mentioned that either the post
       was temporary or was a ‘plan post’.        Against some of
       the posts, it is mentioned that the same was temporary
       but was likely to become permanent.               What is
Page 7 of 12
C.A.No.4951/23
important is that against the post held by the appellant,
       there is no remark that either it was a temporary post
       or a plan post. What is written in the bracket against
       the said post is “tenure basis”. Thus, the post was not
       ad hoc or temporary or plan post.                The post was
       permanent on which appointment was to be made on
       tenure basis.
8.        Clause III of the advertisement provides that the
       substantive posts shall carry G.P. Fund­cum­Pension­
       cum­Gratuity or C.P. Fund benefits at the option of the
       appointee.      The appellant was granted the benefit of
       G.P. Fund which is another indication that her post
       was substantive.
9.        There is a difference between a tenure post and
       an appointment made on a regular post on a tenure
       basis. The advertisement mentions that the post is not
       a tenure post but the appointment to that post will be
       made on a tenure basis.          The reason for this is the
       Guidelines for Academic Staff Colleges framed by the
       University      Grants      Commission.        The     Guidelines
       provided that the appointment to the post of director,
       reader and lecturer will be on a tenure basis for a
       period     of   five    years.   There    is   a provision     for
       continuation       of    appointment     on    these   posts   on
       assessment of the incumbent concerned by a committee
       having the same constitution as for their appointment,
Page 8 of 12
C.A.No.4951/23
subject to the condition that the incumbent on these
       posts will retire at the age of 62 years or as per
       prevailing norms of the university. Accordingly, in the
       order of appointment issued by the 6th respondent, it is
       specifically mentioned that the appellant was appointed
       as a Lecturer in the Academic Staff College in the pay
       scale of Rs.8000­275­13500 on tenure basis. In fact,
       the qualifications for the post of reader/lecturer in
       Academic Staff Colleges clearly lay down that the
       appointment to the post of director, reader and lecturer
       will be on tenure basis for a period of five years with a
       provision     for   continuation    on   these   posts   on
       assessment of the incumbent concerned subject to the
       condition that incumbent will retire after completing
       the age of 62 years.
10.       Therefore, the appointment of the appellant with
       the Academic Staff College of the 6th respondent was
       not against a short­term vacancy.        The appellant was
       not holding the post of Lecturer in Academic Staff
       College on ad­hoc basis and was not working against
       leave/suspension vacancy.          Therefore, the exception
       carved out by the third proviso to Article 77­D will not
       apply as the appointment of the appellant was on a
       substantive post on a tenure basis with a provision to
       continue the same till the age of 62 years.
Page 9 of 12
C.A.No.4951/23
11.       The   advertisement        published      by     the     1st
       respondent on 11th June 2004 specifically permitted in­
       service     candidates    to    apply     by     sending         their
       applications      through      the     respective        appointing
       authorities.     Accordingly, by a letter dated 22nd June
       2004, the Assistant Registrar of the 6th respondent­
       University forwarded the application of the appellant to
       the 2nd respondent. It is specifically stated in the said
       letter that the appellant was working on a tenure basis.
       Accordingly, by the order dated 16th June 2005, the
       appellant was appointed on the establishment of the 1 st
       respondent on probation for a period of two years.
       Thus, this is a case of a government servant taking
       employment in another service or cadre.
12.       At this stage, it may be noted that as provided in
       the Constitution of the 1st respondent College, the same
       is completely financed by J&K Government for both
       plan and non­plan accounts. In the Introductory Note
       to the Constitution, it is mentioned that the 1st
       respondent was established at the instance of the then
       Prime Minister of Jammu & Kashmir.               Moreover, the
       Constitution provides that the Governing Body shall
       carry out the business and affairs of the College of
       which 70% must be members nominated by the State
       Government.       In fact, it is provided that the Hon’ble
       Chief Minister of Jammu & Kashmir will be the
Page 10 of 12
C.A.No.4951/23
Chairman of the Body.       That is how the Government
       has all pervasive control over the 1st respondent. That
       is the reason why while filing the pleadings, the 1 st and
       2nd respondents have proceeded on the footing that
       Article 77­D was applicable to those government
       servants     who   were   appointed   to   a   post     in   1 st
       respondent­College.
13.       The entire approach of the Division Bench was
       erroneous when it came to the conclusion that the
       appellant was not appointed on a substantive basis
       and, therefore, she does not satisfy the criteria laid
       down by Article 77­D.          The Division Bench has
       completely ignored that the only exception carved out to
       Article 77­D was in respect of a government servant
       holding a post on ad­hoc basis or working against
       leave/suspension or any other short­term vacancy.
       Hence, the case of the appellant was not covered by the
       said exception carved out to the third proviso by Article
       77­D.
14.       Therefore, the impugned decision of the Division
       Bench cannot be sustained and the decision of the
       learned Single Judge which directs that pay protection
       should be given to the appellant, needs to be restored.
15.       Accordingly, by setting aside the impugned
       judgment and order dated 25th February 2022 passed in
       LPASW No.184 of 2018 we restore the judgment dated
Page 11 of 12
C.A.No.4951/23
24th September 2018 rendered by the learned Single
       Judge of the Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh High
       Court in Writ Petition (SWP No.1735 of 2015).              We
       direct the 1st and 2nd respondents to pass a formal order
       giving the benefit of pay protection to the appellant.
       The order shall be passed within a period of one month
       from today.      Within a period of three months from
       today, arrears payable to the appellant on account of
       fixation of pay as aforesaid shall be paid to her.
16.       The appeal is accordingly allowed with no order
       as to costs.
…….………………………………..J.
                                [ABHAY S. OKA]


                                ..…..………………………………..J.
                                [PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA]

       New Delhi
       Dated : August 08, 2023.
Page 12 of 12
C.A.No.4951/23