[Cites
16
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Experion Developers Private Limited vs Himanshu Dewan And Sonali Dewan on 18 August, 2023
Author:
Bela M. Trivedi
Bench:
Bela M. Trivedi
REPORTABLE
2023INSC748

                                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1434 OF 2023


                    EXPERION DEVELOPERS PRIVATE LIMITED                                 .....     APPELLANT

                                                        VERSUS

                    HIMANSHU DEWAN AND SONALI DEWAN
                    AND OTHERS                      .....                                       RESPONDENTS



                                                              JUDGMENT
SANJIV KHANNA, J.
The instant appeal filed by M/s. Experion Developers Private

                                   Limited1 under
Section 67
of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 2,

                                   is directed against the order and judgment dated 16.01.2023

                                   passed        by     the       National   Consumer     Disputes   Redressal

                                   Commission3, in the Consumer Case No. 34/2022, whereby the

                                   appellant has been directed to refund to Himanshu Dewan &

                                   Sonali Dewan & Others4, the amount collected towards excess
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Deepak Guglani
Date: 2023.08.19
12:50:46 IST
1 For short, “the appellant”.
Reason:
2 For short, “the Act”.
3 For short, “National Commission”.
4 For short, “the respondents”.
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                             Page 1 of 34
sale area, and to execute supplementary correction deeds within

        six weeks from the date of the order.
2.      The appellant in the instant case had developed and constructed

        the apartments in a housing project, namely “Windchants”,

        situated in Gurgaon, Haryana. The respondents are the allottees

        or the subsequent purchasers/buyers of their apartments. The

        contractual terms inter-se are governed by the “Apartment Buyer

        Agreement”5.
3.      Clause 8 of the agreement pertains to the “CHANGES AND

        VARIATIONS IN THE SALE AREA”. The relevant part of Clause

        8.6(ii) and Clause 8.7 read: -
“8.6 While every attempt shall be made to adhere to
                   the Sale Area, in case any changes result in any
                   revision in the Sale Area, the Company shall advise
                   the Buyer in writing along with the commensurate
                   increase/decrease in Total Sale Consideration based,
                   however, upon the BSP as agreed herein. Subject
                   otherwise to the terms and conditions of this
                   Agreement, a maximum of 10% variation in the Sale
                   Area and the commensurate variation in the Total Sale
                   Consideration is agreed to be acceptable to the Buyer
                   and the Buyer undertakes to be bound by such
                   increase/decrease in the Sale Area and the
                   commensurate increase/decrease in the Total Sale
                   Consideration. For any increase/decrease in the Sale
                   Area, the payment for the same shall be required to be
                   adjusted at the time of Notice of Possession or
                   immediately in case of any transfer of the apartment
                   before the Notice of Possession or as otherwise
                   advised by the Company.
5 For short, “the agreement”.
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                          Page 2 of 34
8.7 If any of the Changes leads to any change in sale
                 area of the apartment in excess of Ten Percent (10%)
                 of the Sale Area mentioned herein at any time prior to
                 the execution of the Conveyance Deed for the
                 Apartment and such variation is unacceptable to
                 Buyer, all attempts shall be made by the Company to
                 offer an alternate apartment of a sale area similar to
                 the Sale Area of the Apartment within a maximum of
                 10% variation in the Sale area within the Group
                 Housing Colony subject to availability. If such alternate
                 apartment is available, the applicable Total Sale
                 Consideration for such alternate apartment shall be
                 payable/refundable, as the case may be, for the sale
                 area of the alternate apartment at the BSP mentioned
                 herein and there shall be no claim against the
                 Company in respect of the Apartment nor shall
                 otherwise be raised by the Buyer in this regard at any
                 time.”
4.      The expression “Sale Area” as defined in Clause 1(xlviii), reads: -
“1. (xlviii) - ‘Sale Area’ shall include the covered area,
                 inclusive of areas enclosed by the periphery walls,
                 balconies/ decks, area under the columns and wails,
                 half of the area of walls common with other premises,
                 cupboads, projections/ledges, area utilized for the
                 common services and facilities provided viz. areas
                 in/under staircases, circulation areas, walls atriums,
                 stilts, lift shafts and lobbies, lift machine rooms, service
                 shafts, passages/ corridors, refuge areas, common
                 washrooms/toilets, mails rooms, all electrical plumbing
                 and fire shafts, community facilities, common service
                 rooms, security rooms, sewage treatment plants,
                 underground and overhead water storage tanks,
                 DG/panel room, terrace gardens, air handling units,
                 pantries and any other areas which have been paid for
                 or are constructed by the Company for common use,
                 but shall exclude the areas under the following:-
a) Sites for retail shops and other
                          commercial areas in the Project.
b) Amenities such as schools, medical
                          centre/dispensary, creche, other health
                          centers and the like.
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                              Page 3 of 34
c) Dwelling units for the economically
                          weaker sections as prescribed under
                          Applicable Laws.
d) Car Parking Spaces”
5.     According to the appellant, there was an increase in the sale area,

       earlier provisionally allotted to the respondents, and therefore vide

       communication/letter dated 27.04.2017, the respective allottees

       were informed about the increase and revision in the sale area of

       their apartments. Accordingly, the differential demand letters on

       account of such increase were issued by the appellant to the

       allottees of the apartments, including the respondents. The

       respondents/their respective previous allottees made payments

       towards the differential demand without any demur or protest

       between the period December 2017 to August 2018, and the

       appellant executed the conveyance deeds in their favour between

       the period April 2018 to September 2019.
6.     Subsequently, the respondents on 25.02.2022 filed a complaint

       being Consumer Case No. 34/2022 before the                  National

       Commission seeking a refund of the amounts paid by them

       towards the increased sale area alleging, inter alia, that there was

       neither increase in the carpet area nor in the built-up area, and

       that the demand towards increase in the sale area made by the

       appellant was illegal.
The respondents relied upon the decision
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                     Page 4 of 34
dated 26.08.2020 rendered by the National Commission in the

       case of
Pawan Gupta v. Experion Developers Private Limited.6
7.     The case was resisted by the appellant by filing a reply

       challenging the very maintainability of the consumer case and

       contending, inter alia, that no ‘cause of action’ had arisen.
According to the appellant, respondent nos. 1, 2 and 5 were the

       subsequent allottees, who came into picture much after the

       increase in the sale area and raising of demand therefor. Even the

       payments for the same were made by their concerned

       predecessor allottees without any protest. In case of respondent

       no. 6, the predecessor allottee was already intimated about the

       increase in the sale area and had not objected to the increase.

       Respondent no. 6 was, thus, well aware of the increase in the sale

       area and had made payments towards the same without any

       protest. Other respondents also had made payments towards the

       increase in the sale area without any protest. It was further

       contended that as per
Section 69
of the Act, a consumer

       complaint could be filed within two years from the date when the

       ‘cause of action’ arises. In the instant case, the ‘cause of action’

       had arisen on 27.04.2017, when the demand for the increased

       area was raised by the appellant. The complaint was filed before


6 2020 SCC OnLine NCDRC 788.
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                    Page 5 of 34
the National Commission on 25.02.2022, that is, about five years

       after the ‘cause of action’ had arisen and three years after the

       lapse of limitation period. Relying upon the certificates, reports

       and affidavits of the architects, it was contended that there was an

       actual increase in the sale area of the apartments as mentioned

       therein and therefore, the charges demanded were valid and

       legal, in terms of Clause 8 of the agreement.
8.     The respondents in the rejoinder had contended that due to the

       Covid pandemic, the period of limitation was suspended during

       the period from 15.03.2020 to 28.02.2022 by this Court in terms of

       the directions issued in Suo Moto Writ Petition (Civil) No. 3 of

       2020, and hence, the claim of the respondents was within the

       period of limitation. In the communication/letter dated 27.04.2017,

       intimating the purported increase in the sale area, the appellant

       had not placed any material or evidence to justify the increase in

       the area. They allege that the reports and certificates of the

       architects are all post-dated records, which cannot be taken as the

       basis for justifying the increase in the sale area.
9.     The National Commission, as stated herein above, by the

       impugned judgment has directed the appellant to refund the

       amount       and execute supplementary/correction deeds. The
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                    Page 6 of 34
appellant being aggrieved by the same, has preferred the present

        appeal.
10.     Heard the learned Senior Advocates Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi

        and Mr. Amit Sibal appearing for the appellant, and the learned

        Senior Advocate Mr. Bishwajit Bhattacharyya appearing for the

        respondents.
11.     At the outset, we must record our disagreement with the finding

        recorded by the National Commission as to the ‘continuing cause

        of action’ till 26.08.2020, which is the date when the question of

        the excess sale area was decided by the National Commission in

        CC Nos. 285/2018 and 286/2018 titled
Pawan Gupta v. Experion

        Developers Private Limited
. The issue of limitation has to be

        decided as per the provisions in the enactment, in the instant case
Section 697
of the Act, which prescribes a two years limitation to

        file a complaint from the date on which the ‘cause of action’ has

        arisen. The ‘cause of action’ means every fact, which, if traversed,



7 69. Limitation period.—(1) The District Commission, the State Commission or the National
Commission shall not admit a complaint unless it is filed within two years from the date on which the
cause of action has arisen.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a complaint may be entertained after
the period specified in sub-section (1), if the complainant satisfies the District Commission, the State
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, that he had sufficient cause for not
filing the complaint within such period:
Provided that no such complaint shall be entertained unless the District Commission or the State
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, records its reasons for condoning
such delay.
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                                              Page 7 of 34
is necessary to prove in order to support the claimant’s right to

         judgment, is not dependant on a decision in another case by an

         allottee raising a similar issue.
12.      As per the respondents, the ‘cause of action’ arose when the

         payments towards the increase in the sale area were made, and

         thereupon, the conveyance deeds were executed between April

         2018 to September 2019. They also submit, on account of the

         Covid pandemic, the period from 15.03.2020 to 28.02.2022 has to

         be excluded in terms of the directions issued by this Court in Suo

         Moto Writ Petition (Civil) No. 3 of 2020. Since the complaints were

         made on 25.02.2022, and on exclusion of the period between

         15.03.2020 to 28.02.2022, the complaints would be well within the

         limitation of two years from the date on which the ‘cause of action’

         had arisen as prescribed in
Section 69
of the Act.
13.      The appellant, relying upon Section 9 8 of the Limitation Act, 1963,

         which provides that once limitation starts running no subsequent

         disability or inability to institute a suit or make an application would

         stop it, have argued that the ‘cause of action’ arose and

         commenced on 27.04.2017, which is when the appellant had
8 9. Continuous running of time.—Where once time has begun to run, no subsequent disability or
inability to institute a suit or make an application stop it:
Provided that, where letters of administration to the estate of a creditor have been granted to his
debtor, the running of the period of limitation for a suit to recover the debt shall be suspended while
the administration continues.
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                                             Page 8 of 34
intimated the increase in the sale area and, consequently, the

       enhancement of price. Accordingly, in terms of
Section 69
of the

       Act, which prescribes the limitation of two years from the date on

       which the ‘cause of action’ has arisen, the limitation had come to

       an end on 26.04.2019. Therefore, the respondents would not be

       entitled to the benefit of exclusion of the period from 15.03.2020 to

       28.02.2022.
14.    Having gone through the wording of the communication/letter

       dated 27.04.2017, we do not find any merit in the submission of

       the appellant. The communication/letter dated 27.04.2017 by the

       appellant states that the construction work was in progress and

       that the appellant would soon be starting the occupation certificate

       process. Further, with the project reaching the handover stage, the

       appellant had got clarity on the overall areas and subsequent

       impact on the respective units. As per the calculation, the sale

       area of the apartment had increased by the square feet as

       indicated in the communication dated 27.04.2017. We do not read

       the communication/letter as the starting point of the ‘cause of

       action’. ‘Cause of action’ being the foundation of the claim refers

       to the entire set or bundle of facts necessary and material to prove

       in order to get a judgment. It refers to a definite point of time when

       the requisite ingredients constituting that ‘cause of action’ are
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                      Page 9 of 34
complete. The ‘cause of action’ is complete when they provide the

       aggrieved party with the right to invoke jurisdiction of the

       court/forum. The test is to determine when the aggrieved person

       could have first maintained action for a successful result. In our

       opinion, the communication/letter dated 27.04.2017 was an

       assertion, albeit without any specific details or particulars. The

       appellant, as per the contractual terms, is well within their right to

       ask for enhanced sale consideration on increase in the sale area

       as defined. The respondents have not questioned and challenged

       this right of the appellant. They have challenged the computation

       and calculations. The respondents have the right to ask for

       calculations and details, when the appellant had stated that the

       sale area had increased. On being satisfied with the calculation,

       the respondents could have accepted the increase in the sale

       area, if the same was in accordance with the agreement. The

       ‘cause of action’ arose when the appellant insisted and compelled

       the respondents/allottees to make payment, but did not furnish the

       details and particulars to enable the respondents/allottees to

       ascertain the actual allocated sale area. One would not expect the

       allottee or the consumer to challenge the demand, which is in

       terms of the contract between the parties, and is therefore not

       questionable. In such cases, no ‘cause of action’ arises. Further,
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                     Page 10 of 34
the onus to justify and substantiate the claim and calculations of

       increased sale area was, and is on the appellant. In the context of

       the present case, it is an accepted position that the sale deeds

       were executed with the respondents between the period from

       13.04.2018 to as late as 09.01.2020. In view of the aforesaid, the

       complaints filed by the respondents cannot be dismissed on the

       ground of being barred by limitation under
Section 69
of the Act.
We also observe that the consumer forums have the power to

       condone the delay when sufficient cause is shown, even after two

       years of the ‘cause of action’ having arisen. While no application

       for condonation of delay was filed, the National Commission could

       have always granted an opportunity to the respondents.
15.    At the same time, we should notice the argument raised by the

       appellant on acquiescence and estoppel, as the respondents are

       seeking a refund of the amount paid without any demur or protest

       about four years after the payments were made. Therefore, it is

       submitted that the plea of deficiency of service is hit by the legal

       bar of acceptance and ones’ previous action and conduct. It is

       highlighted that the conveyance deeds were executed by the

       appellant on the respondents/allottees upon making full payment,

       including the payments with regard to the increased area, and

       such payment, it is submitted, was voluntary and without
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                    Page 11 of 34
reservation. It is also argued by the appellant that it is not even the

       case of the respondents that they/original allottees had made

       payments under some threat, coercion or duress. Therefore, it

       does not lie in the mouth of the respondents to say, rather, they

       were estopped from saying four years after the execution of the

       conveyance deeds in their favour that there was no actual

       increase in the sale area and the demand raised by the appellant

       in that regard was not justified or was illegal.
16.    Similar issues had arisen before this Court in
Wing Commander

       Arifur Rahman Khan and Aleya Sultana and Others v. DLF

       Southern Homes Private Limited and Others
9. This Court

       accepted the argument by the consumers that execution of a deed

       of conveyance by a flat buyer would not preclude a consumer

       claim for compensation for delayed possession in a case where

       the allottees were not given an option, but were rather told that the

       possession would not be given and the conveyance deed would

       not be executed without the acceptance of the offer of possession

       terms. In the said case, the builder/developer had stated that it

       would not handover the possession and execute the conveyance

       deed without acceptance of the offer of possession terms. Any

       request to take over possession and execute the documents

9 (2020) 16 SCC 512.
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                      Page 12 of 34
under protest was untenable. The consumers were, in fact, asked

       to file an unconditional affidavit/undertaking to that effect, as

       execution of documents under protest or claim of coercion was not

       to be entertained.
In this background, this Court in
Arifur

       Rahman Khan
(supra) held that the flat buyers/consumers were

       essentially presented with an unfair choice of either retaining their

       right to pursue their claims, in which event they would not get

       possession or title in the meantime, or to forsake the claims in

       order to perfect their title to the flats for which they had paid

       valuable consideration. Accordingly, the question needed to be

       addressed was whether a flat buyer who seeks to espouse a claim

       against the developer for delayed possession can, as a

       consequence of doing so, be compelled to defer the right to obtain

       a conveyance to perfect their title. This Court held that it would be

       manifestly unreasonable to expect that in order to pursue a claim

       for compensation for delayed handing over of possession, the

       purchaser must indefinitely defer obtaining a conveyance of the

       premises purchased or, if they seek to obtain a deed of

       conveyance to forsake the right to claim compensation. The

       contrary position which the National Commission had espoused,

       this Court was of the view cannot be countenanced and accepted.

       This Court thus rejected the argument that on the execution of the
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                    Page 13 of 34
conveyance deed, the transaction ceases to be a transaction in

       the nature of “supply of services” covered under the
Consumer

       Protection Act, 1986
and becomes a mere sale of immovable

       property and, therefore, it is not amenable to the jurisdiction of the

       consumer fora. At the same time, this Court had refused to

       interfere and grant relief in cases of purchasers who had entered

       into specific settlement deeds with the developers observing that it

       would only be appropriate and proper if the parties were held

       down by the terms of the bargain. The contention that the

       settlement deeds were executed under coercion or under undue

       influence was also not accepted since no specific material had

       been produced on record to demonstrate the same. This Court

       also held that subsequent purchasers cannot benefit from the

       order of this Court therein.
However, this view in re. the

       subsequent purchasers stands overruled by a bench of three

       judges’ in
Laureate Buildwell Private Limited v. Charanjeet

       Singh10
.
In
Laureate Buildwell Private Limited
(supra) the larger

       bench over-ruled the
ratio
laid down in
Arifur Rahman Khan
(supra) to the extent that a subsequent purchaser would not be

       entitled to the benefit of the order passed in case of the original

       allottee. On the other hand, it has been held that the nature and

       extent of relief, to which the subsequent purchaser can be entitled,

10 2021 SCC OnLine SC 479.
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                     Page 14 of 34
is fact and situation dependent. It cannot be argued that a

       subsequent purchaser, who steps into the shoes of the original

       allottee of a housing project in which the builder has not honoured

       its commitment to deliver the flat within the stipulated time, should

       not expect even reasonable time for the performance of builder’s

       obligation. Such an argument, if accepted, would lead to a

       situation where a large number, possibly thousands of flat buyers,

       waiting for their promised flats or residences would be left without

       any relief. Such a conclusion would be arbitrary. In these cases, it

       would be fair to assume that the subsequent purchaser had

       knowledge of the delay, but such knowledge cannot be extended

       to accept the submission that such delay shall continue indefinitely

       based upon an a priori assumption. The equities have to be

       properly moulded.
17.    As these aspects and questions are essentially factual, albeit have

       not been ascertained and addressed in the present case, we

       would pass an order of remand to the National Commission to

       examine the issue in light of the dictum
laid down by
this Court.

       Upon the facts being first ascertained, the legal principles have to

       be applied.
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                    Page 15 of 34
18.    There is yet another and a stronger reason why we are inclined to

       pass an order of remand. For this purpose and for the sake of

       convenience, we would reproduce the observations by the

       National Commission in
Pawan Gupta
(supra) on the merits for

       rejecting the claim made by the builder/developer (the appellant)

       for the increase of the sale area. These are as under:
“The complaints have been filed mainly for two
                    reasons. The first is that the opposite party has
                    demanded extra money for excess area and second is
                    the delay in handing over the possession. In respect of
                    excess area, the complainant has made a point that
                    without any basis the opposite party sent the demand
                    for excess area and the certificate of the architect was
                    sent to the complainant, which is of a later date. The
                    justification given by the opposite party that on the
                    basis of the internal report of the architect the demand
                    was made for excess area is not acceptable because
                    no such report or any other document has been filed by
                    the opposite party to prove the excess area. Once the
                    original plan is approved by the competent authority,
                    the areas of residential unit as well as of the common
                    spaces and common buildings are specified and super
                    area cannot change until there is change in either the
                    area of the flat or in the area of any of the common
                    buildings or the total area of the project (plot area) is
                    changed. The real test for excess area would be that
                    the opposite party should provide a comparison of the
                    areas of the original approved common spaces and the
                    flats with finally approved common spaces/buildings
                    and the flats. This has not been done. In fact, this is a
                    common        practice   adopted      by    majority   of
                    builders/developers which is basically an unfair trade
                    practice. This has become a means to extract extra
                    money from the allottees at the time when allottee
                    cannot leave the project as his substantial amount is
                    locked in the project and he is about to take
                    possession. There is no prevailing system when the
                    competent authority which approves the plan issues
                    some kind of certificate in respect of the extra super
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                          Page 16 of 34
area at the final stage. There is no harm in
                    communicating and charging for the extra area at the
                    final stage but for the sake of transparency the
                    opposite party must share the actual reason for
                    increase in the super area based on the comparison of
                    the originally approved buildings and finally approved
                    buildings. Basically the idea is that the allottee must
                    know the change in the finally approved lay-out and
                    areas of common spaces and the originally approved
                    lay-out and areas. In my view, until this is done, the
                    opposite party is not entitled to payment of any excess
                    area. Though the Real Estate Regulation Act (RERA)
                    2016     has     made      it   compulsory     for  the
                    builders/developers to indicate the carpet area of the
                    flat, however the problem of super area is not yet fully
                    solved and further reforms are required.”
19.    The appellant had challenged
the said decision
of the National

       Commission by filing the appeals being Civil Appeal Nos. 3703-

       3704 of 2020 before this Court. However, they were dismissed

       vide the order dated 12.01.2021. The order reads as under:
“1. We are not inclined to interfere with the order of the
                    National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission
                    dated 26 August 2020 in Consumer Complaint Nos.
                    285 and 286 of 2018.
2. The appeals are accordingly dismissed.
3. Pending application, if any, stands disposed of.”
20.    The review petitions, being R.P. (C) Nos. 1357-1358 of 2021, in

       the said civil appeals filed by the appellant, were also dismissed

       by this Court on 11.01.2022 by passing the following order:
“1. Application for oral hearing is dismissed.
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                           Page 17 of 34
2. We have carefully gone through the review petitions
                    and the connected papers. We find no merit in the
                    review petitions and the same are accordingly
                    dismissed.
3. Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.”
21.    The order dated 12.01.2021 of this Court dismissing the civil

       appeals      and     the   order   dated   11.01.2022 dismissing        the

       subsequent review petitions filed in the case of
Pawan Gupta
(supra) are non-reasoned orders that do not state what has

       weighed with the court while dismissing the appeals and the

       review petitions.
However, the result is that the order passed by

       the National Commission in the case of
Pawan Gupta
(supra) has

       attained finality and binds the parties to the decision.
22.    Learned counsel for the parties have made elaborate submissions

       on the issue of whether the orders passed by this Court in the

       case of
Pawan Gupta
(supra) by applying the doctrine of merger,

       principle of res judicata and in view of the rule of precedential

       value, would foreclose the submissions raised by the appellant in

       the present case. Learned Senior Advocate, Mr. Bhattacharyya,

       appearing on behalf of the respondents, has submitted that the

       findings recorded in the judgment by the National Commission in

       Pawan Gupta’s (supra), which is a case related to the same

       housing project, has merged with the order passed by this Court in
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                          Page 18 of 34
the appeals preferred by the appellant and it will be binding on the

       appellant on subsequent cases, including the cases filed by the

       respondents.
23.    On the other hand, it is submitted by learned Senior Advocates,

       Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi and Mr. Amit Sibal, that the complaint

       preferred by Pawan Gupta was in his individual capacity and not

       in a representative capacity. Pawan Gupta had made specific

       prayer for handing over possession of his unit, for awarding

       interest on the amount paid by him for the delay that occurred in

       handing over possession and also for a refund of the amount

       charged by the appellant towards service tax, car parking and

       increase in the common area. Hence, upon the dismissal of the

       statutory appeals filed by the appellant in case of
Pawan Gupta
(supra), the judgment of the National Commission would merge

       into the order of this Court through a non-speaking order.
The

       result would be that the litigation inter se the parties in case of
Pawan Gupta
(supra) had attained finality in the said case.

       Nonetheless, it could not be construed by any stretch of

       imagination that the National Commission was barred from

       examining or deciding the issues involved in the instant case as

       the appellant had placed on record details and evidence in the

       form of the architect’s certificate dated 23.09.2020 and a report of
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                    Page 19 of 34
the same date with calculations to show and justify the increase in

       the sale area.
The architect’s certificate and the report dated

       23.09.2020 were not placed before the National Commission in

       the case of
Pawan Gupta
(supra). No doubt, the same were filed

       before this Court as additional documents, but the appeal itself

       was dismissed in limine without taking the additional documents

       on record, and that too by a non-reasoned order. In the present

       case, the architect’s certificate and the report dated 23.09.2020

       were placed before the National Commission, but they were not

       examined and considered in the reasons set out by the National

       Commission.
Decision in
Pawan Gupta
(supra) was simply

       applied.
24.    Specifically on the question of additional documents, it is

       submitted by Learned Senior Advocate, Mr. Bhattacharyya,

       appearing on behalf of the respondents, that once an application

       for additional documents was filed in this Court, the doctrine of

       merger would apply and, therefore, the present appeal merits

       dismissal on this short ground.
25.    This Court has examined doctrine of merger in several decisions,

       but we would, for the purpose of this case, refer to only two

       decisions in
Kunhayammed and Others v. State of Kerala and
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                   Page 20 of 34
Another11
and
Khoday Distilleries Limited and Others v. Sri

       Mahadeshwara Sahakara Sakkare Karkhane Limited.12
, which

       approves of the ratio in
Kunhayammed
(supra).
26.
Kunhayammed
(supra) refers to several other decisions of this

       Court and has crystallised the legal position as under:
“44. To sum up, our conclusions are:
(i) Where an appeal or revision is provided against an
                       order passed by a court, tribunal or any other authority
                       before superior forum and such superior forum
                       modifies, reverses or affirms the decision put in issue
                       before it, the decision by the subordinate forum merges
                       in the decision by the superior forum and it is the latter
                       which subsists, remains operative and is capable of
                       enforcement in the eye of law.
(ii) The jurisdiction conferred by
Article 136
of the
                       Constitution is divisible into two stages. The first stage
                       is upto the disposal of prayer for special leave to file an
                       appeal. The second stage commences if and when the
                       leave to appeal is granted and the special leave
                       petition is converted into an appeal.
(iii) The doctrine of merger is not a doctrine of universal
                       or unlimited application. It will depend on the nature of
                       jurisdiction exercised by the superior forum and the
                       content or subject-matter of challenge laid or capable
                       of being laid shall be determinative of the applicability
                       of merger. The superior jurisdiction should be capable
                       of reversing, modifying or affirming the order put in
                       issue before it. Under
Article 136
of the Constitution the
                       Supreme Court may reverse, modify or affirm the
                       judgment-decree or order appealed against while
                       exercising its appellate jurisdiction and not while
                       exercising the discretionary jurisdiction disposing of
                       petition for special leave to appeal. The doctrine of
                       merger can therefore be applied to the former and not
                       to the latter.
(iv) An order refusing special leave to appeal may be a
                       non-speaking order or a speaking one. In either case it
                       does not attract the doctrine of merger. An order

11 (2000) 6 SCC 359.
12 (2019) 4 SCC 376.
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                               Page 21 of 34
refusing special leave to appeal does not stand
                    substituted in place of the order under challenge. All
                    that it means is that the Court was not inclined to
                    exercise its discretion so as to allow the appeal being
                    filed.
(v) If the order refusing leave to appeal is a speaking
                    order, i.e., gives reasons for refusing the grant of leave,
                    then the order has two implications. Firstly, the
                    statement of law contained in the order is a declaration
                    of law by the Supreme Court within the meaning of
Article 141
of the Constitution. Secondly, other than the
                    declaration of law, whatever is stated in the order are
                    the findings recorded by the Supreme Court which
                    would bind the parties thereto and also the court,
                    tribunal or authority in any proceedings subsequent
                    thereto by way of judicial discipline, the Supreme Court
                    being the Apex Court of the country. But, this does not
                    amount to saying that the order of the court, tribunal or
                    authority below has stood merged in the order of the
                    Supreme Court rejecting the special leave petition or
                    that the order of the Supreme Court is the only order
                    binding as res judicata in subsequent proceedings
                    between the parties.
(vi) Once leave to appeal has been granted and
                    appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court has been
                    invoked the order passed in appeal would attract the
                    doctrine of merger; the order may be of reversal,
                    modification or merely affirmation.
(vii) On an appeal having been preferred or a petition
                    seeking leave to appeal having been converted into an
                    appeal before the Supreme Court the jurisdiction of
                    High Court to entertain a review petition is lost
                    thereafter as provided by sub-rule (1) of Rule 1 of
Order 47 CPC
.”
27.    The aforesaid decision no doubt draws the distinction between a

       simple non-speaking order passed by this Court rejecting the

       special leave to appeal filed under
Article 136
of the Constitution

       of India, in which case the doctrine of merger has no application,

       and cases where this Court exercises its appellate power in terms
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                            Page 22 of 34
of the statute or the Constitution. In the former set of cases, the

       grant of special leave to appeal is discretionary. The effect of a

       non-speaking order of dismissal of the special leave petition

       without anything more indicating the grounds or reasons for

       dismissal by a necessary implication cannot be taken as

       acceptance of the reasons or the ratio of the judgment under

       challenge. It is not correct to assume that the Court has implicitly

       decided all the questions. There could be multiple reasons why in

       a particular case a special leave to appeal can be refused. It

       would be incorrect to attempt to embark on such reasons when

       they have not been so stated. Such reasons can be varied and

       different, and may not completely and directly relate to the merits

       of the case as to be construed as an imprimatur of this Court on

       the correctness of the decision appealed against. A case may not

       raise a question of general principle but turn on its own facts.

       Facts of the particular case may not be suitable as a foundation

       for determining some question of a general principle. Due to

       heavy backlog of work, this Court has to restrict the intake of fresh

       cases. Thus, there can be a variety of reasons why the court

       dismisses a special leave petition, and that too by a non-speaking

       order.
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                    Page 23 of 34
28.    Approving this aforesaid ratio, in
Khoday Distilleries Ltd.
(supra)

       it is observed:
“20. The Court thereafter analysed number of cases
                       where orders of different nature were passed and dealt
                       with these judgments by classifying them in the
                       following categories:
(i) Dismissal at the stage of special leave petition —
                       without reasons — no res judicata, no merger.
(ii) Dismissal of the special leave petition by speaking
                       or reasoned order — no merger, but rule of discipline
                       and
Article 141
attracted.
(iii) Leave granted — dismissal without reasons —
                       merger results.”
29.    On the question whether there was any conflict in the legal ratios

       in
Kunhayammed
(supra) and earlier judgment of this Court in
Abbai       Maligai       Partnership       Firm    and     Another       v.   K.

       Santhakumaran and Others13
, the three judges’ Bench in
Khoday Distilleries Ltd.
(supra) has held:
“24. Having noted the aforesaid two judgments and
                       particularly the fact that the earlier judgment in Abbai
                       Maligai Partnership Firm is duly taken cognizance of
                       and explained in the latter judgment, we are of the view
                       that there is no conflict insofar as ratio of the two cases
                       is concerned. Moreover, Abbai Maligai Partnership
                       Firm was decided on its peculiar facts, with no
                       discussion       on      any      principle      of     law,
                       whereas Kunhayammed is an elaborate discourse
                       based on well-accepted propositions of law which are
                       applicable for such an issue. We are, therefore, of the
                       view that detailed judgment in Kunhayammed lays
                       down the correct law and there is no need to refer the
                       cases to larger Bench, as was contended by the
                       counsel for the appellant.
13 (1998) 7 SCC 386.
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                                Page 24 of 34
25. While taking this view, we may also point out that
                    even in K. Rajamouli this Court took note of both these
                    judgments and explained the principle of res judicata in
                    the following manner: (SCC p. 41, para 4)

                          “4. Following the decision in Kunhayammed we
                          are of the view that the dismissal of the special
                          leave petition against the main judgment of the
                          High Court would not constitute res judicata
                          when a special leave petition is filed against the
                          order passed in the review petition provided the
                          review petition was filed prior to filing of special
                          leave petition against the main judgment of the
                          High Court. The position would be different
                          where after dismissal of the special leave
                          petition against the main judgment a party files
                          a review petition after a long delay on the
                          ground that the party was prosecuting remedy
                          by way of special leave petition. In such a
                          situation the filing of review would be an abuse
                          of the process of the law. We are in agreement
                          with the view taken in Abbai Maligai
                          Partnership Firm that if the High Court allows
                          the review petition filed after the special leave
                          petition was dismissed after condoning the
                          delay, it would be treated as an affront to the
                          order of the Supreme Court. But this is not the
                          case here. In the present case, the review
                          petition was filed well within time and since the
                          review petition was not being decided by the
                          High Court, the appellant filed the special leave
                          petition against the main judgment of the High
                          Court. We, therefore, overrule the preliminary
                          objection of the counsel for the respondent and
                          hold that this appeal arising out of the special
                          leave petition is maintainable.””
30.    Reiterating the conclusions in
Kunhayammed
(supra),
Khoday

       Distilleries Ltd.
(supra), states:
“26. From a cumulative reading of the various
                    judgments, we sum up the legal position as under:
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                             Page 25 of 34
26.1. The conclusions rendered by the three-Judge
                    Bench of this Court in Kunhayammed and summed up
                    in para 44 are affirmed and reiterated.
26.2. We reiterate the conclusions relevant for these
                    cases as under : (
Kunhayammed
case, SCC p. 384)
                    “(iv) An order refusing special leave to appeal may be a
                    non-speaking order or a speaking one. In either case it
                    does not attract the doctrine of merger. An order
                    refusing special leave to appeal does not stand
                    substituted in place of the order under challenge. All
                    that it means is that the Court was not inclined to
                    exercise its discretion so as to allow the appeal being
                    filed.
(v) If the order refusing leave to appeal is a speaking
                    order i.e. gives reasons for refusing the grant of leave,
                    then the order has two implications. Firstly, the
                    statement of law contained in the order is a declaration
                    of law by the Supreme Court within the meaning of
Article 141
of the Constitution. Secondly, other than the
                    declaration of law, whatever is stated in the order are
                    the findings recorded by the Supreme Court which
                    would bind the parties thereto and also the court,
                    tribunal or authority in any proceedings subsequent
                    thereto by way of judicial discipline, the Supreme Court
                    being the Apex Court of the country. But, this does not
                    amount to saying that the order of the court, tribunal or
                    authority below has stood merged in the order of the
                    Supreme Court rejecting the special leave petition or
                    that the order of the Supreme Court is the only order
                    binding as res judicata in subsequent proceedings
                    between the parties.
(vi) Once leave to appeal has been granted and
                    appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court has been
                    invoked the order passed in appeal would attract the
                    doctrine of merger; the order may be of reversal,
                    modification or merely affirmation.
(vii) On an appeal having been preferred or a petition
                    seeking leave to appeal having been converted into an
                    appeal before the Supreme Court the jurisdiction of the
                    High Court to entertain a review petition is lost
                    thereafter as provided by sub-rule (1) of
Order 47 Rule
                    1 CPC
.”
                    26.3. Once we hold that the law
laid down
                    in
Kunhayammed is to be followed, it will not make any
                    difference whether the review petition was filed before
                    the filing of special leave petition or was filed after the
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                            Page 26 of 34
dismissal of special leave petition. Such a situation is
                    covered in para 37 of Kunhayammed case.”
31.    No doubt, in Pawan Gupta’s case (supra), this Court had not

       exercised the power or jurisdiction conferred by
Article 136
of the

       Constitution of India, but had exercised its appellate power, which

       would, in terms of the ratio in
Kunhayammed
(supra), becomes

       the final order which is executable.
Thus, the dismissal of the

       appeal by this Court in the case of
Pawan Gupta
(supra), had put

       a finality and an end to the litigation in the said case. To this

       extent, therefore, the application of the general principle of res

       judicata would bar the party from raising the plea once again.
The

       order passed by this Court, on the application of the principle of

       judicial discipline, bars and prevents any tribunal or parties from

       canvassing or taking a view which would have the effect of re-

       examination of the issues and points determined in the case of
Pawan Gupta
(supra) inter-se the parties to the decision.

       However, dismissal of the appeal would not operate as res

       judicata in the case of the respondents against the appellant as

       they were not parties to the said case, and the proceedings

       initiated by Pawan Gupta were fact specific and not in a

       representative capacity.
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                         Page 27 of 34
32.    The dismissal of the appeal in the case of
Pawan Gupta
(supra)

       without any reasons being recorded would not attract
Article 141
of the Constitution of India as no law was declared by the

       Supreme Court, which will have a binding effect on all courts and

       tribunals in India. There is a clear distinction between the binding

       law of precedents in terms of
Article 141
of the Constitution of

       India and the doctrine of merger and res judicata.
To merge, as

       held in
Kunhayammed
(supra), and
Khoday Distilleries Ltd.
(supra) means to sink or disappear in something else, to become

       absorbed or extinguished. The logic behind the doctrine of merger

       is that there cannot be more than one decree or operative orders

       governing the same subject matter at a given point of time. When

       a decree or order passed by an inferior court, tribunal or authority

       is subjected to a remedy available under law before a superior

       forum, then the decree or order under challenge continues to be

       effective and binding; nevertheless, its finality is put in jeopardy.

       Once the superior court disposes the dispute before it in any

       manner, either by affirming the decree or order, by setting aside or

       modifying the same, it is the decree of the superior court, tribunal

       or authority, which is the final binding and operative decree. The

       decree and order of the inferior court, tribunal or authority gets

       merged into the order passed by the superior forum. However, as
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                    Page 28 of 34
has been clarified in both decisions, this doctrine is not of

       universal or unlimited application. The nature of jurisdiction

       exercised by the superior court and the content or subject matter

       of challenge laid or could have been laid will have to be kept in

       view.
33.    What is important is the distinction drawn by this Court between

       the law of precedents and res judicata.
In
State of Rajasthan v.

       Nemi Chand Mahela and Others14
, it is held:
“11. The learned counsel for the petitioners had drawn
                    our attention to para 22 of the decision in Manmohan
                    Sharma case , (2014) 5 SCC 782 which refers to the
                    case of one Danveer Singh whose writ petition had
                    been allowed and the order had attained finality as it
                    was not challenged before the Division Bench or before
                    the Supreme Court. Termination of services in the case
                    of Danveer Singh, it was accordingly held, was not
                    justified and in accordance with law. The reasoning
                    given in paras 22 and 23 in Manmohan Sharma
                    case relating to the case of Danveer Singh would
                    reflect the difference between the doctrine of res
                    judicata and law of precedent. Res judicata operates in
                    personam i.e. the matter in issue between the same
                    parties in the former litigation, while law of precedent
                    operates in rem i.e. the law once settled is binding on
                    all under the jurisdiction of the High Court and the
                    Supreme Court. Res judicata binds the parties to the
                    proceedings for the reason that there should be an end
                    to the litigation and therefore, subsequent proceeding
                    inter se parties to the litigation is barred. Therefore, law
                    of res judicata concerns the same matter, while law of
                    precedent concerns application of law in a similar
                    issue. In res judicata, the correctness of the decision is
                    normally immaterial and it does not matter whether the
                    previous decision was right or wrong, unless the
                    erroneous determination relates to the jurisdictional
                    matter of that body.”
14 (2019) 14 SCC 179.
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                             Page 29 of 34
This ratio was followed and approved by a three judges’

        Bench in
Malook Singh and Others v. State of Punjab and

        Others15
.
34.
In
Makhija      Construction         &    Engg.     (P)    Ltd.    v.   Indore

       Development Authority and Others16
, after referring to several

       earlier decisions, this Court has observed that a precedent

       operates to bind in similar situations in a distinct case, whereas

       res judicata operates to bind parties to proceedings for no other

       reason, but that there should be end to litigation. Principle of res

       judicata should apply where the lis was inter-parties and has

       attained finality on the issues involved. The principle of res

       judicata will have no application in cases where the judgment or

       order has been passed by the Court having no jurisdiction thereof

       or involving a pure question of law. 17 Law of binding precedents, in

       terms of
Article 141
of the Constitution of India, has a larger

       connotation as it settles the principles of law which emanates from

       the judgment, which are then treated as binding precedents.
35.
In the context of factual background of the present case, and on

       examining the judgment in the case of
Pawan Gupta
(supra)


15 (2021) SCC OnLine SC 876.
16 (2005) 6 SCC 304.
17 See Fida Hussain and Others v. Moradabad Development Authority and Another, (2011) 12 SCC
615.
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                                  Page 30 of 34
passed by the National Commission, we are clearly of the view

       that the order passed by this Court dismissing the appeal in the

       case of
Pawan Gupta
(supra) would operate as res judicata in the

       said case but does not lay down a binding precedent which would

       be applicable to other cases.
As it transpires from the judgment in

       the case of
Pawan Gupta
(supra), the National Commission itself

       had specifically observed inter alia that “there was no harm in

       communicating and charging for the extra area at the final stage,

       but for the sake of transparency opposite party must share the

       actual reason for the increase in the super area based on

       comparison of the originally approved buildings and finally

       approved buildings. Basically, the idea is that the allottee must

       know the change in the finally approved layout and areas of

       common spaces and the originally approved layout and areas”.
It

       is true that there was no material on record placed by the

       appellant in the said case of
Pawan Gupta
(supra) showing the

       actual increase in the sale area. Nonetheless, the appellant in the

       instant case, along with its detailed reply, had produced the

       documents, i.e. the certificate dated 23.09.2020 given by the

       Architects D-idea, the Report dated 23.09.2020 given by Knight

       Frank (India) Private Limited, the affidavit dated 31.08.2021 by Mr.

       Muninder Pal Singh, and the affidavit dated 26.04.2022 by Mr.
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                    Page 31 of 34
Anurag Mahajan, to show that there was an actual increase in the

       sale area, justifying its demand for the extra payment. The

       respondents, in rejoinder, had neither placed any material to

       contradict the said Architect’s certificates and reports nor had they

       disputed the contents thereof. The only contention raised by them

       was that the said documents were produced as an afterthought

       and, therefore, could not be taken into consideration. At this

       juncture, it is also pertinent to note that clause 8.6 of the

       agreement, provided for an increase/decrease in the sale area as

       defined and also the corresponding sale price increase of upto

       10%. The appellant, by producing the said documents, had sought

       to justify that the variance, i.e. increase in the built up area of the

       project, which was less than 5% and such variance was within the

       permissible limits.
36.    Thus, we are clearly of the view that the order of this Court

       dismissing the appeal in the case of
Pawan Gupta
(supra) cannot

       be read as a precedent and applied to the cases in hand. In fact,

       precedents cannot decide questions of fact.
The decision in the

       case of
Pawan Gupta
(supra) was based on evidence adduced

       by the appellant/builder/developer, which in the said case was not

       found to be sufficient and cogent to justify and substantiate the

       demand raised in view of the increased sale area. No doubt, the
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                      Page 32 of 34
architect’s certificate and report dated 23.09.2020 was filed before

       this Court as additional documents, but a non-reasoned order

       passed by this Court dismissing the case cannot be read as

       accepting and considering the additional evidence, or as rejecting

       justification      and   reasons   given   therein   for    claiming

       additional/increased sale area. Any additional evidence sought to

       be produced at the appellate stage can only be introduced when

       an appropriate application under Rule 27 to
Order XLI of the Code

       of Civil Procedure
,1908 is moved and an order is passed taking

       them on record.
Therefore, the order passed by this Court

       dismissing the appeal in the case of
Pawan Gupta
(supra) is

       confined to the facts of the said case, including the evidence led

       by the parties before the National Commission. The National

       Commission was therefore required to consider and examine the

       contentions of the appellant and not overrule the same on the

       grounds of the principle of res judicata and on the rule of binding

       precedent, which do not apply. An order of remand on the

       question of merits as to the stipulation and increase in the sale

       area is therefore required.
37.    However, we wish to clarify that the observations made in this

       order, insofar as limitation is concerned, would be binding and has

       attained finality. Observations made in this order on the question
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                     Page 33 of 34
of acquiescence/estoppel and merits/justification of the increase in

       the sale area would be aspects which would have to be

       considered by the National Commission afresh in terms of the

       observations contained in the present judgment. We have not

       specifically commented on whether or not, in the facts of the

       present case, principles of acquiescence/estoppel will apply or

       whether or not the appellant has been able to justify and

       substantiate the claim for the increase in the sale area. These

       aspects would be examined by the National Commission by

       ascertaining the facts and on merits.
38.    Accordingly, for the reasons stated above, the impugned order

       and judgment passed by the National Commission is set aside

       and the appeal is disposed of with a direction of remand in terms

       of the observations and directions given herein. There would be

       no order as to costs.
......................................J.
                                                         (SANJIV KHANNA)


                                                ......................................J.
                                                         (BELA M. TRIVEDI)


                                                ......................................J.
                                                           (UJJAL BHUYAN)
NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 18, 2023.
Civil Appeal No. 1434 of 2023                                           Page 34 of 34