[Cites
13
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Rajasthan vs Sharwan Kumar Kumawat on 1 August, 2023
Author:
M.M. Sundresh
Bench:
M. M. Sundresh
,
A.S. Bopanna
2023 INSC 661                                                                 REPORTABLE

                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 1162-1171 of 2016

             THE STATE OF RAJASTHAN & ORS.                                  ...APPELLANTS

                                              VERSUS

             SHARWAN KUMAR KUMAWAT ETC. ETC                              ....RESPONDENTS

                                                  WITH
                                        C.A. Nos. 1212-1214/2016
                                        C.A. Nos. 1207-1211/2016
                                        C.A. Nos. 1202-1206/2016
                                        C.A. Nos. 1182-1186/2016
                                        C.A. Nos. 1172-1176/2016
                                        C.A. Nos. 1177-1181/2016
                                        C.A. Nos. 1187-1189/2016
                                        C.A. Nos. 1197-1199/2016
                                        C.A. Nos. 1195-1196/2016
                                        C.A. Nos. 1200-1201/2016
                                        C.A. Nos. 1190-1194/2016

                                            JUDGMENT
M.M. SUNDRESH, J.
1.         In all these appeals the Appellants seek to overturn the decision of the Division

             Bench of the Rajasthan High Court, Jaipur Bench declaring sub-rule (10) of

             Rule 4 and sub-rule (3) of Rule 7 of the Rajasthan Minor Mineral Concession
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Rules, 1986 (hereinafter referred to as “the Rules”) as unconstitutional.
   Rajni Mukhi
   Date: 2023.08.01
   15:11:52 IST
   Reason:
1
2.   Heard Dr. Manish Singhvi, learned Senior Advocate, appearing for the

     Appellants and Ms. Shobha Gupta, learned Advocate-on-Record & Ms. Ankita

     Gupta, learned Advocate, appearing for the Respondents.

     A VISIT TO THE RULES:
3.   The Rules were brought into statute by the first appellant in exercise of the

     powers conferred by
Section 15
of the Mines and Minerals (Development and

     Regulation) Act, 1957 (hereinafter referred to as “1957 Act”) for regulating the

     grant of quarry licenses, mining leases and other mineral concessions qua minor

     minerals. Chapter II of the Rules deals with grant of leases. Rule 7 speaks of

     preferential rights of certain persons. As per the said Rule, in existence prior to

     the amendment made on 28.01.2011, one applicant shall have a preferential

     right over the others on the sole basis of his application being made prior in

     point of time. This preferential right was not made available when an

     application is received from a Government Company or Corporation. It is to be

     noted, that this Rule does not stand in the way of the first appellant in making

     appropriate amendments to the Rules in general. Sub-rule (2) of Rule 7 has

     provided a list of entities, entitled for a lease on an order of priority.
4.   The Rules, aforesaid, went through amendments. By way of a Notification dated

     28.01.2011, sub-rule (10) had been introduced to Rule 4 placing a condition that

     there cannot be a mining lease in a Government land excluding marble and

     granite, unless the area is delineated and thereafter applications are to be

     invited. However, the proviso went on to say that the applications pending on
2
the date of the Notification shall be disposed of as per the prevailing Rules prior

     to it. Perhaps this must have been on account of a wrong understanding of the

     order passed by the High Court.
5.   A further amendment was made to Rule 7 by way of substitution of sub-rule (3),

           “(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1) and (2) above, the area
           for mining lease in the Government land for minerals other than Marble and
           Granite shall be reserved under rule 73, for allotment after delineation. New
           System shall be effective from the date of the issue of the notification and the
           applications received prior to notification shall be disposed of as per prevailing
           rules in force prior to this notification. Prior to delineation all requisite NOC’s
           shall be procured by the department. Out of these delineated plots 50% shall be
           allotted by auction and the remaining 50% shall be allotted to the following
           categories of persons, as per percentage indicated against each category:-
(i)    Persons who undertake to install a crusher / mineral based            10%
                 industry;
(ii) Manual workers belonging to Scheduled Castes / Scheduled                 5%
                 Tribes / Other Backward Classes / Special Backward Class
                 employed in Mines;
(iii) Manual workers other than Scheduled Castes / Scheduled                  5%
                 Tribes / Other Backward Classes / Special Backward Class
                 employed in mines;
(iv) Persons belonging to Scheduled Castes / Scheduled Tribes /              20%
                 Other Backward Classes / Special Backward Class
          (v) Persons identified as Below Poverty Lines;                               10%
          (vi) Ex-soldiers including member of para military forces                     5%
belonging to Rajasthan, who have been permanently disabled
                 or dependents of those who have died while in service;
(vii) Rajasthan State Government servants who have been                       5%
                 permanently disabled while on duty or the dependents of those
                 who have died while in service;
(viii) Societies of Unemployed youth of Rajasthan;                           30%
          (ix) Other persons;                                                          10%
In the reserved area applications will be invited after 30 days of notification
           and the applications received within a period of 30 days after 30 days of
           notification shall be treated as received on the same day. The applications shall
           be disposed of by way of lottery.
(vi) after the existing sub-rule (4), the following new sub-rule (5) shall be
           added, namely:-
“(5) If a short term permit application is received from a contractor who has
           been awarded work for National/State Highway (road construction project)
           shall be given priority over an application of mining lease received within a
3
period preceding 3 months from date of short term permit application subject to
           following conditions –
(a) Short term permit application has been filed within 6 months from
                       the date of award of contract;
(b) the National/State Highway (road construction project) is not more
                       than 100 km. away from the short term permit area applied for; and
(c) short term permit shall be subject to the conditions of rule 63.
Provided that this sub rule (5) shall remain in force till 31st March, 2012 & their
           after it will be reviewed again by the government.”
6.   For the first time, the first appellant thought it fit to introduce the process of

     auction, while making it clear that the applications received prior to 27.01.2011

     shall be disposed of as per the prevailing rules, in force earlier.
7.   The Rules aforesaid went through further amendment by way of Notification

     dated 03.04.2013 by which all the pending applications are to be rejected,

           Rule 4 sub-rule (10):
“(10) No mining lease in Government land, including the forest land for which
           diversion is granted by the Central Government under
Forest (Conservation)
           Act, 1980
, shall be granted on an application by the applicant unless the area is
           delineated and applications are invited by the Government. All the applications
           which are presented in Government Land upto 27-01-2011, except the
           application presented by person having preferential right under the rule 3N or
           sub-rule (1) of rule 11, in respect of which lease deed as per rule 19 has not
           been executed shall be rejected.”

           Rule 7 sub-rule (1):
“7. Procedure for grant of lease:- (1) In Government land, the mining lease
           shall be granted after the area is first delineated, plots suitably numbered and a
           notification inviting application is published in two daily newspapers, at least
           one of which is state level and other having wide publicity in the area where
           lease are being allotted. The notification shall be published at least 30 days
           before the intended date of inviting applications and shall contain the date or
           the period within which applications shall be received. Out of these delineated
           plots of committee constituted under sub-rule (3) of rule 23A shall reserve 50%
           of plots which shall be allotted by auction/tender and the remaining 50% shall
           be allotted by way of lottery to the following categories of persons as per
           percentage mentioned against each category:-
4
(i)    Persons who undertake to install a crusher / mineral based      10%
                 industry;
(ii) Manual workers and widows of manual workers belonging to          5%
                 Scheduled      Castes/Scheduled     Tribes/Other    Backward
                 Classes/Special Backward Class employed in Mines;
(iii) Manual workers and widows of manual workers other than           5%
                 Scheduled      Castes/Scheduled     Tribes/Other    Backward
                 Class/Special Backward Class employed in mines;
(iv) Persons belonging to Scheduled Castes/ Schedule Tribes /          20%
                 Other Backward Class / Special Backward Class;
(v) Persons identified as “Below Poverty Line”;                        10%
(vi) Freedom fighter/Ex-soldiers including members of para              5%
                 military forces belonging to Rajasthan who have been
                 permanently incapacitated or dependents of those who have
                 died while in service;
(vii) Rajasthan State Government servants who have been                5%
                 permanently disabled while on duty or the dependents of
                 those who have died while in service;
(viii) Persons with disabilities (disabled persons) other than those   5%
                 covered in Categories (vi) & (vii) above;
(ix) Societies of Unemployed youth of Rajasthan; and                   25%
          (x) Other persons:                                                     10%
Provided that mining leases for mineral bajri shall only be granted by way of
          tender or auction.”
8.   We have been informed at the Bar by Dr. Singhvi, that even these Rules

     underwent further amendments creating a new procedure by way of e-auction.

     While taking note of the said submission, we do not wish to say anything on

     that count.
9.   In conclusion, the impugned Rules undertake two exercises; the process of

     auction as existed earlier, and creation of a level playing field by declaring all

     the pending applications, meant to be considered on a first-come first-serve

     basis, as rejected.
BACKGROUND FACTS:
10. Applications were invited for leasing out minor minerals by the Appellants vide

     Notification dated 23.05.2003. Scores of persons made their applications. The
5
Notification dated 23.05.2003 was followed by Notification dated 24.04.2007

    declaring the applications made for four villages qua sandstone as rejected in

    exercise of the power conferred under Rule 65A of the Rules. An exercise of

    delineation was expected to be undertaken followed by fresh applications. Thus,

    this Notification, and the subsequent Notification, are area centric, restricted to

    four villages and that too for sandstone and also masonry stone which is nothing

    but a by-product of the former. Writ petitions were filed by some of the

    applicants before the High Court of Rajasthan. They were accordingly allowed,

    inter-alia holding that such a restriction applied only for four districts alone and

    cannot be sustained in the eye of law as there is no material available to invoke

    Rule 65A of the Rules in the purported interest of mineral development. While

    quashing the Notification dated 24.04.2007, the High Court specifically directed

    the Appellants to revive the applications of the writ petitioners therein and to

    consider them in accordance with law.
11. After the orders passed by the High Court on 21.05.2009, amendments were

    made to the Rules vide Notification dated 28.01.2011, as noted by us earlier.

    Thereafter, in compliance with the order of the High Court, a Government

    Order was passed on 16.11.2011 facilitating the relief to such of those

    applicants who approached the High Court. A consequential Government Order

    was also passed on 28.11.2011 for payment of royalty by masonry stone

    applicants before grant of any lease. These two orders were put into challenge

    by certain other applicants other than the writ petitioners in the earlier round,
6
inter-alia contending that the same benefits will have to be extended to them as

     well.
12. The High Court passed an order, dated 13.03.2013, holding that the earlier

     decision will have to be construed as a decision in rem but subject to the rider

     that all the pending applications ought to be considered in accordance with the

     amendment made vide Notification dated 28.01.2011 to Rule 4 and 7,

             “(i) That the respondent State shall undertake the exercise of delineating,
             demarcating and specifying all the mining areas available for the
             Sandstone and Masonry Stone within a period of six months as undertaken by
             the learned Addl. Advocate Generals, on behalf of the State.
(ii) Thereafter, the State Government will re-notify such delineated areas for
             grant of mining leases for sandstone and masonry stone, as the case may be,
             with the stipulation & condition that payment of Royalty and dead rent
             applicable for the sandstone in case sandstone is also found available in the
             mining lease granted for masonry stone.
(iii) That all the applications hitherto filed for such mining leases shall be
             treated as revived and with further applications, which may now be filed upon
             such re-notification of delineated areas available for grant of mining leases for
             sandstone and masonry stone. The earlier applicants will be at liberty to
             withdraw their earlier applications & file fresh applications also in pursuance
             of such renotification.
(iv) That as per the submission of State Government vide para 10 (viii) above
             that State has not taken any action in pursuance of the impugned orders so far,
             it is directed that no mining leases for sandstone & masonry stone will be
             granted in pursuance of the impugned orders Annex.11 dated 16/11/2011 and
             Annex.13 dated 28/11/2011 till all such applications are decided as per the
             directions given in this judgment.
(v) That all the applications will be decided within one year from today in
             accordance with the amended Rule 7(3) of the MMCR, 1986 on the basis of
             lottery or by way of auction, as may be considered appropriate by the State
             Government but not on the basis of ‘first come first served’ principle.”
13. As in the case of the first round of litigation, in the second round also the orders

     passed were not put into challenge and therefore both became final. Suffice it is

     to note that the High Court did not grant the relief to the petitioners by directing
7
the Appellants to adopt first-come first-serve basis for the grant of a mining

    lease, but only as per the amended rule.
14. Taking a cue from the orders passed, a further Notification was issued on

    03.04.2013 introducing the impugned amendments. As stated, all the

    applications were declared as rejected while facilitating grant of 50% of the

    leases through auction except for categories mentioned thereunder as entitled

    for preference. By the impugned orders, the Division Bench of the High Court

    declared the amendments as illegal on three primary grounds, namely; the

    applicants have not been heard, and their applications ought to be revived in

    view of the earlier orders passed by the Court on the principle of legitimate

    expectation and rights having vested in them.
SUBMISSION OF THE APPELLANTS:
15. Dr. Singhvi, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the Appellants, submitted

    that the earlier decisions of the High Court pertain to minor minerals and

    sandstone alone and that too with specific reference to four districts. The High

    Court, in the impugned order did not take note of this fact but struck down the

    Rules in toto meant to be applied for all the minor minerals. The earlier

    decisions of the High Court were duly complied with, and therefore the finding

    to the contrary is factually incorrect. There is no preferential right available to

    claim it as vested. The Respondents cannot have a fundamental right in mining.
The High Court is wrong in going into the principles governing Legitimate
8
Expectation and Natural Justice in a case involving amendments by way of

     introduction of new Rules through the process of substitution. He further goes

     on to state that the impugned orders are liable to be set aside as they would

     stand in the way of the new amended Rules being given effect to, meant for all

     the minor minerals in the State.
SUBMISSION OF THE RESPONDENTS:
16. Ms. Shobha Gupta, learned Advocate-on-Record, & Ms. Ankita Gupta, learned

     Advocate appearing for the Respondents, submitted that the High Court was

     right in holding that the impugned amendments are nothing but an attempt to

     overreach the earlier decision of the Court. There is no justification for keeping

     the applications pending for decades. Had the applications been considered

     earlier, leases would have been granted. The areas sought for mining by the

     Respondents are not very huge in extent and therefore their applications ought

     to be considered under the then relevant rules in existence. There is malice in

     law through the introduction of the impugned rules.
DISCUSSION:
Vested Right
17. It is far too settled that there is no right vested over an application made which

     is pending seeking lease of a Government land or over the minerals beneath the

     soil in any type of land over which the Government has a vested right and

     regulatory control. In other words, a mere filing of an application ipso facto
9
does not create any right. The power of the Government to amend, being an

independent one, pending applications do not come in the way. For a right to be

vested there has to be a statutory recognition. Such a right has to accrue and any

decision will have to create the resultant injury. When a decision is taken by a

competent authority in public interest by evolving a better process such as

auction, a right, if any, to an applicant seeking lease over a Government land

evaporates on its own. An applicant cannot have an exclusive right in seeking a

grant of license of a mineral unless facilitated accordingly by a statute.
State of

Tamil Nadu v. Hind Stone & Others
, (1981) 2 SCC 205 : -
“13. Another submission of the learned counsel in connection with the
      consideration of applications for renewal was that applications made sixty days
      or more before the date of G.O.Ms No. 1312 (December 2, 1977) should be
      dealt with as if Rule 8-C had not come into force. It was also contended that
      even applications for grant of leases made long before the date of G.O.Ms No.
      1312 should be dealt with as if Rule 8-C had not come into force. The
      submission was that it was not open to the government to keep applications for
      the grant of leases and applications for renewal pending for a long time and
      then to reject them on the basis of Rule 8-C notwithstanding the fact that the
      applications had been made long prior to the date on which Rule 8-C came into
      force. While it is true that such applications should be dealt with within a
      reasonable time, it cannot on that account be said that the right to have an
      application disposed of in a reasonable time clothes an applicant for a lease
      with a right to have the application disposed of on the basis of the rules in
      force at the time of the making of the application. No one has a vested
      right to the grant or renewal of a lease and none can claim a vested right to
      have an application for the grant or renewal of a lease dealt with in a
      particular way, by applying particular provisions. In the absence of any
      vested rights in anyone, an application for a lease has necessarily to be
      dealt with according to the rules in force on the date of the disposal of the
      application despite the fact that there is a long delay since the making of
      the application. We are, therefore, unable to accept the submission of the
      learned counsel that applications for the grant of renewal of leases made
      long prior to the date of G.O.Ms No. 1312 should be dealt with as if Rule 8-
      C did not exist.”
                                                                  (emphasis supplied)
10
Fundamental Right
18. The question of applicants not having fundamental right in mining is no longer

     res integra,
Monnet Ispat & Energy Ltd. v. Union of India
, (2012) 11 SCC 1 may

     shed some light,

           “No fundamental right in mining
133. The appellants have applied for mining leases in a land belonging to
           the Government of Jharkhand (erstwhile Bihar) and it is for iron ore which is a
           mineral included in Schedule I to the 1957 Act in respect of which no mining
           lease can be granted without the prior approval of the Central Government. It
           goes without saying that no person can claim any right in any land
           belonging to the Government or in any mines in any land belonging to the
           Government except under the 1957 Act and the 1960 Rules. No person has
           any fundamental right to claim that he should be granted mining lease or
           prospecting licence or permitted reconnaissance operation in any land
           belonging to the Government. It is apt to quote the following statement of
           O. Chinnappa Reddy, J. in Hind Stone [(1981) 2 SCC 205] (SCC p. 213,
           para 6) albeit in the context of minor mineral,
                 “6. … The public interest which induced Parliament to make the
             declaration contained in
Section 2
… has naturally to be the
             paramount consideration in all matters concerning the regulation of
             mines and the development of minerals”.
He went on to say: (
Hind Stone
case [(1981) 2 SCC 205] , SCC p. 217,
             para 10)
                 “10. … The statute with which we are concerned, the
Mines and
             Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act
, is aimed … at the
             conservation and the prudent and discriminating exploitation of
             minerals. Surely, in the case of a scarce mineral, to permit exploitation
             by the State or its agency and to prohibit exploitation by private
             agencies is the most effective method of conservation and prudent
             exploitation. If you want to conserve for the future, you must prohibit
             in the present.”
                                                                    (emphasis supplied)
11
Legitimate Expectation
19. Legitimate expectation is a weak and sober right as ordained by a statute. When

     the Government decides to introduce fair play by way of auction facilitating all

     eligible persons to contest on equal terms, certainly one cannot contend that he

     is entitled for a lease merely on the basis of a pending application. The right

     being not legal, apart from being non-existent, it can certainly not be

     enforceable. The principle of law on these aspects, as settled decades ago in
State of T.N. v. Hind Stone
(1981) 2 SCC 205, is being reiterated from time to

     time.
Monnet Ispat & Energy Ltd.
(supra) : -
“Principles of legitimate expectation
183. As there are parallels between the doctrines of promissory estoppel
          and legitimate expectation because both these doctrines are founded on the
          concept of fairness and arise out of natural justice, it is appropriate that
          the principles of legitimate expectation are also noticed here only to
          appreciate the case of the appellants founded on the basis of the doctrines
          of promissory estoppel and legitimate expectation.
xxx                           xxx                           xxx
188. It is not necessary to multiply the decisions of this Court. Suffice it to
          observe that the following principles in relation to the doctrine of legitimate
          expectation are now well established:
xxx                           xxx                           xxx

          188.3. Where the decision of an authority is founded in public interest as
          per executive policy or law, the court would be reluctant to interfere with
          such decision by invoking the doctrine of legitimate expectation. The
          legitimate expectation doctrine cannot be invoked to fetter changes in
          administrative policy if it is in the public interest to do so.
188.4. The legitimate expectation is different from anticipation and an
          anticipation cannot amount to an assertable expectation. Such expectation
          should be justifiable, legitimate and protectable.
188.5. The protection of legitimate expectation does not require the
          fulfilment of the expectation where an overriding public interest requires
          otherwise. In other words, personal benefit must give way to public
12
interest and the doctrine of legitimate expectation would not be invoked
         which could block public interest for private benefit.”
                                                                 (emphasis supplied)
20.
Kerala State Beverages (M AND M) Corporation Limited v. P.P. Suresh
,

    (2019) 9 SCC 710 : -
“B. Legitimate expectation
14. The main argument on behalf of the respondents was that the Government
         was bound by its promise and could not have resiled from it. They had an
         indefeasible legitimate expectation of continued employment, stemming from
         the Government Order dated 20-2-2002 which could not have been withdrawn.
It was further submitted on behalf of the respondents that they were not given
         an opportunity before the benefit that was promised, was taken away. To
         appreciate this contention of the respondents, it is necessary to understand the
         concept of legitimate expectation.
15. The principle of legitimate expectation has been recognised by this Court in
Union of India v. Hindustan Development Corpn.
[(1993) 3 SCC 499] If the
         promise made by an authority is clear, unequivocal and unambiguous, a person
         can claim that the authority in all fairness should not act contrary to the
         promise.
16. M. Jagannadha Rao, J. elaborately elucidated on legitimate
         expectation in
Punjab Communications Ltd. v. Union of India
[(1999) 4
         SCC 727] .
He referred (at SCC pp. 741-42, para 27) to the judgment in
         Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for the Civil Service [1985 AC
         374 : (1984) 3 WLR 1174 : (1984) 3 All ER 935 (HL)] in which Lord
         Diplock had observed that for a legitimate expectation to arise, the
         decisions of the administrative authority must affect the person by
         depriving him of some benefit or advantage which,
         “27. … (i) he had in the past been permitted by the decision-maker to
         enjoy and which he can legitimately expect to be permitted to continue to
         do until there have been communicated to him some rational grounds for
         withdrawing it on which he has been given an opportunity to comment; or
(ii) he has received assurance from the decision-maker that they will not
         be withdrawn without giving him first an opportunity of advancing
         reasons for contending that they should not be withdrawn.” (AC p. 408)”
17. Rao, J. observed in this case, that the procedural part of legitimate
         expectation relates to a representation that a hearing or other appropriate
         procedure will be afforded before the decision is made. The substantive part of
         the principle is that if a representation is made that a benefit of a substantive
         nature will be granted or if the person is already in receipt of the benefit, that it
         will be continued and not be substantially varied, then the same could be
         enforced.
13
18. It has been held by R.V. Raveendran, J. in
Ram Pravesh Singh v. State
            of Bihar
[(2006) 8 SCC 381 : 2006 SCC (L&S) 1986] that legitimate
            expectation is not a legal right. Not being a right, it is not enforceable as
            such.
It may entitle an expectant: (SCC p. 391, para 15)
            “(a) to an opportunity to show cause before the expectation is dashed; or
(b) to an explanation as to the cause for denial. In appropriate cases, the
              courts may grant a direction requiring the authority to follow the promised
              procedure or established practice.”

            Substantive Legitimate Expectation
19. An expectation entertained by a person may not be found to be
            legitimate due to the existence of some countervailing consideration of
            policy or law. [ H.W.R. Wade & C.F. Forsyth, Administrative Law
            (Eleventh Edn., Oxford University Press, 2014).] Administrative policies
            may change with changing circumstances, including changes in the
            political complexion of Governments. The liberty to make such changes is
            something that is inherent in our constitutional form of Government.
            [Hughes v. Department of Health and Social Security, 1985 AC 776, 788 :
(1985) 2 WLR 866 (HL)]
20. The decision-makers' freedom to change the policy in public interest
            cannot be fettered by applying the principle of substantive legitimate
            expectation. [Findlay, In re, 1985 AC 318 : (1984) 3 WLR 1159 : (1984) 3
            All ER 801 (HL)] So long as the Government does not act in an arbitrary
            or in an unreasonable manner, the change in policy does not call for
            interference by judicial review on the ground of a legitimate expectation of
            an individual or a group of individuals being defeated.”
                                                                     (emphasis supplied)


      Legal Malice
21.   Though it is contended by the learned Advocates appearing for the Respondents

      that the impugned Rules have been brought forth only to nullify the effect of the

      judgments, as discussed, we do not think so. The Appellants have duly

      complied with the orders passed. Even otherwise, law is quite settled that basis

      of a judgment can be removed and a decision of the court cannot be treated like

      a statute, particularly when power is available to act and it is accordingly

      exercised in public interest. In such view of the matter, we do not find any legal
14
malice in the amendments. We wish to quote Kalabharati Advertising v.
Hemant Vimalnath Narichania, (2010) 9 SCC 437,

           “Legal malice
25. The State is under obligation to act fairly without ill will or malice— in fact
           or in law. “Legal malice” or “malice in law” means something done without
           lawful excuse. It is an act done wrongfully and wilfully without reasonable or
           probable cause, and not necessarily an act done from ill feeling and spite. It is a
           deliberate act in disregard to the rights of others. Where malice is attributed to
           the State, it can never be a case of personal ill will or spite on the part of the
           State.
It is an act which is taken with an oblique or indirect object. It means
           exercise of statutory power for “purposes foreign to those for which it is in law
           intended”. It means conscious violation of the law to the prejudice of another, a
           depraved inclination on the part of the authority to disregard the rights of
           others, which intent is manifested by its injurious acts. (
Vide ADM,
           Jabalpur v. Shivakant Shukla
[(1976) 2 SCC 521 : AIR 1976 SC 1207] , S.R.
           Venkataraman v. Union of India [(1979) 2 SCC 491 : 1979 SCC (L&S) 216 :
AIR 1979 SC 49] , State of A.P. v. Goverdhanlal Pitti
[(2003) 4 SCC 739 : AIR
           2003 SC 1941] , BPL Ltd. v. S.P. Gururaja [(
2003) 8 SCC 567] and W.B.
           SEB v. Dilip Kumar Ray
[(2007) 14 SCC 568 : (2009) 1 SCC (L&S) 860] .)”


     IMPUGNED JUDGMENTS:
22. In any case, the decisions of the High Court rendered earlier do not stand in the

     way of the impugned amendments. They were with respect to sandstone alone,

     while in the impugned judgment the High Court applied it to all the minor

     minerals. In the decision rendered by the High Court dated 13.03.2013 all the

     applications were directed to be considered as per the amended Rules. In fact,

     the reasoning of the High Court in the impugned order is contrary to the earlier

     order passed. The impugned Rules have been introduced in exercise of the

     power conferred under
Section 15
of the 1957 Act. As held by this Court in the

     decisions referred supra, there is neither a right nor it gets vested through an

     application made over a Government land. Law does not facilitate hearing the

     parties in bringing an amendment by an authority competent to do so. The High
15
Court, in our considered view, has totally misconstrued the issues ignoring the

     fact that there is a delegation of power to the first appellant which was rightly

     exercised as conferred under
Section 15
of the 1957 Act.
23. For the foregoing reasons, we have no hesitation in setting aside the impugned

     judgments and we do so. Accordingly, all these appeals stand allowed.
Consequently, pending application(s), if any, also stand(s) disposed of. No

     costs.
.……………………….J.
                                                              (A.S. BOPANNA)



                                                            .……………………….J.
                                                             (M. M. SUNDRESH)
    New Delhi;
August 01, 2023
16