[Cites
19
, Cited by
42
]
Supreme Court of India
Surendra Trading Company vs Juggilal Kamlapat Jute Mills Company ... on 19 September, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SC 186, 2017 (16) SCC 143, 2018 (1) AKR 663, AIR 2018 SC (CIV) 997, (2018) 4 ALLMR 462 (SC), (2018) 1 MAD LW 813, (2018) 1 BANKCAS 436, (2017) 11 SCALE 634, 2018 (128) ALR SOC 48 (SC), 2018 (185) AIC (SOC) 2 (SC), 2018 (2) KCCR SN 124 (SC), AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 186, 2018 (2) ABR 324, AIR 2018 SC (CIVIL) 997
Author:
A.K. Sikri
Bench:
Ashok Bhushan
,
A.K. Sikri
REPORTABLE

                                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8400 of 2017


                         M/S. SURENDRA TRADING COMPANY                       .....APPELLANT(S)

                                                       VERSUS

                         M/S. JUGGILAL KAMLAPAT JUTE MILLS
                         COMPANY LIMITED AND OTHERS                       .....RESPONDENT(S)

                                                                WITH

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NOS.15091-15091 OF 2017
                                        (ARISING OUT OF DIARY NO. 22835 OF 2017)



                                                         JUDGMENT
A.K. SIKRI, J.
Permission to file the appeal is granted and delay condoned

                                in Diary No. 22835 of 2017.
2) Though this case has a past history as well, in the instant appeal,

                                we are concerned with the correctness of the order dated May 01,
Signature Not Verified
2017 passed by the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal
Digitally signed by
BALA PARVATHI
Date: 2018.03.15
(hereinafter referred to as, the ‘NCLAT’) whereby it is held that
10:13:37 IST
Reason:
the time of seven days prescribed in proviso to sub-section (5) of
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                            Page 1 of 32
Section 9 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (for

       short, the ‘Code’) is mandatory in nature and if the defects

       contained in the application filed by the ‘operational creditor’ for

       initiating corporate insolvency resolution against a corporate

       debtor are not removed within seven days of the receipt of notice

       given by the adjudicating authority for removal of such objections,

       then such an application filed under Section 9 of the Code is

       liable to be rejected.           The precise question of law which was

       framed by the NCLAT for its decision is to the following effect:
“Whether the time limit prescribed in Insolvency &
                   Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (hereinafter referred to as
                   Code 2016) for admitting or rejecting a petition or
                   initiation of insolvency resolution process is
                   mandatory?”
3) Chapter II of Part II of the Code deals with corporate insolvency

       resolution process.             Under Section 7 of the Code, financial

       creditor (as per the definition contained in Section 5(7)) can

       initiate corporate insolvency resolution process. Section 8, on the

       other hand, deals with insolvency resolution by operational

       creditor. Operational creditor is defined in Section 5(2) of the

       Code to mean a person to whom an operational debt is owed and

       includes any person to whom such debt has been legally

       assigned or transferred. This Section provides that if ‘default’ has

       occurred in payment of the said debt within the meaning of
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                                Page 2 of 32
Section 2(12), such an operational creditor may send a demand

       notice to the corporate debtor demanding payment of the amount

       involved in the default, in the prescribed manner, giving ten days

       notice in this behalf. The corporate debtor is given ten days time

       to bring to the notice of the operational creditor about the

       existence of a dispute, if any, however, send requisite proof for

       repayment of unpaid operational debt.            However, in case the

       payment is not received or notice of dispute is not received,

       operational creditor can file an application under Section 9 for

       initiation of corporate insolvency resolution process. Since we

       are concerned with this provision, the same is reproduced below

       in its entirety:
“9. Application for initiation of corporate
                   insolvency resolution process by operational
                   creditor. – (1) After the expiry of the period of ten
                   days from the date of delivery of the notice or invoice
                   demanding payment under sub-section (1) of section
                   8, if the operational creditor does not receive payment
                   from the corporate debtor or notice of the dispute
                   under sub-section (2) of section 8, the operational
                   creditor may file an application before the Adjudicating
                   Authority for initiating a corporate insolvency
                   resolution process.
(2) The application under sub-section (1) shall be filed
                   in such form and manner and accompanied with such
                   fee as may be prescribed.
(3) The operational creditor shall, along with the
                   application furnish —

                        “(a) a copy of the invoice demanding
                        payment or demand notice delivered by the
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                                   Page 3 of 32
operational creditor to the corporate debtor;
(b) an affidavit to the effect that there is no
                        notice given by the corporate debtor relating
                        to a dispute of the unpaid operational debt;
(c) a copy of the certificate from the financial
                        institutions maintaining accounts of the
                        operational creditor confirming that there is
                        no payment of an unpaid operational debt by
                        the corporate debtor; and
(d) such other information as may be
                        specified.
(4) An operational creditor initiating a corporate
                   insolvency resolution process under this section, may
                   propose a resolution professional to act as an interim
                   resolution professional.
(5) The Adjudicating Authority shall, within fourteen
                   days of the receipt of the application under sub-
section (2), by an order—
(i) admit the application and communicate such
                   decision to the operational creditor and the corporate
                   debtor if,—

                        “(a) the application made under sub-section
                        (2) is complete;
(b) there is no repayment of the unpaid
                        operational debt;
(c) the invoice or notice for payment to the
                        corporate debtor has been delivered by the
                        operational creditor;
(d) no notice of dispute has been received by
                        the operational creditor or there is no record
                        of dispute in the information utility; and
(e) there is no disciplinary proceeding
                        pending against any resolution professional
                        proposed under sub-section (4), if any.
(ii) reject the application and communicate such
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                                       Page 4 of 32
decision to the operational creditor and the corporate
                   debtor, if—

                        “(a) the application made under sub-section
                        (2) is incomplete;
(b) there has been repayment of the unpaid
                        operational debt;
(c) the creditor has not delivered the invoice
                        or notice for payment to the corporate debtor;
(d) notice of dispute has been received by
                        the operational creditor or there is a record of
                        dispute in the information utility; or
(e) any disciplinary proceeding is pending
                        against     any      proposed     resolution
                        professional:
Provided that Adjudicating Authority, shall before
                   rejecting an application under sub-clause (a) of clause
(ii) give a notice to the applicant to rectify the defect in
                   his application within seven days of the date of receipt
                   of such notice from the adjudicating Authority.
(6) The corporate insolvency resolution process shall
                   commence from the date of admission of the
                   application under sub-section (5) of this section.”
4) A reading of the aforesaid provision would reflect that time limits

       for taking certain actions by either the operational creditor or

       adjudicating authority are mentioned therein. As per sub-section

       (1) of Section 9, application can be filed after the expiry of period

       of ten days from the delivery of notice or invoice demanding

       payment, which is in tune with the provisions contained in Section

       8 that gives ten days time to the corporate debtor to take any of
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                                       Page 5 of 32
the steps mentioned in sub-section (2) of Section 8. As per sub-
section (2) of Section 9, the operational creditor is supposed to

       file an application in the prescribed form and manner which needs

       to be accompanied by requisite/prescribed fee as well.          Sub-

       section (3) puts an obligation on the part of the operational

       creditor to furnish the information stipulated therein. Once such

       an application is filed and received by the adjudicating authority,

       fourteen days time is granted to the adjudicating authority to

       ascertain from the records of an information utility or on the basis

       of other evidence furnished by the operational creditor, whether

       default on the part of corporate debtor exists or not.          This

       exercise, as per sub-section (5), is to be accomplished by the

       adjudicating authority within fourteen days.       Sub-section (5)

       provides two alternatives to the adjudicating authority while

       dealing with such an application.      In case it is satisfied that

       conditions mentioned in clause (i) of Section 9(5) are satisfied,

       the adjudicating authority may pass an order admitting such an

       application. On the other hand, if the adjudicating authority finds

       existence of any eventuality stated in sub-section (2), it may order

       rejection of such an application.
5) One of the conditions, with which we are concerned, is that
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                             Page 6 of 32
application under sub-section (2) has to be complete in all

       respects. In other words, the adjudicating authority has to satisfy

       that it is not defective. In case the adjudicating authority, after the

       scrutiny of the application, finds that there are certain defects

       therein and it is not complete as per the provisions of sub-section

       (2), in that eventuality, the proviso to sub-section (5) mandates

       that before rejecting the application, the adjudicating authority has

       to give a notice to the applicant to rectify the defect in his

       application within seven days of receipt of such notice.
6) Sub-section (5) of Section 9, thus, stipulates two time periods.

       Insofar as the adjudicating authority is concerned, it has to take a

       decision to either admit or reject the application with the period of

       fourteen days.           Insofar as defects in the application are

       concerned, the adjudicating authority has to give a notice to the

       applicant to rectify the defects before rejecting the application on

       that ground and seven days period is given to the applicant to

       remove the defects.
7) The question before the NCLAT was as to whether time of

       fourteen days given to the adjudicating authority for ascertaining

       the existence of default and admitting or rejecting the application

       is mandatory or directory. Further question (with which this Court
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                               Page 7 of 32
is concerned) was as to whether the period of seven days for

       rectifying the defects is mandatory or directory.
8) The NCLAT has held that period of fourteen days prescribed for

       the adjudicating authority to pass such an order is directory in

       nature, whereas period of seven days given to the applicant/

       operational creditor for rectifying the defects is mandatory in

       nature. Conclusion in this behalf is stated in paragraphs 43 and 4

       of the impugned order and these paragraphs read as under:
“43. Thus, in view of the aforementioned unambiguous
                   position of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court
                   and discussion as made above, we hold that the
                   mandate of sub-section (5) of section 7 or sub-section
                   (5) of section 9 or sub-section (4) of section 10 is
                   procedural in nature, a tool of aid in expeditious
                   dispensation of justice and is directory.
44. However, the 7 days’ period for the rectification of
                   defects as stipulated under proviso to the relevant
                   provisions as noticed above is required to be complied
                   with by the corporate debtor whose application,
                   otherwise, being incomplete is fit to be rejected. In
                   this background we hold that the proviso to sub-
                   section (5) of section 7 or proviso to sub-section (5) of
                   section 9 or proviso to sub-section (4) of section 10 to
                   remove the defect within 7 days are mandatory, and
                   on failure applications are fit to be rejected.”

               On the basis of the aforesaid findings, the NCLAT directed

       rejection of the application filed by the operational creditor in the

       following manner:
“51. Further, we find that the application was defective,
                   and for the said reason the application was not
                   admitted within the specified time. Even if it is
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                                    Page 8 of 32
presumed that 7 additional days time was to be
                   granted to the operational creditor, the defects having
                   pointed out on 16th February 2017 and having not
                   taken care within time, we hold that the petition under
                   section 9 filed by respondent/operational creditor
                   being incomplete was fit to be rejected.
52.    For the reasons aforesaid, we direct the
                   Adjudicating Authority to reject and close the Petition
                   preferred by Respondents. After we reserved the
                   judgment if any order has been passed by the
                   Adjudicating Authority, except order of dismissal, if
                   any, are also declared illegal.”
9) Before we pronounce as to whether the aforesaid rendition by the

       NCLAT is justified or not, it would be apposite to take stock of

       certain essential facts.
10)         Before the enactment of the Code, the relevant legislation

       dealing with such subject matters was the
Sick Industrial

       Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985
(hereinafter referred to

       as ‘SICA’).         Under this Act, an industrial undertaking, on

       becoming sick (i.e. where its net worth got eroded), could file a

       reference under
Section 15(1)
of SICA, before the Board for

       Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (for short, ‘BIFR’)

       constituted under SICA. BIFR, on admitting such a reference,

       was supposed to undertake the exercise whether such a sick

       company can be revived or not. For this purpose, BIFR would

       appoint an Operating Agency (OA) which was supposed to
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                                  Page 9 of 32
explore the possibility of revival plan in consultation with the other

       stakeholders,          particularly   the   creditors.      If     such

       reconstruction/revival scheme prepared by the OA was found to

       be feasible by the BIFR, after ascertaining the views/objections of

       the concerned parties, BIFR would sanction such a scheme. If

       that was not possible, BIFR would recommend winding up of sick

       company by making reference in this behalf to the jurisdictional

       High Court. There was a provision of appeal before the Appellate

       Authority for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (AAIFR).

       This scheme is stated in brief for the purposes of clarity of the

       matter though we are not concerned with any of the provisions of

       SICA. Another aspect which needs to be mentioned is that on

       admitting the reference, all other legal proceedings by creditors or

       other persons initiated against the said sick industrial company

       had to be put on hold by virtue of the protection granted under
Section 22(1)
of SICA.
11)         Respondent No.1 herein, namely, Juggilal Kamlapat Jute

       Mills Company Limited, became a sick industrial company in the

       year 1994 and because of this reason it filed its reference under
Section 15(1)
of SICA.            It was declared as a sick industrial

       company by the BIFR on December 16, 1994 as a result whereof
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                               Page 10 of 32
it came under the protective umbrella of
Section 22(1)
of SICA.
According to the appellant (who is the operational creditor in this

       case), which is a jute trader, it had supplied raw jute to

       respondent No.1 (the corporate debtor) in the years 2001, 2002

       and 2003 in respect of which the corporate debtor owned a sum

       of Rs.17,06,766.95 p.           Further, according to the operational

       creditor, the corporate debtor had issued Certificate dated

       October 24, 2004 acknowledging the aforesaid debt. However, it

       was not in a position to recover this debt because of the

       pendency of proceedings which resulted in stay of proceedings in

       view of
Section 22(1)
of SICA. In the year 2007, one Kolkata

       based company, known as Rainey Park Suppliers Private Limited

       (hereinafter referred to as ‘Rainey Park’), invested in corporate

       debtor and took over its management from its erstwhile

       promoters, i.e. J.K. Singhania Group.         The operational creditor

       had sent notices to Rainey Park to pay the aforesaid amount.

       However, it was not paid.          Legal notices were also sent and

       applications were also filed before the BIFR in this behalf. It led

       to various events which are not required to be mentioned for the

       sake of brevity. Fact remains that the aforesaid debt was not

       honoured or liquidated by the corporate debtor or Rainey Park.

       While the matter was pending with BIFR, Sick Industrial
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                              Page 11 of 32
Companies Repeal Act was passed on the enactment of the

       Code with effect from May 28, 2016. Resultantly, all proceedings

       before BIFR and AAIFR stood abated.                  With this embargo,
Section 22(1)
of SICA also vanished.
12)         In these changed circumstances, the operational creditor

       served another demand notice dated January 06, 2017, in the

       statutory format prescribed under the Code, upon the corporate

       debtor calling up it to pay the outstanding dues. As it was not

       paid, the operational creditor filed application for initiation of

       corporate insolvency resolution process under
Section 9
of the

       Act. The chronology of events which took place from the date of

       filing of the said application till the passing of the impugned order

       by the NCLAT are mentioned herein below:
10.02.2017           →       The appellant filed the application under
Section 9(2)
of the Code, being CP No.
                                       10/ALD/2017, before the adjudicating
                                       authority under the Code.
14.02.2017           →       The registry of the adjudicating authority
                                       pointed out some procedural defects on
                                       the basis of the check list prepared for
                                       scrutiny of the petition/application/
                                       appeal/reply as per Order No. 25/2/2016-
NCLT dated 28.07.2016 and listed the
                                       application for hearing before the
                                       adjudicating authority on 16.02.2017.
16.02.2017           →       The adjudicating authority granted time to
                                       the appellant for removal of the said
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                                  Page 12 of 32
procedural defects on 28.02.2017 and
                                       also wanted to know about the stage of
                                       the proceedings before BIFR when the
                                       proceedings stood abated.
28.02.2017           →       The appellant removed the procedural
                                       defects. As inquired by the adjudicating
                                       authority, the appellant’s counsel sought
                                       for some more time for filing formal
                                       memo by providing/furnishing the latest
                                       order passed by BIFR before the Code
                                       came into force.
03.03.2017           →       The     appellant   filed   its    formal
                                       memo/additional         documents/orders
                                       arising in/out of the pending BIFR’s
                                       proceedings which stood abated. On
                                       03.03.2017, the respondent No. 1 debtor
                                       appeared     before    the Adjudicating
                                       Authority and sought liberty to raise its
                                       objections qua the maintainability of the
                                       application.
09.03.2017           →       The Corporate debtor/respondent No.1
                                       company filed its written objections
                                       before     the       Adjudicating    Authority
                                       disputing the maintainability of the
                                       application filed on various grounds like
                                       time barred debt; the defective demand
                                       notice; civil suit filed against the appellant
                                       being Civil Suit No. 225 of 2017 before
                                       the District Court and embargo created
                                       by Section 252 of the IB Code, 2016 the
                                       proceedings cannot be initiated for a
                                       period of six months after abatement of
                                       SICA.
One JK Jute Mill Mazdoor Morcha,
                                       Kanpur i.e. respondent No. 2 herein
                                       moved       an     application   seeking
                                       intervention in the mater and brought on
                                       record various orders including the
                                       judgment dated 13.11.2014 passed by
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                                     Page 13 of 32
this Court in the matter of
Ghanshyam
                                       Sarda v. Shiv Shankar Trading
                                       Company & Ors.
, reported in (2015) 1
                                       SCC 298 wherein this Court has found
                                       that the sale of assets without BIFR’s
                                       permission as questionable before the
                                       BIFR and also an order dated 18.11.2016
                                       passed by this Court in the case of
Ghanshyam Sarda v. Sashikant Jha
(i.e. contempt petition (civil) No. 338 of
                                       2014), wherein the Director(s) of the
corporate debtor i.e. respondent No. 1
have been held guilty of contempt. It is
                                       also said that the corporate debtor i.e.
                                       respondent No. 1 also failed to clear the
                                       legitimate dues of the workmen of jute
                                       mill which are worth more than 100
                                       crores in rupees.
09.03.2017           →       In light of the foregoing scenario, the
                                       Adjudicating Authority for providing
                                       substantial justice inter alia directed the
                                       respondent No. 1/Corporate Debtor to
                                       maintain status quo in respect of its
                                       immovable property until further orders.

          21.03.2017           →       The interim order passed by the
                                       Adjudicating Authority, Allahabad Bench
                                       on 09.03.2017 was challenged by the
                                       respondent No. 1/Corporate Debtor
                                       under Section 61 of the IB Code, 2016
                                       before the National Company Law
                                       Appellate Tribunal (NCLAT) being
                                       Company Appeal No. 9 of 2017. The
                                       NCLAT on 21.03.2017 issued notice in
                                       the said appeal inter alia observing that
                                       question of law is involved in this case
                                       and directing the Adjudicating Authority
                                       not to admit the application filed under
                                       the IB Code, 2016 by the appellant.
01.05.2017           →       The NCLAT has allowed the AT No.
                                       09/2017 on the ground that the
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                                   Page 14 of 32
application and
Section 9
petition filed by
                                       appellant    herein    was    incomplete,
                                       defected and was fit to be rejected.
Hence, the NCLAT was pleased to direct
                                       NCLT to reject and close the application
                                       filed by the appellant under
Section 9
of
                                       the IB Code, 2016 passed in the
                                       impugned order inter alia rejecting the
                                       application filed by the appellant under
Section 9
of the IB Code, 2016 read with
                                       IB (Application to Adjudicating Authority)
                                       Rules, 2016 being CP No. (IB)10/ALD/
                                       2017.
13)         We may point out at the outset that the learned senior

       counsel appearing for the appellant had submitted that in the

       instant case the defects which were pointed out were not of the

       nature mentioned in the Code but were in terms of the
Companies Act, 2013
. For this purpose, he had referred to the

       Insolvency and Bankruptcy (Application to Adjudicating Authority)

       Rules, 2016 (hereinafter referred to as ‘Rules 2016’) and on that

       basis it was argued that
Section 9(5)
of the Code did not apply in

       the instant case inasmuch as there has to be difference between

       ‘defective’ application and ‘incomplete’ application.             He also

       submitted that the respondent had been violating interim orders

       passed by BIFR in the proceedings pending before it under SICA.

       However, we make it clear at the outset that since we are dealing

       with the substantial issue as to whether seven days period
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                                   Page 15 of 32
provided for removing the defects is mandatory or not, it is not

       necessary to touch upon these mundane aspects.          Instead, it

       would be better to concentrate on the substance of the matter.
14)         As mentioned above, insofar as prescription of fourteen

       days within which the adjudicating authority has to pass an order

       under sub-section (5) of
Section 9
for admitting or rejecting the

       application is concerned, the NCLAT has held that the same

       cannot be treated as mandatory. Though this view is not under

       challenge (and rightly so), discussion in the impugned order on

       this aspect has definite bearing on the other question, with which

       this Court is concerned.        Therefore, we deem it apposite to

       discuss the rationale which is provided by the NCLAT itself in

       arriving at the aforesaid conclusion insofar as first aspect is

       concerned.
15)         It is pointed out by the NCLAT that where an application is

       not disposed of or an order is not passed within a period specified

       in the Code, in such cases the adjudicating authority may record

       the reasons for not doing so within the period so specified and

       may request the President of the NCLAT for extension of time,

       who may, after taking into account the reasons so recorded,

       extend the period specified in the Code, but not exceeding ten
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                           Page 16 of 32
days, as provided in Section 64(1) of the Code. The NCLAT has

       thereafter scanned through the scheme of the Code by pointing

       out various steps of the insolvency resolution process and the

       time limits prescribed therefor. It is of relevance to mention here

       that the corporate insolvency resolution process can be initiated

       by the financial creditor under
Section 7
of the Code, by the

       operational creditor under
Section 9
of the Code and by a

       corporate applicant under
Section 10
of the Code. There is a

       slight difference in these provisions insofar as criteria for

       admission or rejection of the applications filed under respective

       provisions is concerned. However, it is pertinent to note that after

       the admission of the insolvency resolution process, the procedure

       to deal with these applications, whether filed by the financial

       creditor or operational creditor or corporate applicant, is the

       same. It would be relevant to glance through this procedure.
16)         On admission of the application, the adjudicating authority is

       required to appoint an Interim Resolution Professional (for short,

       ‘IRP’) in terms of
Section 16(1)
of the Code. This exercise is to

       be done by the adjudicating authority within fourteen days from

       the commencement of the insolvency date. This commencement

       date is to reckon from the date of the admission of the
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                              Page 17 of 32
application. Under sub-section (5) of
Section 16
, the term of IRP

       cannot exceed thirty days.      Certain functions which are to be

       performed by the IRP are mentioned in subsequent provisions of

       the Code, including management of affairs of corporate debtor by

       IRP as well as duties of IRP so appointed. One of the important

       functions of the IRP is to invite all claims against the corporate

       debtor, collate all those claims and determine the financial

       position of the corporate debtor.     After doing that, IRP is to

       constitute a committee of creditors which shall comprise of

       financial creditors of the corporate debtor. The first meeting of

       such a committee of creditors is to be held within seven days of

       the constitution of the said committee, as provided in
Section 22
of the Code. In the said first meeting, the committee of creditors

       has to take a decision to either appoint IRP as Resolution

       Professional (RP) or to replace the IRP by another RP. Since

       term of IRP is thirty days, all the aforesaid steps are to be

       accomplished within this thirty days period. Thereafter, when RP

       is appointed, he is to conduct the entire corporate insolvency

       resolution process and manage the operations of the corporate

       debtor during the said period. It is not necessary to state the

       further steps which are to be taken by the RP in this behalf. What

       is important is that the entire corporate insolvency resolution
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                          Page 18 of 32
process is to be completed within the period of 180 days from the

       date of admission of the applicant. This time limit is provided in
Section 12
of the Act. This period of 180 days can be extended,

       but such extension is capped as extension cannot exceed 90

       days. Even such an extension would be given by the adjudicating

       authority only after recording a satisfaction that the corporate

       insolvency resolution process cannot be completed within the

       original stipulated period of 180 days. If the resolution process

       does not get completed within the aforesaid time limit, serious

       consequences thereof are provided under
Section 33
of the

       Code. As per that provision, in such a situation, the adjudicating

       authority is required to pass an order requiring the corporate

       debtor to be liquidated in the manner as
laid down in
the said

       Chapter.
17)         The aforesaid statutory scheme laying down time limits

       sends a clear message, as rightly held by the NCLAT also, that

       time is the essence of the Code. Notwithstanding this salutary

       theme and spirit behind the Code, the NCLAT has concluded that

       as far as fourteen days time provided to the adjudicating authority

       for admitting or rejecting the application for initiation of insolvency

       resolution process is concerned, this period is not mandatory.
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                              Page 19 of 32
For arriving at such a conclusion, the NCLAT has discussed the

       law
laid down by
this Court in some judgments. Therefore, we

       deem it proper to reproduce the discussion of the NCLAT itself in

       this behalf:
“32.
In
P.T. Rajan Vs. T.P.M. Sahir and Ors.
(2003) 8
                   SCC 498, the Hon’ble Supreme Court observed that
                   where Adjudicating Authority has to perform a
                   statutory function like admitting or rejecting an
                   application within a time period prescribed, the time
                   period would have to held to be directory and not
                   mandatory. In the said case, Hon’ble Apex Court
                   observed:
“48. It is well-settled principle of law that
                        where a statutory functionary is asked to
                        perform a statutory duty within the time
                        prescribed therefor, the same would be
                        directory and not mandatory.            (See
Shiveshwar Prasad Sinha v. The District
                        Magistrate of Monghur & Anr.
AIR (1966)
                        Patna 144, Nomita Chowdhury v. The State
                        of West Bengal & Ors. (1999) CLJ 21 and
                        Garbari Union Co-operative Agricultural
                        Credit Society Limited & Anr. V. Swapan
                        Kumar Jana & Ors. (1997) 1 CHN 189).
49. Furthermore, a provision in a statute
                        which is procedural in nature although
                        employs the word “shall” may not be held to
                        be mandatory if thereby no prejudice is
                        caused.”
33. That the Hon’ble Apex Court has on numerous
                   occasions interpreted the word ‘shall’ to mean ‘may’.
An analogous position can be found in the context of
                   the time prescribed for filing Written Statements by
                   Defendants to a suit, wherein the Hon’ble Apex Court
                   was faced with the question of a Court’s power to take
                   on record Written Statements that were filed beyond
                   the period of 90 days, as prescribed under
Order VIII
                   Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908. In this
                   regard, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Kailash Versus
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                                    Page 20 of 32
Nanhku and Ors (2005) 4 SCC 480 held as under:
“27. Three things are clear. Firstly, a careful
                        reading of the language in which Order 8
                        Rule 1 has been drafted, shows that it casts
                        an obligation on the defendant to file the
                        written statement within 30 days from the
                        date of service of summons on him and
                        within the extended time falling within 90
                        days. The provision does not deal with the
                        power of the court and also does not
                        specifically take away the power of the court
                        to take the written statement on record
                        though filed beyond the time as provided for.
                        Secondly, the nature of the provision
                        contained in Order 8 Rule 1 is procedural. It
                        is not a part of the substantive law. Thirdly,
                        the object behind substituting Order 8 Rule 1
                        in the present shape is to curb the mischief
                        of unscrupulous defendants adopting dilatory
                        tactics, delaying the disposal of cases much
                        to the chagrin of the plaintiffs and petitioners
                        approaching the court for quick relief and
                        also to the serious inconvenience of the court
                        faced      with    frequent      prayers     for
                        adjournments. The object is to expedite the
                        hearing and not to scuttle the same. The
                        process of justice may be speeded up and
                        hurried but the fairness which is a basic
                        element of justice cannot be permitted to be
                        buried.”
34. Further, Hon’ble Supreme Court in the matter of
Smt. Rani Kusum vs Smt. Kanchan Devi
(2005) 6
                   SCC 705, concurring with the
ratio
laid down in
Kailash Versus Nanhku (supra) held that:
“10. All the rules of procedure are the
                        handmaid of justice. The language employed
                        by the draftsman of processual law may be
                        liberal or stringent, but the fact remains that
                        the object of prescribing procedure is to
                        advance the cause of justice. In an
                        adversarial system, no party should ordinarily
                        be denied the opportunity of participating in
                        the process of justice dispensation. Unless
                        compelled by express and specific language
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                                       Page 21 of 32
of the statute, the provisions
of CPC
or any
                        other procedural enactment ought not to be
                        construed in a manner which would leave the
                        court helpless to meet extraordinary
                        situations in the ends of justice.
11. The mortality of justice at the hands of
                        law troubles a judge’s conscience and points
                        an angry interrogation at the law reformer.
12. The processual law so dominates in
                        certain systems as to overpower substantive
                        rights and substantial justice. The humanist
                        rule that procedure should be the handmaid,
                        not the mistress, of legal justice compels
                        consideration of vesting a residuary power in
                        the judges to act ex debito justitiae where the
                        tragic sequel otherwise would be wholly
                        inequitable. Justice is the goal of
                        jurisprudence, processual, as much as
                        substantive. (See
Sushil Kumar Sen v. State
                        of Bihar
[(1975) 1 SCC 774] .)
13. No person has a vested right in any
                        course of procedure. He has only the right of
                        prosecution or defence in the manner for the
                        time being by or for the court in which the
                        case is pending, and if, by an Act of
                        Parliament the mode of procedure is altered,
                        he has no other right than to proceed
                        according      to     the     altered     mode.
(See Blyth v. Blyth [(1966) 1 All ER 524 :
1966 AC 643 : (1966) 2 WLR 634 (HL)] .) A
                        procedural law should not ordinarily be
                        construed as mandatory; the procedural law
                        is always subservient to and is in aid to
                        justice. Any interpretation which eludes or
                        frustrates the recipient of justice is not to be
                        followed. (See
Shreenath v. Rajesh
[(1998) 4
                        SCC 543 : AIR 1998 SC 1827] .)
14. Processual law is not to be a tyrant but a
                        servant, not an obstruction but an aid to
                        justice. Procedural prescriptions are the
                        handmaid and not the mistress, a lubricant,
                        not a resistant in the administration of
                        justice.”
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                                       Page 22 of 32
xx            xx               xx
41. Further, nature of the provisions contained in sub-
section (5) of
section 7
or sub-section (5) of
section 9
and sub-section (4) of
section 10
of the ‘Code’ like
                   Order VIII Rule 1 being procedural in nature cannot be
                   treated to be a mandate of law.
42. The object behind the time period prescribed
                   under sub-section (5) of
section 7
, sub-section (5) of
section 9
and sub-section (4) of
section 10
, like
Order
                   VIII, Rule 1 of CPC
is to prevent the delay in hearing
                   the disposal of the cases. The Adjudicating Authority
                   cannot ignore the provisions. But in appropriate
                   cases, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, it can
                   admit or reject the petition after the period prescribed
                   under
section 7
or
section 9
or
section 10
.
43. Thus, in view of the aforementioned unambiguous
                   position of law
laid down by
the Hon’ble Apex Court
                   and discussion as made above, we hold that the
                   mandate of sub-section (5) of
section 7
or sub-section
                   (5) of
section 9
or sub-section (4) of
section 10
is
                   procedural in nature, a tool of aid in expeditious
                   dispensation of justice and is directory.”
18)         The NCLAT has also held that fourteen days period is to be

       calculated ‘from the date of receipt of application’. The NCLAT

       has clarified that date of receipt of application cannot be treated

       to be the date of filing of the application. Since the Registry is

       required to find out whether the application is in proper form and

       accompanied with such fee as may be prescribed, it will take

       some time in examining the application and, therefore, fourteen

       days period granted to the adjudicating authority under the
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                                  Page 23 of 32
aforesaid provisions would be from the date when such an

       application is presented before the adjudicating authority, i.e. the

       date on which it is listed for admission/order.
19)         After analysing the provision of fourteen days time within

       which the adjudicating authority is to pass the order, the NCLAT

       immediately jumped to another conclusion, viz. the period of

       seven days mentioned in proviso to sub-section (5) of
Section 9
for removing the defect is mandatory, with the following

       discussion:
“44. However, the 7 days’ period for the rectification of
                   defects as stipulated under proviso to the relevant
                   provisions as noticed above is required to be complied
                   with by the corporate debtor whose application,
                   otherwise, being incomplete is fit to be rejected. In
                   this background we hold that the proviso to sub-
                   section (5) of
section 7
or proviso to sub-section (5) of
section 9
or proviso to sub-section (4) of
section 10
to
                   remove the defect within 7 days are mandatory, and
                   on failure applications are fit to be rejected.”

               There is no further discussion on this aspect.
20)         We are not able to decipher any valid reason given while

       coming to the conclusion that the period mentioned in proviso is

       mandatory. The order of the NCLAT, thereafter, proceeds to take

       note of the provisions of
Section 12
of the Code and points out

       the time limit for completion of insolvency resolution process is

       180 days, which period can be extended by another 90 days.
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                                   Page 24 of 32
However, that can hardly provide any justification to construe the

       provisions of proviso to sub-section (5) of
Section 9
in the manner

       in which it is done. It is to be borne in mind that limit of 180 days

       mentioned in
Section 12
also starts from the date of admission of

       the application. Period prior thereto which is consumed, after the

       filing of the application under
Section 9
(or for that matter under
Section 7
or
Section 10
), whether by the Registry of the

       adjudicating authority in scrutinising the application or by the

       applicant in removing the defects or by the adjudicating authority

       in admitting the application is not to be taken into account. In

       fact, till the objections are removed it is not to be treated as

       application validly filed inasmuch as only after the application is

       complete in every respect it is required to be entertained. In this

       scenario, making the period of seven days contained in the

       proviso as mandatory does not commend to us. No purpose is

       going to be served by treating this period as mandatory. In a

       given case there may be weighty, valid and justifiable reasons for

       not     able     to    remove   the   defects   within   seven    days.

       Notwithstanding the same, the effect would be to reject the

       application.
21)         Let us examine the question from another lens. The moot
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                               Page 25 of 32
question would be as to whether such a rejection would be

       treated as rejecting the application on merits thereby debarring

       the application from filing fresh application or it is to be treated as

       an administrative order since the rejection was because of the

       reason that defects were not removed and application was not

       examined on merits. In the former case it would be travesty of

       justice that even if the case of the applicant on merits is very

       strong, the applicant is shown the door without adjudication of his

       application on merits. If the latter alternative is accepted, then

       rejection of the application in the first instance is not going to

       serve any purpose as the applicant would be permitted to file

       fresh application, complete in all aspects, which would have to be

       entertained.       Thus, in either case, no purpose is served by

       treating the aforesaid provision as mandatory.
22)         Various provisions of the Code would indicate that there are

       three stages:
(i)     First stage is the filing of the application.       When the

               application is filed, the Registry of the adjudicating authority

               is supposed to scrutinise the same to find out as to whether

               it is complete in all respects or there are certain defects. If

               it is complete, the same shall be posted for preliminary
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                               Page 26 of 32
hearing before the adjudicating authority.          If there are

               defects, the applicant would be notified about those defects

               so that these are removed. For this purpose, seven days

               time is given.          Once the defects are removed then the

               application would be posted before the adjudicating

               authority.
(ii)    When the application is listed before the adjudicating

               authority, it has to take a decision to either admit or reject

               the application.         For this purpose, fourteen days time is

               granted to the adjudicating authority. If the application is

               rejected, the matter is given a quietus at that level itself.
However, if it is admitted, we enter the third stage.
(iii)   After admission of the application, insolvency resolution

               process commences.             Relevant provisions thereof have

               been mentioned above. This resolution process is to be

               completed within 180 days, which is extendable, in certain

               cases, up to 90 days.             Insofar as the first stage is

               concerned, it has no bearing on the insolvency resolution

               process at all, inasmuch as, unless the application is

               complete in every respect, the adjudicating authority is not

               supposed to deal with the same. It is at the second stage
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                                 Page 27 of 32
that the adjudicating authority is to apply its mind and

               decide as to whether the application should be admitted or

               rejected.     Here adjudication process starts.   However, in

               spite thereof, when this period of fourteen days given by the

               statute to the adjudicating authority to take a decision to

               admit or reject the application is directory, there is no

               reason to make it mandatory in respect of the first stage,

               which is pre-adjudication stage.
23)         Further, we are of the view that the judgments cited by the

       NCLAT and the principle contained therein applied while deciding

       that period of fourteen days within which the adjudicating

       authority has to pass the order is not mandatory but directory in

       nature would equally apply while interpreting proviso to sub-

       section (5) of
Section 7
,
Section 9
or sub-section (4) of
Section 10
as well. After all, the applicant does not gain anything by not

       removing the objections inasmuch as till the objections are

       removed, such an application would not be entertained.

       Therefore, it is in the interest of the applicant to remove the

       defects as early as possible.
24)         Thus, we hold that the aforesaid provision of removing the

       defects within seven days is directory and not mandatory in
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                              Page 28 of 32
nature. However, we would like to enter a caveat.
25)         We are also conscious of the fact that sometimes applicants

       or their counsel may show laxity by not removing the objections

       within the time given and make take it for granted that they would

       be given unlimited time for such a purpose. There may also be

       cases where such applications are frivolous in nature which

       would be filed for some oblique motives and the applicants may

       want those applications to remain pending and, therefore, would

       not remove the defects. In order to take care of such cases, a

       balanced approach is needed.               Thus, while interpreting the

       provisions to be directory in nature, at the same time, it can be

       laid down that if the objections are not removed within seven

       days, the applicant while refiling the application after removing

       the objections, file an application in writing showing sufficient

       case as to why the applicant could not remove the objections

       within seven days.              When such an application comes up for

       admission/order before the adjudicating authority, it would be for

       the adjudicating authority to decide as to whether sufficient cause

       is shown in not removing the defects beyond the period of seven

       days.     Once the adjudicating authority is satisfied that such a

       case is shown, only then it would entertain the application on
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                                Page 29 of 32
merits, otherwise it will have right to dismiss the application. The

       aforesaid process indicated by us can find support from the

       judgment of this Court in
Kailash v. Nanhku & Ors.
, (2005) 4

       SCC 480, wherein the Court held as under:
“46. (iv) The purpose of providing the time schedule
                   for filing the written statement under
Order 8 Rule 1
                   CPC
is to expedite and not to scuttle the hearing. The
                   provision spells out a disability on the defendant. It
                   does not impose an embargo on the power of the
                   court to extend the time. Though the language of the
                   proviso to Rule 1
Order 8 CPC
is couched in negative
                   form, it does not specify any penal consequences
                   flowing from the non-compliance. The provision being
                   in the domain of the procedural law, it has to be held
                   directory and not mandatory. The power of the court to
                   extend time for filing the written statement beyond the
                   time schedule provided by
Order 8 Rule 1 CPC
is not
                   completely taken away.
(v) Though
Order 8 Rule 1 CPC
is a part of procedural
                   law and hence directory, keeping in view the need for
                   expeditious trial of civil causes which persuaded
                   Parliament to enact the provision in its present form, it
                   is held that ordinarily the time schedule contained in
                   the provision is to be followed as a rule and departure
                   therefrom would be by way of exception. A prayer for
                   extension of time made by the defendant shall not be
                   granted just as a matter of routine and merely for the
                   asking, more so when the period of 90 days has
                   expired. Extension of time may be allowed by way of
                   an exception, for reasons to be assigned by the
                   defendant and also be placed on record in writing,
                   howsoever briefly, by the court on its being satisfied.
Extension of time may be allowed if it is needed to be
                   given for circumstances which are exceptional,
                   occasioned by reasons beyond the control of the
                   defendant and grave injustice would be occasioned if
                   the time was not extended. Costs may be imposed
                   and affidavit or documents in support of the grounds
                   pleaded by the defendant for extension of time may be
                   demanded, depending on the facts and circumstances
                   of a given case.”
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                                   Page 30 of 32
26)         In fine, these appeals are allowed and that part of the

       impugned judgment of NCLAT which holds proviso to sub-section

       (5) of
Section 7
or proviso to sub-section (5) of
Section 9
or

       proviso to sub-section (4) of
Section 10
to remove the defects

       within seven days as mandatory and on failure applications to be

       rejected, is set aside.
No costs.
.............................................J.
                                                                      (A.K. SIKRI)



                                          .............................................J.
                                                        (ASHOK BHUSHAN)
NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 19, 2017.
Civil Appeal No. 8400 of 2017 & Anr.                                    Page 31 of 32
ITEM NO.1501                   COURT NO.6                   SECTION XVII

                        S U P R E M E C O U R T O F         I N D I A
                                RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

Civil Appeal     No(s).8400/2017

SURENDRA TRADING COMPANY                                    Appellant(s)

                                       VERSUS

JUGGILAL KAMLAPAT JUTE MILLS COMPANY LTD & ORS.             Respondent(s)

WITH
Diary No(s). 22835/2017 (XVII)
Date : 19-09-2017 These appeals were called on for pronouncement
        of judgment today.
For Appellant(s)       Mr. Sunil Fernandes, AOR
                        Mr. Gaurav Kejriwal, AOR
                        Mr. Sujit Keshri, Adv.
For Respondent(s)      Mr. Kailash Chand, AOR
                        Mr. Satish Vig, AOR

                        Ms. Kanika Singh, Adv.
Ms. R.K. Mohit Gupta, Adv.
Ms. Sangram Singh Hooda, Adv.
M/s. Coac, AOR
                        Mr. Akshat Kumar, AOR


                  Hon'ble Mr. Justice A.K. Sikri         pronounced the

      judgment    of   the   Bench    comprising   His   Lordship   and

      Hon'ble Mr.Justice A.K. Sikri.
The appeals are       allowed in terms of the   signed

      reportable judgment.
(B.PARVATHI)                    (MALA KUMARI SHARMA)
          COURT MASTER                        COURT MASTER
(Signed reportable judgment is placed on the file)