[Cites
28
, Cited by
19
]
Supreme Court of India
Pooja Menghani vs Sebi on 20 September, 2017
Author:
N. V. Ramana
Bench:
Chief Justice
,
N.V. Ramana
REPORTABLE


               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2595 OF 2013



SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA               … Appellant(s)

                              Versus

SHRI KANAIYALAL BALDEVBHAI PATEL                   … Respondent (s)



                               With


                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2596 OF 2013
    [SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA V. SHRI DIPAK PATEL]

                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2666 OF 2013
 [SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA V. SUJIT KARKERA AND ORS.]

                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5829 OF 2014
    [Pooja Menghani v. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA]

            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11195-11196 OF 2014
[Vibha Sharma and Anr. V. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA]




                                 1
                                JUDGMENT



  N. V. RAMANA J.



1. The important question of law, arising in these batch of cases, being

  similar and the facts involved being largely comparable, all the

  appeals were heard together and are being decided by this common

  judgment.



2. This case revolves round the legality of ‘non-intermediary front-

  running’ in security market under the SECURITIES           AND   EXCHANGE

  BOARD   OF   INDIA (PROHIBITION   OF    FRAUDULENT   AND   UNFAIR TRADE

  PRACTICES    RELATING   TO   SECURITIES   MARKET)    REGULATIONS,   2003

  [hereinafter ‘FUTP 2003’ for brevity]. As SEBI Appellate Tribunal

  [hereinafter ‘SAT’ for brevity] has taken two different views in

  different cases appealed herein, Securities and Exchange Board of

  India [herein after ‘SEBI’ for brevity] as well as private individuals,

  who are alleged to have been involved in front running, are in appeal

  before us.


                                      2
3. A brief factual background would be necessary before we deal with

  the question of law that has arisen in this case instant. Broadly to

  understand the issue at hand, the facts in CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2595      OF

  2013 AND 2596 OF 2013 (related cases) may be stated in brief. SEBI

  investigated into the activities of Shri Kanaiyalal Baldevbhai Patel

  [herein after ‘KB’ for brevity] an individual trader. During the

  investigation, it was found that KB was putting orders ahead of

  orders placed by Passport India Investment (Mauritius) Ltd. [herein

  after ‘PII’ for brevity]. One Dipak Patel, was the portfolio manager of

  PII, who also happens to be a cousin of KB and one Shri

  Anandkumar Baldevbhai Patel [herein after ‘AB’ for brevity]. It was

  alleged that Dipak Patel provided information to KB and AB

  regarding forthcoming trading activity of the PII. It is to be noted that

  trades were executed using the telephone number registered in the

  name of AB at the common residential address of KB and AB. Taking

  advantage of the information received from Dipak Patel, KB had

  indulged in trading before the PII and consequently squared off the

  position when the order of PII were placed in the market. It was

  estimated that the KB earned a total profit of Rs. 1,56,32,364.01/-

                                      3
from the alleged trades. This Court in CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2594        OF

2013, by order dated 05.04.2017, while remanding the matter back

to the Appellate Tribunal with respect to AB, held that there is no

finding or conclusion recorded with respect to AB in the following

manner-

               Learned counsel for the appellant (SEBI) has
               vehemently urged that such findings are
               recorded in the Adjudication Order and the
               said order has merged with the order of the
               learned Appellate Tribunal. We disagree with
               the aforesaid contention urged by the learned
               counsel for the appellant. In the appeal(s) filed
               by the aggrieved person(s) against the order(s)
               of   the   Adjudicating   Officer,   the   learned
               Appellate Tribunal was expected to record its
               own independent findings and arrive at its own
               conclusions for holding the respondent liable
               for the penalty imposed. It seems that the
               learned Appellate Tribunal has proceeded on
               the basis that the case of the respondent is
               same and similar to the case of Kanaiyalal
               Baldev Patel and Dipak Patel which, evidently,
               is not.



                                  4
4. In CIVIL APPEAL NO.2666   OF   2013, Sujit Karkera and Group were

  trading through B.P. Equity Pvt. Ltd. SEBI alleges that they were

  trading ahead of the trades of CITIGROUP Global Markets Mauritius

  Pvt. Ltd.(CGMMPL) on the basis of information provided by Suresh

  Menon (trader of CGMMPL) who was in possession of the orders of

  CGMMPL for 6 scrip days. SEBI in its investigation had found that

  there were several calls made between Suresh Menon and his family

  friend Sujit Karkera during this time period of 6 days.      In these

  telephonic conversations, it was alleged that there was exchange of

  information related to scrip name, order quantity, order timing, and

  order price of the orders placed by Suresh Menon for CGMMPL. Sujit

  Karkera utilized the information provided by Suresh Menon to trade

  thereby making huge profits.



5. In CIVIL APPEAL NO.11195-96    OF   2014, Jitendra Kumar Sharma was

  an equity dealer employed by the Central Bank of India. His

  responsibilities entailed preparation of charts for the chief equity

  dealer and placing of orders based on instructions of the chief equity

  dealer. Vibha Sharma, who is the wife of Jitendra Kumar Sharma,

                                       5
  was a regular trader in the stock market and this fact was disclosed

  to Central Bank of India as a good practice of making disclosure to

  the employer. It is the allegation of SEBI that Vibha Sharma engaged

  herself in front running Central Bank of India’s large scale orders

  allegedly with the knowledge obtained from her husband. Further the

  SEBI had alleged that Vibha Sharma’s trades substantially matched

  with the trades of the bank during the relevant period thereby

  violating regulations 3(a), (b), (c), (d) and 4(1) of FUTP 2003.



6. In CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5829      OF   2014, facts of the case are that

  appellant used to trade in scrips of four companies namely Amtek

  Auto Ltd., Amtek India Ltd., Monnet Ispat Ltd. and Ahmednagar

  Forgings Ltd. through Religare Securities Ltd., ISF Securities Ltd.,

  India Infoline Securities Ltd. and Narayan Securities Private Ltd. It is

  alleged against the appellant that, she had bought and sold equal

  quantities of shares in large volume in these four scrips by utilizing

  the information provided by Deepak Khurana who was privy to

  certain confidential information of Religare. SEBI conducted an

  investigation in the trading of appellant from June 1, 2008 to


                                      6
  January     12,     2009.      During     the     investigation,     SEBI noticed

  irregularities in her dealings in the scrips of above mentioned four

  companies. A general trend of trading was noticed which further

  revealed that the appellant was indulged in Front Running. It was

  found    that     the     appellant’s   sell    orders   (quantity    and    price)

  substantially matched with the buy orders (quantity and price) of

  other traders and that her sell order limit price was always above the

  sell LTP but was same or very close to the buy limit price of other

  traders. Moreover the selling price, quoted by her, was close to the

  highest price reached on market on those days.



7. With this factual background, a reference needs to be made to the

  scheme of FUTP 2003. SEBI, by a notification under
Section 30
of

  the SEBI Act, 1992, dated 17.07.2003, formulated FUTP 2003.


8. Indisputably, the object and purpose of this regulation (FUTP 2003)

  is to safeguard the investing public and honest businessmen. The

  aim is to prevent exploitation of the public by fraudulent schemes

  and     worthless       securities   through     misrepresentation,     to   place

  adequate and true information before the investor, to protect honest

                                           7
  enterprises seeking capital by accurate disclosure, to prevent

  exploitation against the competition afforded by dishonest securities

  offered to the public and to restore the confidence of the prospective

  investor in his ability to select sound securities.


9. FUTP 2003 has three chapters, namely ‘preliminary’, ‘prohibition of

  fraudulent and unfair trade practices relating to securities market’

  and ‘investigation’.
Regulation 1
contains the short title and

  commencement.
Regulation 2
consists of certain definitions. Clause

  (b) of regulation 2 defines ‘dealing in securities’ which includes an act

  of buying, selling or subscribing pursuant to any issue of any

  security or agreeing to buy, sell or subscribe to any issue of any

  security or otherwise transacting in any way in any security by any

  person as principal, agent or intermediary referred to in
Section 12
of

  the SEBI Act. Clause (c) of regulation 2 defines fraud in the following

  manner-


                        c) "fraud"    includes     any    act,
                        expression,         omission        or
                        concealment committed whether in
                        a deceitful manner or not by a


                                      8
person or by any other person with
his connivance or by his agent while
dealing        in       securities in order to
induce another person or his agent
to deal in securities, whether or not
there     is   any       wrongful   gain     or
avoidance of any loss, and shall also
include-


(1) a knowing misrepresentation of
the truth or concealment of material
fact in order that another person
may act to his detriment;
(2) a suggestion as to a fact which is
not true by one who does not believe
it to be true;
(3) an active concealment of a fact
by a person having knowledge or
belief of the fact;
(4) a promise made without any
intention of performing it;
(5) a   representation         made     in   a
reckless       and       careless     manner
whether it be true or false;




                    9
(6) any such act or omission as any
other law specifically declares to be
fraudulent,
(7) deceptive behaviour by a person
depriving         another     of      informed
consent or full participation.
(8) a false statement made without
reasonable ground for believing it to
be true.
(9) The act of an issuer of securities
giving      out        misinformation       that
affects      the market price            of the
security,     resulting       in      investors
being effectively misled even though
they did not rely on the statement
itself or anything derived from it
other than the market price.


And "fraudulent" shall be construed
accordingly;
Nothing      contained in       this    clause
shall apply to any general comments
made in good faith in regard to


(a)   the    economic        policy    of   the
government

                  10
                          (b) the economic situation of the
                         country
                          (c) trends in the securities market
                         or
                         (d) any other matter of a like nature


                         whether such comments are made
                         in public or in private



10.
Regulation 3
prohibits certain dealings in securities, whereas

  regulation 4 prohibits manipulative, fraudulent and unfair practices.
Regulation 5
deals with the power of the board to order investigation.
Regulation 6
elaborates on the power of the investigating authority.



11.    It is important to note that SEBI has amended the regulation, a

  number of times, to keep up with the technology and times. A

  reference may be made to the amendments carried out to the

  regulation -



                 Table No.1- comparison of relevant provisions

                                                                       AMENDMENT OF
          FUTP 1995                FUTP 2003 (APPLICABLE REGULATION)
                                                                          2013



                                      11
                                 “Fraud” includes any of the                                              “fraud” includes any act, expression,          No
                                 following acts committed by a                                            omission or concealment committed         amendments to
                                 party to ac contract, or with his                                        whether in a deceitful manner or
Section 2(c)
connivance, or by his agent, with                                        not by a person or by any other
                                 intent to decive another party                                           person with his connivance or by
                                 thereto or his agent, or to induce                                       his agent while dealing in securities
                                 him to enter into the contract:-                                         in order to induce another person or
                                  (1.)   The suggestion, as to a fact,                                    his agent to deal in securities,
                                     of that which is not true, by                                        whether or not there is any wrongful
                                     one who does not believe it to                                       gain or avoidance of any loss, and
                                     be true;                                                             shall also include-
                                  (2.)   The active concealment of a                                       (1) A knowing misrepresentation of
                                     fact by one having knowledge                                              the truth or concealment of
                                     or belief of the fact;                                                    material fact in order that
                                  (3.)   A promise made without                                                another person may act to his
                                     any intention of performing it;                                           detriment;
                                  (4.)   Any other act fitted to                                           (2) A suggestion as to a fact which is
REGULATION 2 (C) (DEFINITIONS)




                                                                         REGULATION 2 (C) (DEFINITIONS)

                                     deceive;                                                                  not true by one who does not
                                  (5.)   Any such act or omission                                              believe it to be true;
                                     as the law secially declares to                                       (3) An active concealment of a fact
                                     be fraudulent;                                                            by a person having knowledge or
                                  (6.)   And “fraudulent” shall be                                             belief of the fact;
                                     construed accordingly                                                 (4) A promise made without any
                                                                                                               intention of performing it;
                                                                                                           (5) A representation made in a
                                                                                                               reckless and careless manner
                                                                                                               whether it be true or false;
                                                                                                           (6) Any such act or omission as any
                                                                                                               other law specifically declares to
                                                                                                               be fraudulent,
                                                                                                           (7) Deceptive behavior by a person
                                                                                                               depriving another or informed
                                                                                                               consent or full participation,
                                                                                                           (8) A false statement made without
                                                                                                               reasonable ground for believing it
                                                                                                               to be true.
                                                                                                           (9) The act of an issuer of securities
                                                                                                               giving out misinformation that
                                                                                                               affects the market price of the
                                                                                                               security, resulting in investors
                                                                                                               being effectively misled even
                                                                                                               though they did not rely on the
                                                                                                               statement itself or anything
                                                                                                               derived from it other then the
                                                                                                               market price.




                                                                                                            12
                                                               No person shall buy, sell or                                                                       Prohibition of certain dealings in              No
                                                               otherwise deal in securities in a                                                                  securities                                 amendments to
REGULATION 3 (Prohibition of certain dealings in securities)




                                                                                                   REGULATION 3 (Prohibition of certain dealings in securities)
                                                               fraudulent manner.                                                                                 No person shall directly or indirectly-
Section 3(c)
                                                                                                                                                                  (a)
buy, sell or otherwise deal in
                                                                                                                                                                  securities in a fraudulent manner;
                                                                                                                                                                  (b)use or employ, in connection with
                                                                                                                                                                  issue, purchase or sale of any
                                                                                                                                                                  security listed or     proposed to be
                                                                                                                                                                  listed    in    a   recognized     stock
                                                                                                                                                                  exchange,     any    manipulative     or
                                                                                                                                                                  deceptive device or contrivance in
                                                                                                                                                                  contravention of the provisions of
                                                                                                                                                                  the Act or the rules or the regulations
                                                                                                                                                                  made there under;
                                                                                                                                                                  (c) employ any device, scheme or
                                                                                                                                                                  artifice to defraud in connection with
                                                                                                                                                                  dealing in or issue of securities which
                                                                                                                                                                  are listed or proposed to be listed on a
                                                                                                                                                                  recognized stock exchange;
                                                                                                                                                                  (d)engage in any act, practice, course
                                                                                                                                                                  of business which operates or would
                                                                                                                                                                  operate as fraud or deceit upon any
                                                                                                                                                                  person in connection with any
                                                                                                                                                                  dealing in or issue of securities which
                                                                                                                                                                  are listed or proposed to be listed on a
                                                                                                                                                                  recognized     stock    exchange      in
                                                                                                                                                                  contravention of the provisions of the
                                                                                                                                                                  Act or the rules and the regulations
                                                                                                                                                                  made there under.




                                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                            No person shall-                                                                                                                   (1)      Without prejudice to the           Explanation.-




                                                                                                      REGULATION 4 (PROHIBITION AGAINST MANIPULATIVE, FRAUDULENT AND UNFAIR TRADE PRACTICES)
                                                             (a)     Effect, take part in, or enter                                                                                             provisions of regulation 3, no             For            the
                                                            into, either directly or indirectly,                                                                                                person shall indulge in a fraudulent       purposes of this
                                                            transactions in securities, with the                                                                                                or an unfair trade practice in             sub-
                                                            intention of artificially raising or                                                                                                securities.                                registration, for
                                                            depressing the prices of securities,                                                                                               (2)      Dealing in secuties shall be       the removal of
                                                            with the intention of artificially                                                                                                  deemed to be a fraudulent or an            doubt,     it    is
                                                            raising or depressing the prices of                                                                                                 unfair trade practice if it involves       clarified     that
 REGULATION 4 (PROHIBITION AGAINST MARKET MANIPULATIONS)




                                                            securities and thereby inducing the                                                                                                 fraud and may include all or any of        the     acts    or
                                                            sale or purchase of securities by                                                                                                   the following, namely:-                    omissions listed
                                                            any person;                                                                                                                            (a.)    Indulging in a act which        in this sub-
                                                             (b)     Indulge in any act, which is                                                                                                          creates false or misleading     regulation are
                                                            calculated to create a false or                                                                                                                appearance of trading in        not exhaustive
                                                            misleading appearance of trading                                                                                                               the securities market;          and that an act
                                                            on securities market;                                                                                                                  (b.)    Dealing in a security not       or omission is
                                                             (c)     Indulge in any act which in                                                                                                           intended to effect transfer     prohibited if it
                                                            reflection of prices of securities                                                                                                             of beneficial ownership but     falls within the
                                                            based on transactions that are not                                                                                                             intended to operate only as     purview         of
                                                            genuine trade transactions;                                                                                                                    a device to inflate, depress    regulation        3
                                                             (d)     Enter into a purchase or                                                                                                              or cause fluctuations in        notwithstandin
                                                            sale of any securities, not intended                                                                                                           the price of such security      g that it is not
                                                            to effect transfer of beneficial                                                                                                               for    wrongful    gain   or    included in this
                                                            ownership but intended to operate                                                                                                              avoidance of loss;              sub-regulation
                                                            only as a device to inflate, depress,                                                                                                          …                               or is described
                                                            or cause fluctuations in the market                                                                                                    (e.)    Any     act    or   omission    as           being
                                                            price of securities;                                                                                                                           amounting                  to   committed only
                                                             (e)     Pay, offer or agree to pay or                                                                                                         manipulation of the price       by a certain
                                                            offer, directly or indirectly, to any                                                                                                          of a security;                  category        or
                                                            person any money or money’s                                                                                                                    …                               persons in this
                                                            worth for inducing another person                                                                                                      (q.) An intermediary buying or          sub-regulation’
                                                            to purchase or sell any security                                                                                                               selling     securities    in
                                                            with the sole objection of inflating,                                                                                                          advance of a substantial
                                                            depressing, or causing fluctuations                                                                                                            client order or whereby a
                                                            in the market price of securities.                                                                                                             futures or option position
                                                                                                                                                                                                           is    taken      about    an
                                                                                                                                                                                                           impending transaction in
                                                                                                                                                                                                           the same or related
                                                                                                                                                                                                           futures      or      options
                                                                                                                                                                                                           contract.




12.                                                              Although aforesaid amendments are made to the regulation, yet

                                                           such amendments sometimes fail to live up to human ingenuity and

                                                           growth of technology. Usurpation of reprehensible profits by

                                                           fraudsters, who are not entitled to them, must be made answerable


                                                                                                                                                                                                14
  by this Court as per established tenants of rule of law without

  leaving incentives for fraudulent practices, based on creativity of

  disingenuous, to survive the legal gambits. Before embarking upon

  the necessary discussions, I would like to record my views on a

  somewhat unclear picture that emerge from undefined concepts

  contained in the Act and the Regulations framed there under, a

  comprehensive legislation can bring about more clarity and certainty

  on these aspects.



13.    Submissions of Mr. K. T. S. Tulsi, learned senior advocate,

  appearing on behalf of the appellant in CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5829       OF

  2014.

       The finding with regard to the appellant being guilty of fraud

       under regulations 3 and 4 of FUTP 2003 is contrary to the

       definition of fraud as contained in
Regulation 2(1)(c)
of the said

       Regulations.

       Sub-clauses (i), (j), (l), (m), (p), (o) and (q) of clause (2) of

       regulation 4 expressly make themselves applicable only to the

       case of intermediaries and not to individual buyers or sellers.


                                    15
       The rest of the sub-clauses being part of the scheme which

       seeks to regulate the conduct of intermediaries, will be deemed

       on   their   face,   to   pertain   to   activities   undertaken   by

       intermediaries. Thus, the whole of
Regulation 4
seems to be

       inapplicable to the case of the applicant.


  Submissions of Mr. Arvind P. Datar, learned senior advocate,

  appearing on behalf of SEBI-


       That the ambit of FUTP regulations has been substantially

       increased from 1995 to 2003.

       That inclusion of specific prohibition of front-running with

       respect to intermediaries under
Regulation 4 (2)(q)
should not

       whittle the scope of regulation 4 of the FUTP 2003.

       Moreover, ‘Expressio Unius Est Exclusio Alterius’ may not be a

       safe principle to oust the liability for non-intermediary front-

       running.



14.    Other learned counsels appearing for parties have either

  adopted the submissions made by the above named advocates or


                                      16
  provided alternative reasons for the conclusions reached by the

  abovementioned advocates.



15.    The question which has arisen for our consideration is whether

  ‘front running by non-intermediary’ is a prohibited practice under

  regulations 3 (a), (b), (c) and (d) and 4(1) of FUTP 2003?



16.    As this case involves practice of ‘front-running’ in security

  market, a reference may be made to various definitions and

  meanings of front-running-


           Major Law       FRONT     RUNNING.-      Buying or selling
         Lexicon by P.     securities ahead of a large order so as
          Ramanatha        to benefit from the subsequent price
         Aiyar (4th Ed.    move.
             (2010)        This denotes persons dealing in the
                           market,     knowing        that    a    large
                           transaction will take place in the near
                           future and the parties are likely to
                           move in their favour.
                           The illegal private trading by a broker
                           or   market      maker     who    has   prior
                           knowledge       of   a   forthcoming    large

                                      17
                                        movement in prices


           The Black’s Law Front                     running,          n.     Securities.   A
            dictionary (9th             broker’s or analyst’s use of non-public
                     Ed.)               information to acquire securities or
                                        enter into options or futures contracts
                                        for his or her own benefit, knowing
                                        that when the information becomes
                                        public, the price of the securities will
                                        change in a predictable manner. This
                                        practice is illegal. Front-running can
                                        occur in many ways. For example, a
                                        broker or analyst who works for a
                                        brokerage firm may buy shares in a
                                        company that the firm is about to
                                        recommend as a strong buy or in
                                        which the firm is planning to buy a
                                        large block of shares.




          Nancy Folbre1                  In the world of financial trading, a front-
                                         runner is someone who gains an unfair
                                         advantage with inside information




1   Nancy Folbre, The Front-Runners of Wall Street, 07.04.2014 (The New York Times).

                                                       18
17.          SEBI has defined front-running in one of its circular2 in the

  following manner-

                                      Front-running; for the purpose of
                                      this circular, front running means
                                      usage of non public information to
                                      directly or indirectly, buy or sell
                                      securities or enter into options or
                                      futures contracts, in advance of a
                                      substantial order, on an impending
                                      transaction, in the same or related
                                      securities        or     futures        or     options
                                      contracts, in anticipation that when
                                      the information becomes public; the
                                      price of such securities or contracts
                                      may change.


18.          Further a consultative paper3 issued by SEBI had grouped front

  running to be an undesirable manipulative practice in the following

  manner-


                                      ‘However,          SEBI         Act       does       not
                                      prescribe or specify as to which
                                      practice would be considered to be

  2   Circular CIR/EFD/1/2012, dated 25.05.2012.
  3   Consultative Paper issued by SEBI, pursuant to a Press release No. 34/95 dated March 16, 1995.

                                                          19
fraudulent        and         unfair         trade
practices. While the fraudulent and
unfair trade practices are commonly
understood, it would be desirable if
these       practices         are       defined
specifically.
..this will bring about clarity among
the        intermediaries,              issuers,
investors        and      other     connected
persons in the securities markets
about      the        practices     that       are
prohibited, fraudulent and unfair.
…The draft defines fraudulent and
unfair      trade       practices.       These
regulations seek to cover market
manipulation            on        the        stock
exchanges         also.      Practices        like
wash sales, front-running, price
rigging,    artificial       increasing         or
decreasing        the      prices       of    the
securities are brought within the
ambit of the regulations’


                                         (emphasis added)




                 20
19.          In actuality, front-running is more complicated than these

  definitions suggest. It comprises of at least three forms of conduct.

  They are: (1) trading by third parties who are tipped on an impending

  block trade ("tippee" trading); (2) transactions in which the owner or

  purchaser of the block trade himself engages in the offsetting futures

  or options transaction as a means of "hedging" against price

  fluctuations caused by the block transaction ("self-front-running");

  and (3) transactions where a intermediary with knowledge of an

  impending customer block order trades ahead of that order for the

  intermediary's own profit ("trading ahead"). In this batch of appeals

  we are concerned with the first and the last types of trade i.e., tippee

  trading and trading ahead. It is important to note that trading ahead

  has been explicitly recognized under regulation 4(2)(q) of FUTP 2003.



20.          A word on interpretation would be appropriate before I take up

  legal aspects of this case. Mr. K.T.S. Tulsi, learned senior counsel,

  states that penal laws have to be strictly construed. He places

  reliance on Govind Impex Pvt. Ltd. v. Income Tax Department4,



  4   (2011) 1 SCC 529.

                                        21
Krishi Utpadan Mandi Samiti v. Pilibhit Pantnagar Beej Ltd.5

Although strict construction is well established principle when

interpreting a penal provision, but such interpretation should not

result in incongruence when compared with the purpose of the

regulation. In SEBI v. Kishore R. Ajmera, this Court observed that-

                        the
SEBI Act
and the Regulations framed
                        there under are intended to protect the
                        interests          of             investors           in
                        the Securities Market which               has      seen
                        substantial    growth        in    tune    with     the
                        parallel developments in the economy.
                        Investors'         confidence             in        the
                        Capital/Securities Market is a reflection of
                        the   effectiveness          of    the     regulatory
                        mechanism in force. All such measures are
                        intended to preempt manipulative trading
                        and check all kinds of impermissible
                        conduct in order to boost the investors'
                        confidence    in    the      Capital market.        The
                        primary      purpose         of     the        statutory
                        enactments is to provide an environment
                        conductive to increased participation and
                        investment in the securities market which

5   (2004) 1 SCC 391.

                                                22
                             is vital to the growth and development of
                             the economy. The provisions of the
SEBI
                             Act
and the Regulations will, therefore,
                             have to be understood and interpreted in
                             the above light.6
21.          The object and purpose of FUTP 2003 is to curb “market

  manipulations”. Market manipulation is normally regarded as an

  “unwarranted” interference in the operation of ordinary market forces

  of supply and demand and thus undermines the “integrity” and

  efficiency          of    the     market.7        This   Court      in     N.    Narayanan             v.

  adjudicating Officer, SEBI8, has laid down that-

                                     Prevention       of   market        abuse        and
                                     preservation of market integrity is the
                                     hallmark of Securities Law.
Section
                                     12A
read with Regulations 3 and 4 of
                                     the      Regulations       2003        essentially
                                     intended to preserve ‘market integrity’
                                     and to prevent ‘Market abuse’. The
                                     object of the
SEBI Act
is to protect
                                     the interest of investors in securities
                                     and to promote the development and


  6   SEBI v. Kishore R. Ajmera, (2016) 6 SCC 368
  7 Palmer’s Company Law, 25th Edition (2010), Volume 2 at page 11097; Gower & Davies – Principles of Modern
  Company Law, 9th Edition (2012) at page 1160.
  8 (2013) 12 SCC 152


                                                      23
to regulate the securities market, so
as to promote orderly, healthy growth
of securities market and to promote
investors          protection.          Securities
market is based on free and open
access to information, the integrity of
the market is predicated on the
quality and the manner on which it is
made available to market. ‘Market
abuse’ impairs economic growth and
erodes investor’s confidence. Market
abuse       refers          to    the    use    of
manipulative and deceptive devices,
giving out incorrect or misleading
information,           so    as   to    encourage
investors to jump into conclusions,
on wrong premises, which is known
to be wrong to the abusers. The
statutory          provisions           mentioned
earlier deal with the situations where
a person, who deals in securities,
takes advantage of the impact of an
action, may be manipulative, on the
anticipated impact on the market
resulting         in        the   “creation     of
artificiality’.

                  24
22.    From the line of decisions cited herein above, it can be inferred

  that as a matter of principle, while interpreting this regulation, the

  court must weigh against an interpretation which will protect unjust

  claims over just, fraud over legality and expediency over principle.

  Once this rule is clearly established, individual cases should not

  pose any problem.



23.    It is equally well settled that in interpreting a statute, effort

  should be made to give effect to each and every word used by the

  Legislature. The Courts should presume that the Legislature inserted

  every part for a purpose and the legislative intention is that every

  part of the statute should have effect. It must be kept in mind that

  whenever this Court is seized with a matter which requires judicial

  mind to be applied for interpreting a law, the effort must always be

  made to realize the true intention behind the law.



24.    Before dealing with the legal issue we are seized with, it would

  be important to observe certain definition as occurring under the

  regulations. The definition of ‘dealing in securities’ acquires some

                                    25
  importance as charge under regulation 3 completely depends on the

  aspect whether the tippee was dealing in securities in the first

  instant or not. For a transaction to be termed as dealing in

  securities, following ingredients need to be satisfied-

                 1. includes an act of buying, selling or subscribing
                    pursuant to any issue of any security, or
                 2. Agreeing to buy, sell or subscribe to any issue of
                    any security, or;
                 3. Otherwise transacting in any way in any security
                    by any person as principal, agent or intermediary
                    referred to in
Section 12
of the Act.

25.    The definition of ‘dealing in securities’ is broad and inclusive in

  nature. Under the old regime the usage of term ‘ to mean’ has been

  changed to ‘includes’, which prima facie indicates that the definition

  is broad. Moreover, the inclusion of term ‘otherwise transacting’ itself

  provides an internal evidence for being broadly worded so as to

  include situations such as the present one.



26.    There is no dispute as to the fact that fraud is jurisprudentially

  very difficult to define or cloth it with particular ingredients. A

  generalized meaning may be difficult to be attributed, as human

                                     26
  ingenuity would invent ways to bypass such behaviour. It is to be

  noted that fraud is extensively used in various regulatory framework

  which mandates me to take notice of the conceptual and definitional

  problem it brings along. Fraud is among the most serious, costly,

  stigmatizing, and punitive forms of liability imposed in modern

  corporations and financial markets. Usually, the antifraud provisions

  of the security laws are not coextensive with common-law doctrines

  of fraud as common-law fraud doctrines are too restrictive to deal

  with the complexities involved in the security market, which is also

  portrayed by the changes brought in through the 2003 regulation to

  the 1995 regulation.



27.    On a comparative analysis of the definition of "fraud" as existing

  in the 1995 regulation and the subsequent amendments in the 2003

  regulations, it can be seen that the original definition of "fraud"

  under the FUTP regulation, 1995 adopts the definition of "fraud"

  from the
Indian Contract Act, 1872
whereas the subsequent

  definition in the 2003 regulation is a variation of the same and does

  not adopt the strict definition of "fraud" as present under the Indian


                                    27
Contract Act
. It includes many situations which may not be a "fraud"

  under the
Contract Act
or the 1995 regulation, but nevertheless

  amounts to a "fraud" under the 2003 regulation.



28.    The definition of ‘fraud’ under clause (c) of regulation 2 has two

  parts; first part may be termed as catch all provision while the

  second part includes specific instances which are also included as

  part and parcel of term ‘fraud’. The ingredients of the first part of the

  definition are-

               1. includes an act, expression, omission or
                    concealment      whether    in   a    deceitful
                    manner or not;
               2. By a person or by any other person with
                    his connivance or his agent while dealing
                    in securities;
               3. So that the same induces another person
                    or his agent to deal in securities;
               4. Whether or not there is any wrongful gain
                    or avoidance of any loss.


  The second part of the definition includes specific instances-




                                       28
(1) a knowing misrepresentation of the

truth or concealment of material fact in
order that another person may act to
his detriment;
(2) a suggestion as to a fact which is not
true by one who does not believe it to be
true;
(3) an active concealment of a fact by a
person having knowledge or belief of the
fact;
(4) a promise made without any intention
of performing it;
(5) a representation made in a reckless
and careless manner whether it be true
or false;
(6) any such act or omission as any other
law specifically declares to be fraudulent,
(7) deceptive       behavior    by   a   person
depriving another of informed consent or
full participation.
(8)     a   false   statement   made     without
reasonable ground for believing it to be
true.
(9) The act of an issuer of securities
giving out misinformation that affects
the market price of the security, resulting

                       29
                           in investors being effectively misled even
                           though they did not rely on the statement
                           itself or anything derived from it other
                           than the market price.


29.       Although unfair trade practice has not been defined under the

  regulation, various other legislations9 in India have defined the

  concept of unfair trade practice in different contexts. A clear cut

  generalized definition of the ‘unfair trade practice’ may not be

  possible to be culled out from the aforesaid definitions. Broadly trade

  practice is unfair if the conduct undermines the ethical standards

  and good faith dealings between parties engaged in business

  transactions. It is to be noted that unfair trade practices are not

  subject to a single definition; rather it requires adjudication on case

  to case basis. Whether an act or practice is unfair is to be determined

  by all the facts and circumstances surrounding the transaction. In

  the context of this regulation a trade practice may be unfair, if the

  conduct undermines the good faith dealings involved in the




  9
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969
, Section 36A;
The Consumer Protection Act, 1986
,
Section

  2(1)(r)
;
The Competition Act, 2002
,
Section 3
;
The Food Security and Standards Act, 2006
,
Section 24(2)
;
Specific
  Relief Act, 1963
,
Section 20
;
Usurious Loans Act, 1918
,
Section 3
.

                                                         30
  transaction. Moreover the concept of ‘unfairness’ appears to be

  broader than and includes the concept of ‘deception’ or ‘fraud’.



30.    Although learned counsel for SEBI has admitted that there is no

  difference between fraud and unfair trade practice under regulation 4

  (1), but we are of the opinion that such submission may not be

  conclusive. As these cases do not require further investigation, the

  question regarding the scope of prosecution for unfair trade practice

  is kept open.


31.
Regulation 3
prohibits a person from committing fraud while

  dealing in securities. A reading of the aforesaid provision describes

  the width of the power vested with the SEBI to regulate the security

  market. In our view, the words employed in the aforesaid provisions

  are of wide amplitude and would therefore take within its sweep the

  inducement to bring about inequitable result which has happened in

  this case instant.



32.
Regulation 4
prohibits manipulative, fraudulent and unfair

  trade practices. It is to be noted that the regulation 4 (1) starts with

                                     31
  the phrase ‘without prejudice to the provisions of regulation 3’. This

  phrase acquires significance as it portrays that the prohibitions

  covered under the regulation 3 do not bar the prosecution under

  regulation 4 (1). Therefore regulation 4 (1) has to be read to have its

  own ambit which adds to what is contained under regulation 3.


33.
Regulation 4 (2)(q)
of FUTP 2003 states that-

                  (2) Dealing in securities shall be deemed
                  to be a fraudulent or an unfair trade
                  practice if it involves fraud and may
                  include all or any of the following,
                  namely:-
                  …
                  q) an intermediary buying or selling
                  securities in advance of a substantial
                  client order or whereby a futures or
                  option     position    is   taken   about   an
                  impending transaction in the same or
                  related futures or options contract.


  Under the provisions of regulation 4(2)(q), only intermediary trading

  on the information of substantial client order, if it involves fraud then

  the dealing in securities will be deemed to be fraudulent.

                                        32
34.          An argument has been introduced by the Mr. K.T.S. Tulsi,

  learned senior counsel, that sub-clause (q) of regulation 4(2) includes

  only front-running by the intermediaries, by implication it means

  that any persons other than intermediaries are excluded from the

  rigors of law. In our opinion such submission cannot be sustained in

  the eyes of law as the intention of the legislation was to provide for a

  catchall provision and the deeming provision under sub-clause (q) of

  regulation 4(2) was specifically provided as the intermediary are in

  fiduciary relationship with the clients. There is no dispute as to the

  fact that a fiduciary must act in utmost good faith; he should not act

  for his own benefit or benefit of any third party without the informed

  consent of his client. The essential irreducible core of fiduciary duty

  is the duty of loyalty10. Such heightened standard demanded a

  deeming provision under the FUTP 2003.



35.          The reliance on ‘expressio unius est exclusio alterius’ may not be

  appropriate in this case instant as the intention of the regulation is

  apparent in this case. Moreover, it has been well established that


  10   SEBI (Stock Brokers and Sub-brokers) Regulations, 1992, Schedule II.

                                                          33
  ‘expressio unius est exclusio alterius’ is not a rule of law but a tool of

  interpretation which must be cautiously applied.11 In light of the

  above discussion, this rule of interpretation does not help the case of

  the violators.


36.          A crucial aspect which needs to be observed at this point is the

  element of causation which is embedded under regulation 2(1)(c)

  read with regulations 3 and 4. In order to establish the aforesaid

  charges in this case, it is required by the SEBI to establish that the

  harm was induced by the materialization of a risk that was not

  disclosed because of the tippee’s fraudulent practice. Further the

  charges under the FUTP 2003 needs to be established as per the

  applicable standards rather than on mere conjectures and surmises.



37.          It should be noted that the provisions of regulations 3 (a), (b),

  (c), (d) and 4(1) are couched in general terms to cover diverse

  situations and possibilities. Once a conclusion, that fraud has been

  committed while dealing in securities, is arrived at, all these

  provisions            get      attracted        in     a        situation     like     the   one   under


  11   Colquhoun v. Brooks, (1887) 19 Q.B.D. 400; Lowe v. Darling & Sons, (1906) 2 K. B. 772

                                                             34
  consideration. We are not inclined to agree with the submission that

  SEBI should have identified as to which particular provision of FUTP

  2003 regulations has been violated. A pigeon-hole approach may not

  be applicable in this case instant.



38.       Before we conclude, it would be useful to have a look at

  American jurisprudence which has developed around Title 17, Code

  of Federal Regulations, Part 240, Rule 10b-5 (Prohibition of use of

  manipulative or deceptive devices or contrivances with respect

  to certain securities exempted from registration). It is to be noted

  that much of Indian securities laws have similar provisions and a

  brief survey of jurisprudence might be useful for the discussion

  herein. The complexity of the subject we are dealing is reflected even

  in the American jurisprudence as the U.S Supreme Court seems to

  have accepted the aforesaid provision to be the most litigated ones.12

  In David Carpenter, Kenneth P. Felis and R. Foster Winans, v.

  United States13, the United States Supreme Court dealt with the


  12 Securities and Exchange Commission vs. National Securities, Inc., et al., 393 U.S. 453 (1969)
            ‘Although
section 10(b)
and
10
b-5 may well be the most litigated provisions in the federal securities
            laws, this is the first time this Court has found it necessary to interpret them. We eneter the virgin
            territory cautiously…’
  13 484 U.
S. 19
.


                                                        35
matter of fraud under
section 10(b)
. In this case, the Petitioner, who

was a co-author in a Journal’s investment advice column, entered

into a deal with a stock broker wherein he provided pre-publication

information on the content of the column. Further the stockbroker

bought and sold shares based on such information and shared the

profits made therein with the Petitioner. The Court, while convicting

the Petitioner, elaborated the meaning of fraud in following manner –

                     We cannot accept petitioners' further
                     argument    that   Winans'    conduct    in
                     revealing prepublication information was
                     no more than a violation of workplace
                     rules and did not amount to fraudulent
                     activity that is proscribed by the mail
                     fraud statute. Sections 1341 and 1343
                     reach any scheme to deprive another of
                     money or property by means of false or
                     fraudulent pretenses, representations, or
                     promises. As we observed last Term in
                     McNally, the words “to defraud” in the
                     mail fraud statute have the “common
                     understanding” of “ ‘wronging one in his
                     property rights by dishonest methods or
                     schemes,’   and    ‘usually   signify   the


                                  36
                    deprivation of something of value by
                    trick, deceit, chicane or overreaching.’ ”
                    483 U.S., at 358, 107 S.Ct., at 2881
                    (quoting Hammerschmidt v. United States,
                    265 U.S. 182, 188, 44 S.Ct. 511, 512, 68
                    L.Ed. 968 (1924)). The concept of “fraud”
                    includes the act of embezzlement, which
                    is “ ‘the fraudulent appropriation to one's
                    own use of the money or goods entrusted
                    to one's care by another.’ ” Grin v. Shine,
                    187 U.S. 181, 189,
23
S.Ct. 98, 102, 47
                    L.Ed. 130 (1902).

Elaborating on the fiduciary relationship between the employee of a

firm to safeguard the confidential information owned by the firm, the

court observed as under-

                    The District Court found that Winans'
                    undertaking at the Journal was not to
                    reveal prepublication information about
                    his column, a promise that became a
                    sham when in violation of his duty he
                    passed     along    to   his    coconspirators
                    confidential information belonging to the
                    Journal, pursuant to an ongoing scheme
                    to     share   profits   from     trading   in

                                   37
anticipation     of    the     “Heard”    column's
impact on the stock market. In Snepp v.
United States, 444 U.S. 507, 515, n. 11,
100 S.Ct. 763, 768, n. 11, 62 L.Ed.2d
704    (1980)    (per curiam), although          a
decision grounded in the provisions of a
written trust agreement prohibiting the
unapproved            use      of      confidential
Government information, we noted the
similar prohibitions of the common law,
that “even in the absence of a written
contract, an employee has a fiduciary
obligation      to      protect        confidential
information obtained during the course of
his employment.” As the New York courts
have recognized: “It is well established, as
a general proposition, that a person who
acquires        special            knowledge    or
information by virtue of a confidential or
fiduciary relationship with another is not
free   to    exploit        that    knowledge   or
information for his own personal benefit
but must account to his principal for any
profits derived therefrom.” Diamond v.
Oreamuno, 24 N.Y.2d 494, 497, 301
N.Y.S.2d 78, 80, 248 N.E.2d 910, 912

                38
(1969); see also Restatement (Second) of
Agency §§ 388, Comment c, 396(c) (1958).




We have little trouble in holding that the
conspiracy here to trade on the Journal's
confidential information is not outside
the reach of the mail and wire fraud
statutes, provided the other elements of
the offenses are satisfied. The Journal's
business information that it intended to
be kept confidential was its property; the
declaration to that effect in the employee
manual merely removed any doubts on
that score and made the finding of
specific intent to defraud that much
easier. Winans continued in the employ
of   the    Journal,      appropriating   its
confidential business information for his
own use, all the while pretending to
perform his duty of safeguarding it. In
fact, he told his editors twice about leaks
of confidential information not related to
the stock-trading scheme, 612 F.Supp.,
at   831,    demonstrating       both     his
knowledge    that   the     Journal   viewed

             39
                              information    concerning    the   “Heard”
                              column as confidential and his deceit as
                              he played the role of a loyal employee.



39.          In Vincent F. Chiarella v. United States14, the United States

  Supreme Court was seized of the matter relating to securities fraud

  under section 10b of the Securities Exchange Act, 1934. The

  Petitioner therein was a printer of some corporate takeover bids.

  Despite attempts by the companies to conceal the names of the

  takeover targets, Chiarella was able to deduce, and he traded shares

  of the companies he knew were involved. Consequently he was

  convicted by the lower forum as he traded in target companies

  without informing its shareholders of his knowledge of proposed

  takeover. The Supreme Court while reversing his conviction,

  observed as under-



                              “the Petitioner employee could not be
                              convicted on theory of failure to disclose
                              his knowledge to stockholders or target
                              companies as he was under no duty to


  14   445 U.S. 222 (1980).

                                            40
                     speak, in that he had no prior dealings
                     with the stockholders and was not their
                     agent or fiduciary and was not a person
                     in whom sellers had placed their trust
                     and confidence, but dealt with them only
                     through               impersonal          market
                     transactions.”


On the issue of “General Duty between all participants (Tippee’s), the

Court stated that:



                     “Formulation of a general duty between
                     all participants in market transactions for
                     forego    actions       based      on   material,
                     nonpublic information, so as to give rise
                     to   liability    under      section    10(b)   of
                     Securities Exchange Act for failure to
                     disclose, would depart radically from
                     established doctrine that a duty arises
                     from a specific relationship between two
                     parties and should not be undertaken
                     absent     some         explicit   evidence     of
                     congressional intent. Securities Exchange
                     Act of 1934, § 10(b) as amended 15
                     U.S.C.A. § 78j(b).”
                                      41
40.    Although excessive reliance on foreign jurisprudence may not

  be necessary as we have starkly deviated in many aspects from

  American jurisprudence, but we need to keep in mind the

  developments which other countries have undertaken regarding this

  issue.



41.    Now we come back to the regulations 3 and 4 (1) which bars

  persons from dealing in securities in a fraudulent manner or

  indulging in unfair trade practice. Fairness in financial markets is

  often expressed in terms of level playing field. A playing field may be

  uneven because of varied reasons such as inequalities in information

  etc. Possession of different information, which is a pervasive feature

  of markets, may not always be objectionable. Indeed, investors who

  invest resources in acquiring superior information are entitled to

  exploit this advantage, thereby making markets more efficient. The

  unequal possession of information is fraudulent only when the

  information has been acquired in bad faith and thereby inducing an

  inequitable result for others.

                                    42
42.          The law of confidentiality has a bearing on this case instant.

  “Confidential information acquired or compiled by a corporation in

  the course and conduct of its business is a species of property to

  which the corporation has the exclusive right and benefit, and which

  a court of equity will protect through the injunctive process or other

  appropriate remedy.”15 The information of possible trades that the

  company is going to undertake is the confidential information of the

  company concerned, which it has absolute liberty to deal with.

  Therefore, a person conveying confidential information to another

  person (tippee) breaches his duty prescribed by law and if the

  recipient of such information knows of the breach and trades, and

  there is an inducement to bring about an inequitable result, then the

  recipient tippee may be said to have committed the fraud.



43.          Accordingly, non-intermediary front running may be brought

  under the prohibition prescribed under regulations 3 and 4 (1), for

  being fraudulent or unfair trade practice, provided that the

  ingredients under those heads are satisfied as discussed above. From

  15   3 W. Fletcher, Cyclopedia of Law of Private Corporations § 857.1, p. 260 (rev. ed. 1986)

                                                             43
  the above analysis, it is clear that in order to establish charges

  against tippee, under regulations 3 (a), (b), (c) and (d) and 4 (1) of

  FUTP 2003, one needs to prove that a person who had provided the

  tip was under a duty to keep the non-public information under

  confidence, further such breach of duty was known to the tippee and

  he still trades thereby defrauding the person, whose orders were

  front-runned, by inducing him to deal at the price he did.



44.    Taking into consideration the facts and circumstances of the

  case before us and the law laid down herein above and SEBI v.

  Kishore R. Ajmera (Supra) can only lead to one conclusion that

  concerned parties to the transaction were involved in an apparent

  fraudulent practice violating market integrity. The parting of

  information with regard to an imminent bulk purchase and the

  subsequent transaction thereto are so intrinsically connected that no

  other conclusion but one of joint liability of both the initiator of the

  fraudulent practice and the other party who had knowingly aided in

  the same is possible. Consequently, Civil Appeal Nos. 2595, 2596

  and 2666 of 2013 are allowed. At the same time, for the same reason,


                                     44
Civil Appeal Nos. 5829 of 2014 and 11195-11196 of 2014 are

dismissed.




                                         ............................J.
                                                  (N. V. RAMANA)



NEW DELHI
SEPTEMBER 20, 2017




                            45
                        1



                                        REPORTABLE

          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2595 OF 2013

SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD
OF INDIA                            ...APPELLANT(S)

                     VERSUS

KANAIYALAL BALDEVBHAI
PATEL                           ...RESPONDENT(S)
                    WITH
        CIVIL APPEAL NO.2596 OF 2013
         [S.E.B.I. VS. DIPAK PATEL]

          CIVIL APPEAL NO.2666 OF 2013
      [S.E.B.I. VS. SUJIT KARKERA & ORS.]

           CIVIL APPEAL NO.5829 OF 2014
          [POOJA MENGHANI VS. S.E.B.I.]

     CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 11195-11196 OF 2014
      [VIBHA SHARMA AND ANR. VS. S.E.B.I.]


                 J U D G M E N T
RANJAN GOGOI,J.
1.         I have had the privilege of going

through the very erudite judgment of my

learned    brother   Ramana,   J.   I   can   only
2
agree with the trend of reasoning that my

learned      brother     has   chosen     to    adopt       to

arrive       at    his     ultimate        conclusions.

However, I am of the view that the present

case    is    capable     of   resolution       within       a

very    narrow     spectrum     of   law    and      on     an

interpretation of the relevant provisions

of the Securities and Exchange Board of

India     (Prohibition         of    Fraudulent            and

Unfair       Trade       Practices        Relating          to

Securities         Market)      Regulations               2003

(hereinafter         referred        to        as        “2003

Regulations”).           I, therefore, propose to

record my own views in the matter.
2.           The   relevant     provisions          of     the

2003     Regulations        which     would         require

consideration of this Court has been set

out in extenso by my learned brother and,

therefore, I need not burden this order

with a repetition of the same.                 All that I
3
consider necessary to point out is that it

is the provisions of
Regulation 2(c)
,(3)

and   (4)    of    the    2003       Regulations           which

would   require      a    consideration          from        the

limited stand point of whether the actions

attributable to the respondents in Appeal

Nos.2595 of 2013, 2596 of 2013 and 2666 of

2013 and appellants in Appeal Nos.5829 of

2014 and 11195-11196 of 2014 come within

the four corners of fraudulent or unfair

trade     practice       as       contemplated        by     the

aforesaid         provisions            of      the         2003

Regulations.
3.          The   gravamen         of   the    allegations

which can be culled out from the facts in

Civil Appeal No.2595 of 2013 is that one

Dipak   Patel     (respondent           in    Civil    Appeal

No.2596     of    2013),          who   was     holding        a

position of trust and confidence in one

M/s Passport India Investment (Mauritius)
4
Limited (hereinafter referred to as “M/s

Passport         India”),              was          privy         to

privileged/confidential                 information             that

M/s    Passport        India           would        be      making

substantial       investments                in      particular

scrips     through       the           stock         exchanges.

Dipak Patel is alleged to have parted the

said information to his cousins Kanaiyalal

Baldevbhai       Patel      [respondent              in        Civil

Appeal    No.2595      of        2013]       and     Anandkumar

Baldevbhai       Patel      [respondent             in         Civil

Appeal No.2594 of 2013 (disposed of on 5th

April, 2017)] who on various dates placed

orders     for    purchase          of       scrips        a     few

minutes before the bulk orders in respect

of the same scrips were placed on behalf

of M/s Passport India by Dipak Patel.                            The

bulk   order/orders,         because           of    the       sheer

volume,     naturally            had     the        effect        of

pushing up the prices of the particular

scrips     and    no     sooner          the        prices       had
5
increased, Kanaiyalal Baldevhai Patel and

Anandkumar Baldevbhai Patel had traded the

said    scrips       thereby        earning       substantial

profits.           The large volume of the shares

traded in the above manner; the several

number of days on which such trading took

place;       and    the   close          proximity    of       time

between       the     sale     and        purchase       of    the

shares       i.e.    before        and    after    the         bulk

purchases, were alleged by the appellant -

Securities          and   Exchange         Board     of       India

(“SEBI”       for     short)        to    be   amounting        to

fraudulent           or   unfair           trade     practice

warranting          imposition            of     penalty        and

visiting       the    offending           individuals         with

other penal consequences.
4.     The    adjudicating           authority       held       the

respondents           liable.              The     Securities

Appellate          Tribunal        (“Appellate       Tribunal”

for short) before whom appeals were filed
6
by     the     aggrieved         persons       (respondents

herein) interfered with the orders passed

by the adjudicating authority primarily on

the ground that on a reading of
Regulation

2(c)
,(3)       and   Regulation(4)          of    the     2003

Regulations it does not transpire that the

acts attributable amount to fraudulent or

unfair       trade     practice          warranting         the

findings       recorded          by   the      Adjudicating

authority and the imposition of penalty in

question on that basis.
5.           If
Regulation 2(c)
of the 2003 was

to be dissected and analyzed it is clear

that     any    act,    expression,            omission      or

concealment          committed,          whether       in    a

deceitful      manner       or    not,    by     any   person

while     dealing      in    securities          to    induce

another person to deal in securities would

amount to a fraudulent act.                    The emphasis

in the definition in
Regulation 2(c)
of
7
the 2003 Regulations is not, therefore, of

whether the act, expression, omission or

concealment            has     been       committed          in    a

deceitful         manner     but         whether      such    act,

expression,             omission           or        concealment

has/had      the       effect       of    inducing      another

person to deal in securities.
6.           The definition of 'fraud', which

is an inclusive definition and, therefore,

has    to    be    understood             to    be    broad       and

expansive, contemplates even an action or

omission,         as     may        be     committed,         even

without any deceit if such act or omission

has the effect of inducing another person

to    deal    in    securities.                Certainly,         the

definition         expands          beyond      what    can       be

normally      understood            to    be    a    'fraudulent

act' or a conduct amounting to 'fraud'.

The emphasis is on the act of inducement

and the scrutiny must, therefore, be on
8
the meaning that must be attributed to the

word “induce”.
7.   The     dictionary               meaning        of    the     word

“induced” may now be taken note of.
BLACK’S        LAW       DICTIONARY,          EIGHTH
     EDITION, defines ‘inducement’ as “the
     act        or    process           of      enticing         or
     persuading another                 person       to   take a
     certain course of action.”
             Merriam-Webster                         Dictionary
     defines ‘inducement’ as “a motive or
     consideration that leads one to action
     or    to    additional            or     more     effective
     actions.”
8.   A    person      can    be        said    to     have    induced

another person to act in a particular way or

not to act in a particular way if on the basis

of   facts      and   statements            made     by   the    first

person the second person commits an act or

omits to perform any particular act.                         The test

to   determine        whether         the     second      person      had

been induced to act in the manner he did or

not to act in the manner that he proposed, is
9
whether      but    for     the       representation       of    the

facts made by the first person, the latter

would not have acted in the manner he did.

This    is     also    how    the       word     inducement       is

understood in criminal law.                     The difference

between      inducement      in       criminal      law   and    the

wider meaning thereof as in the present case,

is   that    to     make    inducement         an    offence     the

intention          behind     the           representation        or

misrepresentation of facts must be dishonest

whereas in the latter category of cases like

the present the element of dishonesty need not

be present or proved and established to be

present.       In the latter category of cases, a

mere inference, rather than proof, that the

person induced would not have acted in the

manner that he did but for the inducement is

sufficient.         No element of dishonesty or bad

faith in the making of the inducement would be

required.
9.     While
Regulation          3(a)
of    the       2003

Regulations         prohibits           a    person       to    buy,
10
sell or otherwise deal in securities in a

fraudulent      manner,
Regulation       4
declares

that     no     person           shall        indulge      in    a

fraudulent or an unfair trade practice in

securities.                 Sub-regulation              (2)      of
Regulation            4
enumerates              different

situations in which dealing in securities

can be deemed to be a fraudulent or an

unfair trade practice.
Regulation 4
being

without       prejudice          to     the     provisions       of
Regulation 3
of the 2003 Regulations would

operate        on         its         own      without        being

circumscribed         in        any    manner     by     what    is

contained in
Regulation 3
.
10.       Adverting             to      the     facts    of     the

present       case,        if     the        information       with

regard    to    acquisition             of     shares     by    M/s

Passport India was parted with by Dipak

Patel to Kanaiyalal Baldevbhai Patel and

Anandkumar Baldevbhai Patel and the latter
11
had transacted in huge volume of shares of

the particular company/scrip mentioned by

Dipak Patel a little while before the bulk

order was placed by M/s. Passport India

and the said persons had sold the same a

short-while later at an increased price,

such increase being a natural consequence

of     a     huge      investment         made     in     the

particular         scrip   by      M/s   Passport       India,

surely, it can be held that by the conduct

of   Dipak       Patel,         Kanaiyalal       Baldevbhai

Patel and Anandkumar Baldevbhai Patel were

induced to deal in securities.                    A natural

and logical inference that would follow is

that       the   aforesaid         two   latter     persons

would        not       have        entered       into     the

transactions in question, had it not been

for the information parted with by Dipak

Patel.           The    track       record   of     earlier

trading of the concerned two persons does

not indicate trading in such huge volumes
12
in their normal course of business.                  Such

                  an inference would be a permissible mode

                  of arriving at a conclusion with regard to

                  the liability, as held by this Court in
Securities     and       Exchange    Board    of    India

                  Vs. Kishore R. Ajmera1
referred to by my

                  learned brother Ramana, J.                The volume;

                  the nature of the trading and the timing

                  of the transactions in question can leave

                  no    manner      of     doubt     that      Kanaiyalal

                  Baldevbhai Patel and Anandkumar Baldevbhai

                  Patel had acted in connivance with Dipak

                  Patel     to   encash       the     benefit    of    the

                  information parted with by Dipak Patel to

                  them and, therefore, they are parties to

                  the     'fraud'        committed     by   Dipak     Patel

                  having aided and abetted the same.
11.       If the parting of information by

                  Dipak Patel to Kanaiyalal Baldevbhai Patel
1
(2016) 6 SCC 368
13
and Anandkumar Baldevbhai Patel amounts to

'fraud' within the meaning of
Regulation

2(c)
of the 2003 Regulations, we do not

see    as    to    how        the    transactions            entered

into    by    Kanaiyalal             Baldevbhai         Patel      and

M/s Passport India                    through Dipak Patel

both in regard to purchase and sale of the

shares would not be hit by the provisions

of
Regulation 3(a)
and
Regulation 4(1)
of

the 2003 Regulations in question.
12.          Coupled          with    the       above,       is    the

fact,       the        said     conduct          can        also    be

construed         to    be    an     act    of        unfair    trade

practice,         which        though           not     a    defined

expression,             has          to         be      understood

comprehensively to include any act beyond

a fair conduct of business including the

business          in      sale            and        purchase       of

securities. However the said question, as

suggested by my learned Brother, Ramana,
14
J. is being kept open for a decision in a

more      appropriate            occasion             as      the

resolution required presently can be made

irrespective     of     a    decision           on    the    said

question.
13.        On the conclusions that has been

reached, as indicated above, whether the

deemed provisions contained in
Regulation

4(2)(q)
of the 2003 Regulations would be

attracted to the facts of the present case

and the scope, effect and contours of the

explanation     to
Regulation           4
inserted      by

Securities      and    Exchange        Board          of    India

(Prohibition      of        Fraudulent           and       Unfair

Trade     Practices     relating            to       Securities

Market)     (Amendment)           Regulations,               2013

would hardly require any specific notice

of the Court.
14.        To     attract             the        rigor         of

Regulations       3     and       4     of           the    2003
15
Regulations,          mens           rea     is     not       an

indispensable requirement and the correct

test     is     one       of           preponderance          of

probabilities.                   Merely       because        the

operation of the aforesaid two provisions

of     the    2003     Regulations           invite        penal

consequences         on     the        defaulters,         proof

beyond reasonable doubt as held by this

Court in
Securities and Exchange Board of

India     Vs. Kishore R. Ajmera
(supra) is not

an      indispensable               requirement.             The

inferential conclusion from the proved and

admitted      facts,        so      long     the    same     are

reasonable and can be legitimately arrived

at on a consideration of the totality of

the    materials,         would      be    permissible       and

legally justified.                  Having regard to the

facts of the present cases i.e. the volume

of     shares        sold        and       purchased;        the

proximity of time between the transactions

of    sale    and     purchase         and    the    repeated
16
nature of transactions on different dates,

in my considered view, would irresistibly

lead to an inference that the conduct of

the    respondents      in     Appeal       Nos.2595          of

2013, 2596 of 2013 and 2666 of 2013 and

appellants in Appeal Nos.5829 of 2014 and

11195-11196 of 2014 were in breach of the

code     of     business        integrity              in    the

securities market.             The consequences for

such   breach     including      penal      consequences

under the provisions of
Section 15HA
of

the    SEBI    Act    must     visit       the    concerned

defaulters      for    which     reason          the    orders

passed by the Appellate Tribunal impugned

in Civil Appeal Nos.2595 of 2013, 2596 of

2013 and 2666 of 2013 are set aside and

the    findings       recorded       and    the        penalty

imposed   by    the    Adjudicating          Officer         are

restored.
15.       Consequently         and    in    view        of   the
17
above Civil Appeal Nos. 5829 of 2014 and

11195-11196   of    2014   are   dismissed   and

Civil Appeal Nos. 2595, 2596 and 2666 of

2013 are allowed.
..............,J.
(RANJAN GOGOI)


NEW DELHI
SEPTEMBER 20, 2017