[Cites
12
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
In Re : T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad vs Union Of India And Ors. on 26 April, 2023
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
,
Vikram Nath
,
B.R. Gavai
REPORTABLE
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
                                 I.A. NOS. 131377, 147102, 195467, 195468,
                                              205092 OF 2022,

                                    I.A. NOS. 162283 AND 162284 OF 2022
                                                       IN
                                          I.A. D. NO. 125746 OF 2022

                                                       WITH

                              I.A. NOS. 118604, 118606, 119400, 119401, 119404,
                                 137132, 137138, 137140 AND 137143 OF 2022

                                   I.A. NOS. 5764, 6804 AND 10911 OF 2023


                         IN THE MATTER OF:

                                   WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 202 OF 1995

                         IN RE: T.N. GODAVARMAN THIRUMULPAD
                                                          ...PETITIONER(S)

                                              VERSUS
                         UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS                   ...RESPONDENT(S)


                                                  JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI, J.
I.A. NO. 131377 OF 2022:
Signature Not Verified   1.     The present I.A. is filed by the Union of India praying for
Digitally signed by
Narendra Prasad
Date: 2023.04.26
modification/clarification of the order passed by this Court
12:44:10 IST
Reason:
1
dated 3rd June 20221 in I.A. No. 1000 of 2003 in WP(C) No.

202 of 1995.
2.    The applicant specifically seeks modification of the

directions contained in paragraphs 56.1 and 56.5 of the order

dated 3rd June 2022 (supra). The said paragraphs are

reproduced hereinbelow:
“56.1. Each protected forest, that is, national
      park or wildlife sanctuary must have an ESZ of
      minimum one kilometre measured from the
      demarcated boundary of such protected forest
      in which the activities proscribed and
      prescribed in the Guidelines of 9-2-2011 shall
      be strictly adhered to. For Jamua Ramgarh
      Wildlife Sanctuary, it shall be 500 m so far as
      subsisting activities are concerned.
      ……….
56.5. In the event any activity is already being
      undertaken within the one kilometre or
      extended buffer zone (ESZ), as the case may
      be, of any wildlife sanctuary or national park
      which does not come within the ambit of
      prohibited activities as per the 9-2-2011
      Guidelines, such activities may continue with
      permission of the Principal Chief Conservator
      of Forests of each State or Union Territory and
      the person responsible for such activities in
      such a situation shall obtain necessary
      permission within a period of six months.
Such permission shall be given once the
      Principal Chief Conservator of Forests is
      satisfied that the activities concerned do not
      come within the prohibited list and were

1 (2022) 10 SCC 544
2
continuing prior to passing of this order in a
     legitimate manner. No new permanent
     structure shall be permitted to come up for
     whatsoever purpose within the ESZ.”
3.   The clarification/modification of paragraph 56.1 of the

order dated 3rd June 2022 (supra) is sought to the extent that

the Eco-Sensitive Zones (for short, “ESZs”) which have

already been notified (final and draft) by the Ministry of

Environment Forests and Climate Change (for short, “MoEF &

CC”) or the proposals for which have been received in the

Ministry be exempted from the directions therein.              The

applicant also sought modification to the extent that

paragraph 56.1 of the order dated 3 rd June 2022 (supra) may

not be made applicable where National Parks and Wildlife

Sanctuaries are located along inter-State boundaries and/or

common     boundaries.       Modification/clarification   of   the

directions in paragraph 56.5 of the order dated 3 rd June 2022

(supra) in its entirety is additionally sought.
4.   We have heard Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned Additional

Solicitor General (for short, “ASG”) appearing on behalf of the

applicant, Shri K. Parameshwar, learned amicus curiae as
3
well as Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of various State

Governments.
5.   It is submitted that the Government of India has already

issued Guidelines on 9th February 2011 (hereinafter referred

to as the “said Guidelines”) for declaration of ESZs around

National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries. The said Guidelines

were framed after consulting the National Board for Wildlife

(hereinafter referred to as “NBWL”), and all the State and

Union Territory Governments. The said Guidelines provide a

detailed procedure for submitting a proposal for declaration of

the areas around National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries as

ESZs. It is further submitted that the said Guidelines itself

contain various activities which have been categorized as

prohibited, regulated and permitted.
6.   It is further submitted that the direction as contained in

paragraph 56.5 of the order dated 3 rd June 2022 (supra) is

likely to cause great hardship to the citizens residing in the

ESZs. It is further submitted that the said directions provide

that if any activity is already being undertaken within one

kilometre or extended buffer zone (ESZ), and which does not
4
come within the ambit of prohibited activities as per the said

Guidelines, such activities may continue with the permission

of the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (for short,

“PCCF”) of each State or Union Territory and the person

responsible for such activities in such a situation shall obtain

necessary permission within a period of six months. The said

Guidelines further provide that such permission shall be

given once the PCCF is satisfied that the activities concerned

do not come within the prohibited list and were continuing

prior to passing of this Court’s order dated 3 rd June 2022

(supra) in a legitimate manner. It is further submitted that

the direction that no new permanent structure shall be

permitted to come up for whatsoever purpose within the

ESZs would also cause great hardship.
7.   It is further submitted that insofar as the direction in

paragraph 56.1 of the order dated 3 rd June 2022 (supra) is

concerned, it mandates that each protected forest, that is,

National Park or Wildlife Sanctuary, must have an ESZ of

minimum one kilometre measured from the demarcated

boundary of such protected forest in which the activities
5
proscribed and prescribed in the said Guidelines shall be

strictly adhered to. Insofar as Jamua Ramgarh Wildlife

Sanctuary is concerned, it is directed that the ESZ shall be

500 meters so far as subsisting activities are concerned.
8.    The learned ASG, amicus curiae and Senior Counsel

appearing on behalf of various States submitted that in

respect of various National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries,

already final notifications had been issued, prescribing the

boundaries   for   the   ESZs.       In   some   cases,   the   draft

notifications are pending and in some other cases, the

proposals for issuance of draft and final notifications are

pending with the Government of India.
9.    It is submitted that there cannot be a uniform boundary

for all the National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries.            It is

further submitted that there cannot also be a uniform

boundary for a particular National Park or Wildlife Sanctuary.

At times, it may be longer on one side and shorter on the

other side depending on various circumstances.
10.   It is submitted that the rights of the citizens who are

residing in the Protected Areas are settled under the
6
provisions of
Sections 18
to
25A
of the Wild Life (Protection)

Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as “1972 Act”) whereas

there is no settlement of rights of citizens residing in ESZs.

The citizens therein continue to reside and are also

continuing with their daily avocation like farming etc. It is

submitted    that     various   developmental   activities   like

construction of schools, dispensaries, anganwadis, public

health centres etc. are required to be undertaken in such

areas.   Not only that, but if the direction not to make any

construction is continued, the persons residing therein would

not be in a position to construct or reconstruct houses on

their own land. It is submitted that the procedure prescribed

for obtaining the permission of the PCCF is very tedious. If

such a direction is issued, the PCCF would be left with no

other work but to consider the applications for continuation

of such activities.
11.   It is further submitted that though this Court has

observed in paragraph 54 of the order dated 3 rd June 2022

(supra) that the said Guidelines are reasonable, it has
7
nevertheless issued directions which are in conflict with the

said Guidelines.
12.   It is further contended that the issue in I.A. No. 1000 of

2003 was restricted to prohibition of mining activities in and

around Jamua Ramgarh Wildlife Sanctuary and prescribing

ESZs for the said Wildlife Sanctuary only. As such, various

State Governments did not have an opportunity to address

this Court.
13.   Having considered the rival submissions, we find it

appropriate to refer to various orders passed by this Court on

the issue of ESZs/Buffer Zones.
14.   The first of such orders was passed by this Court on

16th September 20052. It will be relevant to refer to paragraph

13 of the said order, which reads thus:
“13. We have perused the affidavit dated 14-9-
      2005 filed by Mr Anurag Bajpai on behalf of
      MoEF and the statement showing the grant of
      temporary working permit in the last two years
      i.e. from 1-1-2003 to 31-12-2004 in the
      national parks, sanctuaries and forest area.
      This is despite the order passed by this Court
      restraining the mining activities in these areas.
      Learned amicus curiae submits that the
      inspection of the government record shows a

2 (2006) 5 SCC 25
8
dismal picture and he would shortly file an
     application for taking appropriate action
     against the persons concerned. Pending filing
     of the said application and further orders, we
     again reiterate that without compliance with
     the environmental laws, in particular the
     permission under the
Forest (Conservation)
     Act, 1980
, no temporary working permission or
     temporary permit or any other permission by
     whatever name called shall be granted for
     mining activities in the aforesaid areas. We
     further direct that no mining activity
     would continue under any temporary
     working permit or permission which may
     have been granted. It appears from the
     chart filed with the affidavit of Mr Anurag
     Bajpai    that    no    temporary    working
     permission is in operation as of today. If it
     is otherwise, an affidavit to that effect
     shall be filed within two weeks giving the
     particulars of such permission.”
                                    [emphasis supplied]
15. It can thus clearly be seen that this Court directed that

no mining activity would be permitted to continue under any

temporary working permit or permission which may have

been granted.
16. It will further be relevant to refer paragraph 15 of the

said order, which reads thus:
“15. MoEF is directed to place on record within
     three weeks its viewpoint on the question of
     area of buffer zone and other related matters
     such as should it be universal or place specific.
9
This should be done after also obtaining the
      viewpoint of the National Board of Wildlife.”
17. It can thus be seen from the said paragraph that this

Court directed MoEF to place on record within three weeks

its viewpoint on the question of area of buffer zone and other

related matters such as should it be universal or place

specific. The Court further directed that this should be done

after obtaining the viewpoint of the NBWL.
18. The second of such orders is passed on 4 th August

20063.     The said order basically pertains to banning the

mining activities in the National Parks, Sanctuaries and

forest areas.     The Court laid down various pre-conditions

wherein temporary working permits could be granted.
19. The next order is passed on 4 th December 20064. In the

said order, the Court expressed its anguish towards the

various State Governments for not responding to the letter

issued by MoEF dated 27th May 2005 requiring them to

initiate measures for identification of suitable areas and

submit detailed proposals at the earliest. It will be relevant


3 (2010) 13 SCC 740
4 (2011) 15 SCC 791
10
to refer to paragraphs 3 and 4 of the said order, which read

thus:
“3. The order earlier passed on 30-1-2006
     [
Goa Foundation v. Union of India
, (2011) 15
     SCC 793] refers to the decision which was
     taken on 21-1-2002 to notify the areas within
     10 km of the boundaries of national parks and
     sanctuaries as eco-sensitive areas. The Letter
     dated 27-5-2005 is a departure from the
     decision of 21-1-2002. For the present, in this
     case, we are not considering the correctness of
     this departure. That is being examined in
     another case separately. Be that as it may, it is
     evident that the States/Union Territories have
     not given the importance that is required to be
     given to most of the laws to protect
     environment made after Rio Declaration, 1992.
4. The Ministry is directed to give a final
     opportunity to all States/Union Territories to
     respond to its Letter dated 27-5-2005. The
     State of Goa also is permitted to give
     appropriate proposal in addition to what is
     said to have already been sent to the Central
     Government. The communication sent to the
     States/Union Territories shall make it clear
     that if the proposals are not sent even now
     within a period of four weeks of receipt of the
     communication from the Ministry, this Court
     may have to consider passing orders for
     implementation of the decision that was taken
     on 21-1-2002, namely, notification of the areas
     within 10 km of the boundaries of the
     sanctuaries and national parks as eco-
sensitive areas with a view to conserve the
     forest, wildlife and environment, and having
11
regard to the precautionary principles. If the
     States/Union Territories now fail to respond,
     they would do so at their own risk and peril.”
20. It can be seen that this Court refers to its earlier order

dated 30th January 2006 wherein a reference is made to the

decision dated 21st January 2002 to notify the areas within

10 kilometres of the boundaries of National Parks and

Sanctuaries as ESZs.     Though the order records that the

letter dated 27th May 2005 is a departure from the decision

taken on 21st January 2002, the Court observes that, in the

said case, the Court was not considering the correctness of

the said departure. The Court therefore directed the Ministry

to give a final opportunity to all States/Union Territories to

respond to its Letter dated 27 th May 2005.   The said order

states that the communication should mention that if the

proposals were not sent within a period of four weeks from

the receipt of the communication from the Ministry, this

Court   may    have    to   consider   passing    orders   for

implementation of the decision that was taken on 21 st

January 2002, i.e., notification of the areas within 10
12
kilometres of the boundaries of the sanctuaries and National

Parks as ESZs.
21. The next order of this Court is dated 21 st April 2014 in

the case of
Goa Foundation v. Union of India and Others5
.

It will be relevant to refer to the following observations of this

Court in the said order:
“49. ……The result is that the order passed by
      this Court saying that there will be no mining
      activity within one kilometre safety zone
      around national park or wildlife sanctuary has
      to be enforced and there can be no mining
      activities within this area of one kilometre
      from the boundaries of national parks and
      wildlife sanctuaries in the State of Goa.”
22. The Court has clarified that there shall be no mining

activity within one kilometre of the safety zone around

National Park or Wildlife Sanctuary and that this has to be

enforced.    It is also reiterated that there can be no mining

activities within this area of one kilometre from the

boundaries of National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries in the

State of Goa.
23. The Court thereafter refers to the earlier order dated 4 th

December 2006 (supra) in the said case and observed thus:
5 (2014) 6 SCC 590
13
“50. ……..It will be clear from the order dated
     4-12-2006 [
Goa Foundation v. Union of India
,
     (2011) 15 SCC 791] of this Court that this
     Court has not passed any orders for
     implementation of the decision taken on 21-1-
2002 to notify areas within 10 km of the
     boundaries of national parks or wildlife
     sanctuaries as eco-sensitive areas with a view
     to    conserve     the   forest,   wildlife   and
     environment. By the order dated 4-12-2006
     [
Goa Foundation v. Union of India
, (2011) 15
     SCC 791] of this Court, however, the Ministry
     of Environment and Forests, Government of
     India, was directed to give a final opportunity
     to all States/Union Territories to respond to
     the proposal and also to refer to the Standing
     Committee of the National Board for Wildlife
     the cases in which environment clearance has
     already been granted in respect of activities
     within the 10 km zone from the boundaries of
     the wildlife sanctuaries and national parks.
     There is, therefore, no direction, interim or
     final, of this Court prohibiting mining activities
     within 10 km of the boundaries of national
     parks or wildlife sanctuaries.”
24. It could thus be seen that the Court has specifically

observed that this Court had not passed any orders for

implementation of the decision taken on 21 st January 2002

to notify areas within 10 kilometres of the boundaries of

National Parks or Wildlife Sanctuaries as ESZs with a view to

conserve the forest, wildlife and environment.       The Court

therefore clarified that there is no direction, interim or final,
14
prohibiting mining activities within 10 kilometres of the

boundaries of National Parks or Wildlife Sanctuaries.
25. It will be relevant to refer to paragraphs 87.3 and 88.1

of the said order, which read thus:
“87.3. Until the order dated 4-8-2006 [
T.N.
     Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India
,
     (2010) 13 SCC 740] of this Court is modified
     by this Court in IA No. 1000 in
T.N.
     Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India
,
     there can be no mining activities within one
     kilometre from the boundaries of national
     parks and sanctuaries in Goa.
88.1. MoEF will issue the notification of eco-
     sensitive zones around the national park and
     wildlife sanctuaries of Goa after following the
     procedure discussed in this judgment within a
     period of six months from today.”
26. It can thus be seen that this Court has held that until

the order dated 4th August 2006 (supra) is modified by this

Court in IA No. 1000 of 2003 in the case of
T.N.

Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India
, there can be

no   mining   activities   within   one   kilometre   from   the

boundaries of National Parks and Sanctuaries in Goa. The

Court further directed MoEF to issue the notification of ESZs

around the National Park and Wildlife Sanctuaries of Goa

after following the procedure discussed in
the said judgment
.
15
The same was directed to be done within a period of six

months from the date of the said order.
27. The next relevant order would be dated 11 th December

2018. It will be relevant to refer to the following part of the

said order:
“The learned ASG has informed us that
     there are 104 National Parks and 558 Wildlife
     Sanctuaries making a total of 662 National
     Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries in the country.
The proposals for declaring areas around
     these National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries
     as Eco Sensitive Zone have been received from
     State Governments / UT Administrations for
     641 National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries.
     No proposals have been received in respect of
     21 National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries.
The proposals have been accepted and
     Notification has been issued in respect of 289
     National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries as on
     26.11.2018 and draft Notification has been
     prepared in respect of 206 National Parks and
     Wildlife Sanctuaries.
The declaration with regard to Eco
     Sensitive Zone is under process with the
     Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate
     Change (MoEF) as well as with the State
     Governments in respect of 4 146 National
     Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries.
We expect the Ministry of Environment,
     Forests and Climate Change to actively pursue
     the preparation of the draft Notification and to
     issue a final Notification at the earliest.
16
The proposals for 21 National Parks and
     Wildlife Sanctuaries in respect of which
     proposals have not yet been received by the
     MOEF are as follows:-
……..
It is submitted by the learned Amicus
     that this issue has been pending since
     sometime in December, 2006. 12 years have
     gone-by but no effective steps have been taken
     by the State Governments in respect of the
     National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries
     mentioned above.
Under the circumstances, we direct that
     an area of 10 Kms around these 21 National
     Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries be declared as
     Eco Sensitive Zone by the MoEF. The
     declaration be made by the MoEF at the
     earliest.
Liberty   is   granted    to  the   State
     Governments to move an application for
     modification of this order along with proposal
     only two weeks after submission of the
     proposals to the MoEF.”
28. It can be seen that this Court has recorded the

submissions of the learned ASG that there were 104 National

Parks and 558 Wildlife Sanctuaries making a total of 662

National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries in the country.   It

was further recorded that the proposals for declaring areas

around these National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries as

ESZs had been received from the State Governments/Union
17
Territories.   It can further be seen that no proposals have

been received in respect of 21 National Parks and Wildlife

Sanctuaries. It further recorded that the proposals had been

accepted and notification had been issued in respect of 289

National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries as on 26 th November

2018 and draft notification had been prepared in respect of

206 National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries.      The Court

therefore expected the MoEF & CC to actively pursue the

preparation of the draft Notification and to issue a final

Notification at the earliest.    The Court then recorded 21

National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries in respect of which

proposals have not yet been received by the MoEF & CC

alongside its anguish that though 12 years had been passed,

no effective steps have been taken by the State Governments

in respect of the National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries

named in the said order. Therefore, the Court directed that

an area of 10 kilometres around these 21 National Parks and

Wildlife Sanctuaries be declared as ESZs by the MoEF & CC.
Liberty was granted to the State Governments to move an

application for modification of the said order.   However, it
18
further directed that the application should be along with the

proposal for declaration of ESZs.
29. It is to be noted that the learned Judges of this Court,

in the case of Goa Foundation6, had directed that the MoEF

& CC shall follow the procedure and issue notification of

ESZs under Rule 5 of the Environment (Protection) Rules,

1986 (hereinafter referred to as “1986 Rules”). The relevant

provisions of the 1986 Rules are reproduced hereinbelow:
“5. Prohibition and restriction on the
      location of industries and the carrying on
      of processes and operations in different
      areas.—(1) The Central Government may take
      into consideration the following factors while
      prohibiting or restricting the location of
      industries and carrying on of processes and
      operations in different areas:
(i)   Standards    for quality  of
             environment in its various aspects
             laid down for an area.
(ii) The maximum allowable limits of
             concentration       of      various
             environmental pollutants (including
             noise) for an area.
(iii) The likely emission or discharge
             of environmental pollutants from an
             industry, process or operation
             proposed to be prohibited or
             restricted.
6 (2014) 6 SCC 590
19
(iv) The topographic and climatic
     features of an area.
(v) The biological diversity of the
     area which, in the opinion of the
     Central Government needs to be
     preserved.
(vi) Environmentally compatible land
     use.
(vii) Net adverse environmental
     impact likely to be caused by an
     industry, process or operation
     proposed to be prohibited or
     restricted.
(viii) Proximity to a protected area
     under the
Ancient Monuments and
     Archaeological Sites and Remains
     Act, 1958
or a sanctuary, National
     Park, game reserve or closed area
     notified as such under the
Wild Life
     (Protection) Act, 1972
or places
     protected      under    any    treaty,
     agreement or convention with any
     other country or countries or in
     pursuance of any decision made in
     any       international   conference,
     association or other body.
(ix) Proximity to human settlements.
(x) Any other factor as may be
     considered     by     the   Central
     Government to be relevant to the
     protection of the environment in an
     area.
(2) While prohibiting or restricting the location
of industries and carrying on of processes and
operations in an area, the Central Government
shall follow the procedure hereinafter laid
down.
20
(3) (a) Whenever it appears to the Central
Government that it is expedient to impose
prohibition or restrictions on the location of an
industry or the carrying on of processes and
operations in an area, it may, by notification in
the Official Gazette and in such other manner
as the Central Government may deem
necessary from time to time, give notice of its
intention to do so.
(b) Every notification under clause
(a) shall give a brief description of
     the area, the industries, operations,
     processes in that area about which
     such notification pertains and also
     specify    the    reasons    for  the
     imposition     of    prohibition   or
     restrictions on the location of the
     industries and carrying on of
     processes or operations in that area.
(c) Any person interested in filing an
     objection against the imposition of
     prohibition    or    restrictions   on
     carrying    on    of   processes    or
     operations as notified under clause
(a) may do so in writing to the
     Central Government within sixty
     days from the date of publication in
     the notification in the Official
     Gazette.
(d) The Central Government shall
     within a period of one hundred and
     twenty days from the date of
     publication of the notification in the
     Official Gazette consider all the
     objections received against such
     notification and may [within [seven
     hundred and twenty-five days [, and
     in respect of the States of Assam,
     Meghalaya,     Arunachal      Pradesh,
     Mizoram,      Manipur,      Nagaland,
21
Tripura, Sikkim and Jammu and
          Kashmir         in         exceptional
          circumstance and for sufficient
          reasons within a further period of
          one hundred and eighty days,]] from
          such date of publication] impose
          prohibition   or    restrictions   on
          location of such industries and the
          carrying on of any process or
          operation in an area:
[Provided that on account of COVID-19
     pandemic, for the purpose of this clause, the
     period of validity of the notification expiring in
     the financial year 2020-2021 and 2021-2022
     shall be extended up to [30th June, 2022] or
     six months from the end of the month when
     the relevant notification would have expired
     without any extension, whichever is later.]
       [(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in
     sub-rule (3), whenever it appears to the
     Central Government that it is in public interest
     to do so, it may dispense with the requirement
     of notice under clause (a) of sub-rule (3).]”
30. It is to be noted that Rule 5 of the 1986 Rules

prescribes a detailed procedure for issuing notification

prohibiting or restricting various activities in the specified

areas.   The said power flows from
Sections 3(v)
of the

Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (hereinafter referred to as

“1986 Act”).
22
31. A perusal of clause (viii) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 5 of the
1986 Rules would reveal that one of the factors that has to be

taken into consideration for declaring ESZ is the proximity to

a sanctuary, National Park, game reserve or closed area

notified, as such under the 1972 Act. Sub-rule 3(a) of Rule 5

of the 1986 Rules requires that whenever it appears to the

Central Government that it is expedient to impose prohibition

or restrictions, it is required to give notice of its intention to

do so by notification in the Official Gazette and in such other

manner as the Central Government may deem necessary

from time to time. As per sub-rule 3(b) of Rule 5, every such

notification is required to give a brief description of the area,

the industries, operations processes in that area about which

such notification pertains and also specify the reasons for

the imposition of prohibition or restrictions on the location of

the industries on carrying out of the processes or operations

in that area. Accordingly, as per sub-rule 3(c) of Rule 5, any

person interested in filing an objection is entitled to file an

objection to the Central Government within sixty days from

the date of publication in the notification in the Official
23
Gazette.     The Central Government thereafter within the

prescribed period provided under clause (d) of sub-rule (3) of

Rule 5 of the 1986 Rules is required to issue a notification in

the Official Gazette imposing such prohibition or restrictions

in an area. This is required to be done only after considering

all the objections received under clause (c) of sub-rule (3) of

Rule 5 of the 1986 Rules. It can thus be seen that a detailed

procedure is prescribed under the 1986 Rules for notifying

ESZs.
32. It is to be noted that MoEF & CC has issued the said
Guidelines for declaration of ESZs around the National Parks

and Wildlife Sanctuaries.
33. The said Guidelines refer to a meeting of the Indian
Board for Wildlife held on 21 st January 2002, in which

“Wildlife Conservation Strategy-2002” was adopted. Point No.

9 of the said Strategy envisaged that lands falling within 10

kilometres    of   the   boundaries   of   National   Parks   and

Sanctuaries should be notified as eco-fragile zones under
Section 3(v)
of the 1972 Act and clause (viii) of sub-rule (1) of

Rule 5 of the 1986 Rules.      It further states that when the
24
views were obtained from all the State Governments, some of

the State Governments had raised concern over applicability

of 10 kilometres range from the Protected Area boundary and

informed that most of the human habitation and other areas

including important cities in these States would come under

the   purview   of   ESZs   and    will   adversely   affect   the

development. The said Guidelines also refer to the National

Wildlife Action Plan (2002-2016). The NBWL, in its meeting

held on 17th March 2005, decided that the delineation of

ESZs would have to be site specific and relate to regulation

rather than prohibition of specific activities.        The said

decision was communicated to all the State Governments for

compliance vide letter dated 27th May 2005.
34. The said Guidelines thereafter refer to the directions of

this Court dated 4th December 2006.        It also refers to the

statutory provisions as contained in
Section 5C (1)
of the

1972 Act,
Section 3
of the 1986 Act and Rule 5 of the 1986

Rules.   The said Guidelines state that the purpose of

declaring ESZs around National Parks and Sanctuaries is to

create some kind of Shock Absorber for the Protected Areas.
25
They would also act as a transition zone from areas of high

protection to areas involving lesser protection.         It also

reiterates the decision of the NBWL that the activities in the

ESZs would be of a regulatory nature rather than prohibitive

nature unless and otherwise so required. Paragraph 4 of the

said Guidelines notes that many of the existing Protected

Areas have already undergone tremendous development in

close vicinity to their boundaries. It refers to the Guindy

National Park, Tamil Nadu, Sanjay Gandhi National Park,

Maharashtra, etc. and notes that the Protected Areas are

lying in the urban set up. It therefore observes that defining

the extent of ESZs around Protected Areas will have to be

kept flexible and Protected Area specific. It notes that the

width of ESZs and type of regulations will differ from one

Protected Area to another Protected Area. It however notes

that, as a general principle, the width of the ESZs could go

up to 10 kilometres around a Protected Area as provided in

the Wildlife Conservation Strategy-2002. It further notes that

in   case   where   sensitive    corridors,   connectivity   and

ecologically important patches, crucial for landscape linkage,

are even beyond 10 kilometres width, these should be
26
included in the ESZs. It further notes that even in context of

a particular Protected Area, the distribution of an area of the

ESZ and the extent of regulation may not be uniform all

around and it could be of variable width and extent.       The

said Guidelines notes that though the directions were issued

by this Court to all the States/Union Territories, except a few

States, several other States/Union Territories have not come

forward with the proposals for declaration of ESZs. It was

observed that this could be perhaps for want of guidelines in

this regard. It further notes that this Court in its judgment

and order dated 3rd December 2010 in a case relating to

construction of park at Noida near Okhla Bird Sanctuary,

observed that the ESZs around the Protected Areas had not

been notified as the Government of India had not issued any

guidelines in this regard.
35. It thereafter refers to the Committee under the
Chairmanship of Shri Pronab Sen for identifying parameters

for designating Ecologically Sensitive Areas in India.
36. The said Guidelines thereafter state in paragraph 6 that

the basic aim of notifying ESZs is to regulate certain
27
activities around National Park and Wildlife Sanctuary so as

to minimize the negative impact of such activities on the

fragile ecosystem encompassing the Protected Area. It states

that the first step towards it is to prepare an inventory of the

different land use patterns and the different types of

activities, types and number of industries operating around

each of the Protected Area as well as important Corridors.     It

states that the inventory could be done by the concerned

Range Officers, who can take a stock of activities within 10

kilometres of the range.      It further notes that a Committee

comprising of the concerned Wildlife Warden, an Ecologist,

an official from the Local Self Government and an official of

the Revenue Department of the concerned area, could be

formed to suggest the following:
(i)     Extent of eco-sensitive zones for the
             Protected Area being considered.
(ii)    The requirement of such a zone to act as
             a shock absorber
(iii)   To   suggest    the        best   methods   for
             management of the eco-sensitive zones,
             so suggested.
28
(iv)    To    suggest    broad      based    thematic
             activities to be included in the Master
             Plan for the region.
37. It further notes that based on the above, the Chief

Wildlife Warden could group the activities under the following

categories:-
(i)     Prohibited

     (ii)    Restricted with safeguards.

     (iii)   Permissible
38. The said Guidelines thereafter note that once the

proposal for ESZs has been finalized, the same should be

forwarded to the MoEF & CC for further processing and

notification. An indicative list of details that need to be

submitted along with the proposals is also appended to the

said Guidelines.
39. The said Guidelines further note that where the

boundary of a Protected Area abuts the boundary of another

State/Union Territory where it does not form part of any

Protected Area, it should be the endeavour of both the

State/Union       Territory   Governments    to   have   a   mutual
29
consultation and decide upon the width of the ESZs around

   the   Protected    Area    in   question.   The   said    Guidelines

   emphasize that the State Government should endeavour to

   convey a very strong message to the public that ESZs are not

   meant to hamper their day to day activities, but instead, are

   meant to protect the precious forests/Protected Areas in their

   locality from any negative impact, and also to refine the

   environment around the Protected Areas.           It further notes

   that these guidelines are indicative in nature and the

   State/Union Territory Governments may use these as basic

   framework to develop specific guidelines applicable in the

   context   of   their   National    Parks,   Wildlife     Sanctuaries,

   important corridors etc. with a view to minimizing and

   preferably eliminating any negative impact on Protected

   Areas.
40. A list of the activities which are prohibited, regulated

   and permitted is contained in Annexure-I of the said

   Guidelines, which reads thus:
Sl. Activity         Prohibited    Regulated Permitte        Remarks
No.                                          d
1. Commercial             Y                                  Regulation
    mining                                                   sill not
30
prohibit the
                                  digging of
                                  earth for
                                  construction
                                  or repair of
                                  houses for
                                  manufacture
                                  of country
                                  tiles or bricks
                                  for housing
                                  for personal
2.   Felling of               Y   With
     trees                        permission
                                  from
                                  appropriate
                                  authority
3.   Setting of      Y
     saw mills
4.   Setting of      Y
     industries
     causing
     pollution
     (Water, Air,
     Soil., Noise,
     etc.)
5.   Establishme              Y   As per
     nt of hotels                 approved
     and resorts                  master plan,
                                  which takes
                                  care of
                                  habitats
                                  allowing no
                                  restriction on
                                  movement of
                                  wild animals
6.   Commercial      Y            For hotels
     use of                       and other
     firewood                     business
                                  related
                                  establishment
31
7.   Drastic                Y
     change of
     agriculture
     systems
8.   Commercial             Y       As per
     use of                         approved
     natural                        master plan,
     water                          which takes
     resources                      care of
     including                      habitats
     ground                         allowing no
     water                          restriction on
     harvesting                     movement of
                                    wild animals.
9.  Establishme    Y
    nt of major
    hydroelectri
    c projects
10. Erection of             Y       Promote
    electrical                      underground
    cable                           cabling
11. Ongoing                     Y   However,
    agriculture                     excessive
    and                             expansion of
    horticulture                    some of these
    practices                       activities
    local                           should be
    communitie                      regulated as
    s                               per the
                                    master plan
12. Rain Water                  Y   Should be
    harvesting                      actively
                                    promoted
13. Fencing of              Y
    premises of
    hotels and
    lodges
14. Organic                     Y   Should be
    farming                         actively
                                    promoted
32
15. Use of                   Y
    polythene
    bags by
    shopkeepers
16. Use of                       Y   Should be
    renewable                        actively
    energy                           promoted
    sources
17. Widening of              Y       This should
    roads                            be done with
                                     proper EIA
                                     and
                                     mitigation
                                     measures
18. Movement                 Y       For
    of vehicular                     commercial
    traffic at                       purpose
    night
19. Introduction             Y
    of exotic
    species
20. Use of          Y
    production
    of any
    hazardous
    substances
21. Undertaking
    activities
    related to
    tourism like
    over-flying
    the National
    Park are by
    any aircraft,
    hot-air
    balloons
22. Protection of            Y       As per the
    hill slopes                      master plan
    and river
    banks
33
23. Discharge of      Y
    effluents
    and solid
    waste in
    natural
    water bodies
    or
    terrestrial
    are
24. Air and                          Y
    vehicular
    pollution
25. Sign board                       Y               As per the
    & hoardings                                      master plan
26. Adoption of                               Y      Should be
    green                                            actively
    technology                                       promoted.
for all
    activities
41. It is to be noted that this Court in paragraph 54 of the

   order dated 3rd June 2022 (supra) has, in fact, held the said

   Guidelines to be reasonable and also accepted the view of the

   Standing Committee of the NBWL that uniform guidelines

   may not be possible in respect of each sanctuary or National

   Park for maintaining the ESZs. It is also observed that the

   sanctuaries like Sanjay Gandhi National Park and Guindy

   National Park in Mumbai shall form special cases. The said

   paragraph 54 is reproduced hereinunder:
34
“54. In our opinion, the Guidelines framed on
     9-2-2011 appear to be reasonable and we
     accept the view of the Standing Committee
     that uniform guidelines may not be possible in
     respect of each sanctuary or national park for
     maintaining ESZ. We are of the opinion,
     however, that a minimum width of 1 km ESZ
     ought to be maintained in respect of the
     protected forests, which forms part of the
     recommendations of CEC in relation to
     Category B protected forests. This would be the
     standard formula, subject to changes in special
     circumstances. We have considered CEC's
     recommendation that the ESZ should be
     relatable to the area covered by a protected
     forest but the Standing Committee's view that
     the area of a protected forest may not always
     be    a reasonable criteria also           merits
     consideration. It was argued before us that the
     1 km wide “no-development-zone” may not be
     feasible in all cases and specific instances were
     given for Sanjay Gandhi National Park and
     Guindy National Park in Mumbai and Chennai
     metropolis respectively which have urban
     activities in very close proximity. These
     sanctuaries shall form special cases.”
42. It is to be noted that an elaborate and exhaustive list

has been prepared by MoEF & CC of the activities which

shall be prohibited, the activities which shall be regulated

and the activities which shall be permitted.
43. In the application, it is stated that after the proposals

are received from the State Governments/Union Territory
35
Administrations, they are scrutinized in consultation with

the Wildlife Institute of India, Dehradun, and in case of tiger

reserves, with the National Tiger Conservation Authority.

They are thereafter published in the Official Gazette of the

Central Government in both Hindi and English.          They are

also placed in the public domain for 60 days for seeking

comments of concerned stakeholders.         The comments so

received are compiled and scrutinized and observation of the

concerned State Government/Union Territory Administration

is sought on the same. The aforesaid requirements are in

tune with the provisions of Rule 5 of 1986 Rules.
44. The application further states that the proposal is

thereafter placed before an Expert Committee constituted for

ESZ within the MoEF & CC. The said Committee comprises

of the following:
(i)   Indian      Institute       of     Remote
           Sensing/Indian          Space    Research
           Organization,

     (ii) Ministry of Jal Shakti,
(iii) Ministry of Rural Development,
36
(iv) Forest Survey of India,
(v) Town & Country Planning Organization,
             Government of India,
(vi) National Tiger Conservation Authority,
(vii) Wildlife Institute of India,
(viii) GB    Pant    Institute       of    Himalayan
             Environment & Development,
(ix) Indian Council of Forestry Research and
             Education,
(x) World Wildlife Fund,
(xi) Zoological Survey of India,
(xii) Botanical Survey of India,
(xiii) Salim Ali Centre for Ornithology and
             Natural History (SACON).
45. It is further stated in the application that based on the

recommendation of the Expert Committee (ESZ), the Ministry

finalizes the notification of ESZs and after due legal vetting

by the Ministry of Law & Justice, final notifications specifying

the ESZs around the Protected Areas are notified. It could

thus    be   seen    that   an   elaborate       procedure   including
37
consideration by a Committee of Experts coming from 13

organizations having expertise in wildlife ecology, forest etc. is

followed before a final notification prescribing ESZs is

notified.
46. In the application filed by the Union of India, various

illustrations have been given to point out as to how if the

directions issued in paragraph 56.5 of the order dated 3 rd

June 2022 (supra) are not modified, a severe hardship would

be caused to the millions of people.        We refer to the same

hereunder:
(i)       “The    ESZ     around       Nagarjunasagar
            Srisailam    Tiger   Reserve     in   Andhra
            Pradesh extends from 0 to 26 kilometres
            and 100 villages are situated within it
            (Zero extent of ESZ is due to Krishna River
            and interstate boundary with Telangana);
(ii)      The    ESZ    around      Valmiki     Wildlife
            Sanctuary, Valmiki National Park and
            Valmiki Tiger Reserve in Bihar extends
            from 0 to 9 kilometres and 323 villages
            are situated within it (zero extent of ESZ
            is towards Western side sharing inter-state
            boundaries    with   Uttar     Pradesh   and
38
towards       Northern         side     sharing
        international boundary with Nepal);
(iii)   The ESZ around Betla National Park,
        Palamau       Wildlife       Sanctuary,        and
        Mahuadanr Wolf Sanctuary in Jharkhand
        extends from 0 to 9 kilometres and 382
        villages are situated within it (Zero extent
        of ESZ is due to Inter-State boundary);
(iv)    The     ESZ      around      Cauvery      Wildlife
        Sanctuary in Karnataka extends from 1
        to 14.5 kilometres and 107 villages are
        situated within it;
(v)     The ESZ around Kanha National Park
        and Phen Wildlife Sanctuary in Madhya
        Pradesh extends from 0 to 30 kilometres
        and 168 villages are situated within it
        (Zero   extent    of   Eco-sensitive    Zone    is
        towards the eastern side having interstate
        boundary with Chhattisgarh);
(vi)    The ESZ around Tadoba-Andhari Tiger
        Reserve in Maharashtra extends from 3
        to 6 kilometres and 150 villages are
        situated within it;
(vii)   The     ESZ   around        Jaisamand     Wildlife
        Sanctuary in Rajasthan extends from 1.6
39
to 8.9 kilometres and 83 villages are
           situated in it;
(viii)   Even a small ESZ such as the one around
           Keoladeo National Park in Rajasthan
           which extends from 0.5 to 1.5 kilometres
           has 22 villages situated in it.”
47. It would thus reveal that in the ESZ around

Nagarjunasagar Srisailam Tiger Reserve in Andhra Pradesh,

100 villages are situated within it.          In the ESZ around

Valmiki Wildlife Sanctuary, Valmiki National Park and

Valmiki Tiger Reserve in Bihar, 323 villages are situated

within it. In the ESZ around Betla National Park, Palamau

Wildlife Sanctuary, and Mahuadanr Wolf Sanctuary in

Jharkhand, 382 villages are situated within it. In the ESZ

around Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary in Karnataka, 107

villages are situated within it. In the ESZ around Kanha

National Park and Phen Wildlife Sanctuary in Madhya

Pradesh, 168 villages are situated within it.        In the ESZ

around Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve in Maharashtra, 150

villages are situated within it. In the ESZ around Jaisamand

Wildlife Sanctuary in Rajasthan, 83 villages are situated in it.
40
Even in a small ESZ around Keoladeo National Park in

Rajasthan, 22 villages situated in it.
48. If the direction as issued by this Court in paragraph

56.5 of the order dated 3 rd June 2022 (supra) is continued,

then no permanent structure would be permitted to come up

for whatsoever purpose in the aforesaid ESZs.        As already

pointed out from the aforesaid examples, hundreds of villages

are situated within the ESZs in the country. If no permanent

construction is to be permitted for any purpose, a villager

who is desirous to reconstruct his house would not be

permitted. Similarly, if there is an extension in their family

and    some     additional     construction   is   required   for

accommodating the enlarged family, the same would also not

be permitted.       Similarly, if the Government decides to

construct schools, dispensaries, anganwadis, village stores,

water tanks and other basic structures for improvement of

the life of the villagers, the same would also not be permitted.

The effect of the order will be to prevent the State or the

Central Government from constructing roads and provide

other facilities to the villagers.
41
49. If the order dated 3rd June 2022 (supra) is not modified,

it will also be impossible for the Forest Departments to

conduct eco-development activities around National Parks

and Sanctuaries.      The said activities are required with the

dual objectives of protection of wildlife and provision of

benefits for the local communities.            MoEF & CC provides

financial assistance to the States under the Centrally

Sponsored    Scheme-Integrated        Development       of    Wildlife

Habitats, which includes assistance for eco-development

activities. These activities often involve construction of small

structures which are permanent in nature in areas including

ESZs. For example, the said activities which are likely to be

prohibited are thus:
(i)   The construction of community halls,
           bridges,    threshing     floors,    fish-drying
           platforms, drinking water storage, etc., for
           the benefit of local communities/villages;
(ii) The construction of forest chowkies,
           watch towers, and other structures for
           protection of wildlife and forests;
(iii) The     construction      of    interpretation
           centres, toilets and other basic structures
42
for   the   environmental    education    of
          visitors    to    National    Parks      and
          sanctuaries.
50. It is further to be noted that there are various regulated

and permissible activities. There are also certain projects of

national and strategic importance such as construction of

National Highways, Railways, Defence related infrastructure

etc. The effect of the direction in 56.5 of the order dated 3 rd

June 2022 (supra) is that all such activities will be

permanently prohibited. In this respect, it is to be noted that

MoEF & CC has issued an Office Memorandum dated 17 th

May 2022 which required that any activity listed in Schedule

of the EIA Notification 2006, when conducted in a notified

ESZs, or in the case of National Parks and Sanctuaries for

which no ESZ has been finally notified, when conducted

within 10 kilometres of such National Park or Sanctuary,

requires the consideration and recommendation of the NBWL

or its Standing Committee in addition to the Environment

Clearance under the 1986 Act. Additionally, activities which

are regulated as per the specific ESZ notification, require
43
approval as per that notification. As such, we find that there

are inbuilt safeguards for preventing rampant construction

and abuse of process which may be detrimental to the

development and maintenance of wildlife habitats.         It is

further to be noted that if the direction as contained in

paragraph 56.5 of the order dated 3 rd June 2022 (supra) that

even for continuation of existing activities, the permission of

the PCCF of each State or Union Territory would be

necessary, remains unmodified, taking into consideration

that in each State or Union Territory there will be hundreds

of villages wherein millions of people would be residing, the

PCCF would be left with no other job except to consider such

applications for permission to continue such activities. Even

a farmer desirous to continue farming activities would be

required to seek such permission.       We find that such a

direction is impossible to be implemented.
51. We are of the view that if such a direction is continued,

rather than avoiding man-animal conflict, it will intensify the

same. As observed in the said Guidelines, the requirement of

declaring ESZs is not to hamper day to day activities of the
44
citizens but is meant to protect the precious forests/Protected

Areas   from    any   negative   impact,   and   to   refine   the

environment around the Protected Areas.
52. As already discussed hereinabove, the necessity to have

ESZs is to provide a buffer zone around the Protected Areas.

The rights of the villagers residing in the Protected Areas are

required to be settled in accordance with the provisions

contained in the 1972 Act and such villagers are rehabilitated

outside the Protected Areas.     However, no such settlement of

rights is available to the villagers residing in the ESZs areas.

As stated in the said Guidelines, the purpose of declaring

ESZs is not to hamper the day to day activities of the

citizens.   If the direction as issued is continued, it would

certainly hamper the day to day activities of the citizens

residing in ESZs.     As such, we find that the said direction

needs to be modified.
53. It is further to be noted that the NBWL, in its meeting

dated 17th March 2005, has also recommended that the

delineation of ESZs should project as regulation rather than

prohibition of activities.
45
54. As was pointed out by the counsel for one of the States,

the entire municipal area of the Sulthan Bathery Block

Panchayat is situated within the ESZ area.
55. Insofar as direction in paragraph 56.1 of the order dated

3rd June 2022 (supra) is concerned, a perusal of various

orders would reveal that this Court has not directed any

minimum area from the demarcated boundary of such

Protected Areas. The area to be declared as ESZ cannot be

uniform and will be Protected Area specific. In some cases, it

may be 10 kilometres on one side and 500 meters on the

other side. In certain cases, it may not be possible to have a

uniform minimum area by virtue of inter-state boundaries or

a sea or a river beyond one side of the Protected Area. In any

case, a detailed procedure is required to be followed as

prescribed under Rule 5 of the 1986 Rules which we have

already referred hereinabove.      We find that once such a

notification is issued after following the procedure prescribed

under the 1986 Rules, the ESZs will have to be as per the

said notification.
46
56. It is further to be noted that, as required under sub-rule

(3) of Rule 5 of the 1986 Rules, before any final notification is

issued, a draft notification is required to be published in the

Official Gazette and in such other manner as the Central

Government may deem necessary from time to time. Any

person interested in filing any objection to such a draft

notification is entitled to file objection within a period of 60

days from the date of publication of the draft notification in

the Official Gazette.   We find that the Central Government

can be directed to give a wide publicity to the draft

notification so that all persons interested have knowledge

about issuance of such draft notification.
57. It is pertinent to note that after following the aforesaid

procedure, the matter is placed before the Expert Committee

consisting of 13 organizations having expertise in the relative

field. As such, before an ESZ area is specified, various factors

are taken into consideration. There are various factors which

will determine the ESZs for a particular Protected Area. The

circumstances may differ from one Protected Area to another

Protected Area.   As such, we find that the direction which
47
prescribes a uniform one kilometre ESZ requires to be

modified.
58. It is further to be noted that on the date of filing of the

present application, final notifications have been issued in

respect of 474 Protected Areas whereas draft notifications

have been issued in respect of 102 Protected Areas.         73

proposals are pending.    As already discussed hereinabove,

this Court has already found the said Guidelines to be

reasonable and has accepted the same. The Court has also

accepted the view of the Standing Committee of the NBWL

that uniform guidelines may not be possible in respect of

each Sanctuary or National Park for maintaining ESZs.

Though the Court has observed that a minimum width of one

kilometre in ESZ ought to be maintained, in paragraph 56.6

of the order dated 3 rd June 2022 (supra) itself, it has

observed that minimum width of the ESZ may be diluted in

overwhelming public interest but for that purpose the State

or Union Territory concerned is required to approach Central

Empowered Committee (CEC) and MoEF & CC. It has further

observed that both these bodies shall give their respective
48
recommendations before this Court and on that basis, the

Court should pass appropriate order.
59. As already discussed hereinabove, the ESZs are

required to be notified after following the procedure as

prescribed under the 1986 Rules and the said Guidelines.

Such notifications cannot be issued unless a close scrutiny

at various levels including the scrutiny by Expert Committee

consisting of experts from 13 organizations. As such, we find

that the direction as contained in paragraph 56.6 of the

order dated 3rd June 2022 (supra) also needs to be modified.
60. Insofar as the restriction on mining is concerned, we are

of the considered view that it has been the consistent view of

this Court that the mining activities within an area of one

kilometre of the boundary of the Protected Areas will be

hazardous for the wildlife.      Though in the case of
Goa

Foundation
(supra), the said directions were issued in

respect of State of Goa, we find that such directions need to

be issued on Pan-India basis.
61. We are therefore inclined to allow the present I.A. The

direction in paragraph 56.1 of the order dated 3 rd June 2022
49
(supra) is modified and clarified that the directions contained

therein would not be applicable to the ESZs in respect of

which a draft and final notification has been issued by the

MoEF & CC and in respect of the proposals which have been

received by the Ministry.
62. We, however, direct the Central Government that wide

publicity should be given to the draft notification which is

required to be published under the provisions of clause (a) of

sub-rule (3) of Rule 5 of the 1986 Rules. We further direct

that the final notification to be published under clause (d) of

sub-rule (3) of Rule 5 of the 1986 Rules shall not be given

effect for a period of 30 days from the date of issuance

thereof.
63. It is further directed that any person who is aggrieved

with such a final notification would be entitled to approach

this Court directly by filing an application in the present

proceedings.
64. We further clarify that the direction contained in

paragraph 56.1 of the order dated 3 rd June 2022 (supra)

would not be applicable where the National Parks and
50
Sanctuaries are located on inter-State borders and/or share

common boundaries.
65. We also modify the direction contained in paragraph

56.4 of the order dated 3rd June 2022 (supra) and direct that

mining within the National Park and Wildlife Sanctuary and

within an area of one kilometre from the boundary of such

National   Park   and    Wildlife   Sanctuary       shall   not   be

permissible.
66. We also modify the directions contained in paragraph

56.5 of the order dated 3rd June 2022 (supra) and replace the

same as under:
(i)      The MoEF & CC and all the State/Union Territory

           Governments shall strictly follow the provisions in

           the said Guidelines dated 9 th February 2011 and

           so also the provisions contained in the ESZs

           notifications pertaining to the respective Protected

           Areas with regard to prohibited activities, regulated

           activities and permissible activities;
51
(ii)    We     further   direct       that    while     granting

          Environmental and Forest Clearances for project

          activities in ESZ and other areas outside the

          Protected Areas, the Union of India as well as

          various State/Union Territory Governments shall

          strictly follow the provisions contained in the

          Office Memorandum dated 17th May 2022 issued

          by MoEF & CC.
67. All the other present I.As shall stand disposed of in

terms of the above. No costs.
…….........................J.
                                                       [B.R. GAVAI]



                                     …….........................J.
                                                 [VIKRAM NATH]



                                     …….........................J.
                                                [SANJAY KAROL]

NEW DELHI;
APRIL 26, 2023
52