[Cites
38
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Himachal Pradesh vs The Recovery Officer, Debt Recovery ... on 28 April, 2023
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
,
S. Ravindra Bhat
1


                                                                             Reportable

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8980-8981/2012



          STATE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH
          AND OTHERS                                                 … APPELLANTS
                                  VS.

          M/S A.J. INFRASTRUCTURES
          PVT. LTD AND ANR.                                           … RESPONDENTS
                                                    WITH

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9212-9213/2012


          STATE OF HIMACHAL
          PRADESH AND ANR.                                            … APPELLANTS
                                                    VS.

          THE RECOVERY OFFICER,
          DEBT RECOVERY TRIBUNAL AND ANR.                             … RESPONDENTS


                                                JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
Preface
1.             A thin thread connects the two sets of civil appeals 1, which are

          at the instance of the State of Himachal Pradesh (for brevity, “the

          State”, hereafter) and its officers. Since the provisions of law
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NEETA SAPRA
Date: 2023.04.28
17:06:32 IST
emerging for consideration are almost the same in terms, though in
Reason:
1
Civil Appeal Nos. 8980-8981/2012 and Civil Appeal Nos. 9212-9213/2012
2
different fact situations, these appeals were heard one after the

other and shall stand disposed of by this common judgment and

order.
Civil Appeal Nos.8980-8981/2012
2.      Civil Appeal No. 8980 of 2012 is directed against the judgment

and order of the High Court dated 7th September, 2007 allowing a

writ petition2 presented before it by M/s. A.J. Infrastructures (Pvt.)

Ltd., the first respondent, on 6th March, 2007. The operative portion

of the order reads as follows: -
“For all the aforesaid reasons, the writ petition is allowed. Order
        rejecting petitioner's application for not mutating the entry in their
        name is quashed and set aside. The respondents no. 1 to 5 are
        directed to delete the adverse entry showing the sales tax dues of
        M/s Regent Rubber and M/s Eastman Rubber in relation to the
        property comprising in Khasra No. 254/2/1, Khatauni Nos. 7 Min, 14
        Min, Measuring 3 Bighas 7 Bishwas, situated at Village Moginand,
        Kala-Amb, Tehsil Nahan, District Sirmour, HP and further
        respondent no. 3 is directed to mutate the property in the name of
        petitioner company. The petitioner shall be entitled to costs, which is
        quantified at Rs, 25,000/- from respondents no. 1 to 5.“
3.      Aggrieved by the judgment and order dated 7th September,

2007, the official respondents in the writ petition applied for a

review3. By an order dated 29th October, 2009, the High Court

proceeded to dispose of the application for review by, inter alia, the

following order:-
2
CWP No. 306/2007
3
CMP No. 1160/2008
3
“The present application of review has been filed after delay of more
     than one year without proper and satisfactory explanation. No
     sufficient material has been placed on record for reviewing the order
     dated 07-09-07, which may be brought within four corners and
     provisions of
Order 47 Rule 1 CPC
, as observed in foregoing
     decisions. Therefore, only for taking different view, the said order
     dated 07-09-09 cannot be reviewed. In these circumstances, the
     present application for reviewing the order dated 07-09-09 is
     dismissed on the ground of delay as well as on the merits.”


The said order dated October 29, 2009 is challenged in C.A. No.

8981 of 2012.
4.   The facts pleaded in the writ petition reveal that the first

respondent had purchased the subject property (described in full in

the operative part of the order dated 7th September, 2007, extracted

above) in an auction conducted by the State Bank of Patiala (for

brevity “State Bank”, hereafter) on 18 th January, 2005 in exercise of

power conferred by the
Securitisation and Reconstruction of

Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002
(for

brevity, “the
SARFAESI Act
”, hereafter). The subject property was

initially mortgaged on 11th October, 1999 with the Himachal Pradesh

Financial Corporation (for brevity “HPFC”, hereafter) by M/s. Regent

Rubber Private Limited (for brevity “Regent”, hereafter). Due to

breach committed by Regent, HPFC took over the property and sold

it in an open auction to M/s Eastman Rubber (for brevity “Eastman”,

hereafter). The subject property was thereafter mortgaged by

Eastman with the State Bank. However, Eastman too having
4
committed default in liquidating its dues, the subject property was

eventually put up for sale in an open auction on 18 th January, 2005

under rules 8 and 9 of the Security Interest (Enforcement) Rules,

2002 (for brevity “SARFAESI Rules”, hereafter).
5.     The first respondent emerged as the highest bidder in the

auction by quoting a sum of Rs. 50,01,000/-. Within the stipulated

time, the first respondent paid the entire bid amount whereupon in

accordance with the provisions of rule 9(6) and (10) of the

SARFAESI Rules, sale certificate dated 21st July, 2005 was issued to

the following effect:-
"receipt of the sale price in full and handed over the delivery and
     possession of the scheduled property. The sale of the scheduled
     property was made free from all encumbrances known to the secured
     creditor listed below on deposit of the money demanded by the
     undersigned."
6.    After issuance of the sale certificate, the State Bank by its

letter dated 24th February, 2006 informed various authorities

including the taxation department of the State of sale of the subject

property to the first respondent. In due course of time, the first

respondent obtained permission from the State vide order dated

17th August, 2006 and consequently was able to have the sale deed

executed and registered on 6th September, 2006.
7.    The first respondent having applied for mutation of the subject

property in its name, an order of rejection thereof came to be
5
passed on 22nd December, 2006 in the circumstances noted now. On

18th January, 2005, an ex parte assessment order under the

provisions of the
Himachal Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1968
(for

brevity “HPGST Act”, hereafter) was passed in relation to the

assessment years 1998-1999, 1999-2000, 2000-2001 and 2001-

2002 against Regent and Eastman amounting to Rs. 19,03,845/-

and Rs.13,73,115/- respectively. Having regard to the date of the

ex parte assessment order, it is quite but natural that when the first

respondent offered its bid for purchasing the subject property in the

auction   ultimately   conducted   (on   18th   January,   2005),   any

outstanding liability of either Regent or Eastman could not and was

not reflected in any official record. However, in view of this liability

of Regent and Eastman, the application of the first respondent for

mutation in respect of the subject property in its name stood

rejected. Such order revealed that on the asking of the Excise and

Taxation Officer, Nahan, District Sirmour, entries in red ink had been

made by the Tehsildar, Nahan pertaining to demand of arrears of tax

payable by Regent and Eastman under the provisions of the HPGST

Act.
8.     The order of rejection dated 22 nd December, 2006 was assailed

in the writ petition and orders were sought seeking (i) deletion of

adverse entries regarding the sales tax liability of Regent and
6
Eastman; (ii) direction upon the tehsildar to mutate the subject

property, after quashing of the order dated 22 nd December 2006;

and (iii) declaring the action of the excise and taxation officer as

illegal, unjust and without the authority of law.
9.     Upon a contested hearing, a Division Bench of the High Court

allowed the writ petition on terms noted above in paragraph 2

supra.
10.    We   consider    it   appropriate   to   reproduce   certain   other

paragraphs from the impugned judgment dated 7th September,

2007, hereunder:-
“ Undoubtedly, Section 16-B of the Tax Act also contains a non-
      obstante clause, which makes the amount of tax payable by a dealer
      to be a first charge on the property of the dealer. There is, thus,
      obviously a conflict between the provisions of the two statutes.
      The powers are absolute and in view of the non obstante clause
      contained in
Section 35
of the Act, would have an overriding effect
      over all inconsistent provisions contained in any other law.
The Act
being a special statute, enacted later in point in time and that too by
      the Central Government (sic, Parliament), in our view, would override
      the inconsistent provisions contained in the Tax Act. This is in the
      scheme of constitutional provisions also. Therefore, the Bank is well
      within its right to take over the property and sell the same
      notwithstanding the 1st charge of the State on the property of the
      dealer.
The issue needs to be examined from another perspective. Under the
      provisions of the Tax Act, the Assessing Authority is required to
      assess the amount of tax due from the dealer on the basis of returns
      filed. If the Assessing Authority is not satisfied that the returns
      furnished are correct and complete or that no returns have been filed
      at all he shall serve a notice, give an opportunity of hearing and as
      the case may arise, adopt the best judgment method and assess the
      amount of tax due from the dealer. This is so provided under section
      14 of the Tax Act. The amount so assessed is required to be paid by
      the assessee within the time stipulated in the notice to be issued by
7
the Assessing Authority, failing which the amount due is recoverable
as arrears of land revenue as provided for under
section 16
, which,
however, in view of non obstante clause contained in section 16A
comes into operation only after the dealer failed to pay the amount
due when a notice in writing is issued to him. Now, in the present
case no notice of demand, as stipulated under
section 14(7)
or
section 16A has been issued to any of the dealers. The action of
respondent no. 5 in asking respondents no. 3 and 4 and also the
action of respondents no. 4 in acting upon the request of respondent
no. 5 to make entries (in red ink) of arrears of tax due recoverable as
land revenue in the revenue record is thus bad in law. For the very
same reason, in spite of No Objection issued by the State for getting
the sale deed executed is thus in gross violations of the provisions of
the Tax Act.
Further the right of the respondent-State to have a first charge on
the property of the dealer can be only if there is proper adjudication
and determination of the amount due under the Tax Act and in the
absence thereof, it cannot be said that the tax is due and payable by
the dealer. Till such time, the same is done, there cannot be any
crystallization of charge. The charge of the State is not a floating
charge.
In the instant case the Bank had already exercised its right and taken
possession of the property much prior to the assessment order dated
18-01-05 passed by the Assessing Authority. In fact before the said
date the property itself had been advertised to be sold by public
auction. No notice of demand was ever issued under
Section 14
and
16A before action under section 16 of the Tax Act was taken.
Assuming that the first charge stood created prior to the passing of
the order of assessment, in our view the provisions of
section 35
of
the Act would override the inconsistent provisions of section 16B of
the Tax Act leading to the only conclusion and that there is no prior
charge on the property except for that of the Bank with whom the
property was mortgaged. Thus, in our view, looking from all angles
the action of the State cannot be upheld.
The creation of 1st charge or status of encumbrance of property was
recorded for the 1st time on 11-07-06. The record of rights, i.e.
revenue record did not reflect any status of encumbrance of the
property or creation of 1st charge in spite of the fact that the
respondents were duly informed about the auction and issuance of
the sale certificate by the Bank in favour of the petitioner. It was only
when the State was satisfied about the non-encumbrance that the
permission to transfer the property in the name of the petitioner was
accorded. In fact, based on the revenue record the Bank considered
the property to be encumbered and accepted the same as a security.
It took over the same and put it to auction as a secured asset which
stands purchased by the petitioner as such.”
8
(emphasis ours)
Civil Appeal Nos.9212-9213/2012
11.   Punjab National Bank (for brevity “PNB”, hereafter) sanctioned

term loan to M/s Superrugs (India) Pvt. Ltd. (for brevity “borrower”,

hereafter) for manufacturing carpets. The loan that was provided by

PNB to the borrower was secured by mortgage of its factory

premises situated at Baddi Industrial Area, District Solan. Shri R.T.

Tejpal and Shri Durga Dass stood as guarantors (for brevity

“guarantors”, hereafter). The loan account of the borrower became

irregular. A recovery suit was instituted by PNB against the borrower

and the guarantors for Rs. 42.29 lacs. Upon introduction of the

Recovery of Debts due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993

(for brevity “
DRT Act
”, hereafter) and constitution of the Debts

Recovery Tribunals, the suit was transferred to the Debts Recovery

Tribunal, Jaipur (for brevity “DRT, Jaipur”, hereafter). Consent

decree was passed on 12th November, 1998 in favour of PNB and

against the borrower and the guarantors. Part payment was made

by the borrower towards satisfaction of the decree, but balance

payment was not made resulting in PNB levying execution of the

recovery certificate for an amount of Rs.2,65,97,162.50 before the

DRT, Jaipur on 14th May, 1999.
Subsequently, the proceedings for

execution    were    transferred    to       the   Debts   Recovery   Tribunal,

Chandigarh    (for    brevity      “DRT,       Chandigarh”,    hereafter)   on
9
2nd January,     2000.    During   pendency   of   the   proceedings,   the

Assistant Excise and Taxation Commissioner, District Solan (for

brevity “Commissioner”, hereafter), issued a notice in ‘The Tribune’

in its edition dated 12th February, 2000 for auction of the property

that was mortgaged by the borrower. Auction was fixed for

3rd March, 2001 for recovery of arrears of sales tax amounting to

Rs.32,72,365/-, which was recoverable as arrears of land revenue

under the
Himachal Pradesh Land Revenue Act, 1954
(for brevity

“HPLR Act”, hereafter). PNB moved an application before the

Recovery Officer attached to the DRT, Chandigarh for stay of auction

whereupon the said recovery officer considering the law laid down

by this Court in
State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur vs. National

Iron & Steel Rolling Corporation and Ors.4
concluded that the

claim of PNB against the mortgaged property had become secondary

in view of the auction initiated by the State for recovery of sales tax

dues. This resulted in PNB invoking the jurisdiction of the High Court

under
Article 226
by filing a writ petition 5 against the State, the

Commissioner, the Recovery Officer of the Debts Recovery Tribunal,

Chandigarh, the borrower and the guarantors.
12.     Prayer in the writ petition was for orders restraining sale by

auction of the mortgaged property of the borrower at Baddi, District
4
(1995) 2 SCC 19
5
CWP No. 239 of 2001
10
Solan for recovery of arrears of sales tax dues, and to strike down

section 16-B of the HPGST Act as ultra vires the provisions of the

Constitution, the DRT Act, the Transfer of Property Act, 1872, the
Contract Act, 1872
and the
Banking Companies (Acquisition and

Transfer   of    Undertakings)    Act,    1970
(for   brevity    “
Banking

Companies Act
”, hereafter).
13.   The State and the Commissioner contested the writ petition by

contending      that   the   borrower    owed    Rs.   32,72,365/    to   the

Government of Himachal Pradesh on account of arrears of sales tax

which had been declared as arrears under the HPLR Act. It was

further contented that the State is competent to recover the amount

as it has a first charge on the property of the dealer under section

16-B of the HPGST Act read with
section 73(3)
of the Code of Civil

Procedure (for brevity “
the CPC
”, hereafter).              It was further

contented that it is wrong on the part of the PNB to contend that its

debt is prior in point of time. Section 16-B of the HPGST Act had

come into force with effect from 21 st October, 1994 whereas the

consent decree was passed in favour of PNB on 12 th November,

1998. This being the position, the provisions of section 16-B of the

HPGST Act would apply and that PNB was not entitled to any relief.

Reference was made to the decision of this Court in
State Bank of

Bikaner and Jaipur
(supra) where this Court considered
section
11
11-AAAA
of the Rajasthan Sales Tax Act, 1954, which is pari materia

with section 16-B of the HPGST Act, creating a first charge on the

property of the dealer. In the light of
the said decision
, the

contention of PNB that it had the prior right to recovery of the debt

was claimed to be devoid of substance and, in fact, misconceived.
14.     The writ petition of PNB come to be allowed by the High Court

vide its judgment and order dated 2nd January, 2008. The judgment

and order dated 7th September, 2007 rendered by the High Court on

the writ petition6 titled M/s
A.J. Infrastructures Pvt. Ltd. vs.

State of H.P. and others
, being the judgment and order impugned

in Civil Appeal No. 8980 of 2012, was relied upon.
Although while

deciding M/s
A.J. Infrastructures Pvt. Ltd.
(supra) the High

Court had not declared
section 35
of the SARFAESI Act as ultra

vires, the Division Bench of the High Court in seisin of the writ

petition of PNB proceeded a step further and held section 16-B of

the HPGST Act to be inconsistent with
section 35
of the SARFAESI

Act;      and, then declared the said section as ultra vires the
Constitution and the Banking Companies Act
. The writ petition filed

by PNB was, accordingly, allowed and it was held that PNB was

entitled to sell the mortgaged property of the borrower in

accordance with law.
6
CWP No. 306/2007
12
15.       The Division Bench of the High Court also recorded as

follows :-
“In the present case, the mortgage was created in the year 1984 and
       the consent decree was passed on 12.11.1998 in favour of the
       petitioner bank and against respondents No. 4 to 6. There is nothing
       on record to show that any notice of demand was firstly issued under
Sections 14
and 16 A before action under
Section 16
of the Sales Tax
       Act was taken. The copies of the notice of demand issued and when it
       was issued have not been placed on record by respondents No. 1 & 2
       except by pleading about their right to sell the property and recover
       the amount as arrears of land revenue in preference to the petitioner
       bank. Therefore, in view of the decision in
Dena Bank
's case it is clear
       that it only gives preferential right to the State to recover the sales
       tax in preference to unsecured creditors but once the property in
       question already stood mortgaged and they had proceeded prior in
       time, they can recover the amount in pursuance of the consent
       decree passed in their favour, the State has no preferential right to
       sell the property and, therefore, the petitioner bank is entitled to sell
       the mortgaged property and realize the arrears of amount due to
       them and State shall be entitled to recover the balance amount, if
       any, left with the bank or in the alternative, they are at liberty to
       proceed against respondents No. 4 to 6 for recovery of the amount by
       proceeding against them in accordance with law. The Division Bench
in
the above case
has already taken the view that the provisions of
Section 35
of the Act would override the inconsistent provisions of
       Section 16B of the Tax Act and as such, there provisions of the
Sales
       Tax Act
Section 16B as they are inconsistent with
Section 35
of the
       Act are declared ultravires of the Constitution.”
                                                               (emphasis ours)
16.     Dissatisfied with the judgment and order dated 2nd January

2008, the State and the Commissioner on 22 nd May, 2008 filed an

application7 under
section 151
of the CPC for “rectification etc., of

the judgment/order dated 2nd January, 2008”. The prayer in such

petition was for recall of the judgment and order dated 2 nd January,
7
CMP No. 1205 of 2008
13
2008 in the interest of justice, equity and fair play so that the

applicants are saved from enormous adverse consequences of such

judgment and order.
17.    The said application came to be considered by the same

Division Bench (which had decided the writ petition) and stood

dismissed, inter alia, by the following order dated 5th June, 2008:
“This application under
Section 151
CPC has been purportedly (sic,
      filed) for rectification of our judgement dated 2.1.2008. However, in
      the prayer clause it has been prayed that the judgement dated 2nd
      January, 2008 may be recalled. It is clear that under the garb of this
      application the State is seeking review of the judgement.
We need not burden ourselves with the various grounds taken in the
      application. The perusal of the application shows that it is virtually a
      review petition but has been styled to be an application under
Section
      151
CPC. This cannot be permitted.
Various facts have now been pleaded in this application, which were
      neither pleaded nor argued when the writ petition was heard and
      decided. In an application under
Section 151
CPC, the applicants
      cannot be permitted to rake up absolutely new pleas which were
      never taken or argued in the writ petition. In case the State is
      aggrieved by the judgment, it has the remedy of approaching the
      apex Court. There is no error apparent on the face of the record of
      the judgement. The application being without any merit and being
      totally misconceived, is rejected”.
18.    The judgment and order dated 2nd January, 2008 allowing the

writ petition has been challenged in Civil Appeal No. 9212 of 2012

whereas the order of dismissal of the application under
section 151
of the CPC is the subject matter of challenge in Civil Appeal No.

9213/2012.
Proceedings before this Court
14
19.    Grant of relief claimed in the writ petitions and dismissal of the

two applications of the State and its officers for review of the

judgment and order/under
section 151
of the CPC led the State and

its officers to approach this Court with separate special leave

petitions.
20.    Certain orders passed in these proceedings need to be noted.
21.    On the special leave petitions carried by the State from the

judgment and order passed on PNB’s writ petition and the order of

dismissal of the State’s application under
section 151
of the CPC, an

order was passed by this Court on 11th March, 2011 recording as

follows:
“The respondent-Bank has filed an affidavit contending inter alia that
      they have recovered their dues and also released the property, which
      was under mortgage in favour of the borrower since they have
      liquidated the loan amount with interest. Counsel appearing for the
      State seeks for a week’s time to enable him to obtain instructions.
      He may obtain instructions accordingly.
Re-notify on 18.3.2011.”
22.    The next effective order dated 8th April, 2011 passed by this

Court on the aforesaid special leave petitions recorded that:
“So far these petitions are concerned, in our considered opinion,
      these petitions have been rendered infructuous partly in view of the
      fact that bank, who is a contesting respondent no. 1 herein, has
      already recovered its dues and thereafter released the property from
      its hypothecation. Hence, the name of respondent no. 1 is deleted
15
from the array of respondents       and   the   petitions   as   against
      respondent no. 1 stand dismissed.
These petitions also stand dismissed so far as respondent nos. 3 and
      5 are concerned. Therefore, these petitions survive only against
      respondent nos. 2 and 4.”
23.    As a result of the above order, the special leave petitions stood

dismissed against PNB (the first respondent), the borrower (the

second respondent) and Shri Durga Dass (the fifth respondent) and

survived qua the Recovery Officer, DRT, Chandigarh (the second

respondent) and Shri R.T. Tejpal (the fourth respondent).
24.    Practically, with the exit of PNB from the proceedings in view

of the developments subsequent to filing of the special leave

petitions resulting in dismissal of the special leave petitions qua

PNB, it admits of no doubt that the issue inter se the relevant

parties, i.e., the State and PNB, as to whether the High Court was

justified in outlawing section 16-B of the HPGST Act, attained

finality.
25.    Notwithstanding such position, this Court on 7 th December,

2012 granted special leave on both the petitions to appeal

whereupon the appeals were placed before us for hearing and

decision.
Issues
26.    The legal issues arising for decision on these appeals are:
16
(i)        Whether, in view of dismissal of the special leave petition

                qua PNB by the order dated 8th April, 2011, the judgment

                and order outlawing section 16-B of the HPGST Act can

                at all be examined?
(ii)       Should the answer to the above question be in the

                affirmative, whether section 16-B of the HPGST Act

                should have been outlawed by the High Court on the

                ground that it is ultra vires the Constitution or the
Banking Companies Act
?
(iii)      Whether having regard to the facts and circumstances

                triggering the writ petitions, the High Court was justified

                in returning the findings that the State’s claim of first

                charge on the subject properties is not substantiated?
(iv)       Whether dismissal of the review petition/application for

                recall instituted by the State by the High Court suffers

                from any infirmity, legal or otherwise?
(v)        To what relief, if any, are the appellants entitled?
Analysis and Reasons
27.
Insofar as the first issue is concerned, we may notice the

Constitution Bench decision in
A.R. Antulay vs. R.S. Nayak8
. It

was held there that one of the well-known principles of law is that a

decision made by a competent court of law should be taken as final
8
(1988) 2 SCC 602
17
subject to any decision of a superior court in further proceedings

contemplated by the law of procedure. However, this Court being

the apex court, a litigant cannot approach any higher forum but can

only invoke its review jurisdiction to correct a patent error. The

power to review is also inherent in this Court and if judicial

satisfaction is reached that an order has been passed, which ought

not to have been passed, and it is accepted that a mistake has been

committed, it is not only appropriate but also the duty of this Court

to rectify the mistake by exercising inherent powers. Mistake of the

Court can be corrected by the Court itself without any fetters. This

is based on the principle that an act of Court ought not to injure any

party before it. To own up the mistake when judicial satisfaction is

reached does not militate against the Court’s status or authority;

perhaps it would enhance both.
28.   There can be no doubt that in normal circumstances this Court

would not allow reopening of an issue that has attained finality and,

that too, in the absence of party who has benefited by reason of

such an order. However, this is not a normal case and we can

unhesitatingly record our satisfaction of a gross error having crept in

requiring correction.
29.   A law, which the State legislature had the competence to

enact, has been outlawed by the High Court while hearing a writ
18
petition which was rendered infructuous due to developments

subsequent to its filing and prior to its disposal but such

developments had not been brought to the notice of the High Court.
30.   During the pendency of these proceedings where challenge

had been laid to the judgment and order dated 2 nd January, 2008 of

the High Court, PNB filed an affidavit dated 30 th September, 2010,

referred to in the order of this Court dated 8 th April, 2011. A reading

of the affidavit reveals that during the pendency of the writ petition

(filed by PNB) before the High Court, the borrower had offered a

compromise proposal which PNB had accepted. In terms thereof, the

borrower paid to PNB an amount of Rs.36 lakh towards full and final

settlement of the loan liability. Upon receipt of the compromise

amount, the title deed of the mortgaged property was duly returned

to the borrower. Pursuant thereto, PNB filed an application for

withdrawing the execution case before the Recovery Officer, DRT,

Chandigarh on 13th August, 2002 and the case, upon being disposed

of as withdrawn, was consigned to the record room. It was further

categorically averred in paragraph 3(g) of the said affidavit that “the

grievance of respondent no.1 raised in the writ petition filed before

the Hon’ble High Court does not subsist any further and that the

object of having filed the writ petition is already fulfilled and that

the writ petition has been rendered infructuous”. Ultimately, in
19
paragraph 5, PNB submitted that “it extends its unconditional

apology for not bringing the aforesaid facts to the notice of Hon’ble

High Court at the time of reserving the orders in writ petition on 27 th

November, 2007” and that “the aforesaid facts could not be brought

to the notice of Hon’ble High Court due to inadvertence and the

same was not deliberate or intentional”.
31.   Therefore, for all intents and purposes, the High Court by its

judgment and order dated 2nd January, 2008 decided an infructuous

writ petition and, in the process, outlawed section 16-B of the

HPGST Act when the same was not at all warranted.
32.   In our considered opinion, it was also a clear but inadvertent

error on the part of this Court to dismiss only the special leave

petition against PNB as infructuous; the appropriate course for this

Court ought to have been to dismiss the writ petition of PNB itself as

infructuous having regard to the clear stand taken by PNB in its

aforesaid affidavit dated 30th September, 2010 that nothing survived

for a decision on the writ petition on the date it was decided in view

of release of the property from mortgage.
33.   We, accordingly, answer the first issue in the affirmative.
34.   Moving on to the second issue, we are clear in our mind that

the same ought to be answered in the negative.
20
35.     The easy answer to the issue flows from what we have

discussed above. Since the writ petition had been rendered

infructuous on the date it was decided, it was not necessary for the

High Court to pronounce on the validity of section 16-B. A decision

on the constitutional validity of a provision should be invited not in

vacuum but when the justice of the case demands such a decision.

Hence, we hold that the decision on an infructuous writ petition is

inconsequential and can never be of any effect. However, we do not

wish to rest our decision only on this technical point. Having

considered the relevant provisions of law as well as the decisions of

this Court, rendered prior to and post the impugned judgment and

order dated 2nd January, 2008, we are of the firm opinion that the

issue as to whether section 16-B of the HPGST Act is ultra vires any

provision of law including the supreme law of the country is no

longer res integra.
36.
Instead of burdening our judgment by referring to all decisions

on the point, we consider it appropriate to refer to only one decision

of this Court (dated 27th February, 2009) in
Central Bank of India

vs. State of Kerala9
which, of course, came into existence after the

decisions challenged in these civil appeals were rendered. This Court

having considered the provisions of the DRT Act and the SARFAESI

Act, as it then stood, vis-à-vis section 38-C of the Bombay Sales Tax
9
(2009) 4 SCC 94
21
Act, 1959 and
section 26-B
of the Kerala General Sales Tax Act,

1963, inter alia, held that:
“116. The non obstante clauses contained in
Section 34(1)
of the
     DRT Act and
Section 35
of the Securitisation Act give overriding
     effect to the provisions of those Acts only if there is anything
     inconsistent contained in any other law or instrument having effect
     by virtue of any other law. In other words, if there is no provision in
     the other enactments which are inconsistent with the
DRT Act
or the
Securitisation Act
, the provisions contained in those Acts cannot
     override other legislations.
Section 38-C
of the Bombay Act and
Section 26-B
of the Kerala Act also contain non obstante clauses and
     give statutory recognition to the priority of the State’s charge over
     other debts, which was recognised by Indian High Courts even
     before 1950. In other words, these sections and similar provisions
     contained in other State legislations not only create first charge on
     the property of the dealer or any other person liable to pay sales
     tax, etc. but also give them overriding effect over other laws.
***
126. While enacting the DRT Act and the Securitisation Act,
     Parliament was aware of the law
laid down by
this Court wherein
     priority of the State dues was recognised. If Parliament intended to
     create first charge in favour of banks, financial institutions or other
     secured creditors on the property of the borrower, then it would
     have incorporated a provision like
Section 529-A
of the Companies
     Act or
Section 11(2)
of the EPF Act and ensured that
     notwithstanding series of judicial pronouncements, dues of banks,
     financial institutions and other secured creditors should have priority
     over the State’s statutory first charge in the matter of recovery of
     the dues of sales tax, etc. However, the fact of the matter is that no
     such provision has been incorporated in either of these enactments
     despite conferment of extraordinary power upon the secured
     creditors to take possession and dispose of the secured assets
     without the intervention of the court or Tribunal. The reason for this
     omission appears to be that the new legal regime envisages transfer
     of secured assets to private companies.
127.      The     definition    of   ‘secured    creditor’   includes
     securitisation/reconstruction company and any other trustee holding
     securities on behalf of bank/financial institution. The definition of
     ‘securitisation company’ and ‘reconstruction company’ in
Sections
     2(1)(za)
and (v) shows that these companies may be private
     companies registered under the
Companies Act, 1956
and having a
     certificate of registration from Reserve Bank under
Section 3
of the
     Securitisation Act. Evidently, Parliament did not intend to give
22
priority to the dues of private creditors over sovereign debt of the
      State.
128. If the provisions of the DRT Act and the Securitisation Act are
      interpreted keeping in view the background and context in which
      these legislations were enacted and the purpose sought to be
      achieved by their enactment, it becomes clear that the two
      legislations, are intended to create a new dispensation for
      expeditious recovery of dues of banks, financial institutions and
      secured creditors and adjudication of the grievance made by any
      aggrieved person qua the procedure adopted by the banks, financial
      institutions and other secured creditors, but the provisions contained
      therein cannot be read as creating first charge in favour of banks,
      etc.
129. If Parliament intended to give priority to the dues of banks,
      financial institutions and other secured creditors over the first
      charge created under State legislations then provisions similar to
      those contained in Section 14-A of the Workmen’s
Compensation
      Act, 1923
,
Section 11(2)
of the EPF Act,
Section 74(1)
of the Estate
      Duty Act, 1953,
Section 25(2)
of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation
      and Development) Act, 1957,
Section 30
of the Gift Tax Act, and
Section 529-A
of the Companies Act, 1956 would have been
      incorporated in the DRT Act and the Securitisation Act.
130. Undisputedly, the two enactments do not contain provision
      similar to the Workmen’s
Compensation Act
, etc. In the absence of
      any specific provision to that effect, it is not possible to read any
      conflict or inconsistency or overlapping between the provisions of
      the DRT Act and the Securitisation Act on the one hand and
Section
      38-C
of the Bombay Act and
Section 26-B
of the Kerala Act on the
      other and the non obstante clauses contained in
Section 34(1)
of the
      DRT Act and
Section 35
of the Securitisation Act cannot be invoked
      for declaring that the first charge created under the State legislation
      will not operate qua or affect the proceedings initiated by banks,
      financial institutions and other secured creditors for recovery of their
      dues or enforcement of security interest, as the case may be.”

                                                             (emphasis ours)
37.   It is much after this decision in
Central Bank of India
(supra) that Parliament proceeded to amend the DRT Act and the

SARFAESI Act by the Enforcement of Security Interest and Recovery
23
of Debts Laws and Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Act,

2016. Chapter IV-A was introduced in the
SARFAESI Act
, with effect

from 24th January, 2020, containing, inter alia,
section 26E
which

accorded priority in payment to a secured creditor over all other

dues in enforcement of the security, subject to conditions specified

elsewhere in the said chapter. Prior thereto, with effect from 1 st

September, 2016, section 31B was introduced in the
DRT Act
extending similar benefit of priority to a secured creditor. We need

not dilate here on the amended provisions for obvious reasons.
38.   What appears to be of significance in the light of the decision

in
Central Bank of India
(supra) is that the findings in the

judgments and orders disposing of the writ petitions impugned in

two of the four civil appeals ~ the first dated 7 th September, 2007

and the other dated 2nd January, 2008 ~ with regard to the scope,

ambit and applicability of
section 35
of the SARFAESI Act, more

particularly the latter holding section 16-B of the HPGST Act as ultra

vires the
Constitution and the Banking Companies Act
, loses its

basis and can no longer be held to be legal and valid.
Section 35
of

the SARFAESI Act could not have been construed as conferring any

right on a secured creditor to claim priority over dues of the State in

the absence of a provision in that behalf which presently can now be
24
claimed, subject to other conditions being fulfilled, in view of
section

26E
of the SARFAESI Act.
39.   Pertinently, the High Court while seized of the writ petition of

PNB was not at all concerned with the
SARFAESI Act
as such. The

matter had travelled to the High Court from proceedings under the
DRT Act
. There was, thus, no occasion for the High Court to

pronounce on the validity of section 16-B of the HPGST Act based on

what was held by its coordinate Bench in M/s
A.J. Infrastructures

Pvt. Ltd.
(supra). The High Court, in our considered view, was

therefore in clear error.
40.   In the light of the above, while answering the second issue we

hold that section 16-B of the HPGST Act is a perfectly valid piece of

legislation and is not ultra vires the Constitution and/or the
Banking

Companies Act
as erroneously held in the decision of the High Court

dated 2nd January, 2008. Also, following the decision in
Central

Bank of India
(supra), we hold that any observation in the decision

dated 7th September, 2007 touching upon section 16-B of the HPGST

Act vis-à-vis
section 35
of the SARFAESI Act is of no effect.
41.   It is now time to consider the third issue.
42.   As noted above, C.A. Nos.9212-9213 of 2012 have been

dismissed qua the writ petitioner, i.e., PNB. Having regard to such

position, it would not be proper to delve deep into the question as to
25
whether the State has the first charge over the property in question

or not. This is particularly because PNB was not represented before

us on the date judgment was reserved in view of the prior dismissal

of the civil appeals and no application had been filed by the State to

recall such order. We further do not consider it appropriate to

reopen     the   proceedings   against   PNB,   bearing   in   mind   the

circumstance that more than a decade has lapsed since the order of

this Court dated 8th April, 2011 was made. However, if the lis in the

writ petition of PNB had subsisted, we would have ruled in its favour

upon acceptance of the other reasons in the decision dated 7 th

September, 2007 which, in the extracted portion, has been

highlighted by us above. We, therefore, would allow the matter to

rest.
43.     Before parting with C.A. Nos.9212-9213 of 2012, we may

observe that in view of the findings returned by the High Court on

the question of absence of determination of liability, with which we

have concurred, it was absolutely unnecessary for the High Court to

outlaw section 16-B of the HPGST Act.
44.     Insofar as C.A. Nos.8980-8981 of 2012 is concerned, the third

issue is very much alive and needs to be addressed.
45.     The discussion must begin with a reading of the relevant

provisions of the HPGST Act. Section 14 of the HPGST Act postulates
26
assessment of tax. The cumulative effect of the several sub-sections

of
section 14
is that after returns are furnished by a dealer in

respect of any period, the duty of the assessing authority is to

assess the appropriate quantum of tax required to be paid by the

dealer, in terms of the procedure laid down therein; and to initiate

steps, also in terms of the laid down procedure, to recover any

amount of unpaid tax, penalty or interest payable under the

enactment.
Section 16
envisages that any amount of tax, penalty or

interest payable under the HPGST Act remaining unpaid after the

due date shall be recoverable as arrears of land revenue. Section

16-A, starting with a non-obstante clause, confers power on the

Commissioner or any officer other than the one excluded to initiate

a special mode of recovery. Then follows section 16-B, which is to

the following effect:-
“16-B. Tax to be first charge on property. - Notwithstanding
      anything to the contrary contained in any law for the time being in
      force, any amount of tax and penalty including interest, if any,
      payable by a dealer or any other person under this Act shall be a
      fust charge on the property of the dealer or such other person.”
46.   Having regard to the terms of section 16 of the HPGST Act

noted above, the HPLR Act, to the extent the same provides for the

procedure for recovery of dues as arrears of land revenue, needs to

be briefly noticed.
27
47.   Section 4(4) of the HPLR Act defines a defaulter as a person

liable for arrears of land revenue and includes such person who are

responsible as surety for the payment of the arrears.
Section 23
provides for the mode of making proclamation issued by a Revenue

Officer relating to any land and provides for the methods of

proclamation. Chapter VI of the HPLR Act, is titled “Collection of

Land Revenue”. Section 74 sets out the process for recovery of the

arrears while section 78 provides for attachment of the estate or

holding. Section 75 ordains that a writ of demand may be issued by

the Revenue Officer on or after the date on which the arrears of land

revenue accrue. Section 75-A envisages that at any time after

arrears of land revenue accrue, a Revenue Officer may issue a

warrant directing an officer named therein to arrest the defaulter

and bring him before the Revenue Officer and section 81 confers

power of sale of estate or holding. Although, there is no express

provision indicating the stage at which a defaulter can deny this

liability, section 84 opens up a remedy to a person denying his

liability before a Civil Court.
48.   From the excerpt of the impugned judgment and order of the

High Court dated 2nd January, 2008 underlined above, it is clear that

proceedings were not initiated upon notice to the defaulters and the

sum they owed to the department had not been finally determined
28
in accordance with law. In view thereof, question of the State

resorting to the provisions contained in Chapter VI of the HPLR Act

for recovering the dues, if at all, as arrears of land revenue did not

arise. The Excise Department, in its reply to CWP 306 of 2007,

submitted that the non-obstante provision contained in section 16-B

would prevail over any inconsistent provisions in other laws; it was

further submitted that in the event of any conflict between any

other statute and the HPGST, the latter would prevail. The

department further urged that sales taxes dues would be higher in

priority over any mortgage since the State would have a first

charge. It was also submitted that the Tehsildar was requested, on

multiple occasions, to make the required red entries in relation to

the   revenue    records   of   the    subject   property,   and   not

mutate/register the same at the behest of the first respondent.
49.   While adopting such a stand, the State and its department

either overlooked or were ignorant of the requirement of law that

section 16-B would be attracted only after determination of the

liability and upon any sum becoming due and payable; and that, it is

only thereafter that the charge, if any, would operate. We are of the

opinion that no relevant documentary evidence having been placed

before the High Court, when CWP 306 of 2007 was being heard, to

indicate that necessary steps under the HPGST Act had been
29
initiated by the State and its officers, the third issue has to be

answered by holding that the State not having taken steps as

required    by   law   for   realization   of   its   dues,   there   was   no

determination of liability, a fortiori, question of taking recourse to

the HPLR Act for recovery of dues as arrears of land revenue did not

arise. Without such determination of liability, no red entry marks

could have been inserted in the revenue records and the High Court

was right in holding that the State ought not to have refused

mutation.
50.   The fourth issue need not detain us for too long. As it is, the

civil appeals against PNB do not survive. Qua the other appeals, we

are once again of the opinion that the High Court was justified in not

entertaining the application for recall. It was not maintainable in

law, since the writ petition was decided on merits in the presence of

the State. A recall application under
section 151
of the CPC,

therefore, was not the proper remedy in the circumstances. When

the law provides a specific remedy, it is not open to a party to take

recourse to section 151. It preserves the inherent powers of the

court to do justice in a case where the party has no other remedy

under
the CPC
. Besides, even if the application for recall could have

been regarded as one for review of the judgment and order dated

7th September, 2007, the same did not warrant to be entertained for
30
the reasons assigned by the High Court. No error apparent on the

face of the record was pointed out, which is the first ground for

seeking a review. Documents were annexed to the application,

which were in existence when the reply to CWP 306 of 2007 was

filed by the State and no case had been set up that despite

discharge of due diligence, such documentary evidence, which were

in existence, could not be annexed to the said reply. Much

indulgence is shown to the State Governments when they carry

judgments/orders in time-barred appeals/revisions, having regard

to the impersonal machinery being involved. However, undue

indulgence cannot be shown to the State Governments either when

they do not file a proper reply or when, despite there being a

provision for review, such remedy is not pursued and a different one

pursued presumably to overcome the restrictions the provision for

review imposes. We, therefore, answer this issue by holding that

High Court was justified in rejecting the application for recall.
51.   The fifth issue stands disposed of by holding that the

appellants (State and its officers) are not entitled to any relief

except the declaration that section 16-B of the HPGST Act is not

ultra vires any provision of law. In view of section 16-B having been

outlawed by the High Court on 2 nd January, 2008, this declaration

shall not enure to the benefit of the State in respect of cases that
31
are old and have been closed but would be effective once again

from this day.
52.   Consequently, all the civil appeals stand disposed of on the

aforesaid terms. Parties shall bear their own costs.
…………………………………J
                                           (S. RAVINDRA BHAT)




                                         .…………………………………J
                                             (DIPANKAR DATTA)

NEW DELHI;
28th April, 2023.